the voyage and peregrination make by ancient king patriarch apostle philosopher and other to and through the remote part of the know world inquiry also of language and religion especial of the modern diversify profession of Christianity the first book chap. i. a large treatise of king salomons navy send from Eziongeber to Ophir wherein beside the typical mystery brief unuail and many moral speculation observe the voyage be large discuss out of divine ecclesiastical and humane testimony intend as a historical preface to the history follow intend to present the world to the world in the most certain view I think a world of author fit for that purpose than any one author write of the world who discourse may haply be more even facile methodical and contract to a more compendious form but can not avoid to be dispendioas if I may so speak in the matter and to suspend the reader judgement for the authority Plaut. I have rather hear the mean of Ulysses his follower relate his wander then wander from the certainty with Homer after all his read and conjecture lo here then after my pilgrimage of the former nature for such as better like that course in open theatre present a show of discovery on a english stage wherein the world be both the spectacle and spectator the actor be the author themselves each present his own action and passion in that kind kind in generous and genuine history act their act Terent. not affect strain or scenic-all- play their part the art indeed of the poet maker or composer aim at delight more than truth seek to please the vulgar with fabulous wonder and wonder-foole fable and for a prologue behold Salomon ophirian navigation that worthy of man be most worthy to be our choragus who aim be in this long work to fetch from Ophir material for the temple structure and to edify Christ church with more full and evident knowledge of God work in the world both of creation and providence than any one natural or humane historian yea then all hitherto in this perhaps in any course have do I compare not with Aristotle Pliny and other in philosophical and learned speculation of reason but in evident demonstration of sense and herein not to we lord not to we but to thy name be give the glory it exceed not modesty to speak thus much in behalf of this cloud of witness which we bring testify what they have see that these exceed the former in certainty relate what they have see and in fullness by advantage of new world find in and beside the world know to they no less than they be exceed in antiquity and learning for i I say with Agur sure I be more foolish than any man and have not the understanding of a man in i prou. 30.2 2. kin. 6.5 alas master I may proclaim to each reader all be borrow I never travel out of this kingdom ingenuous I confess it be the total sum of all my travell-reading the centre of the world good thing and heart of her happiness and yet yea thereby have as thou see conceive where Dinahs gad gain only loss and travel of a gad gen. 34.2 gen. 30.11 a troup of traveller so say Leah a troup come and she call his name gad. and see we have stumble on that word let it be ominous so other read it bagad be by the hebrew resolve into * * see m Sel^en syntog 1. d. Syris Basilius Mazal that be good fortune come I be not Leah I take no such authority on i but when she have leave bear when better leisure quick wit sound health profound learning and all able mean look on let not jacobs bed for the propagation and edification of the church be envy to zilpah leah maid and let this my service in conceive and nurse up this gad be accept of all jacobs friend and that it may be accept I have begin with the most acceptable voyage mention in the old and new testament the one a type of the other those of Solomon to Ophir and of the apostle about the World Solomon be first in time and shall be first here the first in all thing which usual be account first royalty sanctity wisdom wealth magnificence munificence polity exploit renown Solomon in all his glory be proverbial and he first in these by the first and great of testimony matth. 6.29 the particular of salomons voyage be record in the first best and more than human history yea the thing record be first indeed before other thing yea before and great than themselves and that which the first and last have say be true of they all in typical relation a great than Solomon be here Apoc. ^ let Solomon then as elsewhere so here also have the preeminence let salomons name as the character of peace and happiness bode holy happy and peaceable success to this work and let thy name o thou great than Solomon grant protection assistance and some part of salomons wisdom and prosperity to our ophirian voyage that we may buy of thou gold try in the fire to make we rich in grace so to prepare we to that holy jerusalem Apoc. 21.10 11 18 22 23. descend out of heaven from God have the glory of God a city of pure gold like unto clear glass where the lord God almighty and the lamb be the temple and the glory of God do lighten it and the lamb be the light thereof be thou o Christ in this our navigation both lodestar and sun for direction of our course and knowledge of our true height and latitude let our sail hoist up in thy name be fill with inspiration of thy spirit and aspiration of thy favour till they arrive in the fairhaven of human pleasure and profit ac. ^7 thy church service and edify divine acceptance and glory amen o amen o^ S^lomon the holy scripture ^ave thus record 1. king 9.26 27 28. and king Solomon make a navy of ship in Fzion geber which be beside Eloth on the shore of the red sea in the land of E^o^ a^d hiram send in the n^u^e his servant shipman that have knowledge of the sea with the servant of Solomon and they come to Ophir and fetch from thence gold 420. talent and bring it to king Solomon and cap. 10.11 the navy also of hiram that bring gold from Ophir bring in from Ophir great plenty of almug tree and precious stone 12. and the king make of the almug tree pillar for the house of the lord and for the king house harp also and psaltery for singer there come no such almug tree nor be see unto this day 13. now the weight of gold that come to Solomon in one year be 666. talent of Gold 15. beside that he have of the merchantman and of the traffic of the spice-merchant and of all the king of Arabia and of the governor of the country v. 21. and all king solomons drink vessel be of gold and all the vessel of the house of the forest of Lebanon be of pure gold none be of silver it be nothing account of in the day of Solomon for the king ship the cause be add 2. Chro. 9.21 go to tarshish with the servant of hiram every three year once come the ship of tarshish bring gold and silver ivory and ape and peacock 22. and king Solomon pass all the king of the earth in riches and wisdom 26. and he reign over all the king from the river even unto the land of the philistine and to the border of Egypt 27. and the king make silver in jerusalem as stone and cedar tree make he as the Sycomore tree that be in the low plain in abundance @. i. the allegorical and anagogical sense or application of Solomon ophirian navigation this be a extract of Solomon story so much as concern our present purpose the authority whereof be sacred a divine infallible inviolable and undeniable verity the fit ground for many high and worthy consequence hereafter to be deliver I shall here leave to the divinity school in more leisurely contemplation to behold the allegorical sense shall I say or application wherein Solomon seem to signify Christ Whitak descrip. q. 5. his navy the church long before lively represent in that first of ship the ark of Noah which in the sea of this variable world seek for the golden treasure of wisdom and knowledge with that plentiful riches the rich plenty of good work the servant of hiram Hieron ep. 84. August doc. Christ l. 2. c. 40. basil. hom. 24. the legend lib. gentil greg. Nyssens in vit 1. co. 2.14 1. t. 3.16 the doctor choose out of the gentile with the learned christian jew the servant of Solomon employ joint in this ophirian discovery thence bring the rich material as the israelite the egyptian spoil for the tabernacle so these for building and adorn the temple the true sense of scripture after long absence by a troublesome navigation in the search of author divine ecclesiastical and humane a ocean of toil from their home for the natural man that abide at home in himself and have not travel from his own wisdom and self-conceit know not the thing of God nor the great mystery of godliness he must leave the land his and launch into the deep there have his sail fill with the wind the illumination of that spirit which lead into all truth the scripture be their card the faithful heart the loadstone Christ himself the lodestar and sun of truth as before be intimate thus shall the temple and church of God be edify enrich adorn after we have arrive at Ophir and have see our own weakness and take pain in myne god treasure and undermine our own heart search and try our own and god way cast off and purge from we all superfluous earth and detain the gold and rich mettle which we may carry and present as the talent gain by our talent in the best improvement of God grace when we shall return to our Solomon the judge of quick and dead after our navigation and earthly pilgrimage end but alas how many make shipwreck of faith by the way and either be split on the rock of enormous cry sin or sink in the small innumerable sand of habitual lust cover with the shallows mere shadow of civil righteousness or if you have rather adjoin to the allegory the anagogical sense and use this history will appear also a mystery and type of eternity every christian man be a ship a weak vessel in this navy of Solomon and dwell in a mortal body be within less than four inch than one inch of death from jerusalem the word and law of our Solomon first proceed by preach of solomons and hirams servant the pastor and elect vessel to carry his name gather out of jew and gentile which guide these ship through a stormy sea begin at the red sea Christ bloody cross which yield water and blood till they arrive at Ophir the communion of saint in the holy catholic church thither by the water of baptism first and by the water of repentance draw out of our heart and eye in manifold mortification after the fear of God begin this wisdom the windy lust of concupiscence and unstable wave of the world in vain assail they attain in the certainty of faith and assurance col. ^ prou. 1. where seek for knowledge as for silver and search for she as for hide treasure they do as it be labour in the mine for gold which they further purify by experimental practice and study of good work yet not in such perfection but that to this foundation gold silver precious stone 1. co. 3.12 some almug tree be add for the temple pillar oftentimes also of our own hay and stubble as worse and more combustible matter join the ivory be a dead bone may serve for a secular throne and worldly use but here death be dead the ape and peacock lively express hypocrisic and worldly pomp which in the best of saint usual leave some tincture in their voyage for heaven in the return to Solomon these shall be burn as those be by Nebuzaradan but he himself shall be save jer. 5^ and the former admit by that prince of peace the heavenly Solomon to the build of that temple in the new jerusalem for charity never fall away this be that holy city figure by that of Palestina where all be bring to Solomon that God may be all in all as the Alpha which set they forth so the Omega who have make all thing for himself ap. 21.24 for who will and glory sake all thing be and be create and the king of the earth bring their glory and honour unto this city not that he need any thing but that we need the same who in see he as he be do all partake of his glory happy be thy man may more true be say of this Solomon servant happy be these thy servant which may stand in thy presence and hear thy wisdom 1. reg. 10.8 which may enjoy eternity signify by gold which alone of metal neither fire nor rust nor age consume and this city be pure gold and that inheritance of the saint in light Apoc. 21.18 5 p. pil. l. 8 c. 1 figure by silver the most lightsome and delightsome of metal to the eye as for precious stone the foundation of the wall of the city be garnish with all manner of they Apoc. 3.12 and 7 11. c. 15.11 and touch the almuggim tree whereof Solomon make pillar for the temple and psaltery every tree which here bear good fruit and every one that overcome will this Solomon there make a pillar in the temple of his god and he shall go no more out and they shall serve he day and night in his temple and he that sit on the throne shall dwell among they these have also the harp of God and they sing the song of Moses and the song of the lamb nay these be the psaltery and harp which fill with all fullness of God always resound praise and thanks unto the king of saint ps. 16. and with everlasting harmony in that angelical choir be tune with Alleluiah and and holy holy holy in fullness of joy at his right hand ap. 21 22. e. 3.1.15 and pleasure for evermore thus in diverse respect be they both the city and temple and king and priest and instrument and all these and none of these for I see no temple therein say that seer for the lord God almighty and the lamb be the temple of it even God himself shall be with they and God shall be all in all and as he be incomprehensible so eye have not see nor ear have hear nor can the heart of man conceive what God have prepare for they that love he and unmeet be it for i to attempt so high climb not so the tropology or moral use not so the history for our learning wherein the same be write and although the history in nature shall precede yet because we intend the tropological sense or application of this history as a kind of preface or preamble to the many history ensue we have here give it the first place @. 2 the tropological use of the story and of the lawfulness of discovery and negotiation by Sea herein therefore Solomon may become a wise guide unto we and first by his example teach we the lawfulness of navigation to remote region his particular dominion be Palestina his subject province add extend not beyond Egypt and the river Euphrates as be before deliver but God which have enlarge Solomon heart with wisdom do not enlarge it to injustice by a overlarge conscience and he which renounce the price of a dog and a whore in his offering will not permit the temple which sanctify the offering to be build and adorn with robbery and spoil it remain then that Solomon have a right not extraordinary as the israelite to spoil the egyptian by divine especial precept but such a right wherein hiram be interest also philo Mo^ l. 1. aug. quaest. 39 tho. 2.2 q. 104. ar. 4. the hebrew may both at God command who be lord of all and in equity demand wage of the egyptian for so long and tedious service which ^ad not divine precept and power interpose the same tyranny which have impose the one will have deny the other but what have the ophirians wrong Solomon of who and who country they have not ^eard that thus by a numerous and strong fleet he shall enter on their coast we must not think godly Solomon to be Alexander predecessor who the poet call who the pirate accuse as the great * * aug. ciu. d. l. 4 c. 4. find no other difference betwixt they but a small ship and a great Fleet. remote say and before he cyprian * * cyp. ep. donat. l. ^ ep. ^ ac. 17.26 sure solomons right be his be a man which as a wise and a mighty king of man he may the better exercise and execute for howsoever God have give to every man and to every nation a kind of propriety in their peculiar possession yet there be a universal tenure in the universe by the law of God and nature still remain to each man as he be a man and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as the common or royal right of the king or state be neither confound nor take away by the private propriety of the subject true it be that God which have make of one blood all nation of man for to dwell on all the face of the earth and have determine the time appoint have also determine the bound of their habitation but not so strait of negotiation in habitation propriety be requisite that every man may sit under his own vine and under his own figtree and drink the water out of his own cistern and run water out of his own well and that they be only his own and not the stranger with he prou. 5.15 17. but he that have make all nation of one blood will still they shall be as fellow member one of another a shadow of which be in the law permit to eat in the neighbour vineyard Deut. 23. but not to carry forth and that there shall still remain mutual necessity the mother of mutual commerce that one shall not be hungry and another drunken but the superfluity of one country shall supply the necessity of another in exchange for such thing which be here also necessary and there abound that thus the whole world may be as one body of mankind virg. the nation as so many member the superabundance in each concoct distribute retain or expel by merchandise as by the natural bodily office and faculty in nourishment whereby not without mutual gain one may relieve other want may be say of art may be add of region ez. 27. and 28. each country have she own both artificial and natural commodity whereby to enrich themselves with enrich of other thus in old time Tyrus chief staple of the world merchandise and consequent chief storehouse of the world treasure see the same elegant and particular decipher by the holy ghost as it receive from all part ez. 27.33 so when her ware go forth out of the sea she fill many people and do enrich the king of the earth with the multitude of her riches and merchandise and because no one national law can prescribe in that wherein all be interest God himself be the law giver and have write by the style of nature this law in the heart of man call in regard of the efficient the law of nature in respect of the object the law of nation whereto all man nation commonwealth kingdom and king be subject and as he have write this equity in man heart by nature so have he therefore encompass the earth with the sea add so many inlet bay haven and other natural inducement and opportunity to invite man to this mutual commerce therefore have he also diversify the wind which in their shift quarrel conspire to human traffic therefore have he divide the earth with so many river and make the shore conspicuous by cape and promontory yea have admit the sun and star in their direction and assistance unto this general council virg. Ae^ wherein nature within we and without we by everlasting canon have decree community of trade the world through and thus have she teach they who have no other instructor with dislike and disdain to admire at such immanity and inhumanity yea whereas by nature the earth be common mother and in equal community to be enjoy of all she horat. and howsoever this case be since alter in this element lest the idle shall live on the sweat of other brow yet the other and noble element still remain in great part in their original community and can so full be appropriate to possession since the suppose golden age be vanish and this iron or golden in another sense have succeed yea then also the house wife child and such thing as be waste or grow worse in the use as meat drink apparel be appropriate and private chattel to the possess howsoever thing immovable continue the freehold of every man in the common tenure of common humanity as still in the life of brasilian and other savage in the follow relation be to be see by human (@) and divine dispensation the earth be divide among the son of Noah thus some thing become public that be proper to the kingdom state or nation Ou. met. l. 6 other thing private as each man possession and that also in differ degree as the commons and champain country with we in their differ tenure from ground enclose do manifest enough argue but since that division of language and land the poet still proclaim nature right and another these so far as they have not by possession of other man before virg. aen. ^ or otherwise by their own nature can be appropriate be nature commons which both freeholders as man and coppie-holders as other live creature beast fish fowl and creep thing according to their several kind do communicate in if any quarrel this poetical proof I answer that they be nature secretary in the case of reason and the common law of humanity which have not the law be a law to themselves rom 2. and in like case therefore produce as good evidence by the planter of the gospel and doctor of the gentile and if we will surmount reason and appeal to divine censure rom. 2. act 17. 1. cor. 15. tit. 1. what need we other testimony than this of Solomon in his best time and for his best act imitate herein though with unlike success by godly jehoshaphat these thing be also write for our learning to the end of the world that wise magnanimous fortunate peaceable and godly king may propound this pattern to their industry yea more than in salomons time be this lawful to christian king in regard that the jewish pale be down and the church be catholic not appropriate to one people or circumscribe in a circumcise corner or swaddle in a small cradle as in that infancy of the circumcision but open and common to the community of mankind to which in this last age no better mean be leave then navigation and commerce wherein though the most aim at gain yet God that can raise of stone child to Abraham and make David conquest and Salomon discovery serviceable to the temple can n^ less convey the gospel than other ware into those part to who he have give such rich attractive in the east and west perhaps that this negotiation may further another in barter and exchange of rich treasure for their temporal he which bring the northern people be then pagan into the roman empire to make they lord of it and subject to he can of merchant allure with gold make or at least send with they preacher of his son and if the devil have send the moor with damnable mahumetism in their merchandize quite through the east to pervert so many nation with thraldom of their state and person out of the fry pan of Paynim rite into the fire of mahumetrie shall not God be good to Israel and gracious to the end of the earth so long since give in inheritance to his son @. 3 the tropological or moral use enlarge and amplify and a view take of man diversify dominion in microcosmicall cosmopoliticall and that spiritual or heavenly right over himself and all thing which the christian have in and by Christ general rule have exception Solomon be just and wise well know the difference of Ezion-Geber and Ophir and that difference of dominion which God that make man after his image have give we over the creature diversify both in the subject and object (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be write in Adam by creation in Solomon by revelation before nature suggest that sentence to chilo or the delphian devil the ape of divinity have cause it to be write in golden letter on the frontispiece of that temple to know a man self aright be annex to the knowledge of God in who we live move and be of who and for who be all thing not his essence but his express image thereof in his work of which man be in this world the principal what he have receive what he have lose what he retain by nature and what he recover and more than recover by grace in and of that divine resemblance in the first state all man have a natural right in common over the creature man in his fall be rob of supernatural wound in his natural gift supernatural we call those gift which now be not obtain but by god free gift and call the now man in righteousness and h^l^nesse eph. 4. Natural who which r^maine to and in dec^yed nature but the devil the great encloser by sin enclose these commons of humanity and alter their tenure from fee Simple to mere villeinage yet so God in justice remember mercy that some ruin remain since the fall not only in the faculty and substance of body and soul but in the personal right also over torpid vegetative and all unreasonable creature continue to he by that charter of reason which in so well order furniture and so well furnish order as the name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and import can not but have be confound if both the immortal and spiritual part in himself shall not have exercise dominion in some kind over the mortal and bodily and if in the great world the reasonable shall not have dispose of the unreasonable as for the conformity of man will and action to God and right use of that right over the creature to the sole glory of the creator to who man be subordinate as the creature to he this be by the crack of our earthen vessel in man fall lose and as a more subtle and spiritual liquor run out yet still remain in this deface image some obscure lineament and some ember rake up in the ash of man consumption which be by natural diligence quicken give lively expression of God and where supernatural work recover be more than recover internal and inchoative in the state of grace external also and eternal in that perfection of glory hence arise to a man a threefold tenure more and more excellent than any which Littleton have relate fou^e kind of (...) a microcosmicall in respect of ourselves a cosmopoliticall in regard of the world a catholic spiritual and heavenly in relation to Christ the head his body the church and that everlasting inheritance beside that which be the last and least of all in reference to political law and society the first original of all dominion and right be GOD who be lord of all who image as be say be imprint on and in man as otherwise so in this lordship or right which he have first in and on himself microcosmical in the member of his body see my microcosm or pilgrim as the region of this selfe-kingdome where the continual court of conscience the large jurisdiction of reason without which a man be as suspend from the power of himself term impo beside himself as in drunkenness and madness the freedom of the will which be no long will then willing and can be constrain the natural and vital action wrought within we and yet without we without our own knowledge or direction and much less subject to the correction of other the animal also in external and internal sense which can but exercise their faculty upon their due object these all proclaim that the poor slave be lord by divine grant even since the fall of no less than this little-world yea while he obey other he command himself to that obedience in which selfe-commands be the true exercise of virtue or vice this inheritance and dominion be so natural that it can be alienate without confiscation of the whole to the eternal giver of who he hold it for even in and by his eternal law be this make the rule of all righteousness to do as we will be do to to love our neighbour as ourselves and if there be no power in and of ourselves there can neither be virtue nor vice in love or hate our neighbour if no freedom of will and affection no reward with God or man if no government of man self reserve martyr of all man be the most monstrous which for obey God rather than man be the most honour and admire once subjection to God be absolute to prince as they be call god and yet die like man with reservation for conscience of God commandment where his reveal will to the contrary free not and yet even then we must by suffering do the will of superior thereby to show our fidelity in keep God proviso though with loss of our will where we love and our life where we fear show that we love and fear he most of all which yet be neither love nor fear nor virtue pro. 16.31 without this liberty of will and power in ourselves he that rule his own mind be better than he that w^nneth a city this be the great conquest the great possession to be master of thyself nor be this power absolute to ourselves over ourselves we be not our own we be god who have create we our parent which have procreate we our country which sustain we our king which maintain we our neighbour in common humanity to neglect a man fame or life much more prodigal to reject they be to rob all these of their due in we 1 cor. 6.20 and 7.23 lu. 11. Psa. 2. but in christian it be a deep sacrilege they be not their own they be buy with a price the great of price the blood of God they be gain by conquest Christ have find the strong man and spoil his good they be give by the father for the son inheritance and in baptism have by mutual covenant Christian liberty give over themselves to his service the freedom which Christ have purchase for we do yield liberty not licentiousness free not from duty to do what we lust but make we have a lust to do our duty sweet incline the will and renew the mind to esteem the service of God and of man for his sake the great freedom he then that be Christ be a new creature to which bondage or freedom and other worldly respect gal. 5. 1 cor. 7. the pope deny his baptismal name the other be rebaptise be mere respect and circumstance for he that be bond be the lord freeman and he that be free be the lord servant it be the devil sophistry as to separate what he have join so to confound what he have distinguish and it be observable that the pope and the Anabaptist which be brethren in this iniquity have first deny their baptism the seal of their christianity for these many right do not subject we to many master but subordinate our subjection in the beauty of order even in political or civil right one may be lord of the fee another of the soil a three of the way by ingress egress regress a four have right in the same ground in time of fair or market the whole vicinity in common * * a^ be the use of some parish after lamas etc. time and other other way all who right be subject to the right royal and sovereign and if in propriety of strict nature there may be such community of subordinate right without tumultuous cross or pernicious confusion how much more in thing more spiritual and more easy communicable in which respect the philosopher hold themselves of themselves complete and in whatsoever state not dependent where he be proper a man of other man of the world sen epist. 9 not contract he to use senecaes word in this microcosmicall happiness but need the cosmopoliticall help not add beat to live at least howsoever to live well a sound heart and good conscience be sufficient to the other food and raiment be necessary to this the best society be of virtuous thought which make man as Scipio say but vicious company as the company of vice be the most horrid and desolate wilderness no exile can deprive a man of this city no prison of this society no pillage of these riches no bondage of this liberty in this sense Socrates say he be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) all place his country all man his countryman in this bias when he have lose all by fortune of war carry all his away with he in this zeno marvel at nothing neither in nature who depth can be search nor in fortune who possibility of most licentious effect must be the glass to view our own fortune Laert. in zen. and to make that light by long premeditation which other do by long suffer in this in this another Seneca teach in this Diogenes when pirate expose he to sale profess his art be to rule man and bid they sell he to xeniades for he need a master from who when his friend will have redeem he he refuse say lion be master and not servant of they which feed they Laert. in diog. in this the stoic call their poor wiseman rich free a king in this sense Socrates with who we begin say if his fortune will not suit and sort to he he will make himself suitable to his fortune so long as life last and humanity continue they be universal possessor of the universe in which kind Aristotle ha^h leave more memorable monument of contemplation than Alexander of conquest nature commons the sun star heaven air be common at least to their mind in utmost of misery and with internal plenty they supply all external defect in this miscrocosmicall and cosmopoliticall wealth consist all the philosopher estate and revenue which they call virtue and morality which make they master of themselves and thereby of the world the just circle of the centre of humanity for which it be create these thing i think I see not without pity nor can resemble they more fit then to horse of excellent courage but hood-winked so that some little transparence of light make they more importunate to other mischief and their own precipice whence philosopher have be call patriarch of heretic or else like mil-horse to compass with this world wheel the immovable centre of nature corruption Tertul. to which they be subject no less than other which work at a querne and stand still at their hand-mill by a large circumference always move joh. 8. proceed in true freedom nothing at all if the son make you free you shall be free indeed these to make the noble comparison may seem star child of the night which in their morality give ray of light that to the world make they eminent ornament Tertul. pat. faith of the philosopher 4. col. ^ 1. th^s 5. and may make many of we ashamed which in the day sunshine of the gospel love and live darkness and like owl bat and wild beast hide ourselves studious from the sun fly abroad and prey in the dark fashion ourselves to this world have our cogitation and conversation darken CHRIST be nevertheless to all that have eye to see the sun of righteousness by who we be by regeneration translate from the power of darkness and make the child of the day that we may know what we worship and who we have believe not so much talk as walk even in this bodily prison these liberty of the gospel be true though yet in the imperfect growth of infancy restore to ourselves to the world yea to a more glorious state whereof nature can not so much as dream that whereas man have lose both the former by suggestion of evil devil-angel Christ have exalt far above all heaven visible to supply these throne of dominion which those rebellious throne and dominion lose the evidence whereof we have by faith and hope our head already have take livery and seisin and from thence live in we actuate and move we by his spirit prepare we in this fight of militant grace to that light of triumphant glory even these first fruit be sweet and solid I have learn say our apostle in whatsoever state I be ph. 4.11 12 13. 1. C^r. 2.14 therewith to be content and I know both how to be abase and I know how to abound every where and in all thing I be instruct both to be full and to be hungry and to abound and have need I be able to all thing through Christ strengthen i this be the true riches not in the chest but in the heart which therefore neither man nor devil can take a way and see his degree in this school first (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) I have learn this discipline not in the school of nature but of grace for we be all teach of God second (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) this science I know whereas the wise of philosopher profess to know but this one thing that he know nothing three (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and without all controversy this be a great mystery of godliness in which the natural man be not initiate he know not the thing of God nor can know they for they be foolishness to he but the unction of the spirit only enter man in these mystery which the word signify after which follow in due order joh. 15. 1. cor. 15. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) I be able to all thing to do to suffer all thing and therefore lord of himself and of the world but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in Christ enable without i say Christ you can do nothing and not I say Paul but the grace of God in i whereas those philosopher have no stock but their own be poor pedlar not royal merchant which will seem to fly but want wing yea life and as for this christian self and world and heaven-interest it trouble not intermedle not luk. 22. 2 6.10 1. cor. 9.4 verse 19 disturb not earthly possession and power for the great be a servant of all and he be often poor in secular sense which make many rich as have nothing even then when he possess all thing be I not free have we not power say Paul who when he be free from all make himself the servant of all that he may gain the more not as they run and fight ^ cor. 9.26 27. but in this freedom and rule of the spirit beat down and subdue the body of flesh and mortify his earthly member not seek his own but the good of other as I please all man in all thing lawful for of other thing he say if I shall please man and 10. ^4 33. gal. 1.10 I shall not be the servant of Christ not seek my own profit but of many that they may be save the contempt of riches and greatness be the most compendious way to be rich and great the contempt I mean which proceed from content not that of the unthankful prodigal nor of the desperate beggar and he can never be poor that have Christ himself and all thing in present possession God and heaven in reversion this this be that which lift up his thought and so fill they with the fullness of God that he neglect these bas^r and true inferior matter and Ephes. 3 that which other be vicious he be and it be his virtue to be covetous voluptuous ambitious but the object be righteousness joy in the holy ghost and the kingdom of heaven rom. 14.17 this whole globe of earth and water seem great to they that be little but to thought true great and like to God it hold its true place price quantity that be the low base least say the orator say Seneca som. Scip plin. l. 2. Scipio be ashamed of the roman empire point of this point and another be ashamed of this stir for earth by foolish man not consider say Socrates to Alcibiades brag o^ his land which yet in a universal map he can not show whereas the universe itself be not large enough to be the map of the christian inheritance who be the world and life 1. co. 3.22 Heb. 2. and death and thing present and thing to come all be they the three heaven and paradise of God their patrimony the angel their guard be they not all minister spirit send forth for their sake that be heir of salvation the devil the world sin death and hell their triumph Paul Apollo Cephas all the worthy elder senator and of the celestial jerusalem those firstborn who name be write in heaven their kindred brethren Heb. 12. fellow citizen fellow member Christ himself their head their life and God their portion their exceed great reward their own god among they in a tenure like himself Apoc. 21. eternal and unspeakable glorious the degree of this be mention by Paul b b 1. cor. 3. ps. 39.20.4 all be you and you Christ and Christ god and this the descent of our right God Christ all thing God give all to his son his son with all to we Christ with his body be the centre and God the circumference of this mystical corporation rouse up then thy thought o my soul let these worldly pismire toil about their hill and busy bee about their hive and let they in court and suit where forum c c cyprian contest about the shadow of the ass shadow obscure and dark shadow be time of eternity motion of immutability earth of heaven and in a vain show or shadow walk he disquiet himself in vain that heap up riches and know not who shall gather they all that I see be i say the philosopher foolosopher that I see not be i thing see be temporal thing not see be eternal my faith be the evidence of thing not see my hope be not hope if see Heb. 11.1 rom. 8. col. 3.1 and my charity mind the thing above and out of sight where Christ my love so Ignatius call he sit at the right hand of the god of love which be love and yet if I affect shadow this sun yield so far to my yet weak and grosser bodily affect and while it thus shine on my soul by grace it make the shadow as move of time attend my body this be the prerogative of christian godliness to have the promise of this life and that which be to come sure if I be in the starry heaven with mortal eye I can not thence in such distance be able to see this small globe whence I see so small the great star d. Dee in a m. s. whence the light of the world and king of star so much near in place great d d the sun be if art have right measure above 166. time the great star about 100 great than the earth rom. 10. in quantity more visible in quality seem as little as the head that view it and shall this earth which can there be see so eclipse my low moon-like borrow beam by interposition that all shall be shadow in a double night and twofold darkness no no I will get up thither even far^e above myself far above all heaven say not in thy heart who shall ascend into heaven that be to bring Christ from above and thence with a spiritual and heavenly eye look on earth and not here and hence with a carnal and sensual eye look on heaven this make the heavenly body little the great light of heaven eclipse not in itself but to i by every interpose moon and the heaven of heaven whole invisible so shall it not annoy my sense so shall not my sense of earth annoy my reason so shall not my reason perplex my faith but I shall use it as not use as not abuse it to help and not to hinder my present pilgrimage and think not that we speak impossibility of every christian it be say and we be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 1. cor. 7. Ephes. 2.6 rom. 6.5 plant together into the similitude of his resurrection by baptism both in regard of the imputation and infusion if this high mystery be hide yet as when thou have view the sun it make thou uncapable of see the earth either at that time or for a space afterward so the soul that often by devout contemplation be accustom to view this sun neither can then equal nor care much to fix his eye on earthly delight after but have drink of these heavenly water be not very thirsty of these muddy spring and of trouble ale after such generous wine these thing be indeed effect by degree nor can we at once leap from the cradle to the saddle and I suspect the forward herculean hand that can so soon with newborn gripe strangle old serpent yet be not the christian always a dwarf but still grow up in grace and be ever grow into he which i^ the head Ephes 4. CHRIST he be the Alpha and Omega he be lord of all as the son and heir of man the world and heaven and he with all this right be give unto we inhabit purify quicken man heart by faith whence he also be microcosmical master of himself cosmopolitical of the world in catholic christianity heir of heaven all of in by and for Christ to who be glory for ever amen @. 4 the Christian and philosopher compare in that challenge to be rich free a king that this hinder not but further political subjection and of the happy combination of wisdom and royalty in SALOMON as likewise in our day all art be but the supply of nature defect to patch up her ragged and wear rent to cover rather than to cure or recover man fall even that king of art the political art of king be not heir by whole blood but the gift of God beget since the fall and abundant argue our unruliness otherwise which must have lord and law to rule we by like favour of God lest man dissolution shall bring a desolation come in political tenure and civil state and right among man the lest possession be this which we call our proper as be no part of ourselves and a small part of the small part of the universe great be the universe itself and the great right thereto be that which be most universal whereof the soul be only capable great than the great world be this little for who that be make yea for who the word the maker of both be make flesh and as in itself so also to we Psal. 16 who little it advantage to win the whole world and loose our own soul great of all and greatness itself be god the lot of the christian inheritance and the portion of his cup to who the father have give the son and with he all thing these thing may concur and do in Solomon without confusion that the three last may also be separate from the first and that subsist without the least knowledge of these last be a true conclusion and how many have much in political and civil possession which be have and hold of the thing they have and hold as the price of their freedom not so much as dream of any other tenure but propriety laugh at the philosopher sen. benef l. 7 c. 4. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) see Laert. in vit diog. and amb. ep. 7. where you may read calanus whole epistle and in the end of this book and rage at the christian far challenge which yet disturb not as not a worldly tenure propriety but that positive in the of man incorrupted nature be now comparative more certain more ample by faith and shall be in a superlative of full happiness even still propriety in strict sense be the subject state and that with many subdivision and diversification a high and universal right appertain in each man propriety to the king as lord of all that naked cynic that neither have house nor dish not only compare himself with Alexander in emulation of his great title proclaim I be Diogenes the dog but even great Alexander have he not be Alexander profess he will wish to be Diogenes neither fear nor desire can any whit dazzle he in that royal lustre but be question by Alexander if he fear he not ask if he be good or bad be answer good and who say he be afraid of good be bid ask he desire nothing but the restitution of the sun which his interposition have take from he insinuate a great riches in nature inheritance then in the great king beneficence and in his own mind then in the other spacious empire say Seneca posset dare nor have Greece alone such spirit calanus in India be more admire of Alexander than the king of he say he in his epistle to I speak not as approve these man in all their speech and action but if they can do so much in that twilight of nature how much more may christians aspire unto on who as be say before the sun of righteousness be rise these indeed be child of the day which know how to honour the king in that fear of God which be the begin of wisdom which the cynike gymnosophist and sto^kes not have attain dream in their night and do those thing rather as man talk and walk in their sleep then as man true know what they say and do like these ophyrians we write of which possess much gold but Solomon alone know how to bestow it on the temple which sanctify the Gold and yet how far do these philosopher dream exceed the seem wake and watchful care of Croesus and Crassus which rather in trouble feverous frenzy or opium sleep be more fatal perplex esteem virtue the true treasure and riches rather to consist in need little then hold much and a content mind to be a sure cosser then the bottomless bag of insatiate avarice and nature commons of the heaven and element to be great possession than a few handful of enclose dust more admire the physician skill 3. 11. and seq. cyp. ep. l. 2. ep. 2. gen. 25.6 Cic parad. 5. 1. tim. 1.8 amb. ep. 7. handle this theme learned godly (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Laert in zen^ne than the druggist shop full of simple or the apothecary of medicine more joy in more enjoy as the member of the body the public than the private wealth more the contemplation whereby the mind reasonable use all thing even those of other without further care than that propriety whereby the sense distinguish the owner and add to this little own the great care of get keep spend and no less fear of lose yea in many a Tantalus of use as if he be the gaoler rather than owner of that wealth which he lade with iron and strangle in his iron chest for no other fault but call such a miser master the wise man be like Isaac in who Abraham seed be call who he make his heir but these which be call rich be sometime like Ishmael thrust out of all at the best like the son of the concubine to who Abraham give gift and send they away the mind as that which alone be immortal have state of perpetuity and inheritance the sense in her propriety be capable only of gift and moveable from this glimpse of reason do those philosopher the son of nature how much more shall we the son of the free woman attribute liberty and a kingdom to their wise man saint Paul more full saint Ambrose lade with the spoil of these egyptian therewith adorn the christian tabernacle he be a free man say he which do a a Epictetus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. (@) may be say of a good man and his affection as Virgil of Augustus Ep^ct. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. sen. joh. 14.23 gal. 2.2.20 joh. 6. cant. 1. bern. in cant. 21 16 32. 5. 1. cor. 7 3^ ps. 62. job. 24. what he w^ll b and life as he please nor can be force to any thing now the wise man will that which be good hate the evil not for fear but for love obey the commandment seek not to please the uncertain vulgar but his mind hang even in the balance poise with the sheckle of the sanctuary not force by law but he be la^ to himself and have the same write not in table of stone but in fleshy table of the heart not fear the law because his debt be acquit and can therefore be arrest not servant to any yet make himself the servant of all for their good who service to God do not consume but consummate his liberty for God service be perfect freedom to who when all thing be lawful yet nothing be lawful that be not expedient that edify not who abide found and ground on Christ the rock and therefore fear not the swell wave nor rage wind fluctuate not with every blast of doctrine be not puff with prosperity deject with adversity but like joseph which buy those that buy he even all the land of Egypt beside for Pharaoh after himself have be sell for a slave abide himself in whatsoever change of fate and state he have subordinate his will to god will and if he will have he do or suffer any thing possess or loose either himself or ought he have it shall be his will also this make job abide himself when he be shake and as it be thunderstricken out of all at once yea by a sacred antiperistasis he gather his spirit together and not only not blaspheme but bless then and therefore bless God who be no less good in take then in give who have love we and give himself for we before he take aught from we yea therefore take this that he may give that both himself and ourself to we he that lose his life find it and he that deny himself and his own will pu^^ of the chain of his bondage the slavery to innumerable tyrant impious lust and be thus a free man indeed free from the devil the world himself breathe the free air of heaven in the low and dark dungeon yea in the close of prison his own body close by contemplation conve^es himself forth to fetch often walk in the paradise of God once he love Christ he live Christ and therefore can be compel by another will not be compel and master by himself belong to be more and more impel by that spirit which sweet force into the desire haven and to be draw by the father that he may be enable to follow the son with who he be unable to hold pace and fear because he love thus desire help that be it by stripe or threat or other tentation his foot may be make more sure more swift he fear God and therefore fear nothing and whereas he that commit sin be the servant of sin he be thus not only set free by Christ but more high dignify and make a king and priest to God he daily sacrifice prayer praise good work his own live body in reasonable service not the body of dead and unreasonable beast have always the door of the heavenly palace the ear of the heavenly king open to his intercession he be also a king over himself a little world a great conquest over fortune the magnify lady of the great world which he frame to his own manner and if he can bend it to h^s will know how to bend his will to it over the devil the god of the world over death which he make as do the roman tyrant Valerian and Tamerlane the turkish Bajazeth his footstool or stirrup to mount up to a high and better life and like David cut off the head of this giant which have defy all the army of mankind with his own sword he be a king over the world which he neither love for his heart and treasure be in heaven nor fear for what can it do at the worst but further his heavenly happiness nor fashion himself to it but it to himself use it as not use it not set his heart on it for the fashion of this world pass away as a scene where he but act a while his part and a strange country through which he travel to his true home where his king be go before to prepare a place for he and leave the earnest of his spirit with we have take our earnest our flesh there to take possession to make intercession in the presence of God for we our head be there already which can so far degenerate as to neglect his body the real and live part of himself the fullness of he that fill all in all thing eph. 1. vlt. pro. 14.17 Li manuduct li. 2. d. 1^ (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) this kingdom be not meat and drink pomp and splendour and much less intrude into the secret obtrude on the sceptre of their sovereign but righteousness peace and joy in the holy ghost which the philosopher know not and whatsoever they have challenge as yet in comparison of true Christian^ they be but as king in a play as Plutarch say of the stoic which talk stalk walk on their stage and act that part which in deed and in spiritual right be our real part and inheritance and if a kingdom be a power subject to none than every true christian be a king not in anabaptistical frenzy to cast off all yoke of loyalty to cast out all state and royalty and like their John of Leyden to make himself a licentious monarch press down mean while with so many envy vice misery but in this that in that he obey his sovereign not so much of his slavish fear as because he love he and love that god which have give he sovereignty and therefore as to the live image of God yield obedience to he not grudge or of necessity but cheerful and with a willing heart make his superior will to be his own because it be god will and if he command that which he find countermand by the high law senec. he rebel not revile not where he can be willing to do he will yet be willing to suffer the will of his sovereign thus be this man spiritual a king and behold all thing beneath he by suffer overcome by obey roll himself if not other in this sense Christ say of the church of Smyrna I know thy poverty but thou be rich Apoc. 2. and 3 act. 3. and of the laodicean which esteem themselves rich increase with good and need nothing that they be wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked silver and gold have I none say that rich apostle who pretend successor out of a will to be rich have fall into tentation and a snare and many foolish and noisome lust for the love of money be the root of all evil which while these covet after tim. 6. they have err from the faith and instead of apostolical have prove apostatical with babylonical mystery confound thing spiritual and external enclose all the commons of the church and the spirit to the only use of the Vatican and then with the spoil of all christian this spiritual man must judge all and be judge of none usurp the right of and right over king not consider the diversity of these tenor but yet to return to our Solomon if a man by this christian wisdom become free rich a king what shall a king of man be with addition of this wisdom but heroical how good a good and wise King and if not more than a man yet a worthy of man and near to God this appear in David and Solomon two learned no less than potent king the one gain greatness at home the other disperse those ray beyond their own orb to remote Ophir this we see in Philip and Alexander in Caesar and Augustus learn be the best jewel in a king crown and christian wisdom like the vertical cross upon it which both in book by king Alphonsus call his faithful counselor and in their bosom speak that without fear or flattery which servant can or dare not make they to see with their own eye and not only by experience of other yea with the eye of the worthy of former time and to converse with the ancient of all age and search into the cause of thing to penetrate seasonable into affair which sudden assault other but especial in marine discovery we be not so much indebt to the power as the learning of king and both together make a bless match and have produce to the world the best knowledge of itself Solomon be example who in the writing of Moses be instruct of Ophir attempt the discovery how little knowledge have the greek of Asia till Alexander employ both Aristotle with great cost and himself also in discovery of the land and sea beside Nearchus and other his captain julius and Augustus open the first light in manner to the roman the one in discovery of the world and thk part adjoin the other also unto the indies how little of the world have be discover for want of learning by the Turk mogoll persian Chinois and Abassine howsoever call great how little be most of they all but what need I foreign example how little in comparison have our nation the ocean darling hug continual in her bosom discover and make use of yea they be the prey of the easterling and lumbards scarce know their neighbour sea before the late eruption of captive learning in the former age and more especial in the glorious sunshine of queen Elizabeth and after that sunset in the succeed that I say not in ophyrian region exceed time of king james I dare not presume to speak of his majesty learning which require a more learned pen and where to speak the truth will seem flattery nor yet of that learned queen who sometime break in piece the artless picture make to represent she for Apelles be only fit to paint Alexander Homer to sing Achilles and Virgil his Augustus thus a more learned witness have say and I will recite that to the last year of her life due and daily she observe her set hour for read sir f. Bacon Aduanc of learn l. 1. that this part of the island never have 45. year of better time and yet not through the calmness of the season but through the wisdom of her regiment the truth of religion establish the constant peace and security the good administration of justice the temperate use of the prerogative not slack nor much strain the flourish state of learning the convenient state of wealth and mean both of cowne and subject the habit of obedience and moderation of discontent notwithstanding the difference of religion her single life Rome alarm and the neighbour country on fire hence that felicity of the state of religion and especial of navigation now in threescore year continuance grow almost cut of the cradle and swaddle clothes to the present ripeness among we that our virgin-mother in her preparation to the crown by the cross and in happy exploit another David in ^are of just judge and justice jehosaphat in reformation H^zekiah in restore the law that be lose josiah in peace plenty success magnificence and the pillar of all this navigation another Solomon and with great happiness than his leave her name without salomons imputation of fall to idolatry to survive her person and to become her heir and successor in they all die in a good age as be say of David full of day riches and honour in these time Britain have recover her eye and spirit and have discover the western Babylon and her labyrinthian maze and gire of superstition first of all european kingdom and in maturest order cast off that yoke which ignorance cause by irruption of barbarian c c the saxon expel the Britain with their learning the dane after learning have bless the christian Saxons drown all learned man book school art with a ^loud that in k. Alfreds time himself write there be not one priest can understand his latin service and till the conquest this mist continue in great part that priest then be a wonder that know his grammar Alfredi epist ^p asser men. mat. Paris an. 1067 into all part of the roman empire have bring in as a mist whereby that romish mystery of iniquity may work unespied have put on the neck and veil heart of our forefather which by the light of learning be now espy and exile and this freedom maintain mangre all the gate and force of Rome and Hell yea he that command honour thy mother make her sex honourable and cause that a woman have the honour over that Sisera that Abimelech that Holofernes the sword of a woman prevail not by close advantage but in the sight of the sun in the world amphitheatre all Europe look on and wonder yea the most still giddy with that cup interpose against she this christian Amazon overthrow those romish both and as they write of the rhinoceros toss those bull which have think to have push she by their horn of deprivation and invasion and the close fight of treason and insurrection out of England and Ireland to the admiration of man the joy of angel and acknowledgement in all of the sword of the lord and of Gedeon the power of the high perfect in her weakness and which more fit our navigation treatise this virago not lose she own virgin-zone by her general * * sir f. Drake be the first general that swim about the globe Candish the next first loose the virgin zone of the earth and like another sun twice encircle the globe learn have edge her sword then but the successor of this our Deborah like Achilles in the poet have a panoply a whole armour of learned devise and like Apollo in the mid of the Muse^ so have we see he in the learned disputation of both university such a Apollo who oracle discover the devil master piece and papal monster piece of powder treason and bring it to powder by the light of his wisdom prevent those infernal lightning and sulphurous hellish thunder who learned writing as the arrow of pythius have give the deep * * in the question of Antichrist in his majesty monit preface and most fatal wound to this misty mystical Python who birth have make he a great king who great learning have purchase another kingdom and make the school to admire he in divinity the tribunal in law the senate and counsel table as the table of counsel and map of human wisdom who arm but bless be we that his learning and wisdom keep we from their dreary noise and dismal experiment that we in the tragedy of so many nation be spectator that the god of peace have with the gospel of peace give we a Solomon true type of the prince of peace who day be day of peace at home who treaty propound way of peace abroad who sun-like ray have shine not by bare discovery but by rich negotiation to this our salomons Ophir in what part of the world soever the quarrelsome wit of man have place it if you look near hand Scotland be add and Ireland now at last make english disperse fear by english city and plantation if you look further * * in the mogul country who sea be the stage of this war as I have by relation of sir tho. roe ambassador there with those which seek for Ophir in the west indies there may you see english plantation and colony in Virginia and other part of both those suppose peru the northern and southern America if to Sofala on the south of Africa or to the east of Asia there also have the english fleet pass trade and if you think nothing complete without arm surpass the most advantageous assailant that even the indian which yield common in martial always in neptunian affair to the moor have a proverb three moor to a Portugal three portugal to a Englishman who happy time have exceed salomons and H^rams discovery even where no writing have mention any name of Noah son where none of Noah son ever yet inhabit where the sun itself seem afraid of uncouth sea horrid land and marine monster hide himself diverse month in the year together and but peep when he do appear as it be fearful pry and compass about with beam there have the beam of our british sun descry b b king james his newland name and exhale profit from those portentous c c the whale fish dragon of the sea lo these the happy war against the beast by sea and land not like nimrods hunt of man and seek new d d in the northwest discovery by Hudson button baffin etc. Boe^ Mari etc see best voyage discovery notwithstanding the ocean army of icy land affront till the sea itself fear total subjection have embay itself and lock up all passage by unknown land and not to mention the new Wales there discover England have her Virginia bermuda new England Scotland a new daughter of her own name yea Ireland by the care of the present deputy be now multiply also in America and his majesty have sow the seed of new kingdom in that new World let not the severe sort censure i of presumption if I thus embellish my rude line with these glorious name wherein I communicate in the public benefit at once testify my fear of God the author with my honour to these two great light of heaven to our Britain world as actor autor instrument mortal image of the immortal he alone it be and make our king a defender of the faith by which eternity flow from time well husband and to resemble herein also (...) in this tranquillity we may employ our industry in painful and gainful labour I also in this peace under Israel Solomon can from the shore behold with safety with delight and in this glass let other see the dangerous navigation and ophyrian expedition of our country man and view their warlike fight in the watery plain as from a fortify tower so the mogul do the battle of the english and portugal not only free from peril but enjoy some the gain of their pain other the sweet contemplation of their laborious action all of we the fruit of our labour and negotiation at home and abroad which grow from that jacobaean tree who blossom be inscribe this work be the fruit of that peace and my song may be that I may write with ink at leisure and under the shadow of this tree you read with pleasure what these pilgrim have write with hazard if not with blood in remote sea and land I flatter not the present I devote to future posterity this monument of praise to the almighty who have give we this Solomon if not in all dimension never be there or shall be such yet herein like that we enjoy under his wing in the combustion of neighbour country this our peace plenty learning justice religion the land the sea voyage to Ophir the world new world and if we have new heart the communton of saint Psa. 144. vlt. Psa. 118. guard of angel salvation of Christ and God himself the portion of our cup and lot of our inheritance bless be the people that be in such a case yea blessed be the people that have the lord for their god this be the day that the lord have make let we rejoice and be glad in it and if our time yield some exception also and the traducer impute it to flattery that I bring not evil on the stage I say that bless and loyal Shem and japheth bid from themselves and other that which curse cham and Canaan quarrel salomons time yield grievance and we live on earth not in heaven there be the perfection of wisdom holiness happiness whereof salomons time be a complete type we have the truth in part but all fullness be in he in who dwell all the fullness of the godhead bodily col. 1. and 2. which to expect here be epicurism and state-puritanisme malcontent I be no lord of time nor prince of prince they be both god peculiar I endeavour to keep i in the office of my call to choose the good part and in conscience towards God to acknowledge God work in all and special in those of who he have say you be god to be a accuser be the devil office and they which be evil themselves will only see evil in other @. v. of the propriety which infidel have in their land and good of propriety in the sea and of salomons propriety of the sea and Shore at Ezion geber thus have we discourse of the prerogative of God peculiar the right which the true child of the church have in Christ and by he in all thing but what shall we say of propriety of propriety of infidel Christ kingdom be not of this world and proper neither give nor take away worldly propriety civil and political interest but add to his subject in these thing a more sanctify use all thing be pure to the pure impure to the impure for they be sanctify by the word and prayer which infidel know not in that interior court of conscience which in the wicked be defile the just have before God a just use tit. 1 vlt. 1 tim. 4. use the world as not abuse it not be high mind nor trust in uncertain riches not set their heart on they 1 cor. 7. 1 tim. 6. Psa. 62. mat. 6. luk. 12. though they increase nor lose their heart with they in their decrease or loss not lay up to themselves treasure on earth where rust and moth and thief have power not sing a requiem soul take thy ease thou have lay up treasure for many year when this fool soul itself be the worst thing it have and may be turn this night out of that secure body and secure state but in the outward civil court and before man the gospel altar not remove not the land mark of the law but as well bid give to Caesar that which be Caesar as to God that which be god and therefore the right of man by the royal or common law establish all derive from that of nature and consequent from God who be the creator of nature be in conscience of God commandment to be permit to they neither without god special command may the israelite spoil as they do the egyptian or invade the canaanite it be saint judes note of filthy sodomite fleeper ignorant beast disciple of cham Balaam and Core rock cloud without water corrupt tree twice dead rage wave wander star to despise government jud. ep. natural bruit beast say saint Peter prophesy of his pretend successor spot and blot well without water cloud carry about with a tempest to who the black darkness be reserve for ever 2 pet. 2 promise to other liberty and be themselves the servant of corruption in this sense the servant of servant neither can the devil devise a great scandal to the gospel then that it shall rob king of their supremacy and pre-eminence subject of their land and state as if to convert to Christ be to ever out of their possession and subvert state which be the cause of so few jew convert and so perverse conversion in America as I have elsewhere show the gospel be not a sword to take away earth but to destroy hell and add the key of the kingdom of heaven not a hammer to break in piece the door of earthly kingdom and lest of all make instead of key picklock the note of a thief even though he shall enter at the door and lawful succeed lawful bishop which open and shut all at pleasure against which there be but one word of force and that be force itself and power which their faction can overthrow the romish conscience being lesbian and leaden or iron and run compass and variation as the needle of that see have touch it to observe the pope as the magnetical pole which philosopher say be not that of heaven but of the earth God have make we man his son have call we to be christian and this opinion do turn man into beast yea christian man into wild beast without all propriety or any thing proper to humanity which with the right thereof extend to infidel these hold not Christ nor hold of he as joint heir yet be they not without all right infidel propriety joh. 8.35.36 yea of he also they hold in another tenure not as son but as servant and the servant abide not in the house for ever but the son abide ever but if the son make they free they be free indeed these hold in a tenure of villainage not in state of spiritual inheritance which yet warrant a just title for the time against all man as servant use their master good but be call by death to give account to their lord be dispossess of all and themselves also for ever whereas the child here seem in wardship and to receive some short allowance in the nonage of this life but in the day of death the birth day of true and eternal life as at full age enter into full possession of heaven and earth for ever that tenure yet of godless man which be without hope without Christ without God in the world be a tenure from God eph. 2.10 1.16.17.1 though as be say in a kin^e of villainage and warrant against all man as hold of and at the will of the lord Christ by who and for who all thing be create and he be before all thing and in he all thing consist and he be the head of the body the church this tenure in be the church jointure that of human nature from he who all thing be remain to foreigner Eph 2. col. 1. which be stranger from the commonwealth of Israel and from the privilege of the holy city the new jerusalem for after the image of God by this image of the invisible God be all man create which though it be in part by sin deface yet through the mercy of God in part remain in the worst of man which still retain a immortal reasonable spirit endue with understanding will and memory resemble the unity and trinity animate and rule how imperfect soever the organical body and with it the inferior creature which dominion over the creature be by God himself reckon to the image of God infect with sin and infest with a curse but God even in the sentence that judgement remember mercy add thorn and ihistle and sorrow gen. 1.26 and 3^ 17.18 19 and sweat but take not away the use yea he renew the blessing to all the son of Noah and enlarge their commission indent in man heart this natural right and in the beast this natural awe and subjection by nature own hand write he that then bless they with replenish the earth do confound their Babel building gen. 1.7 8. and scatter they abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth to put it in execution and have make of one blood all nation of man as be say before to dwell on all the face of the earth act. ^7 26. and have determine the time and bound of their habitation (...) 19.20 ^1 22 1 ^eg ^ gen 47.20 Da^ 4. joh^^9 ^9 11. thus he that give Canaan to the israelite be say in a proper sense though differ manner to have give be unto the child of lot for a possession the land of the emims and the land of the Zamzummims which he destroy before they as he do that of the horim to the child of Esau that as the former generation enter by the law of nature as first finder so these by the law of war as confounder of the former and founder of a second state and succession both guide by the hand of divine providence Solomon give hiram twenty city in recompense of cedar and firre-tree and gold and innumerable be the compact and contract mention in history whereby the rule of country and state have be make over to new master or to the old in a new tenure as joseph buy all Egypt their land^ and person to Pharaoh but in all these work of me^ God be a coworker the most high rule in the kingdom of man and give it to whosoever he will be verify both active and passive in Nabuchadnezzar Cyrus be call his servant pilate power be acknowledge by the lord of power to be give from above and to that roman sovereignty how unjust soener their conquest be he submit himself in his birth occasion at Bethlehem by the decree and taxation of Augustus in his life by payment of tribute and in his death by a roman both kind and sentence be his proclamation whether * * by divine immediate vocation as in Moses or mix with lot or mere or free choice or inheritance or conquest of war or exchange or gift or session or marriage or purchase or title begin in unjust force or fraud at first yet afterward acknowledge by those who it concern and approve by time which in temporal thing proscribe and prescribe by this king of king do king reign and the power that be be ordain of God to which every soul must be subject even for conscience sake and whosoever therefore resist the power resist the ordnance of God and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation this be write when all king be idolater and infidel nor have the world many age after ever hear that infidelity heresy or idolatry be cause sufficient for rebellion in subject or invasion of neighbour as in the many example of the israelitish and jewish king which nei^her invade other for infidelity nor be at home deprive for heresy though all the neighbour be infidel and most of those king idolater to usher religion by the sword be scarce approve among Mahumetans which permit man liberty of soul though not of body but to turn all the world into Timars and knight or soldier fee be more intolerable it be barbarous latin to turn the title of all free land of subject hold in in * * hence come the ^ (@) vid S.T. Smith^ common wealth l 3 c. 10. see this question handle more large in bait p. Alex his bull l. 2. c. 1. read also a spanish divine in his Relect. pot ecc. and he with many argument confute this pretend power of the pope ca^e^an also 2.2 q. 66. a. 8. t. aq. 2.2 q. 10. ar. 1. vid. vict. ind. n 31. and in which he prove the pope gift etc. can not give just title to the indies and confute 7 title as unjust 1 King 2.35 1 Chro. 18.13 2 cro. 21. rom. 5. and 6 and 7 Gen 4. gen. 10. act. 4 32.34 and 45. luk. 12.14 trust of perform rent service and other condition annex to the first donation by the superior lord but this more barbarous divinity to dipossesse barbarian of their inheritance and by their want of faith to increase our fee of inheritance as if all the world be hold of the pope in catholic fee obtrude on we for catholic faith Christ come not to destroy the law but to fulfil it and therefore do not disannul by the gospel that natural commandment of allegiance and obedience to prince the honour due to the parent of our country neither do religion make a father or mother but nature and it be say honour thy father and mother without annexion of quality good or bad nor can jonathan deny filial observance or loyal subjection to Saul with such excuse nor can the key that come late expel sceptre which be of more ancient foundation nor heavenly key open or shut earthly door nor can infidelity which concern divine law yea in matter supernatural take away that right which positive or natural law have give nor exclude from just title on earth which some hold rather than in such as have not hear nor can a pretend vicar challenge just what his lord never claim what he also disclaim nor do he send soldier but preacher to convert the world to the faith true catholic and therein show himself a true Solomon a prince of peace figure by this our Solomon who send ship of merchandise and not of war to Ophir and as for any high priest bull who roar may conjure the spirit of prince within the circle of pontifical censure those day know no such brutish dialect yea wise and just Solomon be so far from fear or desire the bull of Abiathar that he put he out of the high priest place for intermeddle with the crowne-succession and set Zadok in his room and for Ophir long before inhabit as appear gen. 10. he do not for the discovery thereof then new challenge jurisdiction or sovereignty as lord of that sea or region by he discover no more than the ophirians have be lord of Israel if they have then discover it but leave thing as he find they the country appropriate to the inhabitant the sea open to such as will and can in like manner adventure otherwise it be with he and his right in Ezion geber on the shore of the red sea in the land of edom. for this be peculiar both the shore and sea adjoin unto Solomon chief lord of edom which David have before conquer and so it continue under the king of juda till the evil day of jehoram the son of good jehoshaphat who make like use of this haven but with unlike effect true it be that if man have continue in his first integrity have never prove such quarrel pronoun to make war more than grammatical in set all the part of speech together by the ear but sin enter into the world yea as a invade tyrant rule it be necessary that propriety shall prevent rapine of the idler and mighty and encourage the industry of the just labourer which for the sweat of his brow may earn and eat his own bread thus have Cain and Abel their proper good he the fruit of the earth this of his cattle the proper object of their labour and when the whole earth be fill with cruelty God cleanse the confusion of those fence-breaker by a general deluge after the flood Noah posterity have the earth divide among they and in that renovation of the world in the golden age of the church when they have all thing common the reason be as many as be possessor of land sell they and bring the price so that they have a just propriety of those their own possession and confer the same to other and after it be sell the money be their own and remain in their own power he that refuse to divide the inheritance to brethren will not dissolve and dissipate it to stranger and abolish one of the precept * * thou shall not steal this some borderer be report to hold first put into the decalogue by king hen. 8. they sure be borderer that be thief in divinity which will t^ke it out of the decalogu of the decalogue for steal in proper sense can be if there be no propriety wicked therefore do the anabaptist in general the papist for their own advantage the one by confusion the other by combustion deprivation and depravation of estate remove the landmark nor do other well to take away all sea-mark and right of marine propriety the contrary we see in salomons Ezion geber through other sea he sail by universal and natural right in this as his own propriety he build his fleet prepare victual man his navy and altogether use the sea and Shore and port as be his proper and just inheritance @. 5 the commendation of navigation as a art worthy the care of the most worthy the necessity commodity dignity thereof man that have the earth for his mother nurse and grave can find any fit object in this world to busy and exercise his heavenly and better part then in the knowledge of this earthly globe except in his god and that his heavenly good and inheritance unto both which this be also subordinate to the one as a book set forth by himself and write of his wisdom goodness power and mercy to the other as a way and passage in which man himself be a pilgrim now though I may borrow much from Ptolemey Strabo and other in geography praise yet will I rather fix myself on Solomon and his Ophir if we shall respect person and be move by authority we have in this ophirian navigation the pattern of two most worthy king as two witness beyond exception jew and gentile conspire we have reverend antiquity of time sanctity of Sociall league holiness of sacred design greatness of high majesty magnificence of bright splendour munificence of rare bounty wisdom of just temper provision of maturest prudence all these in this expedition of Solomon proclaim that there be no way by land alone to the top of human Felicity wherein Solomon also be a type of a great but as God have combine the sea and land into one globe so their joint combination and mutual assistance be necessary to secular happiness and glory the sea cover one half of this patrimony of man whereof God set he in possession when he say replenish the earth and subdue it gen. 7.22 and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the foul of the air and over every live thing that move upon the earth and when the sea have as it be rebel against rebellious man so that all in who nostril be the breath of life and all that be in the dry land die yet then do it all that time endure the yoke of man in that first of ship the ark of Noah and soon after the goad also when God renew the former covenant and impose the fear and dread of man upon every beast of the earth and upon every foul of the air upon all that move upon the earth gen. 9.2 and upon all the fish of the Sea thus shall man at once loose half his inheritance if the art of navigation do not enable he to manage this untamed beast and with the bridle of the wind and saddle of his ship to make he serviceable now for the service of the sea they be innumerable it be the great purveyor of the world commodity to our use conueyor of the excess of river vid. d. amb. Hexa^m l. 3. c. 5. by traffic of all nation it present the eye with diversify colour and motion and be as it be with rich brooch adorn with various land it be a open field for merchandise in peace a pitch field for the most dreadful fight of war yield diversity of fish and fowl for diet material for wealth medicine for health simple for medicine pearl and other jewel for ornament amber and ambergrise for delight the wonder of the lord in the deep for instruction variety of creature for use multiplicity of nature for contemplation diversity of accident for admiration compendiousness to the way to full body healthful evacuation to the thirsty earth fertile moisture to distant friend pleasant meeting to weary person delightful refresh to studious and religious mind a map of knowledge mystery of temperance exercise of continence school of prayer meditation devotion and sobriety refuge to the distress portage to the merchant passage to the traveller custom to the prince spring lake Rivers to the earth it have on it tempest and calm to chastise the sin to exercise the faith of seaman manifold affection in itself to affect and stupefy the subtle philosopher sustain movable fortress for the soldier maintain as in our island a wall of defence and watery garrison to guard the state entertain the sun with vapour the moon with obsequiousness the star also with a natural looking-glass the sky with cloud the air with temperateness the soil with suppleness the river with tide the hill with moisture the valley with fertility contain most diversified matter for meteor most multiforme shape most various numerous kind most immense difform deform unformed monster once for why shall I long detain you the sea yield action to the body meditation to the mind the world to the world all part thereof to each part by this art of art navigation neither shall we alone loose this half of nature dowry without the benefit of this art but even the earth itself will be unknown to the earth here immure by high impassable mountain there inaccessible by barren wayless desert here divide and rend in sunder with violent river there engird with a strait siege of sea here possess with wild devour beast there inhabit with wild man-devouring man here cover with huge world of wood there bury in huge spacious lake here lose itself in the mid of itself by shower of sand there remove as other world out of the world in remote land here hide her rich mine and treasure in sterile wilderness which can be feed but from those fertile soil which there be plant and as it be remove hither by help of navigation yea whereas otherwise we reap but the fruit of one land or the little little part thereof which we call our own land hereby we be enrich with the commodity of all land the whole globe be epitomise and yield a abridgement and summary of itself in each country to each man nor shall we alone loose the full moiety of our demesne by sea and a great part of that other moiety the land but the heaven also will show we few star nor shall we grow familiar with the sun perambulation to overtake he to disappoint he of shadow to run beyond he to imitate his daily journey and make all the world a island to beguile this time-measure in exact reckon of time by add * * this be effect by such as sail about the world as be know of all such as know the sun course or lose a day to the sun account nor can we know the various climate with their differ season and diversify affect and effect of the heaven and element nor can we measure the earth true dimension and longitude nor know many creature both vegetable and sensitive therein which be our chattel nor her high prize mineral and gem nor yet can we know and use the variety of fowl or like inferior god dispose of the wind in the air bring constant effect out of their variety and observe their season to fly with they about the world have we not these sayle-wing of ship whereby we outrun the wild beast out-swimme the swift fish out-flie the light fowl outstretch the fierce wind out-set the strong current outpass most spacious sea and tame all nature to the nature of man and make he capable of his natural patrimony what shall I say of other man the holy the wise the great of man of king of king of king Salomon example speak all this hereby honour God hereby have make themselves to all posterity honourable will you have all commendation at once Solomon the epitome of all human worth and excellence promise by prophecy before his birth name by special appointment of God when he be bear founder of that miracle of earth and mystical mirror of heaven the temple glorious in his other erection custom tribute riches government and in that soul of happiness the happy endowment of the soul in vision wisdom and holiness in his fame exceed fame itself his renown attract all the king of the earth to seek his presence in his write elect a secretary of God to record wisdom to salvation to all age and place of the world in these thing pass other yea surpass himself even here may we say 2. Chron. 8. as before be say be a great than Solomon type the great creator and saviour of the world this first and most eminent of man be ^y the first and best of story set forth as the first founder of long and far navigation and discovery as for Noah ark it be intend rather to cover and secure from that tempestuous deluge and to recover that handful the seed of a new world from the common destruction then to discover new world or to make voyage into any part of the old though if we shall yield this the beginning of navigation as indeed it be though not of discovery we have hereof a great than Solomon God himself the institutor and author Christ cross type in the matter man baptism in the special and salvation in the general scope and event but for heathen josephus have show that Solomon be ancient than their god not their navigation alone and that Carthage be conceive many year after salomons death and for Greece Plato have record that egyptian testimony that they in all thing be child which yet dote with age when the roman be in the vigour of their youth the tyrian indeed be suppose author of this art but neither can they make this voyage but pass over land through the country of other there to build a navy as in this case they do with Solomon nor be there record or likelihood of any far navigation of they till this yea it be likely that here and hence begin the greatness and supereminent lustre of their name the art which they exercise at and near home before be thus bring out of the nest and by salomons wisdom teach such remote flight thus the author and thus antiquity commend navigation and no less the end which move Solomon thereto which be to get gold silver ju^^y precious wood and stone and other rarity which give such lustre to his state ^ewel to his magnificence glory to his name ornament to the temple splendour to religion material to the exercise of his body and mind that I mention not the custom increase other by the king example adventure the sea and merchandise quicken this also he make the fit object of his royal thought and unmatchable wisdom not trust other care he go himself to Ezion-Geber to make provision for his navy yea and not lean to his sole wisdom power and success enter into league with hiram and employ his ship and mariner as he which have proclaim to the world and esteem two better than one and to have better wage for their labour and a threefold cord not easy break ecc. 4. job 40. he be not like Behemoth to trust that he can draw up jordan into his mouth much less to make a monopoly of the ocean as if the whole east have be create for eziongebe but amid his incomparable design frame of greatness clothe with wealth enliven with wisdom attend with success and glory disdain not yea seek assistant and admit a heathen king society in this in the temple negotiation infer that they neither mind the good of the true temple or the catholic church which will not endure christian compartner in the voyage to Ophir which impound the world in a corner and entile a corner to the World and as he seek not to prejudice Egypt or any of his neighbour if out of their own port they intend to seek the world abroad no more do he prove injurious to the ophirians with who he deal either in their wealth hinder by prohibit all other to trade with they or among his many care of building by erect fort against their will as prison of their liberty and fetter of their captivity for if to do as we will be do to be the law and prophet this prophet of the law will not seek his own profit by invade the public of whole nation remote and to he innocent and force upon they so unwelcome knowledge of God and his people Israel that through their injury his name may be blaspheme among the heathen rom. 2. but as he may use his own right where be no people so in place inhabit not to neglect the security of his own nor to usurp the sovereignty of the native or prevent and the right of common humanity God that will not as before be intimate the price of a dog or a whore nor the patrociny of a lie will not by public latrociny have his temple adorn nor suffer his house to be build with blood nor the holy city with iniquity righteousness and peace kiss each other in God kingdom ab. ^ and act of war though just exclude David from the honour of build the lord house it follow then that Solomon be in this ophyrian business a man of peace and thereof a example to all follow discoverer according to that christian rule as much as be possible to have peace with all man rom. 12. as s justice so his wisdom and prudence be exemplary which though in he supereminent yet find as be already observe no mean at home to maintain the glory of Solomon no mean by land correspondent to such magnificence and munificence but address himself by sea and long voyage to seek it nor do he esteem other eye enough nor other assistance too much but survey his navy himself and be glad of hirams help nay this be not only the subject of his wisdom but the furtherer and purveyor by new experiment in mineral gem beast fowl fish serpent worm tree fruit gum plant man climate wind season sea land soil river fountain heaven and star and a world of the world variety of all which howsoever he have receive the main stock of wisdom by immediate gift of God yet do he frugal employ his talon and thrifty improve that revenue labour to be more wise and travel in wisdom and knowledge ecc. 2.13.21 and equity and * * ecc. 1 13.1^ give his heart to search and find out wisdom by all thing that be do under the heaven God humble he with this s^re travel although he excel in wisdom all that be before he in jerusalem thus Homer ulysses in the school of diverse nation and navigation be train to that peerless wisdom and thus Aristotle the chief of nature scholar travel with Alexander purse and experience to furnish himself and succeed age with natural science and wisdom and our age which God have bless beyond many former produce as twin navigation and learning which have be bury together in the same giave with the roman greatness and now be as it be raise again from the dead hence it be that barbarous empire have never grow to such glory though of more giantlike stature and large land-extension because learning have not fit they for sea attempt nor wisdom furnish they with navigation thus the persian the mogoll the ab^ssine the Chinois the tartarian the Turk be call great but their greatness be like Polyphemus with one eye they see at home like purblind man near to they not far off with those eye of heaven and light of the world the learned knowledge whereof be requisite to navigation the Chinois at home be hereby strong and so be the Turk but the other be brave by every pett^ pirate on their own shore the rest like ostrich spread fair plume but be (...) themselves from the land yea their land also as have happen ^o the abassine and sea-towne take from they to the downfall of their estate one Solomon leave great testimony of greatness by this his wisdom and help of navigation t^en many of the late ottoman which possess all salomons territory and perhaps a hundred time so much add but as God give huge strength and vast body to beast yet make man by art and reason secure from they if not whole their master so to the good of Christendom have he deny learning to those barbarian and skill or care of remote navigation which how otherwise they may infest the world appear by their christian slave and unchristian pirate whereof they make use against we and whereby their mediterranean be guard but on the arabian the portugal before the english since have put a bridle into the mouth of the ottoman horse accost hist. ind. l. 3. c. 15. and show how easy it be to intercept his maritime income and if not to smother he as the Floridans serve the whale by stop the two hole whereby he breath yet to impoverish he by divert the riches of the persian and arabian gulf and hereby be evident that as we have observe in salomons justice and wisdom so forti^de itself here be exercise hence increase nor do Alexander think it enough to have overcome man but will also encounter the unknown ocean Salomon riches make he eminent and secure his navigation rich but beside the necessary exercise of fortitude in the mariner expose and oppose himself to stepdame element to shelf and rock from the earth whirlpool current billow and bellows of the sea tempest Huricanos tufon water-spout and dreadful meteor from the air by sea-fight be the safe defence of our own as the oracle instruct the grecian by wooden-castle to fortify against that world of man in Xerxes his army and sure offence to the enemy what reputation of courage what increase of state do the portugal hereby attain in Africa and Asia coop up the native within ^heir shore possess themselves of diverse petty kingdom enrich themselves with the rich trade in the world and that maugre the force of the moor of the egyptian and turkish sultan the sea be the workhouse and navigation the anvil whereon the fortitude of a woman wrought the safety of her subject and hammer the terror of that enemy which be call nor need I name the belgian unite province who free estate like another Venus arise out of the sea and have force Mars to woe this lady love and amity when force can not ravish she which seem since not only to contemn that force to neglect this love but almost wanton in many of she remember to forget herself in some respect to her quondam best friend by who help this neptunian Amazon be secure at home by who aid and example that I add not their name her fortune and fortitude have attempt bo^h east and west yea have take away the name of east and west out of the world and three time compass the compass thus have a little remnant of land by sea-assistance swell to this present greatness and fill the remote indies with her marshal and mercurial design now for temperance Solomon himself stumble and fall at that stone neither be sea-man usual on land the most temperate Ulysses have not hear of cyrce or the siren have he not adventure the Sea yet let this be a commendation of the marine art how ever the mariner be to blame it be the excellency of the thing that make it a strong temptation strong and sweet wine be commend though weak brain and distemper head be just blame for their intemperance in the good gift of God beauty wealth and honour as the worm breed in best fruit be the list of the lust of the flesh 2. joh. 2. the lust of the eye and pride of life which be not of the father but of the world nor be heaven to blame for the fall of angel or paradise for that of man nor the sea if her riches make man mind seasick waver inconstant distemper and like the sea subject to tempestuous temptation yea if you look near you shall see as man blame and fear death for the last fatal pain which yet be not proper of death which be not in possession till pain and sense be quite dispossess but of the remainder of life so deal they with navigation in this case whereas the sea hold they in good temper and be a correction house to the most dissolute but the land make they forget the sea and temperance together Salomon uxoriousnesse and idolatry be land beast not sea-fish nor can his ape and peacock the vain of his sea ware teach he that vanity the wonder of the lord in the deep teach many Psal. 107. no doubt deep divinity and profound temperance though some froth swim on the top of the sea and beat on every shore where the wind drive it carry about with every blast of tentation to the death of more in the wrongly-accused voyage of the east indies by Bacchus and Venus than Neptune and Mars and all such other suppose deity and perhaps I will not speak Dutch that scurvy sea-devill too they carry their vice with they which because the sea a school of sobriety and temperance permit not to practice break out on they aland in great fury and as Ouied^ tell of louse hat they leave man a little past the acore as they sail to the west indies and die and vanish by degree nor trouble they in the country but at their return about the same height as if they have wait all that while for they breed afresh so be it with vice which be (...) land do find man on every shore where people and plenty offer opportunity once earth be predominant as in our complexion so in our condition now for the virtue call theological faith hope and charity the sea be a great temple not to contemplate their theory but real to practice they faith have her great eclipse by interpo^^tion of earth as we see in the moon but at sea and no earth be see only the heaven the wall of our father palace and the inconstant shift element which constant put we in mind of our pilgrimage and how near in a thin ship and thin weak tender body we dwell to death teach we daily to number our day and apply our heart to wisdom and what can more lively train we in hope then sea-navigation where the life we live be hope where as David former deliverance confirm he against the uncircumcised Philistine 1. sam. 17. so daily deliverance from death in so few inch distance by wind and wave which like the bear and the lion always assault we may the better train we to the fight with Goliath himself and as I have say by death escape death to cut off goliahs head with his own sword but the chief of these be charity and the chief charity be that which be most common nor be there any more common than this of navigation where one man be not good to another man but so many nation as so many person hold commerce and intercourse of amity withal Solomon and hiram together and both with Ophir the west with the east and the remote part of the world be join in one band of humanity and why not also of christianity Sidon and Zion jew and Gentile Christian and ethnic as in this typical story that as there be one lord one faith one baptism one body one spirit one inheritance one God and father so there may thus be one church true catholic one pastor and one sheepfold and this also we hope shall one day be the true oph^rian navigation when Ophir shall come into jerusalem as jerusalem then go unto Ophir mean while we see a harmony in this sea-trade and as it be the consent of other creature to this consent of the reasonable unite by navigation howsoever by rite language custom and country separate heaven conspire with the inferior element and yield as it be a sea card in the sun and star the element which every where else be at open war herein agree in sweet symphony the earth yield shores cape bay and port as nest the air wind as wing to these artificial sea-fowle so esteem at their first sight by the american and by the negro and the sea admit strange child into her family and become a nurse against her nature to the earth generation what shall I say more to the many profitable effect of navigation many pleasure may be add both of reason in speculation and of sense in more than sensual delight Solomon in his ophirian voyage furnish himself with gold and silver and other solid commodity with Almugg^^ tree also yea with ape and peacock the one for the musical delight of the temple the other domestical and natural but I be plunge in a ocean when I go about the ocean praise which go about all thing I shall soon drown myself in these deep then measure the true depth of the sea commendation or navigate through the commodity of navigation by commerce abroad by his own or by custom at home by other employment the text itself be a sea and needs a better steeresman to instruct in these point of salomons compass which say more for navigation than I can who yet to show my love and honour of that noble science have adventure to say this to pay this as custom for the whole work wherein be return so many return from Sea and now it be high time we come to the history itself and historical or literal sense the first in our intention howsoever last in execution @. 7 of Ezion geber Eloth and the red sea that of edom it receive that name and communicate it to the indian ocean by the phoenician navigation frequent in those time to India and king Solomon make a navy of ship in Ezion geber which be beside Eloth on the shore of the red sea in the land of edom etc. 1. reg. 9.26 this be the first and best testimony of a holy navy Noah have by divine wisdom and precept build a ship which preserve the remainder of the old and beginning of the new world a figure of that baptism which now save we by the resurrection of jesus Christ the temple a late and lively figure of heaven and salvation itself 1. pet. 3.21 must be furnish with due material by a whole fleet of ship which shall not save alone from danger but crown with fullness of joy and glory this typical then renew by Solomon for new supply every trinity of year but there the eternal trinity shall at once be the temple the sun Apoc. 21.22 23. gen. 15.1 1. cor. 15. the exceed great reward and all in all for ever no passage be find for Israel out of Egypt to the wilderness a type of the life by faith nor for abundance of the temple riches the shadow of glory but by the red sea so meritorious be the blood of our redeemer which by bloody sweat whip and a thorny crown well spring of the water of life out of all part of his body out of his hand and foot yield the four river which water the paradise of God out of his pierce side and heart flow a sea a red sea of water and blood to save to enrich we to purchase our justification by grace and beginning of sanctification grow unto perfect glory but as all fair thing be far from easy possession so be it with heaven and all her mystery so be it with we in this voyage of Solomon to know where this eziongebe be from whence he set sail and to come to that Ophir where he make his voyage touch both which thing otherwise enough difficult be make the hard by those mist which disagree opinion have raise in our way the text give three mark to know the first that it be beside Eloth on the shore of the red sea and in the land of Edom. this three mark of eziongebe be delineate by Moses Deut. 2.8 and before in num. 33.35 make the two and thirty station of the israelite remove or march in the wilderness and herein our map of that chapter be in the former bible much to blame which be in that and other respect much amend in the map of the holy land add to the last translation now that it be on the shore of the red sea and not on the mediterranean this text prove i. g^rop Bec^^ hispanic l. 5. and the conceit of Goropius in this kind that deny Idu^^aea to extend to the red sea and aver that this fleet be set forth from the dumaean mediterranaean shore it be as many other disputation of he more full of industry than wit of wit then learning of learning than judgement strange be his conception and strong his disceptation but have weak foundation ground common on name and word bury under succession of rubbish they prove in the end as joseph Scaliger speak but more wordy than worthy guide antiq. l. 8. c. 2. which do but dare again that josephus place Esiongeber at Berenice be either a marginal note of some novice geographer creep into the text or else a old error for Bere^ice be on the egyptian shore Esiongeber on the arabian josephus place it near Elana and in the text Eloth be set a guide to Esiongeber now Eloth be write in the holy tongue (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be by transmigration shift and remove to diverse pronuntiation a thing usual in Hebrew name both of place and person he that see how John or james be transport in such unlike sound from the original in greek latin french dutch spanish italian english and other language in all so unlike and diversify will scarce acknowledge they brother or to have any kindred either to the mother tongue or in th^se many sister language and so be it common with other name Strabo call it (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) josephus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the latin Elana and the gulf or bay near to it be term Elaniticus str. l. 16. o^ this place how it lie and how the ancient be deceive you have the relation of don John Diego Castro from his own eye and learned judgement suppose to be the same which be now call el Tor see li 7. c. 6 @. 4.5 lib. 8. c. 13. or Toro yea the red sea be likely to have receive that name from edom as the pamphilian ionian tyrrhene british and other sea be ordinary so name of the principal shore they wash see li. 7. c. 6. in fine Castro have better examine the redness than any man and compare the modern and ancient opinion with his own eye and for a booke-traveller I must needs applaud master Fuller our countryman who in the last chapter of the four book of his have muster the testimony of the ancient together and ascribe the name of Red-sea to edom ge. 25.25 30. of who idumaea take name and of he and it this Sea for ptolemey Idumea be far short o^ the ancient which contain also Nabathaea and their city Petra whence Arabia Petrea receive the name Esau sword of which his father have prophesy conquer to both sea this edom or Esa^ be that Erythras which the grecian mention to have give name to that sea p^st Origini^us by translate edom into Erythras or Erythraeus as Cephas into Petrus Postellus have stumble on this note which full more full and learned have open as other thing also pertain to our purpose that there be a redness in some part of that sea by reason of the clearness of the water and abundance of a kind of red coral branch itself on the transparent bottom Castro have make evident but that in a small part of that sea the like whereof happen in other sea of clear water which show white from sand green from weed particoloured with pleasant diversify hue as Pineda cite the testimony of Ferandez observe near to Carthagena in America every stone shell or whatsoever else be in the bottom in those liquid wave yield so pleasant and various a tincture see his voyage l. 4. c. 1. @. 3. as his many navigation have no where else observe an^ captain Saris in this sea call ancient erythraean which name beside the Arabic and persian gulf contain the indian ocean so name as it seem from the frequent navigation out of Eloth and Esion geber in edom unto India be one night almost terrify with a glare yield light to discern letter phot. Bib. co. 1322. and seq. Mela siti^ 3.7 P^in l. 6. c. 23. Strab. 16 suspect to be some breach and prove nothing but cuttle fish in the bottom but to return to our red sea agatharchides in photius his say it be not call red of the colour but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of some man which there rule the scripture call it siph Suph or Souph translate to which accord marshal verse erythraea Indus in alga it seem of the abundance of rush and weed there grow the moor turk and trader thereof in late time call it the sea of Mecca Mela mention the colour and the king Eryhras there reign Pliny add for the name the sun repercussion from the sand and land Strabo city the same out of eratosthenes with a tale of ctesias of a fountain empty his red-okerie water thereinto and the relation of a persian that Erythras a persian plant a persian colony in a island thereof in stephanus tell of the red adjoin mountain the poet have their Perseus and other their other conceit and deceit which I leave to their author as also Pinedas * * Pineda reb. salom. li. 4. c. 10. think this red sea to be so name of red weed grow therein so join Suph and erythraeum in one speculation but those red herb be his creature or neither he cite not can I find any authentic author for they agatharchides in Phot^us have (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) late device the nature of that sea be better deliver in the voyage of Castro Midleton Saris Dounton haines and other in these our navigation but for Eloth and Esiongeber master Fuller be of opinion that Solomon in his great wisdom want fit mariner send to hiram for tyrian and phaenicians and that a large colony be send by hiram to inhabit those part then subject to king Solomon by which mean Solomon and hiram enter into society for the indian traffic by that sea of edom so to get the riches of the east in possession this colony numerous and strong he place at Esiongeber the arsenal or fit place of build ship and at Eloth the fit port mart and staple for the indian merchandise thus he and very probable add that the Hebrew Aelath in the singular and Aeloth in the plural number be by the phoenicians turn into Ailath who singular be Aila and plural Ailan thence the greek Ailae Ailana Eilane Elana and the lati^s aelana and by inversion Laeana this phaenician colony he observe to have be of most name of all other the inhabitant thereof for the jewish yoke be soon shake off by the edomite themselves after Jehosaphat death Iehoram rebel against God 2. Chron 21.8 2 Re^ 14.22 2 reg. 16.6 and the edomite against he after that azariah recover elath and build it it continue not long but rezin king of Syria recover elath to Syria and drive the jew from elath and * * the edition of Brix^^nus have and Sylli etc. to which a manuscript of m. Fuller agree the syrian come to elath and dwell there to this day thus the jew which be the lord and receive the custom be expel but the idumaean native and Phaenicians which may be useful to the conqueror remain the tyrian being syrophaenicians and speak the syrian language and by their merchandise so profitable to their king this elath be after call Albu^ pagus by Strabo call the chief mart of the nabataean whence the indian and arabian merchandise be carry to Petra thence to Rhinoculur^ in Phoenicia near Egypt and thence disperse to other place thus in the time before the ptolemey but in salomons time and while the jew rule there s^r. l 16. they be bring to jerusalem and to Tyrus and after that to Myos hormos and Berenice egyptian port on the other side of the red sea to be thence convey to Alexandria Arriani periplus arrianus in his time mention the garrison at albus pagus and custom there take the transport of ware thence to Petra notwithstanding the egyptian flourish saint jerom also place adjoin to the wilderness and the red sea hier. loc. Heb. Ptolemey place not far from Elana he which will see more of these antiquity let he read m. Fuller the isle astarte be a phaenician memorial also Pliny mention gens Tyra and Herodotus the syrian on the red sea shore that I pursue no other antiquity these tyrian it seem first begin the sail of the indian sea and habitation on the arabian shore instruct by the wisdom and procure by the friendship of Solomon with hiram which they continue under many state-change till the mahometan time the staple of those indian merchandise be alter after the jewish time with the chief monarchy assyrian babylonian persian ptolemaean roman mystery of the phoenix and this be the only phoenix-neast make of sweet spice in nature false for God make all fowl at first and after bring to and out of the ark in both sex male and female but true in this allegory the phaenicians of all the nation know be the only skilful mariner in the arabian and indian sea and from the one by the other bring the spice and riches of the east into the west that skill be ever communicate not by generation but by industry Ezek. 27. and 28. which make Tyru^ as Ezekiel describe it the phoenix indeed of all city of trade in the World master Fuller learned add the fable of Bacchus and Hercules their indian expedition to this of Solomon and hiram original of the ^ables of Bacchus and Hercules Hercules be adore of the one and jehova of the other which name by heathen be pervert to (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) name of Bacchus in hesychius which agree to Plutarch conceit that the jew worship Bacchus on their sabbath and derive the name from (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) * * take away the greek termination and it be evident l. ^ one make it 157. and a half the other 150. and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a name of Bacchus as his priest be term (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) now for that gulf in which Strabo place Elana and call it therefore Elaniticus and another towards Egypt I refer you to Castros follow relation which better know those part than Strabo can Gaza by Strabo and Pliny reckon seem to be about one hundred and fifty of our mile or more from thence Solomon go in progress to take care of this his ophirian fleet from jerusalem to esion-gebe almost as far as from London to York asion geber in saint Jerome interpretation signify (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Hieron epist. Fabiol whence some gather that much timber grow there useful for build of ship perhaps and I rather believe for the Timbers bring thither as to a arsenal or store-yard for that purpose for as wood agree not with Moses his wilderness so I find little mention of wood in all the Arabic shore at least late time have know none there and Soliman the great Turk a. 1538. be say to have bring the material of the great fleet which he build at sue in the red sea to invade Dium and expel the portugal out of India from remote region Damianus go be our author who with other venetian be force to that service out of their ship at Alexandria to go to cairo and sue co^ Venet. ram. to. 1. see inf l. 8. c. 1^ of th^se desert and of sue Satalia be in Pamphil^a and another some say in Cilici^ more particular rela^eth that sue be in a desert place where no herb of any sort grow where the armada for India be make and all the Timbers ironworke tackle munition be bring from Satalia and Constantinople by sea to Alexandria and thence carry on the Nile by zerme boat or raft to cairo and thence on camel to sue this voyage be eighty mile in which be neither habitation nor water nor any thing for life they carry Nilus water on camel when the Carovans go thither in the pagan time it be a great city and full of cistern and have a trench from Nilus which fill all their cistern destroy by the Mahumetans so that now they fetch their water six mile off from brackish well there the Turk build a fleet of seventy six vessel of all sort etc. HONDIUS his map of the desert and Israel peregrination therein @. 8 of Ophir diverse opinion weigh and censure whether the compass be know to the old world that the remote part be late inhabit the new world but new and a great part thereof not yet this golden country be like gold hard to find and much quarrel and needs a wise Myner to bring it out of the labyrinth of darkness and to try and purify the miner themselves and their report and here our best athenians seem owl indeed which dazzle with salomons splendour hide themselves affarre off and seek for eastern Ophir in Peru and the west indies such conceit have transport Postellus Goropius Becanus Arias Montanus Vatablus Possevinus Genebrard marinus Brixianus sa Eugubinus Auenarius garcia noble morney and many other by their authority their reason be spell out of the letter of Ophir and Peru so near of kinne Arias Montanus in his Phaleg be both large and little in this point say both much and nothing for from the scripture still the ophirian gold (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) paruaim he gather that it be bring from the two perue one of which he make new Spain and the other that which now be call Peru or the northern and southern moyty of America and that those part be common trade in ancient time he make the row of hill which run from panama to the Magellan straits to be mount Sephir gen. 10.26 27 28 29 30. for so it be say gen. 10. speak of joktans son the brother of peleg or Phaleg and joktan beget almodad and Sheleph and hazarmave and jerah and Hadoram and Vzal and Diklah and Obal and Abimael and sheba and Ophir and Havilah and jobab all these be the son of joktan and their dwell be from Mesha as thou go unto Sephar a mount of the east or as tremellius if learned Montanus have view his own map only he shall have see his Ophir in the west and not in the east and if it be say salomons fleet go by the east to the western part of the world as the and Moluccan ship of the spaniard use to do yet Moses speak of the dwell and habitation not of journeying and navigation which god after the babylonian conspiracy have allot to the generation of man their dwell must then be in regard of Moses when he write this in the desert or of the scatter from Babylon whereof he write but these part of America be more th^n half the globe distant from those place eastward and much near by the west again the name Peru or Piru be a vain foundation for diverse place see Ortelius his Geograph have like or the same name sepharuaim 2. reg. 17. be a name as like and true add but a samech to paruaim a name of a place subdue by the assyrians Vega. come reale l. 1. c. 4.5 see his story tom. 2. l. 7. c. 13. neither be any part of America by the inhabitant call Peru but this name be accidental by the spaniard ascribe to those beginning of their discovery on the south sea and continue to that great kingdom of the find by pizarro garcilasso de la Vega of the Inca blood royal by his mother son to one of the spanish conqueror bear and bring up at Cozco chief city of Peru say that they have no general name for the kingdom but Tavantin Suyu that be the four part of the world nor acknowledge the appellation of Peru but the first discoverer seize on a fisherman in a river ask he of the country and he amaze and not understand they answer Beru and anon add Pelu as if he shall say my name if you ask i thereof be Beru and I be fish in the river Pelu be the common name of a river the spaniard as if he have answer direct corrupt a name of both those word which they understand not and call the region Peru a name which the native have never hear the like they do in another province where ask a native what be the name of the country he answer Tectetan tectetan that be Lopez de Gomara gen. hist. c. 52 I understand you not which they corrupt call jucatan and yucatan as if the indian have affirm that to be the name of the region the like casual name he observe of other american place the jesuite blas Valera in his history of Peru affirm the same blas val. hist. Peru. acco hist. l. 1. cap. 13. that Peru be not the proper name but accidental which the native know not acosta acknowledge it unknown to the natural and a occasion name from a small river which Vega say be call so first by those spaniard which there take the fisherman thus the name which they will make as old as Solomon begin but 1515. at the most and that which be extend to new Spain and Peru be know in neither nor in any place else of the World three I answer that Peru be not inhabit nor yet new Spain one thousand year after salomons time of which I shall speak more anon and in my follow discourse of the apostolical peregrination four neither can so long a voyage then have be perform in three year be far more than to have compass the globe which have cost Drake and other three year work where their work be not in mynes but in quick fight five this can not then be do without the compass Pineda may conceit him^elfe that those time know it but the phoenicians have in no story leave any such memorial nor other of they yet these be Salomon sea man Levinus Lemnius and master Fuller will have we believe that the ancient have the compass within the compass of their art lem. nat. l. 3. c 4. full. miscel. l. 4. c 19 ec. 1.10 by reason of the phaenicians marine skill and experience which we say may be as much as it be by the star the monsons the sound and Sh another reason be the learning and skill of those time whereof Solomon say be there any thing whereof it may be say this be new it have be already of old time which be before we it may therefore be know in those time and by barbarous invasion be after lose and by better time restore I answer that the time be learn before and after Solomon but when that learning shall by barbarian incursion be lose I know no^ the egyptian assyrian chaldaean invasion may rather increase and disperse than eclipse and abolish learning be then more learned than the greek who borrow their very letter from the phaenicians the persian time be know and the greek learning then grow to the high pitch when their empire succeed and in love of learning exceed the other Hypocrates Socrates Plato Xenophon Aristotle and before they Pythagoras and other philosopher flourish before the persian ru^nes and travel into the east for that learning which they bring into Greece and Italy the roman borrow their art from the greek neither do we read of learn evaporate in barbarian flame till the deluge of those savage in the roman empire which yet continue both empire and learning in the east till the west have in good measure recover itself out of those mist and the barbarous saracen have grow lover of learning and our teacher joseph count see Voss. hist. in four bookes^ Solomon have all knowledge necessary to moral politic and save wisdom and to the end for which God give he so large a heart but the sea ha^h bound and so have Salomon wisdom somewhat be leave for John Baptist to be great than he or any bear of wom^n neither be the knowledge of the compass necessary to Solomon who without it can and do compass the gold of Ophir and yet have there be such barbarian which have root that skill out of the world which be unlikely that marine skill be the best mean to increase their empire to enrich their coster to do they other service in war and peace the ancient conqueror use fleet also to their purpose yet some of the book and monument of all age from salomons time be leave to that of the roman as appear by josephus so well acquaint in the tyrian library and other author of diverse nation and by the fragment which be come to our hand and by whole book of voyage in the indian and mediterranean sea as this book will declare it can be but some mention of the act if no description of the art will have remain to posterity now for salomons testimony it confute those which make he the author and first founder of the loadstone which to m. Fuller and other seem probable if nothing be then new it may aswell be allege for many generation before that they also make ship at esion-gebe to go to Ophir for like rarity and against all new invention in any age which sense be also contradict by Solomon in the same chapter verse 16. where he say that he have more wisdom than all they that have be before he in jerusalem and 1. reg. 3.12 there be none like before thou nor after thou shall arise any like unto thou this be then a new thing under the sun this his wisdom which brand we for fool if we make he contradict himself and divine verity the scripture will go one mile with they and show the vanity both of man and other creature and they post and force it two apply what Solomon speak of kind to individual act and event which may aswell enforce Plato great year and a personal revolution of each man withal his conceit word and act the Magnete be no new thing but this use of the Magnete be new know two thousand year after salomons death the argument to i seem a merry one rather than serious and I will answer it according with a jest the jesuite Pineda which out of Lemnius cite these argument to prove that the compass be ancient be no new thing as a man but as a person as a jesuite a new order which begin 1540 as a author which conceit that that great fish which take up jonas carry he in three day quite through the mediterranean and round about the african vast * * above 13000 mile space perhaps the whale-constellation take up this sea whale into his chariot some p^rt of the way circumference these be his own word these a^e new thing under the sun and this a new interpretation which himself preface with these particular be new and yet that text be true I will not add that be too serious and severe that all jesuitism be new and their exposition of scripture counsel father for the roman monarchy be all new new-gay-nothings vanity of vanity and vexation of spirit yet to lie the of jesuitical tenant as they be jesuite christians be a name too old for they be as old as the old serpent but lest I be overbold with our author and may seem to pass from a new argument to a old quarrel and from jest to jerk I contain myself lest any veterator take i for a novelist and with reverence and thanks for his better pain crave pardon for this and come to his three argument out of Plautus where in speech of sail he have these word here Lemnius Giraldus and Calcagninus with other mention by he do interpret of the compass who Pineda believe not and yet say he have notwithstanding he conjecture it to be some pole to thrust the vessel if any instrument and acknowledge that the oar and rodder may be in regard of turn the ship and last conclude it to be speak without respect to any nautike instrument interpret cape to return and that Pl^utus his actor do point to the heaven not to any instrument when he say which seem to be the poet true sense Pineda add that we ought not to doubt but that Solomon know this of the loadstone aswell as other stone and herb I answer we have a better loadstone and Leadstone for one then for the other the scripture speak of he more as a herbarist then as a lapidary and mariner he allege that the attractive faculty will reveal that I answer that experience have produce many age to testify the contrary which know the one not the other his argument from the store of loadstone in those eastern part conclude nothing for the skill any more than that the naked artless indian in hispaniola be better goldsmith than the europaean because they have more Gold his last argument be least from the divine providence which will not permit man so many age to be ignorant hereof for here we come to a o o the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God how unsearchable be his judgement and his way past find out for who have know the mind of the lord rom. 11.33 34. or who have be his counsellor I like much better that which Pineda add of the ancient ability to sail without ken of the shore without magnetical help which Strabo arianus and Pliny acknowledge and Aratus say that the phaenicians follow the lodestar not the loadstone which Tully cite also out of he in the begin of the second book the six reason arrianus mention the help of the monsons as now they term they or season of the wind observe a constant course in the indian ocean which with experience of the frequent coast may easy teach a compendious passage through the main or at least further from ken of land whereupon Pliny have relate the former course add 6. cap. 23. they also observe the fly of certain bird which they carry with they but all these can nothing help to a peruan voyage from the red sea where the know star be lay asleep in Te^hys lap where neither bird carry with they can instruct to any near shore nor any bird in the main ocean be to be see where the monsons and season of the wind be so diversify where without the compass all thing be out of compass and nothing but miracle or chance which never produce art can save or serve they I have speak of the loadstone in another place to which I refer the reader lest that make i wander and drown which direct and save other last Peru can not be Ophir if we conceive that SALOMON bring thence ivory and peacock for peacock they read parrot and for ivory they be force to take it up by the way in some place of Africa or India which distraction must needs prolong the voyage which without such let can not as before be observe in three year be perform as for such ass for such I may have say which think so huge and vast a tract of land as that new world may be now empty of elephant which then it have for it be confess by all classike author that America never see elephant as England be rid of wolf wherewith it have sometime abound why shall not other kind of creature be utter destroy aswell as these be more hurtful to the inhabitant I mean tiger leopard and other ravenous beast whereof America have more than a good many and if they shall destroy elephant for their ivory what piece of ivory be ever find in Peru or all America before our man come there if salomons man have destroy all it be inhuman to after-age the hunt of wolf in the north of Scotland at this day and the hunt use by many nation tartars cafres etc. easy tell we how England be clear of wolf army or multitude in a large ring encircle the beast and with fire waters dog arm etc. bring all into a narrow compass and there kill they but in the new world that will have require another world to have do it I add that no elephant can come into Peru but by miracle the cold and high hill every way encompass be impassable to that creature as we shall see in our spanish entrance with horse yea I aver further that a elephant can not live in Peru but by miracle for the hill be cold in extremity and the valley till the make artificial river be without water it never rain there whereas the elephant delight in place very hot and very moist but I deserve blame to fight with elephant in America which be with less than a shadow and to lay siege to castle in the air these argument have no less force against Columbus and Vatablus their Ophir in hispaniola a second (@) on for hispaniola which from the red sea make a far fetch with like or great improbability this error be more fortunate than learned for out of a right rule that the world be round and that therefore man may sail to the east by the west Columbus first and present after he sir Sebastian cabot make their discovery Colon a happy discoverer of the new world then the old and stumble on a new world by the way whereof they have not dream cabots voyage be to seek cathay or China Columbus his intent be for the east indies and find much gold in hispaniola without examine other difficulty and false suppose himself to have attain the east indies he call that island Ophir which conceit Francis Vatablus receive now for Sofala or Cefala many argument be allege by Ortelius who here place salomons Ophir and other three opinion for Soph^la and indeed the abundance of gold and the excellency thereof as likewise of silver there take out of the mine peacock or parrot whether you choose to interpret elephant ape monkey and baboon excellent wood for such use as the almuggim tree be apply all these together with the easy navigation from the red sea thither alongst the african shore and last the name itself may seem to plead for a Sofalan Ophira or Sophira as josephus call it in this place joaon do santos live eight year in those part see inf l. 9 c. 12 and allege many thing to this purpose he say that near to Massapa be a great high hill call in the kingdom of Monomotapa to which he will not suffer the portugal to pass lest the rich mine shall cause their too potent neighbourhood on the top of that hill be old ruinous wall of lime and stone barrius say their be also unknown letter over the gate Barros dec. 1. l. 10. the people ignorant of such work say they be build by devil think they impossible to man judge other by themselves they be five hundred and ten mile from Sofala in one and twenty degree of southerly latitude he conjecture it to be ptolemeys Agysimba t. Lopez ap. tom. 1. the building be still call Simbaon^ Thomas Lopez add that the moor affirm that their book and ancient write contain that king Solomon fetch his gold in his three year voyage from thence at that time 1502. there be war but former the moores of Mecca and use to carry two million of mitigal which be about eight shilling a piece yearly from thence but to return to santos he allege a tradition of the native that these mine and building belong to the queen of Saba and that other ascribe they to Solomon make this or to be Ophir see the place * * tom. 1. pag. 1549. and his plead of this point wherein I can be persuade to be of his mind if that Moses do not place Ophir eastward gen. 10.30 who it be likely give name to this golden region there be that seek for tarshish at Carthage and some I have know which place Ophir near Gambra a four and five opinion of this mind be captain jobson which travel up that river nine hundred and sixty mile and hear such golden report of the inland country as this work will from he deliver to you and indeed I do easy persuade myself that the rich mine of gold in the world be in Africa especial in the heart of the land from the line to the tropic of Capricorn see our relation out of Bermudez jobson battle and other and I can but wonder that so many have send so many and spend so much in remote voyage to the east and west and neglect Africa in the midst which perhaps may prove as much rich as near than both the indies but if we show Ophir to be in the east indies it can be in America or Africa unless we be of acostas opinion who howsoever he think that salomons gold a six opinion jos. accost l. 1.14 etc. come from the east indies yet conjecture that Ophir and Tharsis signify no certain region but be take in a general sense as the word India be with we apply to all remote country Ophir may be any of the former remote far from the red Sea but I can tell that India receive his name from the river Indus still call sinde which have also foil all our geographer hitherto inf. l. 4. c. 16. make it to pass through Cambaya which sir Thomas roe voyage will confute that it be less marvel if Ophir trouble we so much and because the countreve beyond India be so mean know by their true name and Indus come from so remote region they continue and extend that name to they and as even now you hear colon by misprision call America India not dream of a western but suppose that by the west see @. 12. for accost opinion other opinion he have arrive in the eastern India now why Ophir shall be so dilate I see no such reason tarshish we shall better examine after and for other opinion of Ophir to be a island in the red sea call Vrphe or Ormus in the persian they be not worth examine be not able to yield gold and the other commodity which Solomon seek the truth of Ophir must as from a deep my bee draw out of Moses gen. 10. wherein although we can approve the opinion of those which conceive Moses in that chapter to have set down the just number of language and nation as if there be seventy two of each and neither more nor few yet it must needs be grant and the text plain aver these be the family of the son of Noah after their generation in their nation and by these be the nation divide in the earth after the flood gen. 10.31.32 and particular of the son of Shem here question these be the son of Shem after their family after their tongue in their land after their nation so that we gather that the first original of nation be there mention such especial as concern his ecclesiastical story or be necessary for the church to take knowledge of for neither be they all differ nation and language which he mention nor be all nation or language there mention for eleven of they be the son of Canaan which all people that little region which Israel after by joshuas conduct possessedial which also speak one language or else Abraham and the patriarch must have learn many tongue in their frequent perambulation which some think the same which the israelite speak and judge it evident in the history of the first spy and of rahab entertain of the late spy and that it be call by the prophet the language of Canaan es. 19.18 and carry thence into Egypt before by the patriarch to who joseph speak first by a interpreter but in reveal himself he with his own mouth that be in their tongue speak unto they when the interpreter and all other be exclude and in the whole story of the old testament no difference of language be notify in all the commerce and cohabitation of all sort of both nation * * prisc. l. 5. Hie^on jer. 5 A^nob in ps. 104. Aug verb. Dom^s 25 cont. (@) l. 3. C.D. 16.6 etc ber. A^d^^ie Anteg l. 2 c. 2. Priscian say and saint saint Augustine often say as much and diverse word of the language confirm it as for a Shibboleth and sibole or some difference of dialect which we see with we almost in every shire we make not that a difference of but in the language and so it seem it be in the first age before conquest and commerce bring in so many new word to the punic language the punic scene in Plautus his by * * Scalig. in ^rolegom vlt. edit Emend temp. Selden d. s. prolegom c. 2. the spy have such servile education in Egypt have no mean ^o learn tongue gen. 45.12 Scaliger m. Selden and other be find a kind of Hebrew after all those age and change I will not herein contend with m. Fuller and other which have write contrary but either they be the same or not much differ and which I principal aim at all these eleven nation have the same language at lest in the patriarch time and not unlike the Hebrew which be so little alter after such alteration of time and place now because that country be give to Abraham posterity Moses be more exact in bound the place and intimate the people then ^n all joktan posterity which it seem people one hundred time so much country as not pertain to Israel inheritance and not much to their neighbourhood or knowledge and if Solomon employ above eight score thousand in continual work so many year for the temple how many shall we think employ themselves in that babylonian structure which occasion that diversify of language and which be therefore likely to have happen long after peleg birth by which time the world can not likely be so people neither may we deny more than ordinary multiplication in those first age after the flood though we grant a good space after peleg birth for how else can such a multitude have assemble so soon to such a purpose we see the like admirable increase of the israelite in Egypt in despite of bloody butchery and slavery which yet ask above two hundred year from seventy person and can any man think that where a world be multiply that the father have no more son than be there mention especial see of sems line gen. 11. it be say they beget other son and of they be express five generation of the other but two or three and most of they omit except such as most concern Israel in neighbourhood or other affair how can jocktan yield thirteen nation then when peleg give name to none till of Abraham six generation after some be derive I suppose therefore that Moses there name not all nation as write not a story of the world but those principal which by vicinity or inheritance or future commerce as this Ophir and his brethren it behoove the israelite to take notice of especial he who be to alter Moses his tabernacle into so glorious a temple and to be so lively a figure of a great than Moses and Solomon both nor be it likely but that there be a great confusion of language then into so many as can be gather in the ten of genesis or that all there mention differ in tongue from each other for so cham and japheth shall never have understand each other nor their posterity it be probable therefore that God multiply the world in so short a space which as I say I rather think to have happen some good while after peleg birth then at that very time almost to a miracle most man of most family be there and their language also miraculous multiply the jewish tradition be that it happen a little before peleg death as Genebrard observe out of they but be a conspiracy against God many other be not there and retain their ancient Hebrew especial the pious and religious patriarch such perhaps be peleg himself than a man of year and therefore his name give he of that division in other for if any think that peleg name intimate the build of Babel at his birth we see that Abraham Sarah and jacob have their name change in their ripe year this division of language cause that dispersion therefore be the name of it call Babel or confusion because the lord do there confound the language of all the earth and from thence do the lord scatter they abroad upon the face of all the earth yet can we say that present this be whole execute but even then so many as speak one language dwell together in one region other person and family in other region which then be thin plant and in process of time more full people and colony also derive to people remote region for although man that be mankind have a right to all the earth yet here there be a very great part of the earth unpeople in Moses time yea to these day of we and if we mark all the head of family mention by Moses we shall see none which at that time have inhabit so far as this our Britain but how much near the region be to the arke rest and Babel confusion so much soon be they people sure it be that some age after the best and most frequent habitation and near those part be but mean people as appear by Abraham Isaac and jacob lot Laban and their child wander and remove from place to place with their great flock and herd as if ground and pasture have then even in the region of Syria and Canaan be of small value compare Abraham time with joshua and you shall see a great difference more city and village seem then build then before be family of note and that in four hundred year space Ammon moab ishmael all the family of the son of Keturah and that of edom with innumerable other be not in neither the language which it seem by mixture with other be alter nor the nation yea how poor a thing be our Britain in Caesar time either for the number or civility how thin be all the northern America from thirty degree upward towards the pole inhabit a world of continent by no probability contain in the whole so many people as some one small region in Asia or Europe all Virginia New-england and newfoundland can have notwithstanding such commodious habitation and innumerable commodity so many inhabitant so far as my industry can search as this one city with the suburb contain though we add all even to the pole and take one hundred mile within land alongst the coast all the way which easy argue the late people thereof neither be there any thing in all America which do not indeed proclaim it a new World America new inhabit for as in the old world first there be simplicity of herdsman shepherd and husbandman and after that trade merchandise riches city kingdom more curious rite civil and religious and some monument of they which those which have esteem other for the want thereof barbarian and savage as a wild kind of man and this civility city population and kingdom begin in Assyria Egypt and other place near the first confusion and after proceed to Greece who the egyptian call child chaldaea Syria as be before say for their late civility art and history and thence to Italy which be long swaddle in roman rusticity and late attain to polite science and thence into France as we now call it and after that into Britain and late into Germany all by roman conquest and impart art with their arm so may we judge of the new world wherein two empire be grow great civil rich and potent after their manner as our mexican and Inca story will show in due place this their greatness produce story of their act by Quippos picture and other monument which derive to posterity the knowledge of former time and act see acosta and the picture story to. 2. l. 5. c. 7. and Vega his Inca story l. 7 c. 13. by which we may gather that the northern America be first people and that probable from the eastern or northern part of Asia and communicate people to the southern part the northern antiquity of Mexico be ancient than those of Peru. those first story also see they in the picture-booke and in Vega and acosta follow how raw and infantly beginning and proceed do they show what barbarism yet neither contain memorial of one thousand year so that allow six hundred year to mere breed and barbarous infancy with creep in dispersion as out of the cradle of american humanity among they till they be full of people and town where one wit whett another to new device yet we scarce come to the time of Christ and his apostle I may add that till about one thousand two hundred year after Christ neither of those empire be worthy the name of petty kingdom and even then have scarce creep out of the shell now for land in the sea betwixt Asia and they as also along the north sea as they call it on the eastern shore of America in the north and south part thereof also these relation will show you world of they not yet people the southern continent be yet but salute on the shore and land of which we may no less conjecture much emptiness for the fullness of the continent disburthen itself into land and fullness of the first people part Asia Africa and Europe make they seek to root out one another by the sword or to possess vacant place by sea or land which either chance or industry have find but except Deucalion and Pyrrha have sow stone to procreate man or Cadmus his swoon tooth have procreate army or the cloud have rain people as they be say to do frog I know not how wise and learned man by their leaf inconsiderate enough fill China and America with people in those day before Moses and Abraham and find great commerce and knowledge of the new world when the old be but yesterday begin so necessary to humane and divine knowledge be Geographie and history the two eye with which we see the world without which our great clerk be not the wise man but in this part blind and not able to see far off if any deride this as paradoxical and new I say again that in America alone so much as have be discover and whereof knowledge from eye-witness have come to my hand partly in the continent partly in land as much and in great part as commodious for man use as all Europe be either whole habit or so thin inhabit that man rogue rather than dwell there and so as it will feed and sustain a hundred perhaps a thousand time as much people by due husbandry @. 9 JOCTANS posterity seat in the east part of Asia among they India where chryse be of old and now be the kingdom of Pegu and the region adjoin AFrica fall to Cham part with some adoyn region of Asia Asia itself in great part to Shem and Europe with Asia Minor and the northern part of Asia to japheth their very name have leave memorial of they as Arias Montanus junius Montan^ Phaleg broughtons consent see my pilg. l. 1. Broughton and other have observe to who commentary I refer the reader but for joctans son we find in and near to India the print of all their name elmodad have leave his name in the hill Emodus whence the indian river flow and Comedus the great hill of Asia elsewhere call Taurus and by diverse name as it run through diverse country from the one end of Asia to the other also in the themeotae or in Sarmatia of Sheleph be the mountain sariphi whence oxus flow Seilon be a famous island in these day of hazarmave Sarmatia of jerah aria and arachosia of Hadoram the Ori oritae Oxidraca also the adraistae Andresti of Vzal muziris musopalle Ozoana oxus Vdi^ or a city and Vdezza a kingdom in India auzacia a city Imaum and Auxacitis of Diklah del Dankalee tacola and Tagola also Dela Dekaka the Laos Bacola Bengala and by conversion of d into R not unusual rhacan and arracan Orixa Dandagula and Daedala of Obal the and near Paraponisus of Abimael the mount imaus and the Malli in India mention by Curtius now for sheba and Havilah cush have Seba and Havilah and his son raamah have also sheba all mention in the same chapter and jokshan Abraham son by Keturah beget sheba gen. 10. his two son be author of the sabaean in Arabia so famous for the merchandise of myrrh and frankincense gen. 25. some distinguish the Sabaei in Arabia who posterity rob job from the rich sabaean of sheba in Arabia job. 1.15 whence that rich queen call of the south that country be call alieman that be the south to this day come to visit Solomon Abraham sheba have his habitation eastward in the northerly part of Arabia 1. reg. 10. as if his kindred by the flesh the son of Keturah and Hagar the carnal israelite gal. 4. and such which insist on justification by their own work of the law shall never have to do with Canaan fertility and felicity the type of heaven righteousness peace and joy in the holy ghost rom. 14.17 gal. 4. but distract themselves in wander error and a disconsolate miserable estate as those arabian do to this day sheba be author of the Sabae beyond Ganges of Sabana Sabara and now siam Champa Camboia be famous in these part Havila of Chus be he which plant that country at the entrance of susiana in Persia commend gen. 2. for the Gold and of he also may abila in Syria and aualites a bay and port on the red sea and the p^puls which thence remove into Aethiopia and the chalybes among the Troglodytae bare name joctans Havila may give name to the i will the gulf Tavai to Avarice Martavan Cavelan also and Cublan all kingdom late subject to the king of Pegu. the auares in the northern part may be a deduction from he Chaberis also and the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a bactrian nation by some call and the where Hipanis spring the and indian Abali and Abarimon also in Scythia and jesual a kingdom in these day of jobab come the the or (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a indian nation the Sobi and sarmatian ibiones jacubel also in the kingdom of Pegu the i will java jamba and in old time Barebe and Bepinga some impression of the name of Ophir be leave in Ophar a sarmatian river and the and in those name of the hil Taurus paropamisus Pharphariades otherwise Pariades Parthenasis Ortelun thes. geogr. in Taurus Partao chaboras Oscobar para Choatra Parthaus Opurocarra paryadres I may add the renown indian island taprobane the prasij hippuros the city Paraca Palibothra perimula Doperura sobura Cottobora Sippara Mapura Caespira brachme and other name in Ptolomey and the in Curtius also the Hippuri in Pliny to omit Porus the great king of India who Alexander subdue and many place of principal note in India in these day have such a termination as and the like of more certainty than the occasional and yesterday name of Peru. thus have we bring argument of name to find all joctans posterity in the way to India or the inland indian country where it be likely they fi^st seat themselves and afterwards spread themselves both to the northern sarmatian and sythians and to the sea coast southerly after the flood some fear whereof do not a little terrify the first age at this day Tippara serepore on Ganges Caplan the place where they find the ruby saphire and spinell six day journey from Avarice Pegu itself and the Bramas which found the new city and which still people the kingdom of prom melintay calam Bacam Miriam and purdabin Purhola at the spring and Benpurbat the entrance of Ganges to the sea the straits of Cingopura with diverse other place in those region where we place Ophir have some foot-print leave of that name after so many age their brachmanes Probar their chief God talipoy their priest may be add for sound but word be windy sound and not sound wordy not worthy argument except thing agree make the truth evident for accidental name be the same in diverse country as if any man lust to observe in a geographical dictionary he shall easy see these be only probability which be to be weigh with the word of Moses and their dwell be from Mesha as thou go unto Sepha^ a mount of the east read it josephus interpret from Assyria to a river of India call Cophene Sepher be Ptol l. 7. tab. 4. Asia if you receive Montanus the per^an andes the mountain of the west in the world situation from Babylon and the place where Moses write Ptolemie mention Sipphara not far from Euphrates Postellus make it imaus saint Hierom place it in India sepharuaim of the assyrian which be perhaps Ptolemy Sipphara 2 reg. 17.22 and 19.13 esay 36 etc. be often mention and confirm well that opinion of josephus from Mesa therefore which take his beginning east from those part where Moses write be also part of that hill Taurus whereto we have find all joktans son neighbour afterward call mount Masius in Mesopotamia to Sephar another part of that great hill Taurus he name Mes^ and Sephar as ^etter know and but the entry of their further population as Tremelli^^ translate both eastward and thence also in process of time to further easterly mountain the remote eastern part of Taurus do joktans posterity spread and disperse themselves one of the most easterly whereof we find this question Ophir or if any like rather to find they more easterly Pliny mention the and in India and there also be Ptolemy Sapara and Sippara agree with Sephar sarpedon also and Sariph be hill so call part of Taurus it remain then to see whether the commodity of those part and the voyage thither be correspondent to the scripture description for the commodity we will give both ancient middle and modern testimony with this difference that the ancient and middle be not so particular nor direct express and notify place and thing as the last the rather because this have be the stumble stone to Ortelius and other to make they seek for Ophir elsewhere the ophirian voyage it be probable comprehend all the gulf of Bengala from Zeilan to sumatra on both side but the region of Ophir we make to be all from Ganges to Menan and most proper the large kingdom of Pegu tab. Asiae 11. indiae ext. gan. from whence it be likely in process of time the southerly part even to sumatra inclusive be people before salomons time in India beyond Ganges Ptolemy place both argentea and in his periplus or treatise of the sail about the erythraean sea which as be say before contain the indian speak of Ganges and the rise and fall thereof like Nilus place (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or the golden region near to it and add the report of golden mine in those part (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) marcianus mention this golden Chersonessus also * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) long before they Herodotus in his Thalia relate the tribute pay to the persian monarch say the indian as they be more in number then other man so their tribute be great 360. talent of gold and then add the report of aunt not so big as dog but big than fox which cast up antheap full of golden sand arrianus city Nearchus and megasthenes who Strabo produce also for these aunt which I think rather to be a emblem than a story Herod Thal. pro. 6. and 30. for as Solomon send the sluggard to school to the pismire to learn of that little creature great industry and providence so salomons and other prince mine can not be better express then in such a allegory live in darkness and as it be bury alive and bear excessive burden yet bait with poor diet and wage and thus georgius Fabritius fab. met. pl. l. 6. c. 19 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. the like fable they have of monstrous griffon thereby express the miserable monstrosity of covetousness Pliny have speak of the indian nation plut. alexand. etc. these prasij place near Ganges Plutarch call all which name they which know any thing in Hebrew can tell how easy they may be derive from Ophir pass the greek termination after other change and Palabothra or palimbothra be by arrianus place at the confluence of the river 10 10 Erannoboa perhaps be now jem^i Strab. 1.15 Erannoboa and Ganges Strabo speak of the sail up Ganges to Palibothra against the stream and say that Ganges descend from the mountain and from the plain take a eastward course then pass by Palibothra a very great city enter the sea with one channel although it be the great of the indian river master fitch our country man spend five month in pass down Ganges he may have do it soon and mention s^rrepore which as Sanbal y y sanb^l stand where jemni fall into Ganges d s. l. 3. c. 10. by the first syllable may seem to be the same by the situation traffic and last syllable and tell of the gold mine in the way Diodorus siculus speak of India say another Diodorus in his geographical verse say of the indian gold-mining (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and after (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) pomponius Mela mention those aunt more keep the gold he solinus and Pliny mention chryse and argyre so plentiful of metal mela. l. 4. c. 8. plin. l 6.21 Solin cap. 54. that man report the soil be gold and silver so hyperbolical report be raise of their store but as the ancient know not these part of India so well as late time we will produce late testimony and general it be esteem in the remote east part that gold by reason of the plenty have not his true and natural preaeminence above silver which ordinary be twelve to one but low by much in some place more in some less see to. 2. l. 1. c. 4 @. 6. ^a 92. and pag. 394. Cardandan about the head of Ganges as the follow relation will better acquaint you so Marco polo say that in the province of Cardandan they give one ounce of gold for five of silver gold be exceed plentiful which many bring through the desert to change as aforesaid the way be unpassible for other I omit the golden monument he mention in mien in Tholoman he say be great quantity of Gold the former place be somewhat northerly this easterly from the neck of the Chersonessus Nicolo de conti mention bell of gold common sell in those part still in use in pegu to put in man yard odoardo Barbosa mention store of gold at Queda and in the kingdom of Pam in this Chersonessus but I be too sudden slip into late time long before these aside l. 14. c. 3^ saint isidore mention chryse and argyre plentiful of gold and silver and those golden mountain and grypha and aelian have a long discourse of those griffin out of ctesias keep the gold in vast desert aelian De animal l. 4. c. 27. of which I note before as of the phoenix and the aunt that a mystery rather than history be intend either show the barrenness of miser produce no good fruit in the mid of golden abundance but rather ready to devour all which come in their clutch or else intimate the difficulty to get gold and manifold danger in respect of the neighbour inhabitant see the gloss and Lyran. in 1. reg. 9 and of famine in those desert Rabanus Ma^rus and long after he Nicolas lyra relate these beast perilous to such as seek the gold in these part and indeed for wild beast both lizard tiger and other I think no place more infest then those in and near pegu for which cause the country and people be force to build their house above ground that they may go up to they on ladder Barros tell of one tiger which in malacca seize on a piece of wood to which three slave be chain and carry all away see my pilgrimage Linschoten fitch Balbi all which have write of these part aelian De ani^^ leap therewith over a high wall also neither be the tiger of other country comparable to these in these part be another kind call Thoes or some other kind rather than true tiger of which be many in Africa and America but leave the testimony of ancient and middle time we will come to late day Ludovico barthema in his three book of India c. 16. much extol pegu for riches he write six score year ago especial for jewel and he say the king have a million of gold in revenue and note that the Bramas empire or monarchy be not then begin barthema barthema also mention the gold in Somatra testimony be before Caesar Frederick which be at Pegu near sixty year since in the Bramas reign in Pegu Frederik see l. 10. say that the king have diverse magazine full of gold and silver every day increase without diminish he be lord also of the mine of ruby saphire and spinel he mention also colossus or prodigious and more than giantly statue of gold and silver the foot as big as a man body innumerable varelle or idol temple cover with leaf gold with other thing which I omit master fitch fitch beside the gold mine at Patenaw as he descend the Ganges relate the like golden story of Pegu where he be 1586. as Frederick have relate of house of the king full of gold of guild idol house and statue the merchandise in Pegu faith he be gold silver ruby saphire spinel musk Gansa be a mixture of brass and tim. Balbi begin his journey 1579. he come to Pegu a. 1583. and stay till 1586. in which space be a combat betwixt the king of Avarice and Pegu on Elephance and the king of Avarice slay etc. neither be their money of those metal but of a kind of brass call Gansa wherewith gold and silver be buy somrtime dear sometime cheap no less than other ware so also say Frederick say that every man may stamp that money at his pleasure and therewith buy gold and silver as aforesaid Gasparo Balbi a venetian jeweller be there a little before fitch and relate likewise of the statue magazen of gold silver Ganza jewel clothes musk etc. under several treasurer and conclude that this king for gold silver and jewel be the rich king in the world except the king of but the jesuite letter have best open these mine of the king of Pegu. n. Pimenta write Fernandus also from syripore 1599 16. kal. feb. of the state of Pegu that the king father a braman have subject twelve kingdom to his sceptre viz. the kingdom of Cavelan whence come the best ruby and saphire Avarice which have mine of cyprian brass lead and silver the kingdom of bacan which have many mine of gold the kingdom of jangoma abound with copper musk pepper silk gold silver all which be also have say he in the rest of the kingdom of the peguan empire Cablan abound with gem etc. he proceed to relate the miserable ruin and destruction of that kingdom which then have late happen not yet recover as you may read at large in he and in my pilgrimage the former king of Pegu be report to have cast 366. of gold each contain 180. pound weight which none know what be become of they this king have 67. idoll-statue of gold adorn with all kind of gem he kill 200. eunuch lest they may disclose his treasure Andrea p. p. l. 5. c. 3 another jesuite relate the miserable death of the king in his letter from sirian in Pegu march 28. 1000 slay by the king of tangu to who he have yield himself who neglect silver and thing of small value only with gold and gem lade six or seven hundred * * one copy ha^h 600. ^arric have 700. elephant and as many horse the king of arracan take his leave glean so much silver as be value at three million beside ordnance 3300. piece now for trade of gold out of the adjoin part I can add hither out of Fernand mendez pinto which travel from Timplan in Calaminhan the emperor whereof he place Calaminhan betwixt Pe^u and China near to prom. he say have seven and twenty kingdom subject to he to pegu an. 1546. then possess by the braman conqueror he report that the bramans monarchy have ancient contain thirteen kingdom and that abundance of gem gold silver and innumerable riches be in the Calaminhan empire in which be no money of gold or silver but they trade by weight of cate Tadis Maazes and conderin he also report that the lake Chia^^a contain in circuit sixty jaons each of which be three league alongst which be many mine of silver copper tin and lead which they carry in Cafilas of elephant and Badas I think he mean rhinocerot to the kingdom of Sornan to wit siam savady tangu prom Calaminham and return therefore much gold and diamond and ruby as for the mine of gold near the lake Pinator whence the river of Camboia run yield yearly two and twenty million of gold and a rock of diamond there also I refer you to the author which place they further than our limit Peregrin f. m. pinto c. 39 but if we add sumatra which the most think to be taprobone in which ophir name be evident see still we have the tradition of the people the gold also a franciscan have relate that the peguans be descend of salomons servant send to these mine peguan tradition but I know not whether the native have any such tradition perhaps it be the friar conjecture as appear by the follow testimony and if we add the next neighbour on the west which now possess the eastern part of Ganges and the kingdom of Bengala I think we shall utter take away Ortelius his scruple the cause why Ortelius reject the opinion of josephus only remember that in the ophirian voyage we take not only the chersonesus but all the country from Ganges and thence to sumatra place pegu in the centre as the Ophir of Ophir or Ophir in most proper sense annex the rest with all the choromandell coast also as be subject to one and the same trade and navigation all on the shore of the gulf of Bengala I like master dees similitude which set the foot of his ophirian compass one in Zedan the other in Samatra the head I place in Pegu. this head be the true Ophir the other part of the compass the part cumpass and trade in in this ophirian voyage from Ganges to Menan be diverse chersonesi or rather land in regard of the river which come from the lake Chiamay and from Bengala to Menan be the peguan chersonesus which perhaps be the true chryse and aurea for that Malaccan Chersonessus have never be renown in latter time for any great quantity of gold that I have read or learn not yet altogether destitute as we have show but not sufficient for salomons Ophir from which as first people the inhabitant of Samatra may as be say be a colony whether it be so or no I dispute not nor whether it or Zeilan be the true Taprobant nor whether it be ancient a island and since separate by the sea irruption that it be well store with golden mine need no question and therefore fit to be salute by salomons navi^ then in their ophirian voyage and by we here in our ophirian discovery of sumatra odoardo Barbosa witness that there be many gold mine 6 and speak of Menancabo one of the kingdom in the south part of that great island say and principal etc. there be the principal original of the gold of that island as well of the mineral as of that which be gather near the brink of Rivers he write an. 1516. and be one of magelans companion in his voyage about the World Long before he Nicol^ conti testify of sumatra that in it be abundance of Gold Andrew Thevet mention the gold mine but we have late and better testimony from our own man captain davis be in that island 1599 and mention not only the king of Achens store see inf. p. 121. but the mine of gold and other commodity of that island and the brass mine to be also rich in gold and which make most to our purpose a tradition of the native that salomons ophirian voyage for gold be to that country sir james Lancaster voyage and diverse other english voyage will ratify Sumatras Gold but what need we better testimony than the letter of that king to our king which this story yield to your see inf. pa. 468. and 532. view and worth your read to that and to Walter paytons testimony of the gold of Passaman in this island I refer you likewise for the next adjoin part on this side I will trouble you only with two testimony one of master fitch who travel down the river Ganges at Patenaw observe the golden mine where say he they dig deep pit and wash the earth thence take in great bole and so find the gold the other of captain Hawkins who bear the name of the english ambassador in the mogul court and speak of six several treasury of that king relate the particular of that one of agra which stand on jemni or a river tributary to Ganges where his gold silver and jewel may seem to our poor world beyond credit but I have rather point you to the place Ins. 217 and seq than here trouble you with transcribe and thus have we use a threefold argument one of name a second of situation a three of the principal commodity return to prove that Ophir be in these part and have before show that it can be in none other allege but gold and gem have such a lustre and salomons other rarity be so precious that we may I hope be pardon to take long view on they both for our better knowledge in such thing and for better confirmation of the ophirian pegu and the region adjacent @. x. of the gold silver gem ivory almug-tree ape and peacock which salomons fleet bring from Ophir with diverse other profitable observation insert metal be our mother hide treasure by man covetousness often occasion of her violent ravishment and no better to she then a viperous issue or as worm or colike passion in her entrail in themselves and in divine ordinance they be many way profitable for medicine against disease armour against enemy ornament for peace engine for war instrument for daily labour utensil for daily food and in money-emploiment they be all thing of all metal gold have preeminence as like the sun in purity of substance glory of splendour powerful attraction long endurance in despite of age and fire most operative influence and of base idolater most adore how it be find in grain pippin or powder this book elsewhere show * * to. 1. li. 9 c. 12. @ 3. to. 2. l. 5. c. 2. @ ^ etc. 3 etc. see Brerewood Numm^s c. 20 22. Pollux hesan (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Li^ l. 38. pl. l. 3 c. 3. Hero Thalia and although silver be a durable metal and well endure both time and flame yet herein be it short of gold and notwithstanding the colour be more lightsome and the sound more delightsome yet gold have in great proportion always be prefer jullius Pollux cite Menander and hesychius polemarchus which make this proportion ten fold which the roman also observe in their agreement with the aetolian that if they pay in gold one piece shall countervail ten of silver the old greek and persian seem to have observe the like rate Pliny mention at the first coin the proportion of fifteen and near that to wit fourteen and a half be observe in the constitution of Arcadius and honorius Herodotus make one talon of gold equal to thirteen of silver in galbas time it be twelve and a half but China and some part of the east indies by reason of plenty of gold and small store of silver have diverse underualued the Gold the most general which Plato also approve and in Pliny time be currant and be most usual in these part be ordinary twelve for one as a ounce of silver five shilling of gold three pound the pure gold and which be as much as may be purify from all other mixture be call a word procreate in the mint Gerop. Pine etc. and not of ophirian parentage and such be as they say the darike coin and our Edward nobles not above the ninety six part be of other mixture they say say master Brerewood that it may be so far refine that only the three hundred eighty four part shall be of other mettle the greek coin of Philip and Alexander admit a fifty part of silver the roman forty eight t^l joma fol. 44. Hi^r^n (@) 10. job 22.24 and 28 16. 1 c^r 29.4 now observe in turkish hungarian spanish and venetion coin those of Rome luque Milan have alloy thirty two french crown sixteen italian nine etc. the Talmudists mention seven kind of gold or observe seven name by which gold be name in scripture saint jerom also intimate the same and Pineda have long discourse of they which I omit the scripture seem to ascribe a prerogative to the gold of Ophir before salomons time in job and in David day whereby it may seem that the voyage to Ophir for gold be in use long before Solomon and some think that a great part of David gold consecrate to the temple be by his care fetch thence for above his other preparation mention 1. Chron. 22.14 which be a hundred thousand talent of gold and a thousand thousand talent of silver in the nine and twenty chapter he out of his proper good give 3000. other talent of gold of the gold of Ophir and 7000. talent of refine silver the prince offer also 5000. talent of gold and 10000 dram and of silver 10000 talent etc. this be diverse sum by diverse expositor differ in their computation of a talon master dee and master Berewood have seem to have give the best construction derive from Moses himself Exod. 38.25 26. which rabbi Solomon and lyra have observe before they that a talon contain a a 6003550. at half a shekel a man ^ay 100 talent and 3550. shekel so that 600000 pay 300 talent and consequent a talon be 6000. half shekel 3000. Shekles which be 375 li. a talon of silver and a talon of gold allow twelve fold proportion be 4500. li. according to which just reckon salomons four hundred twenty talent of gold bring from Ophir come to one million eight hundred ninety thousand pound David 3000. talent of gold of Ophir 1. Chron. 29.4 aforesaid be thirteen million and five hundred thousand in english money his silver then offer 7000. talent be two million 625000. li. the offering of the prince 5000. talent of gold be two and twenty million five hundred and seven thousand and 500 pound and their ten thousand talent of silver come to three million and seven hundred fifty thousand pound Solomon have also give he by the queen of sheba 120. talent that be five hundred and forty thousand pound as much be send he by hiram now the whole furniture of the tabernacle be twenty nine talent of gold 1. reg. 10.10 exod. 38.24 25 and 730. Shekles in our money one hundred thirty and one thousand five hundred ninety and five pound the silver be 100 talent and 1775. shekel that be thirty seven thousand seven hundred and twenty one pound seventeen shilling six penny thus have master Brerewood cast up these sum now for this ophirian gold Solomon be say 2. Chron. 8.18 to have have from Ophir four hundred and fifty talent thirty more than 1. reg. 9 be mention which thirty talent it seem be spend in wage or other charge and come not to the king coffer but a great scruple remain about the 100000. talent of gold mention before out of 1. Chron. 22.14 which amount to four hundred and fifty million of english pound and the million of silver talent to three hundred seventy five million of pound sum stupendous and prodigious beyond all that the persian greek or roman empire ever see at one time after great and long conquest than David and such as even salomons wealth have be by much overtop by David which agree not either to the history * * 2. Chron. 1.12 or to the mystery that heaven peace and glory shall be surmount by militant faith and grace Alexander the rich conqueror leave but eighteen million and seven hundred and 50000. pound of money at his death and in conquest of Darius have get but thirty two million 750000. ^ and Cyrus out of the conquest of Asia gather but 125. million which yet be the great sum except that of mention by C^esias a author not much to be credit which any ethnic story mention we must therefore find another acceptation of the word there translate talon which be take sometime for a lump of mettle in form of a cake or else that name talent be sometime take for a small sum as out of Pollux and Homer m. brerewoods pain have observe who also have cast up the particular find that such sum can not have be spend on the temple have the wall and pavement be of massy silver the roof and all this line of the wall and the furniture of solid Gold Salomon yearly revenue as some interpret 2. Chron. 9.13 be six hundred sixty six talent of gold beside his custom and the rich present of gold and silver send he from the king of Arabia and the governor that lack but three pound of three million in our reckon some will make up this great sum of the ophirian gold and hirams and the queen of Shebas gift which all lack but six talent as if it be not a annual but casual revenue which I can approve some interpret it of ordinary tribute levy of his subject some of the posterity of the chanaanite a thing unlikely and some of foreign voyage make he to send every year a fleet though none of those fleet return till the three year Villalpandus * * Villal to. 2. Explan. p. 2. c. 44 and seqq silver bring home much more than Gold 1. Chron. 9.27 and 1 reg. 10.21 1. 9.23 24 make it but one return from Ophir the first of four hundred and twenty talent the second of four hundred and fifty the three of six hundred sixty six of gold beside silver and other good and as for Salomon entire revenue he with great pain in the audit raise they high than the persian than Alexander than those of the roman empire arise from his custom his gift and present taxation tribute provision of corn etc. that of the king of Tyrus he reckon a tribute and out of eupolemus allege that the tyrian be tributary we may here also remember that there be no mention of the sum of the silver which they bring from Ophir which be likely be far more than the gold insomuch that it be repute as stone and be of none account in the day of Solomon to i it seem that the six hundred sixty six talent of gold be speak only of foreign gold partly by ophirian and other merchandise trade and partly by presenr of which the two principal hiram and the queen of the south be express but it be add of other that all the king of the earth seek the presence of Solomon and bring every man his present vessel of silver and vessel of gold and raiment harness and spice horse and mule a rate year by year grant then a fleet yearly set forth which come not home till the three year one succeed another as in the spanish fleet to Peru and we to the indies of which be a yearly return yet not of the same and these yearly present there can not be less than six hundred sixty six talent beside perhaps ten or twelve time as much in silver and all the spice horse mule custom of merchant tribute of the edomite moabite and vassal tax on his israelitish * * Villap sup raise the tribute of Israel to 120. talent each tribe and as much of hiram of who subjection I dispute not it agree with Canaan curse and the promise of all Canaan to Israel which together make 1560. talent 26254800. Roman ducat beside silver and all other profit which he bring together above Assuerus Alexander the roman empire with fair probability subject revenue out of his pasture and innumerable cattle and husbandry of crown land we will not add with some chemistry that may have save his ophirian pain and all the riches leave he by inheritance from his father now that the six hundred sixty six talent be to be understand of stranger appear in that exception vers. 14. where none but foreign incombe be mention and hereby most lively be both the call of the gentile figure of which the 72. psalm be by the spirit of God purposely indict in correspondence of this type and the christian truth as also the glory of the heavenly jerusalem which arise not out of the work of righteousness which we have do but of free gift of which it be say they shall bring the glory and honour of the nation into it Reu. 21. where in vision that glorious c^tie be represent and correspondent to salomons type the city be of pure gold and the foundation and gate of precious stone but there be no mention at all of silver another question arise out of David 3000. talent of gold of Ophir whether David send fleet to Ophir whether he practise the ophirian voyage also and some suppose that he ^ad make seven voyage thither which reckon 420. talent a time make much about that sum of three thousand talent for my part I think David a great warrior than merchant allow the great sum before question to be reserve and consecrate out of the spoil as himself confess 1. Chron. 22 1^ and 18 11. d. Dee in my trouble I have prepare for the house of the lord 100000. talent of gold etc. and more plain 1. chronicle 18.11 consider also that it be long before his state can be settle at home and fit abroad to attend such navigation which likewise have neither ground in the sacred story for the gold of Ophir be proverbial usual in scripture for fine and pure gold nor agree with the type David one way Solomon another resemble Christ and their time the state of the church likewise that David have much care of husband his estate to the best thrift be the fuel of magnificence as appear in the particular enumeration of the officer for his rent 1. Chron. 27.25 26 27 28 29 30 31. storehouse husbandman in the field vineyard olive-tree sycamore and oil herd in sharon and in the valley camel ass flock it be no marvel if such industry acquire such substance in such continuance of time and that he say I have of my own proper good of gold and silver which I have give to the house of my god over and above all that I have prepare to wit in consecrate spoil for the holy house three thousand talent of gold of Ophir etc. two remarkable pillar of royal magnificence husbandry on land and navigation by sea this example of David show that it be no impeachment yea the true advancement of honour for prince to use all frugal husbandry and mean of thrive at home as that other of Solomon to add help of discovery and trade abroad both in a royal manner by their just officer that magnificence may stand firm on both leg the want whereof have deny that wealth not to speak of power these many age to many king out of far far great mean beside other inconvenience to themselves and their subject which david Solomon and other king in the old world have once these example so move that good king jehoshaphat 1. Chron. 17.11 12. and 20.35 36 37. that he build city of store at home and have many flock and make ship also to go to tarshish and they make the ship in Ezion-Geber the same port where Solomon make his naval provision but join therein with Ahaziah king of Israel who do very wicked so much worse before God be a Ahaziah then a hiram the one a honest mind gentile the other a schismatical idolatrous Israelite that the lord br^ke the work and the ship be not able to go to tarshish we have be very long in this metal discourse yet how much long be Solomon in his three year voyage and how much long the most of man which make their whole life a voyage to Ophir for gold and silver through so many diversify sea of art force fraud to get those metal which procreate near hell carry these eager seeker thither altogether that the silver be more by far than the gold be before prove but the quantity be not express as not agree with salomons either literal story or mystical glory d. Dee some think that there be in every voyage 24. time as much silver as gold both because they conceive that nature have give so much more thereof in quantity as the quality and price be underualued and because all story ancient and modern magnify India for store of silver and so prodigious prodigality to give silver in jerusalem as stone must have a deep fountain for such a flow stream 1. ^ 20 27. beside those other silver hooks and brook mention in salomons history but we will leave these precious specious object to take view of gem gem and herein american Peru and Sofala be beggarly in comparison of those part of India where we have place Ophir as the former testimony well weigh with whatsoever can be bring for the other will easy and superabundant convince in northern America be some turkess in the southern be say to be which other question emerald in both pearl but not comparable to the oriental these bezoar be twice so good in spice to make comparison have no spice of knowledge and first for the first of gem diamond Pliny say plin. l. 37. c 4. some have conceit it to dull the lodestone attraction and to resist all force of hammer which experience have find contrary the kingdom of Narfinga Or^ssa Masul^patan and all the country on the Choromandel coast be the most famous for rock of diamond and now also Soccodanna where they dive * * see c. Saris. l. 4. c. 2. ^ Taniapura for they as for pearl Decan and agra also in the Tract of malacca and java here then be the world centre of diamond both for the most and best write that he have see one of one hundred and forty mangle that be seven hundred grain another of one hundred and twenty and have hear of one of two hundred and fifty and a credible man tell he that he see one as big as a small hen egg in bisnager Garc. Hort^ l. 1. c. 47. this soil be so diamantine that where you have dig and take they now in two year space you may dig and find other neither be it poison as some affirm but he have know the whole stone and the powder take without hurt the heaven-coloured sapphire with some obtain the second place because of the likeness thereof under the foot of the almighty when he speak to Moses exod. 24.10 Epiphan. ^ibel 12. od. Barbosa of which be store in Zeilan and the most true hard and fine as Barbosa testify but m. fitch and m. Frederick have before tell you of mine of they in Pegu and these say Garcias and Linschoten be esteem the fine and be in great plenty so be there also of the ruby a stone of great value none in the world exceed that king in excellency and variety of gem Linschot cap. 86 as appear by general voice of ruby the carbuncle be esteem the best the ballast next the Spinell in the three place of fiery colour there be beside white carnation half white half red ruby other half saphire half ruby and one thousand other sort if we believe Linschoten Garcias ascribe this to the generation of the ruby which at first be whitish and grow unto redness in process of time and because the sapphire and ruby grow in one rock gar. cap. 49. they be find sometime such participle as be deliver sapphire-ruby call the Granado and hyacinth be also reckon by some among the ruby call the yellowish ruby the hyacynth and the blackish a Granado these be plentiful in cananor Calcutta and Cambaia near westward and in the way to the gulf of Bengala in Zeilan also as Nicolo di conti and Andrea Corsali affirm Pimenta his testimony of Cavelan and Cablan two gem kingdom you have before the jaspar be find in much plenty in Cambaia chrysolite and amethyst there and in Zeilan and in balagate the apennine of the great indian chersonesus where they have also the or which stay the issue of blood present Pegu Brama Zeilan yield the cats-eye and agate of which the indian conceive the owner shall increase in wealth and Garcias say he have try that no fire can burn a linen cloth press to the eye of it the armenian stone be find also in balagate the loadstone in Zeilan near to which be the fish for pearl but the best of the world be in the persian gulf near ormuz the Alambie in Cambaia the bezoar stone be at Pahan near malaca and Cambaia take out of the maw of a sheep or goat the beryl be in Pegu and Zeilan the topaz be almost like a diamant and be dig out of the earth in many place of India there be white saphire and ruby hardly know from diamond in Cambaia also be find plenty of the stone Alambre there be find in Zeilan also the topaz lins. c. 87. and Marucha who name I can better give you then the understanding there be also many sort of stone you read Lischoten as well precious stone as against poison and other disease of many property and virtue but I have only mention those that be daily buy and sell and be common know the emerald I mention not though say to be in these part because some doubt of they and in other part be find better wherewith the venetian have make good gain at pegu in exchange for ruby those also of Peru be suspect for gem we now conclude no part of the world but India can fit salomons turn wherein if Aaron breastplate be so glorious in the tabernacle to how precious height will Salomon temple elevate our thought and consequent both manifest and magnify the indian-ophirian voyage these be find either natural in the peguan Ophir or by trade there or in the way from Ophir by the western part of India part of the persian gulf and the shore of Arabia and Aethiopia of which Arabia be say to yield the hemathite topaz Sardonyke onyx m^lochite myrrhite coral andromade Iris Pineda reb. salom. l. 4. c. 18. of indian store of jewel and their richness see inf 217.550.558.559 1. reg. 10.12 Aethiopia the chrysolite Chrysolamp heliotrope hyacinth hemathite chrysoprase the persian gulf from Babylonia the Sagda and sardy and the best pearl Egypt in ordinary trade the galactite emerald and Aegyptilla some of which you have before particular mention in India and likely enough shall there find most of the rest with many other unknown if India be as much frequent with philosopher from hence as merchant we be next to consider the almug tree whereof be make pillar for the house of the lord and for the king house * * Terrises or ^^aire^ be add 2. chr. 9.11 jos. 1.8 c. 2. it seem to have be write by m. Hakl hand among who paper I have it and have here make much use of it although (@) much late and better intelligence be here also cite harp also and psaltery for singer there come no such almug tree nor be see unto this day josephus interpret pine tree but say they differ from the usual resemble the timber of the fig tree to the eye but that they be white and bright there be mention of tree in Lebanon 2. Chron. 2.8 which some think to be the same with the former and the word only alter by transposition of letter other that that transposition intimate no less specifical difference in the wood then in the word though otherwise have some likeness to those of Lebanon but of great excellency d. dee have write a laborious treatise almost whole of this ophirian argument the same year in which I be bear a. 1577. of seventy sheet of paper howsoever entitle of famous and rich discovery of which I have a write copy and can willing but for the length have publish it which may appear in this that he have ten sheet of paper about these almug tree more profitable to the leisurely scholar then commodious to be insert to so voluminous a work as this library of we he there as commissioner for salomons Timbers like a learned both architect and planter have summon a jury of twelve sort of tree mention by diverse interpreter to examine or to be examine rather which of they be the almug here mention I shall bring you into a wood to relate his labour in this kind the kind be the deal box cedar cypress ebony ash juniper Larch olive pine oak and sandal tree the spanish bible read Brasilwood all which with their several quality and fitness for royal and sacred building he examine by best testimony and conclude nothing absolute but incline to josephus who either by some monument in writing may have learn or in some remainder to his time in instrument musical or other profane or sacred memorial may probable be think to have see thereof I easy believe that these pine or thynes or whatsoever other tree plin. l. 13. c. ^6 be both odoriferous to the send of beauteous aspect to the eye of fit temper to refract sound to the ear smooth to the touch and of long continuance and strong substance for building therein to be serviceable to all sense of which sort it be evident out of ancient and modern writer and out of the follow relation that India have the best in the World the live creature remain to our ^earth elephant ape peacock of their tree and of elephant see m. terry l. 9 c. 6. @. 2. of their ape as big as greyhound ib. @. 3 see also santos jobson Leo and many other in this work of which I need say little say so much in our follow history and have say so much already elephant come near man in understanding ape in form say Ennius and peacock for their beauty as parrot also bird of paradise and many other indian fowl may be desire the great elephant be ^ound in all this our ophirian Tract from Zeilin to Pegu those esteem to have a natural preeminence and these have of late a political the king of Pegu still himself the king of white elephant and keep they royal attend his subject and tributary king also it be Gasper balby his report kneel to they once all India be plentiful of they and therefore of ivory this country also near Ganges be store with the or Rhinocerote who horn be in Bengala by reason of certain herb he there feed on a good counterpoison indian asse-horne in these part be also use for buckler and drink cup and esteem a great jewel as master Finch affirm pag. 436. for peacock or parrot translate which you will here be not only so many of both peacock wild parrot ape great and white se^ 436 etc. that they fly wild as the follow relation show but for excellency beyond those of other part as the ape also be for their beauty and strength see sir t. Ro^ master Finch and other journal or rather talk with our indian merchant which usual trade and travel those part som^ of which in the mogoll country carry with they a english greyhound one of the company shoot at a great white she ape on a tree and wound she whereby she with her cub fall down they set on the greyhound and this ape before seek shift for her cub see the greyhound come lay it aside and encounter the greyhound so fierce about the neck these ape be tail that he die within a few hour the company with their weapon come in and kill the ape as themselves relate to i and carry away the young one the country people in I know not what superstition forbear to kill they whereby they multiply exceed here by the way may be observe that it appertain to royal magnificency and disagree not to human excellency to procure rarity of live creature and to keep they as testimony of our admiration of God various work and exercise of the mind contemplation the body pleasure with the right humane over sensitive creature which nature teach Alexander yea Motezuma and the Inca^ in that wild world and divine grace our Solomon as these scripture manifest the imitation of who wisdom have whet my study almost to curiosity to give to the world a world of rarity in that kind as any occasion offer itself in these voluminous voyage @. 11 probable conjecture of the course take in the ophirian voyage and account give of the three year time spend therein also of the course take in like voyage by the roman and the diverse port whereto the spice and riches of India have in diverse age be bring and thence disperse to the several part of EUROPE plin. l. 6. cap. 23 as covetous rich man be ever needy and greedy so India have ever swallow in trade the world treasure and yet be the treasury of the World we have now undertake a hard task where we tell not but spell a voyage and from reasonable conjecture ground on other experiment gather what be most likely in this of salomons d. dee have write 23. sheet of paper in examine the mile the day the way the employment of the time and muster or man and ship employ in this service I can presume either of so much learning in myself or so much patience in the reader yet I shall be bold both to follow he and to add somewhat for further light Pliny write that in his time this voyage from Egypt to India be make every year every year India consume his 500 which jacobus in his note sum to 1200000. crown of the roman empire treasure yearly yield merchandise therefore in return sell at a hundred time so much their course he say be from Alexandria twelve day by Nilus to Coptus thence by camel over land to Berenice two hundred fifty eight mile travel most part by night by reason of the heat in twelve day more from Berenice on the red sea they begin to set forth at midsummer or about the begin of dog-day and in thirty day come to ocelis in Arabia or to Canaan or Muza if they go not to India but for arabian frankincense and odour and from ocelis in forty day they arrive at the first indian port muziris remember that in this course they both take benefit of the monson muziris be by some thought to be C^aul by arrianus in his periplus (@) be place more southerly on that which we call the malabar coast. d. Dee think it surat voyage of onesicritus and Nearchus plin. l. 6. c. 22. voyage to Taprobana and go the near way for so a little before he mention another course by the Shore he mention the voyage of onesicritus and Nearchus from India to Tigris in the bottom of the persian gulf which hold they till the seven month so much be navigation improve in Pliny time their pepper they take in on the malabar coast and return in December the same year the name which then they give to place be quite differ from the ancient and the like indian mutation have continue to our time the course to taprobane have accidental come to their knowledge a little before find in Alexander time to be a island by onesicritus mention by megasthenes the ancient deem it another World the sea be f^l^ of shoald the north-star be not see there and they observe their course by send out bird which they carry with they and follow their flight but in the empire of Claudius annius have farm the custom of the red sea one of his retainer or freeman * sail on the arabian coast be by a northern storm carry alongst the carmanian shore to hippuros a port therein and be kind use by the king who admire his roman relation send four ambassador back with he these relate among other thing that the side of the island which lie towards India be 10000 furlong * * that be 1250. mile which can agree to Zeilan but sumatra the easterly situation emodos and commerce with seres agree to sumatra Arrian l. 8. and that they have trade with the Sere I will not recite Nearchus out of arrianus nor Ptolemey and marianus which can little advantage we in regard of the less knowledge of the former and less certainty of the late pass the ignorance of transcriber and above one thousand year darkness yet herein be Ptolemey profitable where his longitude and latitude be false that by his order of position and successive set down of place some knowledge may arise but the length of the way be better know by late writer John Barros have set down the coast distance from the Bab or mouth of the red sea to cape nigraes the southerly part of our Ophir who Portugal league allow for each three english mile and a five part of a mile come to 5769 @ and from that cape to Singapura be 1008. mile more from the Bab or mouth of the red sea to the bottom be by Comito Venetiano in Ramusio reckon 1441. mile and in his return 1514. the breadth in some place two hundred inf. to. 1. l. 7. c. 6. the way full of shoald so that it can be sail near the shore but by day so troublesome be this sea and so difficult to be sail that don John de Castro who voyage follow at large spend no less than three month in the way from the straits to sue from the nine and twenty of january 1541. to the seven and twenty of April and return the eight and twenty of April arrive at the Bab the eighteen of july so that here the way be to be weigh by the quality as well as the quantity Hieronimo da santo Stephano in Ramusio spend from cosir to aden fifty day almost three hundred mile southward from sue and therefore so much less way we must here note also that neither the ship nor their furniture the shipman also nor their furniture of skill can in salomons day be any way comparable to these late time and that if three month be spend by the Portugal navy from sue to the Bab we may at least allow so much time to these ophirians for if these have more haste the other have more skill and better ship neither may we think that they dare there sail but by day in salomons fleet and therefore be likely to make it long the less vessel and many man will require also often stay for water and refresh beside the seven day rest which Salomon servant according to the law and especial in a voyage for adorn the temple build in honour of the legal worship must not break be out of the straits into the ocean they be neither willing nor able as appear by the mention voyage of onesicritus and Nearchus to adventure the sail beyond ken of land and therefore also Ptolemie in his longitude and latitude abate of marinus and the mariner reckon one three part because of the crook in their coast as every bay and point enforce they and that compendious way mention by Pliny be then new in his time when ship and the mariner art have be by frequent experience much improve and from the swaddle band in salomons time grow to some virility so that except force by distress of weather we can make the ophirian course but within ken o^ shore all the way now than if it be the seven month as we have read in Pliny before Alexander fleet can arrive in Tigris from Indus in which arrianus report that there w^r^ Phaenician egyptian and cyprian beside his best grecian mariner they all bring then his subject we can allow no less to salomons fleet before it can touch the near indian port be no ^esse way and howsoever it may be object that triumphal devotion and tempest and fight and reparation of the fleet take up much of Nearchus his time I answer that this ophirian fleet be neither warrant from enemy nor tempest and be likely also to spend time in reparation and in provision and in devotion special that which be peculiar to they the sabbath and although single ship in the Arabic gulf and in the ocean may even then make quick way than this mention yet in that of Castro of N^archus and this of Solomon where care be to keep a whole fleet together for mutual help and common security the great body must needs have slow motion thus then allow three month to the red sea and six month from thence to India we shall follow Comito Venetiano who reckon the one 1514. mile from the straits to sue inward and thence outward to Diu 2023. to which add the coast about to the ormuzian strait and come to any port in India as namely muziris or any in the malabar coast it can not much less than double the length of the way and therefore the time by this proportion we shall spend the three year in go and return if we add that spacious way from muziris to our near port in Ophir and so shall both their labour and we be vain and nothing shall be do Barros himself to make this more evident have reckon short of the way which salomons fleet must make in bout and wind by the shore or which he make no allowance d. dee be spare in this calculation and yet make it from Ezion geber to cape negraes 9155. mile of which we deduct for the Arabic gulf but 1514. and leave 7641. remain we therefore in regard of the manifold danger and shelf of that gulf allow to it eighty day of which deduct eleven sabbath there remain sixty nine to which one with another we allow one and twenty mile a day somewhat more as much as can convenient in that sea be allow to a fleet sail together and this allowance be so large that Castro be eighty eight day and that in the day of better navigation in the way which we allow to sixty nine now in the ocean where they may make better use of the monson and tide as free from the danger which attend the gulf we will allow thirty two mile a day one with another the sabbaoth deduct which by the year end will bring we to our port at Peg^ or some other the near to cape negraes where we may harbour our fleet for to cape Negraes itself deduct the one and forty sabbath remain of the year 7641. mile be proportion in each day equal sail in requisite and direct way one and thirty mile and 17/244 which being very far from any safe port must needs make it two and thirty mile the day to bring we thither allow nothing for new moon or any other jewish solemnity or other occasional stay whatsoever nor for those board gibe and fetch tu^n^s which mariner and special coast-winders must make and consequent much superfluous way which alone beside force of storm will make this thirty two to be above forty mile a day ordinary way break and whole one with another and if this seem to any man a small thing thirty two mile a day allow for the whole voyage one day with another for what that fraction lack must be allow ^n go from cape either to the mouth of Ganges or Avarice or some other port. let he consider the weakness of navigation then both in skill and ship the phaenicians before this time not acquaint with those indian sea but only with the mediterranean as probable may be think their use the o^re more than the sail and not dare to sail by night when they can not see shore their necessary occasion of stay sometime for water and provision sometime by fo^le weather detain sometime for reparation of some of the fleet occasional need help that all the fleet may keep together sometime for trade by the way sometime for healthful ^^sport recreation and joy and which be of principal observation in those sea for expectation of the Mons^^ or season of the wind^ which there keep a even course as out of the follow voyage you shall see all which lay together it will not seem miserable and unjust do to have allow the proportion before mention if you read the first discovery b b see l. 2. c. 1^ @. 2. a whole age have pass before they discover far as the cape of good hope sum. ^otal on the coast of Africa by the portugal and see how little they discover in a whole summer when their skill be not inferior to these phaenicians and experience more you will think i (@) if not prodigal in this allowance captain Hawkins in the Hector a ship no^ the worst of (@) and which before have be twice at the indies be from the first of Apr^ll 1607. till August 24. 1608. ere he can arrive at the bar of Sura^ in the near part of the indies almost seven^^ene month space where no jewish sabbath no^ shore-creeping enforce then stay the dragon at the (@) time be long in her way to Suma^^^ and I believe many of ou^ late voyage do not much exceed this proportion it seem therefore to i probable in a round reckon to allow ou^ one year little more or less on the voyage a second in the stay at their several port and in the mine of gold and silver and for further provision of almug tree ivory ape and peacock and a three year in their return doctor dee allow fifty mile a day of requisite way that be 1200. mile every four week d. dees reckon rest the sabbath and forty mile a day within the gulf or red sea the mile he compute 9155. and the whole voyage to be perform in seven month and six and twenty day outward and as much homeward one fortnight of (@) after their land before they fall to their mine-worke to be spend in mind-worke of devout thankfulness prayer and festival rejoice as much before their ship for return the rest in their work and purvey of commodity so that for what I allow a year to each of these he allow the space of eight month or there abouts the three year he bestow on their business rest and triumph at home care of their family and state preparation for the next return as trim the ship in these time the worm which in those sea breed in ship and eat they compel we to sheathe they and other provision he allow 4500 workman for the mine not all at once work but in course some rest by turn other work and then those succeed to their work while they again rest the work and yielding whereof he diligent examine three hundred for the almug tree for elephant tooth twenty for ape and peacock ten one hundred officer in all 5040. to this business he hold requisite fifty tall ship to each ship thirty mariner in all 1500. which with the former number make up 6540. man thus he and more than thus with much curiosity of mineral and naval learning which can here be express without that liberty of long discourse which neither the vulgar reader can understand nor other perhaps except some few find leisure to read otherwise I will have insert it I honour his great industry but can conceive that that age yield such great ship to carry so many nor that they can one day with another make so much way nor that Solomon will permit so long a stay as a whole year but rather press new man as for the phaenician mariner upon this occasion it be likely that they settle their dwell at or near Ezion geber as all antiquity mention Phaenicians in the red sea seem to argue and for the servant of Solomon Salomon servant send to Ophir be not israelite 1 reg. 9.20.21.22 they be the posterity of the people that be leave of the amorite hittites Perizzite Hi^ites and jebusite which be not of the child of Israel their child that be leave after they in the land who the child of Israel also be not able utter to destroy upon those do Solomon levy a tribute of bond service unto this day but of the child of Israel do Solomon make no bondman thus the holy write but a few verse before the mention of this ophirian navy of these it be say 2 Chro. 2.17 1 reg. 5.14 and Solomon number all the stranger that be in the land of Israel after the number wherewith David his father have number they and they be find a hundred and fifty thousand and three thousand and six hundred and he set 70000. of they to be bearer of burden and 80000. to be hewer in the mountain and 3600. overseer to set the people a-work if Solomon will not ease they by course near home for they be the israelite which serve by those course not these stranger I can here ease they and if he will not employ the israelite in the near quarry and forest neither will he send they to remote mine a more dangerous and difficult work now some of those hewer in the mountain be fit for this hew and mine in the mountain for metal to which that place may also be intend and extend officer to Ophir and man of command he may have out of Israel but for the oar by sea and ore at land these be likely to be the servant of Solomon mention in the text the rather because that name ever after continue to they as you may read even after the return from the captivity in ezra 2.55 Nehem. 7.60 this have be omit by other handle this argument and therefore I be the full in it beside it be as likely which other also observe and before be mention and agree to the 666. talent of gold yearly that Solomon after the temple building be end villa^^^nd Pineda etc. employ fleet yearly to Ophir one under another that each shall make their voyage in three year but of they every year one shall return which agree not with d. dees speculation of a year stay neither be it probable that in seven or eight month so much gold and silver can be get by so unexpert miner nor do d. dee^onsider ^onsider the monsons of those sea which be by six month regulate and not by eight nor may we think but that many of salomons servant settle some abode in the country so long at lest if we will permit course which I will not much quarrel among they as Solomon use the voyage by who the ivory ape and peacock may be procure and gem also without any special allowance of man each three year to that purpose except as the fleet in come or go may touch by the way at each good mart for which doctor dees time of eight month seem also too short yet if any approve and lust to follow he I have no empire over opinion first merchant and the diverse mart for spice gen. 37.23.28 this ophirian voyage which bring the riches of the east to Ezion geber occasion a qu^re of the voyage of spice and the manifold shift of the mart and port thereof in former time i^ a work of voyage not unfit for consideration the first mention of merchant be of ishmaelite and midianite which travel in a caravan together with camel carry spicery and balm and myrrh to Egypt these inhabit not far from Ezion geber or the shore of the red Sea whither their spicery come out of the southern part of Arabia or further out of India bring into some arabian port jer. 8.22 and 22.6 be not easy to determine their balm they may have at gilead by the way though Arabia yield of that also as the myrrh likewise what spicery the first mention be be not so easy to decide job mention the gold of Ophir and other passage in that book may cause conjecture of a indian trade in his day Su^das but this be easy gather out of history that the great monarch endeavour to make themselves lord of India for the riches aforesaid Sem^ramis be say to have invade India and to have be repel by sta^^^bates which I can believe though not so prodigal of faith as to accept the report of three million of foot see full. miscel. and five hundred thousand horse in her army no more than that she be the founder of Babylon but both Ni^u^ or Ninius which her husband N^^us have make the sea^e of the assyrian empire stand upon Lycu^ which flow into Tigris and Babylon feat of the chaldae^n empire on Euphrates seleucia also and Bagdet of late building not far from thence have in their time be fit seat to receive either by land or sea or both the indian riches thence to be disperse to other mart and through the world the persian be lord of India as both the scripture and Herodotus affirm Est^ 8.9 Herod Thalia and Alexander advance the macedonian empire thither also who empire after his death be rend into four part seleucus pofess Babylonia and Ptolemeus Egypt which by the red sea make most advantage of the spicery egyptian Sesostris who josephus esteem to be Shishak 2 Chro. 12. the king of Egypt which take away great part of these ophirian treasure be by Strabo report the first which subdue Aethiopia and jos. Ant^q l. 8. c. 4 Strab. l. 16. at the strait of where the red sea be out sixty furlong or seven mile and a half broad leave monument of his exploit a pillar engrave with hieroglyphike he pass thence into Arabia and through all Asia his western expedition I omit Lucan sing but it be like that be in the time of Solomon and his emulous enemy 2 Chro. 35. Herod l 4. that the glory of salomons ophirian art have whet he to this asian and indian expedition Pliny mention the tyrian in this coast and the port Dancon whence Sesostris first of all thought to bring a navigable river to delta of Nilus 62. mile necho long after he which sew king josias be say to have seek to make a marriage betwixt the red sea and Nilus the ca^se be evident the arabian pl. l. 6. c. 29. diod. s. c. l. 1. c 3 plin. l. 6. c. 29. aethiopian and indian commerce to be join with the mediterra^an and to have send phoenecians from that sea upon discovery round about Africa in which voyage they spend two year Cambyses conquer Egypt and build cambist a city on the red sea Darius the persian pursue Nechos project think to perfect a trench from the river to the sea but be deter by those which say that sea be high than Egypt some make Psamme^icus^ ^ worker also in this trench and therefore will drown^ yet do this project outli^e the persian empire in Egypt for Ptolemie make a trench 100 foot br^d and 30. deep 37. mile and 400. pace as far as the bitter fountain and then break off fea^ing^n inundation the red sea be find three cubit high than the land of Egypt some say finie say the fear be lest Nilus shall be corrupt by the sea water yet by three way do the then pass to Arsinoe build by Ptolemaeus Philadelphus the trench still continue as a geman which see it in his way to mount Sinai from cairo testify Cop^s way be find by king Ptolemy and the egyptian exchequer thereby so advance that in ally time a king nothing frugal Arsine^ or Sue^ Furer voyage in his l. 8. c. 13. Strab. l. 17. the prodigal father of prodigious Cleopatra Strabo city it out ^an oration of Cicero the royal revenue come to 12500. talent which be of english coin by m. ^erewood^ reckon two million three hundred forty three thousand and seven hundred and fifty ^ounds and if that he say Strabo which careless and negligent administer his kingdom hd so much revenue what may we think of the present roman government the indian and troglo^ticall merchandise be add for whereas afore scarce 20. ship adventure out of the str^^s now very great fleet be set forth to India and Aethiopia whence precious Merchandise^ be ^ought to Egypt and thence transport to other place with the benefit of double custom (@) importation and exportation but those precious ware have heavy impost because of the mo^polies only Alexandria receive and disperse they thus Strabo who call Alexandria (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the great mart in the World how gainful this trade be Alexandria and what co^^e they hold in this voyage in Pliny time you have hear out of he already Alexa^dria be overwhelm with a saracen deluge see Leo and (@) by schismatical Chalipha^ begin at last to haul up head again and while the mameluke empire last be the chief mart for the spice ^ought to Mecca and thence carry to Alexandria the trade whereof be in the venetians^nd ^nd and enrich their signiory very much till the portugal in our grandfather day foun the way by sea into the indies whereby both the moor and venetian be impoverish this trade set Henry that noble prince of Portugal on work to begin that see in^ l. 2. c. 2d @. 2. which be so long ^efore it produce any fruit yea this indian trade set Columbus and after he cabot on worl to find the way to the indies by the west which their industrious simplicity God reward (@) a new world by they discover but to return to our roman Rham^sio city out of the (@) law the custom for the indian good set down in the reign of Marcus and Comodus viz. cinnamon pepper long and white clove Costus Ca^camo spikenard Pham vol. 1. fol. 371. Caessia Frankinc^e Xilocassia myrrh amon^um ginger Malaba^^rum Ammoniake Laser Agol^^um gum Arabic silk parthian and babylonian work ivory eboni^ll sort of precious stone pearl sardonix Ceraunia hyacinth emerald diamond saphire Callio Berill Cilindre indian and sarmatian clothes Dioscu^^^ strab l 11. plin. l. 6. c. 5. etc. which I have mention that we may see (@) trade then and now be much alike Strabo and linie before thi^ greatness of Alexandria as it may seem extol Dioscuria^ in the bottom the euxine or black sea where people of seventy language or as timosth^nes affirm three hundred several nation resort and after that the roma^s^sed ^sed one hundred and thirty interpreter in their business in Pliny time this Babylon be wal^e I imagine that when the Persia e^pire possess India and Asia minor this dioscurias be the staple of indian commodity (@) partly by the persian gulf as far as Tigris will permit and the rest by land which be (...) way or as some think and not without cause those sea be so infest with pirate as appear in Pliny and the arab be always robber they carry their good up the Indus as many still do from tatta to lahor and thence by Caravan over the Candahar and other hill the river oxus and over the caspian sea to the river Cyrus and so to dioscurias when the seleucidae succeed in those part it be like that the trade continue though weak till the roman draw all to Alexandria especial the parthian empire not permit such commerce to their roman enemy as neither the persian after that barbarous mist of so many nation which overcome the roman empire bury this trade in darkness till the saracen grow to some height and Bagdet be make the chief seat of their caliph build on Tigris and commodious to attract the trade of the east and disperse it to the west a great part of this trade after the declination of Bagdet the east be infect with mahometan folly Mecca honour also with colour of religion be convey by the arabian moor and moorish indian to Mecca the sink of that superstition by the red Se^ judda and ziden be their port and thence be much of it carry to Damascus and thence to Aleppo which trade have continue to our day and another part to cairo hereby flourish and thence to Alexandria as aforesaid which be still use also but much empare and almost forsake by the european navigation b b this cause so much war to the Portugal^ from the moor the mameluke and the turk and since from they to we and the dutch. ant. G^luano and Ramus Boghar astracan Novogrode Caffa Trapezond Ormus Moha London lib. 5. cap. vlt. Anastas lib. 12. Hexam pine salom. acosta nat. orb l. 1. c 13 14. into India while the tartarian empire flourish these indian ware be carry much as you may read in polo to Mangi or China to cathay many also carry to Boghar in Bactria an^ to samarcand and thence to other part also in those troublesome time when the tartar h^d overrun all and when Boghar be in esteem for trade the indian merchandise be ship on the caspian sea by oxus and thence convey to astracan on the river rha or Volga ^nd so to novogrode and thence partly over-land partly by water to Caffa or Theodosia wher^ the genoese fetch it who then be of great power in these part and disperse it in christian port the venetian and genoese be corrival in this trade as in other thing an^ in those day very great much also pass to Trapezond that city so flourish that it become a empire a title too heavy for it and the ruin both of Constantinople the mother thus weaken and of itself ormuz be famous by this trade and Moha in the red sea but both have their cou^se to Aleppo of which our traveller shall in due time tell you in the follow discourse ^nd now we see London a indian mart and Turkey itself from hence serve with pepper and the^ indian commodity as master Mun deputy of that company in his follow tracate will show you thus much of the port make famous by indian spicery and merchandise Anastasi^ sinaita affirm that salomons fleet make a return every year which of the same fleet can be understand Pineda yield to this but he make we more labour about Tharsis to wh^ch now we be return from Ophir he enforce we to a new voyage and to find tharsis^n ^n Spain josephus acosta also have make a scruple both of Ophir and Tharsis and make they to signify no particular set place but general and remote as India do now with we signify all th^ eastern world in vulgar appellation you do he acknowledge the substance of that we ha^e speak and profess to agree with josephus so that with he we shall have but a gramm^r quarrel we will add a word of the phaenicians which here be express to have be sol^ons mariner and of their ancient navigation and so shall we make a end of our ophirian vo^age which to some reader will perhaps seem much long than three year @. 12 of Tharsis or Tharshish whether it be the same with Ophir and bot^ some indefinite remote country whether it be the sea or tartessus ^^ny place in Spain of the ancient navigation about Africa and of the phaenician antiquity accost nat. n. Orb. l. 1. c. 13. and 14. learned acosta have allege reason sufficient for confute that opinion of per^^ to be Ophir a upstart name unknown to the native and when^ neither ivory nor such precious gem can be bring and whither Solomon navy in those time ignorant of the loadstone can not come to f^tch they (@) eastern (@) be fit than the west for Solomon purpose the conclude s^n^ Ophir and Tharsis he ^onciveth that a^ India be a name give to any remote rich and strange region very much difer^ng from our^ as (@) Mexico brasil malaca etc. so likewise Ophir and Tharsis and as for Tharsis it signify ei^^er the main sea or most remote and strange region thus he conjecture for Ophir we have before find it the proper name of a man and of a region denominate of he but withal have acknowledge the ophirian voyage to comprehend more than the region of Ophir include the other indian port whereat they touch and trade in that voyage especial the two land now call Seilan and sumatra and all place on the coast within the gulf of Bengala which may fit their purpose it be usual now to call a indian voyage not only to jacatra Bantam or Banda but thereto also they reckon their touch at Soldanha on the main of Africa or at the river of saint Augu^tine in the great island of saint Laurence and the land of Comoro or Socatra or wheresoever they arrive on the abash or Mohan shore in the red sea or in any Arabic port or in the persian gulf before they come to India and there also surat diul Calicut or wheresoever they touch beside on this side or beyond that principal port where they make their voyage as they term it that be where they take in their chief lade of which the follow relation will give you many instance so the straits voyage intimate not the mere sail to or through the straits of Gibraltar in vulgar appellation but all voyage within those straits whether to Venice or Leghorn or Zant or Constanstinople or Scanderone or Alexandria or in one voyage to visit many or all of these port be yet call but a straits voyage we may yield thus much therefore to acosta that Ophir the bound of Ophir be a proper country as India also be extend from Ganges to Menan and betwixt the lake Chiamay and the gulf or sea of Bengala but as it happen that India be the remote know region give name in old time to all late discovery beyond it and in after time accidental to the new world which the first finder mistake for eastern India so also the voyage to Ophir accidental may give name to all those remote part and comprehend all the far port which by occasion of the voyage to Ophir they visit lie in the way thither or somewhat wide or beyond and as there be a region true and proper call India even all that which extend from Indus whence it be so name to Ganges which name by other ignorance of the proper name of region be extend further both beyond Ganges and to all remote region so be there a true Ophir name of Ophir the son of joktan which occasion other remote country to bear that appellation at least in this voyage thither but for Tharsis or tarshish or Tharshish we see acosta himself in his final upshot to make a of it so that his former proposition admit now another that either it be the main ocean which I take to be the true sense or some remote region some be of opinion that the voyage to Ophir Rihera Pineda etc. 1. reg. 10 22. 2. Chton 9.21 th^ king ship w^nt to Tharshish etc. every thr^e year o^ce come the sh^ps from tha^sh^sh and that to Tharsis differ because the scripture say according to our translation for the king have at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of hiram once in three year come the navy of Tharshish bring gold and silver ivory and ape and peacock tremellius have it the vulgar latin and septuagint saint Jerome in many place examine this Tharshish as in es. 2. and allege jonas his flee to Tharsis who from joppe can not come to India by sea most of the late writer agree with tremellius that Tharsis be the ocean ribera in jon 1 cornel. corn. in es. 2. Forerius in es. 2. E^ Saa in ps. 47 marin in arca. jud. 3. reg. 10. Villalpand in Eze. ^7 r. mos. had. in Ps 71. and make that a difference betwixt Tharshish and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which signify the sea as the red sea or mediterranean and withal those less collection of water as the dead sea the sea of Galilee and that brazen vessel for the largeness call a sea 2. King 25.16 whereas Tharshish be only the main or large Sea r. mose Hadarsan cite four signification Tarsus a city of Cilicia Carthage India and the Sea this place can admit Tarsus nor Carthage be in another sea to which Esiongeber on the red sea have not be the port to have sail from but joppe or Tyrus or some other haven in the mediterranean now if any think they two voyage from two several port the scripture be plain where it be say jehoshaphat make ship of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold but they go not for the ship be break at Esiongeber and lest any may think that they be call^d ship of Tharshish because the material come from Cilicia it be more full 2. Chron. 20. ^5 and after this do jehoshaphat king of judah 1. reg. 22.48 join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel who do very wicked and he join himself with he to make ship to go to tarshish and they make the ship in Esiongeber then Eliezer prophesy etc. and the ship be break that they can not go to tarshish note also that the vulgar translate in one place sea in the other Tharsis some hence gather it to be a region in India as that rabbi post. de orig^n and Jerome also do in some sort aver with josephus and many late writer but because no such region in India can be find hence so many opinion postel^us place Ophir in the golden region where malaca stand but make Tharsis to extend further even to the south sea or the peruan coast so that Ophir and Peru be divorce for a marriage with Tharsis the Chaldee will have it Africa cha^ 2. parap 9 sam. ib. Rib. in jon^ ^ and Emanuel Saa in angola acosta no certain place ribera will have they two voyage and not the same to Ophir and Tharsis Pineda and Goropius bring we to tartessus in Spain but I embrace the opinion of Cornelius Cornelij gen. 10.4 and herein ribera also agree which say that o^ tarshish the son of javan Cilicia take name at first still continue to Tarsus where saint Paul be bear famous in old time by straboes report for the university and other antiquity and the inhabitant thereof and the adjoin region be famous at sea may cause that great sea as the scripture call * * jos. 15.12 it in comparison of the lesser sea in judaea to be call tarshish a name then ea^^ly by the jew derive to all great sea whether mediterranean or ocean now that w^ich make interpreter to question some place in India or elsewhere be the phrase of go to and come from tarshish and bring good from thence a kind of speech which to Pineda seem ridiculous if thereby be not mean some certain place on land we see at this day the hill Atlas in Africa have give name to that huge huge ocean extend even to the new world of the south and west the straits betwixt Spain and Africa give name with our mariner to all the midland sea within and beyond they Indus give name to India and all the ocean adjoin and the south sea the great of know sea be so term because Vasques balboa first see it lie to the south from he neither can the western take away that name to this day be it then any marvel that tarshish the Cilician sea next adjoin to judaea shall give name to all the deep and large part of the mediterranean which they have occasion after to take notice of and to other sea from the red sea forward more wide and spacious Pineda himself confess that tartessus which he will have to be Tharsis give name not only to but to all Spain and be it any more ridiculous or absurd to say the king have a navy of Tharshish at sea then that which our vulgar mariner say the straits fleet be now at sea or the straits fleet be come from sea speak of our merchant ship which keep company together in the sea for fear of Algiers pirate do not they call they straits merchandise and say that such and such good be bring out of the straits or carry to the straits that be send through those sea and bring by those sea to or from any port therein and as usual a phrase it be which Pineda judge so absurd that a mariner be ask whither he go shall answer to sea or that gold silver ivory peacock and ape shall be say to be bring from sea for our mariner which learn not their idiom of scholar use to say when all their money be spend they will go to sea and get more that they bring this or that from sea that short they be to go to sea or have late come from sea without name any port that such a man have get all his good by sea great wealth have come to he by sea he have have great loss by sea and other like phrase of seaman for so also be they call in opposition to land-man in regard of their tra^e and course of life though the habitation of both be on land this than may be the sense SALOMON have at sea a navy at Tharshish that be ship build for long voyage at sea as we call man of war or ship of war which be build for that purpose and how eadie be the construction jehoshaphat make ship of Tharshish to go to Ophir in these word a sea-navie or ship of the sea to go to Ophir that be not such fisher-boat as they see in the sea of Galilee or such small bark as they use in palaestina to trade from port to port but a navy royal of strong ship able to brook long voyage in the ocean jonas 1 H^eron in jon. 1. ps. 72.11 by some undiscreet and vain cutter or printer flattery or ignorance insensible of divine mystery in the forefront of a great book some word of this psalm proper to Christ be apply to his majesty picture which I mention to vindicate both that scripture and his majesty from cacalumnie I also think that in regard of the length of those voyage in which they be two three of the time at sea after our account and three whole year in each voyage from their land-home in a kind of eminence they be in these voyage say to go to Tharshish or to Sea and so jonas likewise mind to fly from that land whither he be send be hurry in the strength of temptation a quite contrary way whether that ship intend Tarsus in Cilicia or whithersoever it go he choose rather a certainty of flight then of or settle himself any where as saint Jerome say of he likewise in that psalm which mystical and full be true of Christ in the call of the gentile typical and in part verify in Solomon wicked and antichristian since apply to the pope in many passage of the last council of Lateran under julius the second and Leo the ten it be say the king of Tharshish and of the isle shall bring present the king of sheba and Seba shall offer gift it be plain by the history of Solomon in scripture and by join of Tharshish and sheba together that no tartessus nor angola nor Peru be intend and that maritime king be mean tremellius read which rule in land which be also add or coast and port near the sea sure as hiram then be and all remote maritime province the scripture call land which use also as in those part of the east indies almost all the king be at this day merchant trade by sea and perhaps enjoy the title of the adjoin sea as his majesty be king of the british ocean and another his predecessor add it to his royal title * * see tom. 2. ^^g. 19 such be the king of Tharshish who custom from the sea and trade by it make they have their ship of Tharshish and wealth from Tharshish as in late day the king of aden Ormus and malacca and still of Socatra Calicut cochin Zeilan Achen and many other include in the circuit of our ophirian voyage be and may therefore just be call king of Tharshish from all which no doubt either in the course of this ophirian voyage and trade or otherwise send by special messenger Solomon have present as i^ 1. reg. 10.24.25 be express Pineda himself cite out of straboes three book of the gaditan which be tartessus or with he and in this respect Tyrus may by the prophet be call Tharsis daughter of the sea as seat in it rule on it and live of it the Chaldee paraphrase have the king of Tharsis and the land of the great ocean sea which may be understand of the indian sea and not as Goropius and Pineda will urge we of Spain Pineda cite anastasius sinaita that Tharsis be and Forerius and Eugubinus to assist Goropius who authority shall so far move as their reason be weighty as for Goropius his five six and seven book of his be principal spend on Tharshish the son of javan which he write Tarsees as signify in that which he make the first of language the dutch tongue mother of we one that dare adventure the sea or one which ^^^^ies in the sea therefore also surname Atla^ or Atlant hat-lant or hate-land he he make with his brother elisha the peopler of Spain and say that of his skill in astronomy and invention of the sphere he be fable to bear the heaven and to have name his daughter with name of star to have sail also to Ophir so call as over the wide sea as Peru of a peer there build and other like collection he have very witty learned and pleasant not solid enough to convince nor so contemptible as very easy to be confute Pineda have write many sheet of paper to honour his spaniish home with salomons voyage for the temple structure wherein his error and not may plead his excuse according to that of the poet I can but marvel that two so learned man be so strong carry by so weak reason as the likeness of word in Tharsis and tartessus when geographer tell we of and themselves confess Tarsus in Cilicia Tarsis in Syria tarsius in Pannonia and a river of that name in Troas with I know not how many other and beside tartessus be a phaenicean colony may of Tharshish or the ocean receive the name whether we intend Gades or Cadiz thereby or the whole boetike province as seat in or on the sea or coast and live by maritime Arts. but of name of place we have before speak how casual and accidental they be even Tartarus the name of hell be near the former and Strabo ghess that Homer call it so of this tartessus in the remote west which hellish kindred of term i think shall not be very grateful to spanish ear etimologist may easy run mad if they be permit liberty neither be any argument sound from the sound of syllable without other credible witness Strab. l. 3. therefore Pineda add the frequent circumnavigation of Africa in those day of which he cite one out of Herodotus of the Phaenicia^s long after this send by neco circumnavigation of Africa rare which make against he for Herodotus both doubt of it as a matter seem to he incredible that they shall sail beyond the sun course and therefore can not be frequent for that navigation will have make both tropike familiar he also say if that be the first voyage salomons be none or at least his title be false Herod l. 4. Arabico in navigatione they winter also by the way and stay the grow and ripen of corn which argue no people at lest no trade in those part his next testimony be of Setaspes who have deflower the daughter of zopyrus shall therefore have be crucify but by his mother entreaty Xerxes pardon he upon condition of this african circumnavigation which argue the rareness of the attempt as do the sequel also for have sail out of the straits and coast some part of Africa he return in despair and say he can sail no further his ship be detain that it can not go forward as for Darius send to Indus it be not to this purpose the fragment of spanish ship in the Arabic gulf be mention by Pliny as a wonder in Caius Caesar time plin. l. 2. c. 67. and that of Hanno agree not with the history which be extant of his voyage and more credible and for eudoxus flee the tyranny of Lathyrus and come to Gades by that circumnavigation it be not for trade but at a dead lift to save his life another be say by Antipater to have sail from Spain to Aethiopia which may be to the near black before he come to that which now be call Guinnee and these be all which be bring for the that of neco and of eudoxus and a spanish wrack be all that all Age^ can yield unto Pliny time and all also long after Solomon Strab. l. 2. and of these that of eudoxus which be the most likely be far otherwise tell by Strabo and at large refute as for the long tale of Semiramis out of suidas it be to India by the indian ocean if it be at all and not to Spain and out of Silius his verse to gather the baetike navigation to India round about Africa or to Mexico and Peru argue the author to be Hispalensis a baetike wit ravish with I know not what beatike fancy as that also that salomons reign from sea to sea Psal. 72. must be from the red sea to the gaditan as if from esion-gebe to jop be not from sea to Sea from hence he turn to the phaenician navigation which to mention here be more to our purpose they be salomons mariner to Ophir then to he of tartessus Pliny and mala applaud the phoenicians for invention of letter astronomy naval and military science Caius posterity first in the old world and Cham in this flourish in art and human science joshuahs conquest cause many of they as Procopius and other affirm to flee into remote region special the maritime part of Africa commerce add Spain and whatsoever be fit to that purpose of trade navigation and riches especial to the phoenicians both before and after Carthage their come in and through Spain be acknowledge by Varro also in and they be the first discoverer of the fortunate land in straboes opinion and before Homer age hold the best place in africa and Spain till the roman dispossess they Carthage in Africa be know a phaenicean colony to school boy and Pliny say that all the baetike coast be of Phaenicean original or of the which in author be often confound with the former of who they proceed and as saint jerom observe be call still in great part retain that language as be also the name carthaginian of who Polybius testify that they possess all Spain from the straight to the pyrenaean hill but be that will view a map of the tyrian greatness and the ancient phaenicean navigation traffic and discovery let he read the 27. of Ezekiel with some good commentary and from the best evidence it shall appear that all the best part and port in Asia Africa and Europe be then familiar to this daughter of Tharshish the baetike by Strabo be repute the most learned of the spaniard use grammar poesy antiquity and law as they say 6000. year old which agree with their Phaenician original to hunt the legend of Bacchus and Osiris I here purpose not as have little truth and no mention at all of Spain nor be that more credible of the phaeniceans besiege by Nabuchodonosor and relieve from their phaenicean colony in Spain and his revenge upon they therefore invade the spaniard Aldrete a learned Spaniard reject both however megastenes other where find fabulous may make somewhat for they yet I believe their commerce and Phaenician original and great traffic their mine also of gold and silver but such as yield more to the phaenicians and carthaginian then all the new world have hitherto to the Spaniard or many year after Goropius his hitherto add by yea still Pineda bring testimony to prove it no less rich in mine which make i not a little marvel at their wisdom to be at such cost to fetch so far off that which they have so plentiful at home and that as the throat which swallow all the meat and nothing stay there it will cause suffocation so the spaniard before Columbus his time be so poor and quiet according and that at that time there appear so little money or credit that the queen pawn her jewel to borrow a small sum of 2000 ducat or little more and that since Spain have except soon after the return of the indian fleet so little coin stir but base money shall we think they miserable miser-like rich-poore or be it that their mine seem whole recollect in their mind they be if you believe Pineda a nation say he I envy not their happiness to they so much chant by this Spaniard I wish that they be so content therewith that they disturb not the quiet of other and that as they have their navy of Tharshish yearly bring gold and silver as for ape and peacock they need not go so far for they so they will do as Solomon live in peace with their neighbour and build the temple at home which have they do much of this our paper navy of Tharshish have not be neither have their gaditan tartessus become a prey to her navy of tarshish who in her day be tarshish indeed not Venus Mari but who defend she own at home by home invade by hunt her enemy round about the World let we leave the spaniard magnify the present riches of their mine as that of Guadalcanal one of the best in the world by the king treasurer report in a letter to our author date 1607. and another of Francisco Tesada his son so far extol the spanish he name diverse beyond those of Potossi that whereas a quintal that be 1600. ounce of Potosi ore or earth dig up yield but a ounce and half of pure silver most of the spanish yield ten ounce of a quintal some more to 15.30.60 mark each of eight ounce it be fit in a long tractate and as it be another voyage to Ophir to end with mine and fit in salomons Ophir to end with honourable mention of our Solomon who without any hirams help send her servant to Ophir and Peru too and round about the universe to repair that temple and to defend the faith which a great than Solomon have by she in England restore from babylonish captivity which the great power on earth seek in vain to hinder she sail further by her servant reign long in she own person more glorious in her last day than Solomon and leave a peaceable Solomon to succeed she yea to exceed with addition of another kingdom not a Rohoboam to loose the great part of the former he God defend to defend his faith long among we with salomons virtue and ophirian magnificence amen chap. 2 man life a pilgrimage the peregrination of Christ and the first encompass the habitable or then inhabit world by the holy apostle and first planter of the gospel @. i. man by sin becomne a worldly pilgrim Christ pilgrimage in the flesh to recover he man spiritual pilgrimage in and from the World GOD which in the beginning have make the world and endow man with the natural inheritance thereof who also he make another a live and little world yea a compendious image of God and the world together do in the a a gal. 4. fullness of time send his own son by who he have make the world and m^n to be make a man in the world that he may make new and recreate the world and man now lose and vanish to perdition which salvation first accomplish in the infinite worth and worthiness of his person and passion he commit to faithful witness give they charge to go b b mark 16.15 into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature that by those ministerial conduit in the cooperation of his spirit his amiable and imitable example may as the lodestar of christian be propose his save virtue as heavenly influence infuse his all-covering and al-curing merit impute to his believe member by spiritual grace to prepare they to supercaelestiall glory whither he be before ascend as our priest to make intercession and as a king in human flesh to take possession for we by he make king and priest unto God thus have we one author of the world of man of peregrination by man in and about the World the first he make by his omnipotent word he command and in six day this huge fabric be both make and furnish the second be vouchsafe great indulgence in preparation premise as of consultation let we make man in the work do c c gen. 1.26 ^ 2.7.22 as of a masterpiece he form and build in the exemplar or prototype in our own image after our likeness in his bountiful portion the sea and earth with all their appurtenance subject to his regal possession the heaven with their real influence and royal furniture to his wise un-erring contemplation thus at first but the first become last by set the last first and prefer the creature to the creator and therefore be just turn out of paradise to wander a pilgrim over the world but therefore do his creator for medicine be of contrary prefer this creature to himself by infiniteness of humility to make satisfaction for his unspeakable pride and he which have before make man after his image make himself after man image to recover that which be lose (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and propicious unspeakable superadmirable bounty the world he make that he may give it man. man he make such as may be capable of the world and give he now a double world add to the former great this lesser of man self and when both these be lose by wilful treason and voluntary actual rebellion that he may forgive the traitor he give the prince who to himself forgive not the demerit of his servant nor be content to regive the forfeit world of creature but add a world supercelestial where fall regain man may supply the room of fall forlorn * * folly and madness of envy even in those wise creture take by a high wisdom in their own craftiness who envy man his paradise lose their own heaven and god yea leave those throne and principality of principality and throne to be by God mercy recover and repossess by man who they have make sinful Christ victorious angel yea he restore lose man to himself in a sure and noble possession and for the compliment of bounty he give to this lose creature the creator self in this unity give God have observe a trinity of give he give his son unto we do give his spirit into we reserve himself for we to be our exceed d d Jer 15.1 great reward our e e esay 18.5 crown of glory and diadem of beauty in that glory where we f f 1. John 3 shall see he as he be and g g 1. cor. 15. God shall be all in all unto we nor be this a six day work but he which make the world and man in six day vouchsafe to be make man endure to converse with sinner more than half sixty year and not with a word command this new creation to be make but the word be command and h h ber. dilig God over all bless forever be make obedient i i phil. 2. to the death even the death of the cross and be make k k Ga^ 3. a curse for we to redeem we from the curse and to make we heir of blessedness this be indeed the great of all peregrination when the word be make flesh and leave in a sort his heavenly country and his father house dwell among we the next remote peregrination be his ascension from the low part of the earth where also his life be a certain uncertain pilgrimage l l io. 1. far m m eph. 4.8 9.10 11. above all heaven to lead captivity captive and give gift to men. and he give some apostle and some prophet and some evangelist and some pastor and teacher by who in the work of the ministry be effect a double remote peregrination one in we when we travel from ourselves that each man may say to his corrupt corrupt flesh as that traveller to his quondam mistress n n amb. l. 2. c. 10. seek after his return to renew her dissolute acquaintance and say when she see he strange as if he know she not it be I at answer he I be not I now I travel in birth till * * gal. 5. Christ be form in i and I live o o gal. 2. not but Christ live in i that I may p p mat. 16.24 deny myself and take up my cross and follow he the other be when we put off our earthly tabernacle and depart from this house of clay who foundation be in the dust arrive in the fair haven of heaven in the choir of angel and triumphant society of the heavenly first bear and thus be man whole life a pilgrimage either from God as cains or from himself as Abel and all the saint which confess themselves pilgrim on the earth and to seek another country that be a heavenly unto this spiritual and celestial peregrination be subordinate that bodily * * Heb. 11.16 ps. 39.12 of those first evangelist unto all nation through the world to plant the church and settle it on her foundation which also in their q q mat. 24.14 Mark 16. vlt. time be effect according to the prophecy and precept of our saviour who peregrination if we have all the particular be alone sufficient to yield a large volume of voyages Christ indeed vouchsafe even in literal sense to honour peregrination in his own person who bless mother soon after his conception travel from Nazareth in Galilee into the hill country of judaea to her cousin Elizabeth and after her return be by Caesar edict bring back that in r r luk. 2. a inn at Bethlehem this pilgrim may in a pilgrimage be bear the s s mat. 2. governor of his people Israel that be of spiritual pilgrim and there from a remote place by pilgrim of the east be he visit and how soon be his infancy force to a egyptian peregrination how restless and manifold be his after-peregrination in Galilee Samaria the wilderness and city of judaea in the coast of Tyre and Sidon in decapolis by sea by land t t mat. 9 3^ go about all the city and village teach and preach and heal every disease among the people till the heaven receive he into a certain rest but my pen be unworthy to follow his foot-print @. 2 how apostle differ from bishop their preach the gospel to all nation his apostle as they differ from other in immediate vocation to evangelicall ministry how Bellarmine contradict himself touch the pope and bishop succeed the apostle see Torti Torti p. 248. and how improper Gregory be call our apostle 325. and infallible revelation of the evangelicall mystery so in the unbounded limit of their mission unto all the world whereas other ordinary commission and calling be though of God yet by man nor have privilege of unerring illumination and must take heed to the several flock over which the holy ghost have a a act 10.28 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) set they overseeer whence also episcopal church be call cathedral and see from their sit b b mat. 23.2 and 5.1 luk. 4.20 or teach that be the preach posture of the ancient both jew and christian in their special place of charge well therefore do saint Gregory c c greg. ep 38. etc. bishop of Rome hold the title ecumenical incompetible to a bishop and antichristian and as ill have his successor in that see swell over all episcopal bank into title and universality apostolical the apostle be not all in all place and sometime as in consideration of divine blessing upon Paul ministry among the gentile e e gal. 2.6 7. as of Peter among the jew they do especial employ themselves where they see their labour most fruitful in which respect some settle their long abode in certain city and some scarce depart from jerusalem while other of they go f f mar. 16.20 forth and preach every where and the gospel be g g col. 1.6 23. in all the world not virtual but actual and be fruitful and be preach unto every creature under heaven that be in saint Matthewes phrase d d vid. rat. l. 2. in to h h mat. 28. all nation or to all sort of man after which embassage accomplish the temple as CHRIST have prophesy and all the legal ceremony which die in the death of our saviour receive a more solemn than honourable funeral by the revenge roman divine providence order that i i rom. 11.12 the fall of the jew shall be the riches of the world and the diminish of they the riches of the genetile and prevent the revolt of weakling which see those thing to remain which the prophet have build and God have ordain may in a judaize retire embrace the shadow for the body and prefer the dazzle lustre of carnal show to the sincerity of faith and spiritual truth k k sulp. sever l. 2 ^dem ^ed in (@) 13. say and that this be according in the apostle day effect we have not only general testimony of the ancient but the particular region and people mention and acknowledge elsewhere by that generation l l bell. rom. Pont l. 3. c. 4. Antich d. 8. which in the question of Antichrist hence raise a demonstration no less still serve they their goose be all swan that he be not yet come because the gospel be not yet preach through the World neither do we seek advantage of the word world as it be use in opposition to the narrow limit of judaea where the church in her nonage be impound and as it be swaddle in that cradle of her infancy so you even now read the fall m m rom. 11.12 of the jew the riches of the World nor in a roman challenge wherein Rome pretend herself head of the world in the style of her quondam emperor succeed and exceed therein by her modern prelate one of which decree in the edict above intimate that n n luk. ^ 1 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) all the world shall be tax which world be no more than the roman empire as since also the petty counsel papal be call ecumenical even that of Trent and the church of Christ in a strange babylonian contradiction catholike-roman nor yet in a figurative hyperbole as that seem speak of the jew at jerusalem of every o o act 2.5 nation under heaven which hear the apostle in their several language utter the great thing of God but their sound p p rom. 10.18 go over all the earth and their word to the end of the world be true of the heavenly body and these heavenly messenger neither can any of the world be show then inhabit that be no nation of the world whereof we have not plain history or apparent probability that the gospel have there found before that generation of the apostle pass whereof as we have allege divine both prophecy before and testimony after the fulfil so our ecclesiastical author be herein plentiful thus do saint chrysostom q q chrys. in mat. hom. 76. interpret that prophecy of our saviour Matthew 24. to have be fulfil before the destruction of jerusalem and prove it by the fore-alleadged place roman 10.18 colossian 1.6 and 23. so Theophylact r r theoph. in mat. 24.21 after he so saint Hilary s s hil. in mat. can. 25. then shall be the end of jerusalem when the knowledge of the heavenly mystery have be carry to all man so Tetullian t t Tertul. c. 22. vid. down Antich part 2. 8. who also cite Euseb. Hicron Ambros. theod. ^gnat^us etc. beda Euthimius jansenius and other cite by the reverend and learned bishop Downam to who I refer the reader and how else have they execute their commission to all nation if this mission have not succeed for if by succession of after pope or bishop then ought that gift of tongue to have continue or be restore and that of immediate revelation whereby the glory of the world conversion may be god peculiar and not diminish by the art not by the act and labour alone of men. u u bern. and Genebrard 10 10 Geneb Chron. an. 44. accord affirm that while the apostle live in thirty year space at most the gospel which he call the faith of the roman be divulge through the world even all the most remote nation and barbarous hereof he cite witness beside the former clement alexand. justin martyr Irenaus Origen cyprian and the prophecy of esay c. 66. @. 3 the peregrination of saint PETER we see the persecution which begin against Stephen proceed to the dispersion of the disciple a a act 8.1 and 11.19 into the region of judaea and Samaria and Phaenice Cyprus and Antioch where they first hear the name christian Peter also warn by vision break the partition wall and preach to Cornelius b b act 10.13 and other gentile unto who soon after Paul and barnabas receive large commission saint Peter also as ecclesiastical writer testify beside Palestina Syria and the region adjoin to judaea preach the gospel in Antiochia d d act 6.1 and 1 pet. 1.1 and after in Rome in both which place they constitute and celebrate his episcopal chair in Pontus Galatia Cappadocia Asia Bythinia to who be inscribe his former epistle that be to the dispersion of the jew in those region he be principal the apostle of c c gal. 2.6 7. the circumcision for the jew be divide into three sort the hebrew which be the inhabitant of Palestina and the scatter stranger which be either hellenist (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or e e io. 7.35 v^d jos. scal. Annot. in Euseb. p. 124. and can. Isag. pag. 278. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the remainder of the babylonish deportation which still continue in those part when other return and from thence be occasional disperse afterward the metropolis of these be Babylon of the former Alexandria of this sort be the italian egyptian and grecian jew which use the greek tongue in their synagogue in which also they read the scripture translate by the seventy two interpreter yea they be ignorant of the Hebrew as Scaliger affirm e e scal. count trib. of josephus and philo two of their most learned they have a synagogue at jerusalem call f f act 6.9 of the alexandrian of which be those disputer against Stephen of the babylonian dispersion be the jew in Asia to who saint Peter write that epistle from Babylon and although Baronius g g tom. 1. a 45. 1. pet. 5.13 and Rhem. Annot. o^^ those word the church at Babylon salute you and our rhemist out of diverse ancient labour to prove thy Babylon in that place of Peter to be mean Rome that some scripture may testify his be there at least though little can thence be infer a 25. year episcopality and less apostolic succession dellarm R.P. in ap. etc. and least of all a approbation of late novelty successive hatch in the last and worst age yea the current of the jesuite argue not say only that Rome be the mystical and apocalyptical Babylon and cry out upon we for unhonest partiality that there acknowledge it here in Peter disclaim it not consider what a hook they swallow with this bait yet because that epistle of saint Peter i i see this large prove in Conf. ^ainoed ch 6. be deliver in literal and not mystical form like the apocalypse and because that opinion of Peter five and twenty year bishopric deliver by Eusebius be manifest repugnant to the scripture and because that some of the romanist k k Onuph in p^at diu. 3. vit. pet. themselves differ from the receive opinion as incredible as l l mar. scot. a 72. Onuphrius and Genebrand and marianus Scotus also allege out of methodius that Peter preach at Babylon to which he also add Corinth and almost all Italy and because the ancient m m Euseb. hist. ec. l. 2. ca. 14. receive that conceit of papias a man of no great judgement as appear by the millenary fancy derive from his tradition though I will not meddle with that controversy whether Peter be ever at Rome or no the negative whereof in whole book Velenus and Bernard have write n n Velenus his book be extant with b. Fisher his answer print at Antwerp 1522. yet I can believe but that he write that of and in the Chaldea Babylonia the rather because that be the metropolis of the asian dispersion as be say and that it well agree with the prime apostle to execute his apostolical mission to remote and many nation especial to the circumcision who peculiar apostle n n gal. 2.6 he be in all country where they be scatter as appear by his care of the hellenist and Alexandria their mother city where he place as author affirm saint mark the first bishop and because ecclesiastical writer affirm that he preach almost all the world over so p p Nicep. cal. ec. hist. l. 2. c. 35. Nicephorus Asiae and Europae in dispersione Indaeis and etc. q q Metaph. in 29. jun. metaphrastes affirm that after the church of Rome and many other set in order saint Peter go to Carthage in Africa r r O^uph pla. in petri. Onuphrius acknowledge his roman see yet will have he a resident if not a apostle rather not to abide there but find he in that five and twenty year space at jerusalem after that at Antioch seven year together whence he come to Rome and reform that church constitute Linus and Cletus his s or coadjutor and travel thence through the most part of Europe at his return to Rome be there crucify thus in a large sense of the word bishop may Peter be style bishop of Rome as have care to oversee that as a principal church not neglect mean while his apostleship to which proper belong the care of all church and hence be that different reckon of the roman bishop t t hier. script Eccles. in Clemens Hierom reckon Peter the first Linus second Cletus the three Clemens the four but irenaeus u u Iren. l. 3. c. 31. name Linus the first bishop Cletus the second etc. the like difference be in the see of Antioch betwixt Hierom and 10 10 eus. Chron. and hist. l. 3. c 19 Eusebius the one beginning with Euodius the other with Peter which show their opinion that Peter preach in both place as a apostle not as bishop in proper sense so irenaeus y y iren sup the two apostle Peter and Paul have found the roman church commit the bishoply charge thereof to Linus and rufinus z z Rufi^ prefat. clem. that Linus and Cletus be bishop while Peter live that they may have the care of the bishoply charge and he may do the duty of the apostleship and a a Epip^^ haer 27 epiphanius in Petrus and Paulus episcopi Linus etc. Peter and Paul be both apostle and bishop in Rome and after other word of doubt touch Clemens his be bishop in the time of Linus and Cletus all of they live in the same time while Peter and Paul be bishop say that the apostle go often into other country to preach Christ in which mean while Rome can not be without a * * so damasus in Pontif. sa^^h that Peter ordain Linus and and Genebrard an. 81. say of Linus and Cletus five and marianus Scotus an. 59 Linus Petro A^o^tolo an. 70. Cletus coe^^ after the proof hereof out of pope Leo add Petro papa s. clem. eccles bishop for the apostolical function enjoin a universal the episcopal a particular charge and as the great office include the less as the office of the lord chancellor or lord chief justice or any councillor of state contain the authority of a justice of peace in each shire with large extension and intention of power and a diocesan bishop the ministerial function in any pastoral charge in his diocese which the parson or curate must yield to he be present and please to supply and execute so and more than so the apostolical comprehend the episcopal commission as less and the apostle be in this respect bishop wheresoever they come not by ordinary constitution but by a high and extraordinary function to who other bishop be successor not in the apostleship strict take but as bishop to apostle as justice of peace in their limit to the high commission either ordinary as of itinerant justice or extraordinary by special commission on special occasion constitute in part not in all their authority we shall launch into a whirlpool if we proceed to declare Peter successor as some call the bishop of Rome the father themselves disagree in their catalogue so far off be they from make papal succession a essential either note of the church or ground and rule of Faith but for their preach the gospel through the world all bishop be all apostle successor these in their limit those in a universal commission which either they perform or not if they do not it be disobedience as in sauls expedition against amalek if they can not it be impotence and the command of preach to all nation implead defect in the commander who be the wisdom of God and the power of God his wisdom appear also together with his power in give they tongue and not only healthful constitution of body but miraculous transportation and power nature defect not hinder the effect of grace as appear in the story of Philip and the eunuch act 8. of Paul survive a stone John the scald in oil and other other difficulty mention in part both in divine and ecclesiastical history neither have miracle and tongue necessary to such a conversion ever since happen nor have we promise that they ever shall nor be it ever meet that the new king shall be proclaim then when when have lead captivity captive he ascend on high and take possession of his supercaelestiall throne the apostle herein do that for the heavenly Solomon with spiritual magnificence which Nathan zadock and other have do for the typical Solomon by David appointment the universal ceremony be the same in the whole church and such as no general council can determine argue the unity of the spirit in the apostolical preach thus as we have partly show in all and particular show in Peter for his part we will declare of the rest @. 4 of saint ANDREW JOHN the two PHILIP and Simon Zelotes ANdrew the brother of saint Peter as a a Dorat Synops. dorotheus and sophronius b b ap. Hieron Catol scrip Eccl. testify preach to the scythian sogdian and sacae and to the inner or savage aethiopian be bury at patrae in Achaia be crucify by Aegeas governor of the Edesens Nicephorus c c nic. hist. ec. l. 2. c. 39 write that he travel into Cappadocia Galatia and Bythinia and thence to the country of the anthropophagi or man-eater and to the wilderness of the scythian to both the euxine sea and to the southern and northern coast as also to Byzantium now call Constantinople where he ordain Stachys bishop after which he go through Thrace Macedonia Thessalia and Achaia that he be send to the scythian Baronius prove out of Origen d d Orig. in ge. l. 3 Euseb. hist. l. 3. c. 1 and Eusebius and out of Nazianzene e e greg. Naz. orat. in arian his descent into Graecia and Epirus saint John his banishment into Pathmos and epistle to the seven church of Asia which Tertullian f f tert. l. 4. cont. mart. call be extant in his own write irenaeus g g Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and many other mention his labour at Ephesus prochorus h h prochor in hist. s. joan. in Biblioth. pat. to 2 his suppose disciple have write a history of his asian peregrination his action at Ephesus his passion at Rome whither he be send and in other place but his authority be no better than of a counterfeit as Baronius i i ba^on to 1. an. 44. have also brand he of this nature we find many counterfeit gospel and journal or history of the apostle act censure by the ancient the devil then labour to sow his tare in the apostolical history which in after age antiquity may countenance with venerable authority metaphrastes k k Metaph. in 5. Septem. relate his act sn Phrygia and hierapolis that he preach in other region of the east l l Relat. ep. jesuit a 1555. affirm especial to the parthian to who his first epistle be inscribe in ancient copy that he convert the be still hold by tradition among they IAmes the brother of John be put to death by Herod to please the jew m m act. 12. a wicked geneneration not please God and contrary to all man it be report of some that before his death he travel as far as Spain and there preach the gospel at least to the disperse jew Baronius in his martyrologue n n bar. Mart^ jul. 25. produce a book of suspect faith attribute to Isidore testify his preach to the nation of Spain and of the western region and the breviary of Toledo in which be these verse the testimony also of beda and other all the church in Spain he say o o annal. to. 1. an. 44. hold the same opinion yet be he uncertain and so leave his reader because of that untimely timeliness of his death it be not likely that the apostleship and office of preach to all nation and the name of the son of thunder be give to he by he which as easy infuse the virtue as impose the name and foreknow the time and season of his life and death but that the sequel be answerable his hasty death argue his forward courage as of he which stand in the forefront of the battle that he preach to the disperse tribe p p in dispersione Hieron Dorothei etc. have many author that his body be bring from jerusalem to Spain the roman martyrologue and the pope callistus and innocentius be cite by Baronius the other james call Alphaei and oblias and justus and the brother of our lord either because he be the son of joseph by a former wife according to Eusebius q q Euseb. hist. l 2 c. 1. vid. Epipha haer 78. Ab^ l. 6 or because his mother be sister to the bless virgin as saint Jerome r r high script Eccles. rather think be a man famous for sanctity and devotion among the jew by the testimony of josephus s s jos. antiq. l. 20. c 8. which impute to his cruel and unjust murder the terrible desolation which soon after befall that nation and (@) Talmud both of t t Talmud bab. idol c. 2. hierosul sciabboth c 14. jerusalem and Babylon mention he as a worker of miracle in the n^me of jesus hegesippus a man near the apostle time say of he * * so hierom. but Euseb l. 2. c. 22. have of which word this seem the sense that whereas the apostle by common consent in a just aristocraty have govern the church of Christ reside at jerusalem until the time of their dispersion to diverse part of the world which as Eusebius u u Euseb. hist. l 5 c. 17. cite out of Apollonius be the twelve year after Christ passion they then betake they to their several province joint agree to leave james the just at jerusalem for the regiment of the church both there and as from other place of the world occasion be offer through the universe for as jerusalem be far 10 10 plin. l. 5. c. 14 the famous of the city of the east not of judaea alone in other respect as Pliny have honour it so in religion it be by better testimony call the y y mat. 4 and 5. holy city and the city of the great king who tabernacle z z ps. 76. be in Salem and his dwell in Zion not in the time of the law but of the gospel also the law of the lord go out of Zion as a a es. 2 3. esay have prophesy and the word of the lord from jerusalem this be the staple of christian merchandise Emporium b b 150 Espenc in 1. Tim 4. Christianae say the mart and mother of the christian faith which therefore always need some grave father to be the principal factor in her holy affair Jerusalem be before her destruction the centre of Christianity whence all the line of apostolical mission be diffuse and thither again reduce the ocean whence all the ecclesiastic c c ec. 1.7 stream of the evangelicall water of life issue and whither they again return once it be the senate-house of christian counsel and counsel for all province of christianity the confluence of other but special of the jewish dispersion which from all country come to the legal feast may there fraught themselves home with festival ware of evangelicall commodity necessary it be therefore that some apostolical senator and principal apostle shall there reside with who in all difficulty to consult not so much as bishop in proper sense of that city as of the jew yea and as opportunity lerue of other nation through the whole World this be that james which write the epistle bear his name who Paul mention to the galatians d d gal. 1.19 and the act e e act. 15. often * * the other general counsel be rather of the roman than the universal world assemble by roman emperor only especial in the fifteen chapter where you see he precedent of the first council if not the only in strict sense term general of the apostle after their provincial dispersion assemble at jerusalem for in his sentence the council conclude and if the apostle as the father concur have commit to he be a apostle the government of jerusalem to who may the presidentship of counsel in that place appertain rather than to this apostolical bishop and bishoply apostle to who the lord first commit his throne on earth as epiphanius f f ep. haer. 78. testify as a deputy or precedent reside g g as the precedent of York for the whole province the viceroy of Goa for all the indies etc. in one city though his government be not there confine but extend to the whole kingdom or region so be it with this apostle bishopric at jerusalem from that high pinnacle to oversee and provide for the affair of the catholic and universal church from that high pinnacle in another sense also be he cast down stone and at last with a fuller club brain by the jew which be soon in a terrible desolation call to account for this and other apostolical and prophetical blood yea of the high prophet and apostle of our salvation which yet the jew attribute to this martyrdom of james as late and near precede his successor be Simeon his brother in that see of jerusalem not Simon call the cananite one of the twelve as Baronius h h bar. p. 325. to 1 have also observe saint Philip be record to have preach in Asia superior and as the roman i i rom. mart. mai. 1. martyrologue say almost all Scythia Baronius k k martyr suppose the testimony of Isidore and the toledan breviary that Philip convert the gall be false write for galatians which yet if Nicephorus relation l l Niceph l. 2. c. 40. and li. 8. c. 30. be true needs no such correction Simon be call Cananite as Nicephorus say for his birth at Cana who marriage be there celebrate when Christ turn water into wine and for the fervour of his zeal he be surname Zelotes his preach peregrination he relate through Egypt Cyrene Africa Mauritania and all Libya even to the western ocean yea to our Britain land he preach last in Phrygia and at hierapolis be crucify @. v. of saint THOMAS Bartholomew MATTHEW juda Mathias and of counterfeit write in the apostle name saint Thomas call Didymus preach to the parthian as m m ori. in gen. l. 3. etc. Origen and after he n n Euseb. l. 3. c. 1. Eusebius have write Gregory Nazianzene o o Naz. hom. arian add the indian chrysostom p p chrys. hom. 12. ap. say he white the black aethiopian Theodoret q q theod. gent. l. 9 recite the parthian persian mede brachmans indian and the adjoin nation Nicephorus r r nic. l. 2. c. 40. have the same and add the island taprobane which be now call in the opinion of the most samotra in Hierom catalogue be add out of sophronius the german of India hircans and bactrian and his death at Calamina on the coast of Choromandel where the river Ganges be swallow of the sea call the gulf of Bengala be diverse christian from old time call s. Thomas christians some of the jesuit have add China also to the labour of s. Thomas of these christian both in Narsinga and Cranganor on that sea where Indus fall and in diverse part of the indies you may read in s s o^or derch em. l. 3. Osorius t t m^ff hist. ind. Maffaeus and other his feast day be celebrate at malipur so they now call the city where he lie bury not by the christian alone but the ethnic also of those part the eunuch of candace u u act. 8. convert by saint Philip be among the aethiopian in Prester john country honour for plantation of the gospel in those part of Africa but by dorotheus 10 10 dor. Synops. ^n fine say to have preach in all the erythraean coast and the island Taprobana before ascribe to saint Thomas and in Arabia saint Bartholomew say chrysostom y y chrys. hom. 12. apost bar. pass into Armenia Maior and instruct the Lycaones sophronius z z soph. ap. Hieron script ec. add the albanians and the indian term fortunate Origen say the hither India a a Soc. l. 1. c. 15. Socrates India next to Aethiopia Eusebius b b eus. l. 5. c. 10. testify that pantaenus a stoic philosopher and rector of the school or university at Alexandria be ordain preacher of the gospel to the eastern nation and pierce to the region of the indian for there be at that time many c c in the time of Aurelius and Commodus zealous imitator of the apostle of who be this pantaenus which preach to the indian among who he be report to have find the gospel of s. Matthew in the hand of some christian which c c in the time of Aurelius and Commodus have receive the faith by s. Bartholomew and leave they the say gospel in Hebrew reserve till that time Nicephorus d d nic. l. 2. c. 39 adjoin s. Bartholomew to s. Philip in his plantation of the gospel in Syria and Asia superior and after at hierapolis where he be crucify with Philip but deliver and yet again at Vrbanopolis in Cilicia die that ignominious death and glorious mrrtyrdome this e e hier. sup Hebrew gospel of saint Matthew saint Hierome both see and copy out it be reserve in the library of Caesarea saint Matthew travel into Aethiopia that namely which adhere to India as Socrates f write Nicephorus g g nic. l. 2. c. 41. add the anthropophagi and tell I know not what legend reject also by Baronius for such be the indulgent providence of God not to burden the faith of the church with voluminous history of apostolical act through the whole world which scarce as saint John have of our lord the h h John 21. whole world can have contain unto the faith of all not to the curiosity of some be write enough by those holy penman the secretary of the holy ghost in holy scripture but the devil impious provident counterfeit father on apostle etc. hence take occasion to burden the church with so many unworthy legend both present after their time forge in their name and since by upstart devise and obtrude on the credulous world as life lie of the saint history yea misse-story hisse-story by the old serpent hiss and buzz among superstitious man miss worthy the right and deceive with lie because they have not receive the love of the truth to make way to the succeed mystery of iniquity out of which babylonian mint we have late that babble and fable abdias by Lazius his midwifery bear after so many age a abortive indeed or changeling as the wise i i etc. of themselves confess he can tell you instead of saint Matthewes life many aethiopian fable and entertain you in a fool paradise situate above the high mountain with such delicacy as show that Adam child be still in love with the forbid fruit and will lose or at least adventure the true paradise to find a false their abundant labour and travel which come see overcome each so large portion of the world leave they no leisure to write annal whence some have find leisure to write old wife tale and make the conversion of the world a object of our faith rather in believe the prediction and testimony thereof in the scripture then of human credit where the apostle and martyr of their golden action and passion have find such leaden k k (@) and Canus complain (...) hereof yea d. ha^d^u etc. legend and wooden workman maker or poet rather than historian which here once speak may be apply to the rest of who great work so little be record saint Augustine l l Aug co^ (@) and cont (...) l. 1 c. ^^ complain of such scripture among the and refuse the like testimony of John and Andrew produce by the marcionite s. Hierom m m hier. scrip name five book false attribute to Peter his act his gospel his praedication his apocalypse his judgement some also mention n n clem. alex. Strom. l. 6. Petri which perhaps be the same with Clement recognition another counterfeit in Paul name be publish a gospel apocalypse his revelation his ascent to heaven which the gnostiks use as say epiphanius o o Epiph. haer. 26 vid. his baron a 44. to 1. his act and three epistle to the corinthian and to the thessalonians and one to the laodicean John be make a father of other revelation and of the virgin departure saint Andrew gospel saint Thomas his gospel and apocalypse saint Bartholomew gospel saint matthews book of Christ infancy receive by the valentinians be condemn by p p gel. in decret lib. apot. gelasius neither do Mathias Philip and Thaddaeus want their gospel heretical birth injurious lay at their door nor barnabas also nor mark no nor judas the traitor which the caians acknowledge as Theodoret and epiphanius have write lettice suitable to such pollute lip we may add the act so inscribe of Andrew of Thomas of Philip of Paul and Thecla john circuit yea the coliedge apostolical be make to father like bastard as the doctrine of the apostle the lot of the apostle the praise of the apostle beside other act of the apostle and the mangle of the true apostolical page by addition or substraction what shall I say our bless lord escape not heretical imposture in his name as the book and I think he rather prodigal then liberal or just of his faith which subscribe to that story q q Euseb. l. 1. c. 13 of Abagarus but it be endless no less than needless to entangle ourselves in this diabolical maze and heretical labyrinth of sacred forgery in that and after age matth. 13. the envious man supper semination to bewitch unstable soul not content with God and provident allowance if therefore of saint Matthewes aethiopian peregrination if of saint Mathias in Aethiopia also for a great part of Asia sophron. and Niceph. l. 2. c. 40. and the great of Africa be style by that name if of judas thaddeus his preach in Mesopotamia Arabia idumaea and the region adjacent we have so little record it be no great marvel it may be sufficient to understand reader that we have out of the best author extant name the most country of the then know world and if every region and people be not mention impute it to the want of history of their several act who seek rather to write Christ passion in the heart than their own action in the book of man to produce deed not word and monument of divine not their own glory few place can be name in Asia or Africa which we have not mention in their prerigrination and preach and fair probability be for those not mention by consequence of reason which at lest can prove nothing to the contrary and more than probability be the divine testimony before observe @. 5 of saint Paul of apostolical assistant some doubt discuss as for saint Paul the doctor of the gentile he fly like a swift fowl over the world we have his own testimony of his preach in Arabia his return to Damascus and journey after a a gal. 1. three year to jerusalem thence to the region of Syria and Cilicia yea that he not sprinkle but fill jerusalem to illyricum with the gospel of his preach in Italy and Rome of his purpose for Spain which some b b Theat. Conuers gent. say he fulfil afterward add thereto Portugal France Britain the Orchades the land and region adjoin to the sea and his return by Germany into Italy c c Bed and aug. script Niceph. l. 2. c. 20. where he suffer martyrdom be by Nero behead I force no man credit as neither to that of joseph of Arimathea his preach to the briton nor saint Denis his conversion of the gall at least in all thing write of they but for the act of Paul as the apostle of the gentile the scripture be more ample then of any the rest the great part of saint Luke history be of Paul Acts. what shall we add the labour of evangelist assistant and co-workeman with the apostle in those first plantation send by they in several mission to diverse place such be barnabas d d with his Dorothei Synops. Merman etc. silas Philip the deacon Silvanus timothee Titus and other some of which be after bishop as be ancient believe of particular church epaenetus saint Paul disciple be say to have be bishop of Carthage Andronicus another of they in Pannonia now call Hungary Amplyas at Odyssa Vrbanus in Macedonia jason at Tarsus trophimus at Arles crescens at Vienna Aristobulus in Britain Asyncritus in Hyrcania Hermes in Dalmatia and other in other place a catalogue of who in his theatre you may see at leisure saint mark disciple of saint Peter have preach to Libya marmarica Pentapolis and Egypt ordain bishop in the new plant church eutropius another of saint Peter disciple be say to have preach in France mansuetus another of they to some part of Germany as Simon of Cyrene to other part but it be too tedious to bring hither all that author have write of the seventy disciple and other apostolical assistant who spend and be spend consume and consummate their course in and for the gospel HONDIUS his map of saint Paul peregrination but here some may say that we have not name all country of the world and of those name there be in author much variety of report in judicious reader much scruple to credit I answer that it be a far hard task to prove that any country not here mention be neglect in this ministry neither do the geography of those time extend their survey much further then that we have here in their journal express although it much extend itself beyond the truth beside who can wonder that the apostle find not penman to record their evangelicall conquest through the world seek to establish a kingdom spiritual and internal contemn the world glory and of vainglorious worldling contemn when the great conqueror which seek to subdue the world by force and plant empire by arm have leave so obscure notice of their exploit though dedicate to human applause and admiration of the egyptian conqueror Sesostris Lucan sing of Nabuchodonosor the scripture witness that his greatness e e dan 4 2d reach to heaven and his dominion to the end of the earth yet have they neither journal nor annal of their great act leave to posterity not so much as the name of their subdue province not so much as we have here produce of the apostle nay what be leave to memory of the long-lived assyrian monarchy but shadow glimpse fable who have leave in register the name of the one hundred twenty seven f f Esler 8.9 province subject to the persian monarchy from India to Ethiopia nay how little and how uncertain be remain of the greek Alexander his expedition although then undertake when Greece have arrive at the height of human learning and by he that be himself a famous scholar of the most famous of philosopher do not he deplore g g cic. Arc^ poet. his own unhappiness in this kind tread on the tomb of Achilles and have not Curtius and arrianus long long after his death write of he I question not the certainty how little shall we have of great Alexander great in his act and art great in his attempt great in the unbounded ambition of great renown to late posterity yet how much more be leave of the act of humble apostle then of ambitious Alexander and now his conquest be obliterate and forget how be they write not in book and line but in the mind and life of man so great a part of the world still remain the volume of their expedition in their christian profession and how much more do so till the unbelief and unthankfulness of wicked man provoke divine justice to remove his golden candlestick from so many nation through the world which for contempt of christian truth be again abandon to ethnic superstition thus have God deal with the jew before thus after with the christian in Africa almost general in a great part of Europe and in a great great part of Asia by mahometan madness in which what that arabian cankerworm have leave the tartarian caterpillar do almost utter devour thus in Marco polo in in Odoricus and Mandivil^ you may read of christian nation disperse quite through Asia 1200. year and more after Christ overwhelm with that tartarian deluge where the name of christian in the remote part be extinct till navigation in the last age revive it and have not navigation and peregrination open a window no geographer have let we know the name of nation which christian of the west find profess the same Christ in the unknown region of the east at once see to be and to be christian. yea how little of the remote north and east of Europe and Asia or of the south of Africa be know to Pliny Ptolomey and other ancient geographer where their christian light have shine to we with the first notice of themselves I infer not that the gospels lightning kindle a evangelicall flame and obtain episcopal entertainment in every place where the apostle preach the reason of the name pagan or Paynim nor that every lord tribe and family hear this divine message nor that each country be fill with the gospel or any with a universal profession in the first plantation or in their time the name which signify a peasant or rustic for this cause be alter to a panime or ethnic because religion can not but in tract of time diffuse her bright beam and line of light from her episcopal city centre that also not whole christian to those rude part of her remote circumference this I say rom. 10.18 that their sound go into all the earth and their word unto the end of the world in some country and nation more full in some more obscure in all by fame at left if not by the apostle presence as the spirit permit utterance that some of all may be convert @. 7 of America whether it be then people and if any more scrupulous doubt of the new world and of many place where no foot print of Chistianity be extant I answer * * sup. c. 1. @. 8. beside what before in our ophirian tractate be speak not only that time eat up her own child and that none can prove that Christ have not be there preach in former time because these be thereof ignorant for a deluge of oppose persecution another of eclipse superstition and heresy a three of war and invasion extinguish both the religion and people also have succeed in some the most renown church of the world and what then may time have do in unknown place but who can tell that America and many part of Asia Africa and Europe be then people with man the subject capable of this preach nay may we not in probability think the contrary how great a part of the world be yet without habitation how great a part of the world be yet unknown all the south continent be in manner such and yet in reason * * see brerewoods book of lang. and acosta temp. nou. l. 1. c. 18. conjecture to be very large and as it be another new world also Fernand d^ Quiros say he have discover eight hundred league of shore neither be it probable but that so temperate part be inhabit which in part so far as be know on the shore and adjacent land be apparent nor be their likelihood of Christianity where the nation every way adjoin be ethnic that I say not savage on the part of Asia and America and both these and they seem lately people than the apostle day in the new straits beyond the magellane the stupidity of the fowl argue they know not the face of man which they not at all dread and many many land not yet inhabit this ensue discourse will manifest yea in large tract of the continent of Groenland and other part unto newfoundland it be find that either there be no people or they but for some time in the summer and for some purpose as of hunt or fish not certain and settle dweller a name scarce fit to the people in Virginia and Florida even in our old world itself how new be the elder monument and antiquity in all the north Norway Sweden finland Lapland the samoyed tartar yea the northermost Russ lithuanian livonians pole how new their art their act their law government civility and fame which therefore must needs as the world increase be evacuate from country near the sun by necessity enforce to hard climate of island our story will show it be but yesterday inhabit see my pilg. l. ^ c. 10. the scythian and sarmatian of the ancient be more southerly and well may we reject the fable of hyperborean and I know not what devise northern people and monster the creature and colony of idle busy brain these northern people scarce worthy the name of a people do God use when the sin of the roman empire be full to punish their pride by so base instrument in gottish Vandal hunnish Saxon Frank and other name in judgement remember mercy to the chastise child and to the chastise rod not therefore cast into the fire except to refine they but by conquer christian nation themselves dispose by divine hand to become a christian conquest and to submit themselves to that god to that religion who loose professor they overcome with a overwhelm inundation how unsearchable be thy way o God and thy judgement pass knowledge which of stone raise child to Abraham and bring lion into the sheep-fold in hope of prey and spoil where thy discipline transform they into lamb and persecute Saul turn a prophet the remote northern and southern part of America be yet thin inhabit and in great part not at all as before be observe whereas Mexicana and Perwiana be abundant people at the spaniard first arrival with the land adjacent two great empire be there erect one * * as Canaan be in Abraham time nothing so populous as in joshuas in Mexico the other of the Ingas in cusco but neither of they ancient nor let any impute this to their illiterate barbarousness for they have mean to preserve memory of their act by computation no less certain than we though more troublesome and thereby be the mexican Epocha or first beginning then begin to be a people the devil imitate the israelite in their towards the country which they after possess apparent to have be above seven hundred year after Christ as that of the Ingas some hundred late * * acosta reckon the mexican beginning out of their own history about an. 900. and Garcilosso de la Vega bear in cusco^nd ^nd of the stock of the Ingas begin the first Inca after a. d. 1100. which w^re before most savage for it be most likely that America be first people from the north of Asia and Europe in she near and northern part whence by secret instinct and hopeful allurement they be entice to remove near the sun and from the mexican to pass to i perwian continent neither can probable reason be give of people America but from thence as by the discourse of acosta and master Brerewood appear neither do those northern part receive inhabitant till the region of the world near noas ark and of more commodious habitation be first people whence the east and south part be soon after noas time replenish the cold and worse successive and the extreme north by late compulsion and necessity the better be people before and there exceed their just proportion they empty themselves partly by return into the south by conquest to overrun civil nation and partly be force to seek further as vicinity of sea and land afford till America be also people for beside that those northern part be as fertile in the womb as barren in the soil numerous beyond due food those rough cold mountainous habitation yield like constitution of body and unquietness of mind strong and able to endure bold and forward to adventure great difficulty still press where worse than the present can hardly befall and follow their hope till near propinquity to the sun climate more temperate rich soil consent of element and aliment breed content to their mind and more prosperous consent of fortune which soften their rigid disposition and by degree dispose they to think on mechanical and politic art further to humanize their society and to polish their cohabitation with polity this we see soon do in Egypt and Babylonia present after the flood but how long before the persian be civilise how long after before the macedonian or roman yea how long before there be roman nature infuse the first care of necessary be which be by the fertile habitation and industrious culture rich supply in the settle stand the milk of human wit yield the flower or cream of art for flourish and beauty which unsettle and discontent estate weary of the present and press still forward can produce neither can a roll stone gather moss and thus we find the german now a civil nation which many age after Christ be barbarous yea where more feritie and savage rudeness than this our Britain yield not long before the birth of our saviour for their paint nakedness and other rude demeanour worse than the virginian now and like some more barbarous american what have America savour of antiquity what beside the former not savour of the cradle and late transmigration those memorial which they have of the flood may pass with they by tradition even from the ark itself through all their remove and transmigration and no less may be say of that Ticfiviracocha mention by acosta who Vega observe to have many thing not so true like to our man and preach among they many good lesson with little effect acco ind. sal. l. 1. c. 2. Veg. tom. 2 lib. 7. c. 13. pag. 1454. hist Na^ in era. c 16. and after many miracle among they be slay who picture some of the Spaniard^ have see resemble those of our saint Vega tell another and more likely story of Viracochas apparition in that habit which no doubt be the devil the like be record by of a tradition among the brasilian that innumerable moon before there come a Mair or stranger clothe after the christian manner and beard which preach unto they the knowledge of GOD but none will believe he after who another come which deliver they a sword since which time they have use to slay and eat one another these thing as they may be true so may they be the new action of the old serpent ambitious of deity or may by tradition fly with they through all their habitation or if any shall think it there happen which I can believe yet be they rather to interpret it of the apostle and so further confirm our opinion then of any other see no such man can there have access and their speech be understand but by miraculous dispensation as for the rock in Brasill call Etooca where as master Knivet affirm saint Thomas preach convert out of wood into stone the fish be his auditor knivets journal who see not a friarly supersemination in the report we read in Theophrastus or Aristotle or whosoever else be author of that book of a fertile desert island find by the carthaginian abound with wood and river navigable and other bounty of nature distant many day sail from the african continent some of the carthaginian intend there to inhabit but be repel and all man prohibit on pain of death lest the sovereign power and weal public of Carthage may thence be endamage this be by some interpret of the west indies or some land thereof which if it be so confirm our opinion that those part be not then inhabit p. pilg. l. 8. c. 2. nor do any civility appear in America to argue civil progenitor but that which be of late memory Plato atlantis we have elsewhere show to be allegorical at least no historical truth nor any likelihood in other ancient navigation mention in Plutarch Diodorus and other to point at these part if the multitude of people find there by the first spaniard seem to plead for a long habitation then that we allow let it be observe that a thousand and four hundred year for the first discovery be 1492. after Christ may well fill a world with people especial consider their polygamy or many woman their simple diet and that which attend the same healthful constitution and long life in some place admirable their easy course of life content with a little not fear to exceed their mean and maintenance by numerous issue where nature yield homespun or rather womb-spunne attire and the mother earth with little importunity or labour yield food sufficient where plague morraine famine be scarce hear of where covetousness the root of all evil have so little work ambition scarce know to diversify title of honour and war the enchant circle of death compendium of misery epitome of mischief a hell upon earth have not iron steele lead not engine stratagem ordnance not any human art of inhumanity to fill those part of the world with emptiness and there to erect theatre of desolation and destruction nor do nature yield many devour beast but reserve all her savageness to the men. to let pass the people of the world before and after the flood in no great time we see that in Egypt in the midst of heavy burden inhuman butchery and intolerable tyranny the israelite be multiply in the space of two hundred and ten year from seventy a a gen. 46.27 person to above two million as may be ghesle in that there be 600000. b b E^ 12.37 man beside child and beside the female also as appear in the c c num. 1.46 and 2.32 second number by Moses and d d num. 26.51 64. in the three by he and Eleazar when all those but Caleb and joshua be dead allow therefore the male child not much less as that three number evince and the female in probability as many as the male the rather for that pharaohs cruel edict touch not they you can but find above 2000000. now this their increase be by natural mean though by singular providence and therefore may as well happen in America those impediment remove and many other furtherance annex in liberty plenty and largeness of Territorie all element conspire to multiplication neither can any thing but divine providence which none can deny in America and have many more easy and visible mean few let then in Egypt be allege for the one more than the other this I may say that if any list to examine the proportion and suppose like providence in that time of 1400. year may follow a more numerous inundation of people than ever America perhaps the whole world may probable be suppose at once to have number although large deduction be allow both for ordinary mortality and some more dismal accident neither be it likely that the first plantation be so few if voluntary seek and not by accident force to those habitation as 70. person twice tell nor that America at once or from one place receive she first colony as by the diverse language stature habit of man may appear although time custom accident be allow no little power in these thing this we see among ourselves where one Dutch or teutonike e e diatrib europaeor ling. jos. Scalig. p. Merul. Cosmog part 2. l. 1. cap. 8. have yield not only a distinction of high and low but the english danish Sweden norwegian Islandish Nordalbing frisian beside the subdiversify dialect which each of these multiply language people rite so much differ and the elder both tongue and custom as in our saxon by variation and succession after a few century in manner extinguish so vain a thing be man. let i conclude this discourse of multiplication in America by a american example of cattle transport out of Europe thither especial kine which as they bear no more at a burden than a woman nor often so be they shorter-lived usual by two three part yet have they so increase there that * * acosta l. 1. cap. 21. and l. 4. c. 34. one man the bishop of venezuela have above 16000 yea they have grow wild their number exceed the care of owner and every man at pleasure kill they for their hide and one man the f f Ouiedol 15. c. 1 a few horse also and mare leave by the river of plate so increase that since they have slay they only for their tail to sell to the negro of coney strange increase see l. 2. ^ 1. @. 2. dean of conception have of one kow live 26. year in her life time the increase of 800. these indian which respect in generation little else but sensuality and in manner of life resemble brute beast rather than civil that I say not Christian man enjoy like privilege of nature in other thing may in this also @. 8 the glory of apostolical conquest the hope of enlarge the church in this last age by knowledge of art and language through the benefit of print and navigation let i conclude this discourse of apostolical peregrination with consideration with collaudation with admiration even to ecstasy and astonishment of their shall I ^ay or god exploit and renown Acts. little be the act of great Alexander Pompeius Magnus Fabius and other great and of the world who by arm and art military by fire sword famine massacre force the body the least part of man to a compulsive subjection shake off with the first opportunity but how shall I ad^or^e your noble conquest you divine apostolical worthy who walk in the flesh not war after the flesh without yea against the force of carnal weapon pull down strong hold cast down imagination and every high thing that exalt itself against the knowledge of God and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ herein they use not assistance of other nation by confederation nor muster multitude in press and train band of their own 2. chor. 10.3 4 5 nor receive supportation by subsidy nor make invasion by force nor obtain a unwilling conquest of body the shell without the kernel nor entertain clo^e intelligence nor work by close treason nor divide to themselves the spoil nor erect fort establish garrison impose taxation transplant inhabitant depress noble share new province into timar tithe child plant colony nor have their counsel of war at home or warlike custom abroad engine stratagem combat sieges skirmish pitch field ship horse chariot tent trumpet munition nor that worst baggage of army cry spoil sack wound maim kill with multiformity of cruelty as if the nethermost hell have muster and evaporate the most and worst of her fume and fury into our world which may therefore take that they may destroy the shape of man by human inhumanity but a few poor fisherman and tent-maker overthrow the world wiseman in the most flourish time of worldly learning subdue the sceptre of great king and monarch ruin the gate of hell and undermine the deepness of Satan supplant the profound suttl mighty of satanical combination with the whole world of man against a handful and maugre their unite force preach a crucify God ap. 2. and teach the cross as the first principle of christian learning to overcome the edge of the sword with suffer it to stop the mouth of lion with their flesh to quench the violence of fire with their blood to forsake all good good name wife life child to deny themselves to pluck out their right eye to cut off their right hand to pray for their persecutor to recompense hatred with love and overcome evil with goodness look for no other reward then what the world can neither look on nor for they invade with innocence and with save overcome the world and while it most resist persecute overcome incline it to willingness calmness subjection write their conquest not in the blood of the conquer but of the conqueror erect trophy not in O^eliskes pyramid arch by other industry but in their own funeral crucifying stoning martyrdom solemnize triumph not with their own army not with captive troop attend in great pomp the sublime triumphal chariot but by be lead forth with out-cry shout clamour to the base and most ignominious death those of who the world be not worthy repute unworthy of the world have the panegyrike of their praise write not by the pen of parasite or poet nor in the line as be say but in the life of man the christian world as before be observe remain not write but real annal of the apostle act who be poor make many rich and have nothing possess all thing the solaecisme b b Theo^ orat. 5 of fisherman dissolve the syllogism of philosopher and where but a few of any nation can be win to profess themselves the disciple of any philosophical sect 2. cor. 6.10 though grace and admire by the world yet the world become christian in despite of the world disgrace and persecution nor can the immane-cruelty of some or superfine subtlety of other subvert nay they convert man to the gospel the seed the fatten of the church be the blood of her slay martyr all age sex sort of man even woman even child even women-children outbraving the great the fierce the wise of satanical instrument by suffer conquer and at once overcome the devil the world themselves even so o father because it please thou and be not angry reader if the pass present unto my contemplation future thing and if the consideration of divine assistance in tongue revelation miracle immediate confer for the first plantation of Christianity occasion my thought to a more serious survey of future hope in the propagation and reformavion thereof in the first foundation of mosaical Rite^ God raise bezaleel and Aholiab with other by divine instinct enable to curious workmanship ex. 31. l. 6. and 35.30 fit that Oeconomie of the tabernacle while that jewish church be as it be rock in the cradle and God vouchsafe to dwell among those tent-dweller in a tent. but after that state be settle and the church flourish in the reign of David and Solomon God do not again infuse science by miracle or by miraculous disposition as before the egyptian be spoil provide material to that work but furnish salomons wisdom with help of the two hirams the one a cunning workman in gold silver brass iron stone timber to grave any manner of grave ^ Chron. 2.14 and to find out every device the son of a tyrian by a israelitish woman the other his master the king of a man furnish with a navy of ship and store of mariner by who mean the temple and court may be provide of necessary from remote Ophir aswell as the near Lebanon I implore not I importune not any unwilling assent or follower of my apprehension and application hereof to what I now propound in like differ state of the christian church 1. cor. 10 11. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) this be likewise found and as it be a tabernacle build for Christ by the apostle man whole enable by immediate grace and gift of the spirit to so divine a worke. a tabernacle I call the church not only as be yet militant and therefore abide in tent but in comparison and respective to that external spendour which follow long after the apostle time when king become her nurse father and queen her nurse mother subject their crown to the cross shine in the high top thereof albeit therefore in purity of doctrine and manner the apostolical time have their spiritual preeminence as the tabernacle also exceed the temple in the ordinary cloud pillar of fire manna miracle syncere worship by Moses and the like yet when the world become Christian and the cross become the imperial banner the church before persecute now revive under Constantine jovianus Theodosius and other religious monarch and king seem to renew the golden revolution and settle return of christian David and salomons and they which before have not a smith in Israel scarce a bishop or temple to be see have temple school bishop counsel whence religion be propagate and establish in the several realm and nation of Christianity not now by miracle as before by the apostle but by the ministry of bishop and priest of ordinary call and gift and he himself be now the great miracle that believe not the whole world believe and wonder at infidelity as a monster and as the temple and state of religion decline be repair and reform by godly king as joash hezekiah josiah and zealous priest such as jehoiada and after the ruin thereof be rebuild by prince and priest Zorobabel and joshua Nehemiah and ezra so have God stir up good king and pastor in the decline age of the church as Charles the great king alfred and many other in history mention and after the deportation thereof into mystical Babylon when she seem in her true member flee out of the world easy view into the wilderness have God raise up the king of England Sweden Denmark and other christian prince state and potentate with religious bishop and minister to repair the desolation of Zion and restore jerusalem with the temple if not to her first splendour yet from her late captivity where she have small pleasure to sing the lord song in a strange land and babble her holy in the unknown language of Babylon Psal. 37.4 as therefore the first plantation of the tabernacle be by miracle and immediate instinct the erection of the temple and succeed reparation be by the art and human industry of such heroic spirit as God raise up and sanctify in every age so the christian church plant by apostle have be since water by faithful pastor exalt by pious emperor depress by heretic and persecutor captive by pope and in she diversify change and chance rather expect extraordinary blessing upon the ordinary help function and grace then mean mere extraordinary and miraculous among all which help by human industry none in my mind have further prevail than those two the art of art print and navigation both in manner give at once to the world by divine goodness this for supply of matter that other of form to this spiritual reedification of God sanctuary and as hirams art improve natural wit by diligent industry succeed the infuse science of bezaleel and Aholiab so to that apostolical gift of tongue in the foundation of the church have succeed for reformation thereof the principal tongue and language of nation Hebrew Greek latin Syriake Arabic and the rest partly refine partly renew by human industry through the benefit of print for how be the learned and remote tongue bury and unknown in these part till that be bring in plenty facility and cheapness of book whereby language become the key book the treasury and storehouse of science while by those man find access into these and print yield admittance to both in plenty and variety and thus be unuail that mystery of iniquity in the age before we which have captive so many age in worse than egyptian darkness this mystery at first arise in a mist from the bottomless pit in a time of barbarous ignorance occasion by irruption of barbarian into all part of Christendom successive like wild boar out of the forest root up God vineyard and prepare a way to the romish fox to spoil the vine to corrupt and devour the fruit thereof the goth vandal hun herule Lombard saracen in Spain Africa and Italy the Frankes and after they the saracen dane and norman in France and the place adjoin the pict saxon and angle and after they the dane in these part the auare saracen tartar turk in the east and south with other deluge of ethnike hate learning burn library kill learned man in these and other part second with faction treason and civil uncivil combustion of christian among themselves make easy way first and strong confirmation after to the papacy apprehend all opportunity to advance itself first in spiritual thing after also in temporal but what illiterate ignorance little discern not withstand renew literature have expose to the view of all and by revive art have discern the art of that paint jezabel who foul wrinkle her jeza^elicall jesuitical parasite still labour with renew and refine art also to plaster and fill up a fresh but hereby whet the industry of other to improve their art and industry on the otherside in more eager search and diligent inquisition to take those wise in their craftiness and to let man see that the material of this late Babylon in the west be turf of earth which human wit have bake into bri^kes and with slime of policy have raise to so superadmirable a frame and structure and lest so great a blessing procure by print shall rest and rust among ourselves in this western corner of the world God have add that other art of navigation as that other hirams assistance to Solomon and of Nehemiah to ezra the prince and priest learning and power combine this art be before obscure and rude of this improvement of navigation read the next chapter but by the industry of the portugal lift up to high attempt with care of their king employ astronomy to her better furniture enable to new discovery in Africa and after that in all the east who example the Spaniard follow happy encounter a new world and first of all man unlose the virgin zone of the earth encompass the whole compass of this vast globe and thus have God give opportunity by navigation into all part that in the sunset and evening of the world the sun of righteousness may arise out of our west to illuminate the east and fill both hemisphere with his brightness that what the apostle by extraordinary dispensation send by extraordinary providence protect and conduct into all part by extraordinary gift of tongue be able to preach to all sort of man this latter age follow those glorious father and founder though far off may attempt and in some sort attain by help of these two art print and navigation that Christ may be salvation c c ps. 2. and 22. Luke 2. Apoc. 7.9 to the end of the earth and all nation may serve he that according to the scripture innumerable number of all nation and kindred and people and tongue may be clothe with the white robe of the lamb I be no prophet nor son of a prophet instruct in future revelation but one with all other pray thy kingdom come neither dare I take upon i the revelation of the revelation in that prophecy of the holy jerusalem descend out of heaven from God new measure with a golden reed to apply it to the reformation of the church in the last time which howsoever some have interpret only of her glorious and celestial estate other have include the terrestrial also after the call of the jew which saint Paul call life from the dead as if it be the resurrection of the world and consequent in spiritual respect a new heaven and new earth allege many argument seem altogether to this purpose not improbable and least of all will I less than the least of all take upon i the reduce of the jew into I know not what external pomp and policy and exalt they in splendour above all other nation and monarch the very stumble stone of their downfall this dream of a glorious Messiah provoke they to crucify the lord of glory who kingdom be not of this world though prefigure by type and paint in shadow of secular glory I meddle not with secular state but pray for the conversion and spiritual regeneration of all man and nature itself preach thus daily if the sun daily forbis brightman Bernard etc. in Apoc. rom. 11.15 shall not the sun of righteousness once enlighten all the world it be the holy ghost resemblance if the father d d psal 19 rom. 10. of old do expect a further conversion of nation by the gospel if the sybilline oracle promise as much if the papist make this a demonstration that Antichrist be not yet come because the gospel be not yet preach to all man which they hope hereafter shall be effect if the prophecy of the glorious state of the church mention in esay and Zacharie e e aug. ep 78.80 vid. prosp. lib. syb. or. l. 3. etc. Bellar. etc. vid. accost proc. jud. l. 4 c. 2. and temp. l 1. c. 17.18 collect on good Friday except in the quoud^m roman empire and the country next adjoin viz the sweden pole norwegian dane Russ and other northern people most of they late add to the church and the abassine on the south and some handful on the east Christianity have rather be disperse in nation then public and general profess God grace if it be his will for I rather make it a article of my charity then of my faith a large Christendom shadow in ezekiel temple and destruction of gog and Magog renew in the revelation seem not yet to have take their full effect but to promise some better future estate as even those many ancient also conceit who full sail and forward gale carry they beyond the truth into the millenary error if our church pray for all jew turk and infidel that they may be one sheep-fold under one pastor then I may also with the stream be carry into expectation of that dilate the church pale and a more catholic enlarge of her bound special in those part of the world where though we grant the gospel preach by the apostle yet little fruit in comparison follow in many country nor any general conversion of nation except of the roman empire with the adjoin region and some few scarce a few prounce annex have hitherto happen and how little to the rest of the world be all that which be call Christendom or that also which in any settle flourish estate of a church have ever yet be christian pardon therefore this charity extend to all man to pray and hope for the remote of nation no more remote from Christ in nature or promise than ourselves and to return to our navigation the present navigation mission preach of jesuite and friar in the heathen nation of the world seem to present unto my mind that state of the disperse jew before Christ come in the flesh he come to his own and his own receive he not which yet by their scripture synagogue rite in their many many dispersion have unwitting prepare a way unto he among the gentile let none contemn this figure of the jewish church which yield d d the great and pl^usiblest argument of papist draw from the authority etc. of the church may be with fa^rer show and ^urer ground apply to the jewish church which yet apostatise in most objection of popery touch visibility succession antiquity universality consent pontifical privilege and most of their vulgar and popular flourish real and experimental resolution by paralel the jew and romanist this be inferior in evidence superior in arrogance if herein also we see they like and those late pharise compass sea and land to make proselyte by preach some christian verity among their traditionary chaff become apparitor and harbinger of a future purity which yet themselves crucify as heretical Spain have as be say in navigation best deserve in lead the way to other some of which have e e english and dutch. Apoc. 17.13 16. 2. reg. 9.22 17.5 explo^s of Spain since in the art equal in attempt perhaps exceed she and by divine providence have be bountiful reward in the east and west both overshadow under her wing be also one of the ten horn as the current of our interpreter agree which together with the beast receive power as king out of the ruin of the roman empire of which it be prophesy that the ten horn shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate and naked and shall eat her flesh and burn she with fire for God have put into their heart to fulfil his will etc. God put into their heart to be thus true catholic and able to discern the whoredom and many witchcraft of their mother jezabel the mother of fornication of the earth enable they to see that catholic Roman be the language of Babel where man but babble and the word like Esau and jacob strive in the womb supplant the next precede that the now roman be but new roman and therefore catholic no more in time then place no more in sound apprehension of truth then in round comprehension of the universe and that God which have give they to chase the relic of the moor out of Europe to chastise they in Africa and Asia to find that new world of America with her two arm of navigation from Lisbon and Seville yearly to embrace the whole globe and to have great opportunity for so catholic a work then yet be grant to any other nation put into their heart with other prince and christian nation to fulfil this his will against that whore which the prophecy enforce to believe shall be do and their king in our father day give instance how easy Apoc. 17.6 Apoc. 18.6 I ring not sound not a alarm nor strike up a march for war I determine not the particular way or instrument of that desolation I delight not in imprecation nor to that whore drunken with the blood of saint and martyr wish any bloody reward of myself vid. Praefat. Monit but God himself have foretell devour her flesh and burn she and enjoin also in the cup which she have fill fill to her double which howsoever it shall be effect I do not prescribe nor do I single out that nation to this purpose but join they with other in my prayer for the execution of that prophecy both to go out of Babylon and to go against it in just reformation that it may be no more find at all at least by make her naked of that protection which thence she receive and redemand their own may detain the overflow of that the way of the king of the east may be prepare to exterminate Babylon out of the World and be it not better thus to pray for they that they may have a honourable part in that prophecy that Babylon may further fall by their fall from they then that they shall fall with she or to reckon up the bloody effect of their inquisition in Europe and their inhumanity in America and number they among the king of the earth who shall bewail and lament Rome ruin or to those ship-master ship-company sailor and trader by sea and merchant of the earth weep for her desolation once I say not that they of all man have the most eminent opportunity to subvert Babylon by their italian neighbourhood and territory I pray that they endeavour to convert the eastern and western indian make that best use of their navigation prou. 21.1 give they gold refine and true spiritual for their temporal and though they now of all nation seem most enamour of that roman therein true catholic that be common harlot yet he which have the heart of king in his hand as the river of water can turn it when and whithersoever he will can effect this also by other ez. 29.19 without yea against they can reward as sometime he do Nabuchadnezzar for his service do at Tyrus with the land of Egypt for the wage of his army and the israelite at their departure with egyptian spoil can reward I say both those which at his command go out of or when his providence shall dispose against this Babylon which for captive the people of God be call Egypt ez. 27. and ap. 12 for filthiness Sodom and for the staple of spiritual merchandise be also resemble to Tyrus with the spoil of the spiritual egyptian with the turk destruction which literal possess Egypt with the riches of the gentile bring to the church beside their own and the church liberty and as jerusalem to return to our similitude be demolish by the roman the church become true catholic not look any more to wall of a temple to carnal sacrifice to the petty pinfold of one nation to one city as the mart and mother of christian religion and discipline how much have the apostle to do while jerusalem stand to withhold * * so some interpret gog and Magog Apoc. 20.8 and ap. 9 etc. * * act 15. ep. gal. col. phil. Heb. and christian from judaize so be it to be hope and pray that this mystical Babylon which now by usurpation challenge to be mistress and mother of the church arrive at that prophesy irrecoverable downfall catholike-roman universall-particular may no more be hear but true catholicism recover her venerable and primary antiquity may without distract faction in free and unanimous consent extend her demesne of universality as far as the earth have man and the light of her truth may shine together with the sunbeam round about the habitable world that as Solomon by hirams mariner fetch material gold gem almuggim tree to the temple structure which by the other hirams art be bring and wrought into due form so the heavenly Solomon the lord JESUS may by this his gift of navigation supply those remote field white unto the harvest with plenty of labourer to bring into the society of the true church those rude ethnike of they to frame pillar in the house of God prou. 8. vessel of sanctimony in the sanctuary fine than the gold of Ophir enlighten with spiritual wisdom and understanding of holy thing rich than ruby and the most incomparable it well that these may by the art of hiram the son of a Isralitish woman by a tyrian father that be by the ministry of pastor and doctor learn in divine and human literature be instruct baptise hos. 1.10 edify and discipline that in the place where yet be no christian nay no humane or civil people it may be say unto they you be the son of the live god that there may be one pastor and one sheepfold one salvation redeemer and advocate to jew and Gentile JESUS CHRIST the light of the gentile and the glory of his people Israel who my discourse have now obtain to embrace shall here confine itself with a and end with amen to that amen in who all the promise of God be yea and amen even so amen lord JESUS HONDIUS his map of the christian World chap. 3 of diverse other principal voyage and peregrination mention in holy scripture of the travel and dispersion of the jew and of Nationall transmigration have premise the two former tractate as the two eye of peregrination most fair face I shall be as brief in the follow as I have in they be tedious and discursive the first voyage of mankind be out of paradise into the curse part of the earth paradise thence with sweat and labour to get his live cains restless wander and yet still dwell in the land of nod tha^ be of agitation and vexation never be still there be no peace say my god to the wicked and Henochs contrary walk with God I need not mention and I have already mention the first ship and voyage by water es. 57.31 Noah ark and the first earthly peregrination after to the plain of shinar Babel where Babel building be with mutual babble or confusion of language confound which give occasion to the dispersion of mankind over the earth that be to the plant and people of the world of which I have give account somewhat large before in the first book of my pilgrimage Abram and lot Abram be call out of of the chaldee and travel with lot to Haran first and after into Canaan thence famine force he into Egypt after he set forth for the recovery of lot in a martial expedition against four king return by Melchisedek king of Salem Abraham after many tent-wandring come to gerar and after Isaac birth and bless hope conceive of he Abraham and Isaac be send on the most difficult journey to moriah at Hebron he bury his wife and fellow traveller send his servant to Mesopotamia for rebekah and have send his multiply issue by Keturah unto the east country as before ishmael he end his earthly pilgrimage Isaac inherit the promise and yet travel of they by travel not sound city but dwell in tabernacle as do jacob also before and after his long service in Padan aram jacob and joseph till at last he descend into Egypt whither God have send joseph in a former peregrination these both die in faith and give charge the one for his dead body the other for his bone to travel to Canaan the type of their hope out of Egypt God call his son now multiply into a army as be before observe which yet be not present in Canaan after the passage of the red sea Moses and Aaron Israel peregrination in the desert see it before in Map but be pilgrim forty year in the wilderness we also after we have escape the bondage of hellish Pharaoh and see he vanquish in the red sea of Christ blood whereinto we be baptize must live the life of faith pass through the wilderness of this world have no more sustenance to our soul from our mere natural power than there their plow and husbandry yield their body but as their food and raiment tit. 3.5 exod. 13. be the effect of God grace and not human labour so not by the work of righteousness which we have do but according to his mercy he save we and by his word and spirit as a pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night travel with we till joshua the true JESUS for Moses bring not into Canaan nor can the law justify set we in possession of the heavenly Canaan where jericho be batter not by warlike engine but by the power of faith in the word and covenant of God and the house which our work build not and vineyard which our merit plant not even the throne which angel lose be make we for ever by free grace and mere mercy this be that rest into which none but traveller can enter and that by crowd so hard into that naerrow gate matt. 7. that they must leave themselves * * matt. 16.24 behind nor take possession of but by loss of life itself pass that jordan which flow the way of all flesh into the dead sea before they can live with God nor need man think much to travel where God himself be a mystical traveller in the tabernacle till Solomon build he a house adorn by ophirian navigation Saul before this have travel to seek lose ass Saul David and stumble on a earthly kingdom David by keep of sheep and follow the ewe with young be initiate and after by many many travel train to the mystery of royalty which with diversify travel he exercise all his day jeroboam travel to Egypt teach he those calvish devotion which make Israel travel into many assyrian plantation captivity and judah also be carry captive to Babylon restore by a travel from thence to jerusalem under Zorobabel ezra and Nehemiah a mystery of that misty deportation of the christian church by ignorance and superstition and her reformation by godly prince and pastor hirams mission the queen of Shebas visitation jonabs journey to ninive intimate the call of the gentile matt. 2. who first-fruit be the wiseman of the east which come so far a voyage to salute the new bear king of the jew job. 1. ^ pet. 5. the devil also be a traveller and continual compass the earth to and fro and go about as snore lion seek who to devour travel of mischief and conceive lie such be the assyrian syrian persian babylonian egyptian and other travel of the church enemy they also which in blind zeal compass sea and land to make pharisaical proselyte in Mordecais time you see in the book of Esther the jewish dispersion through all the one hundred and twenty seven persian province even from India to Ethiopia long after the return under Zorobabel est. vlt. which multiply no doubt in age follow according but why look I for traveller and voyage there where the church be tie to one place Deut. 16. to travel thither three time a year and therefore ordinary not to be far from thence the babylonian and alexandrian dispersion after the captivity we have already mention whereby the world be strew with jew not to mention the israelite as apparitor to the Messiah and preparer thereof to christianity in the apostle preach then indeed the jew be traveller from all part to jerusalem and as man be more religious affect there dwell at jesalem jew devout man out of every nation under heaven which be of jewish parentage act. 2.5 9 10 11 be by the place of their birth parthian mede and Elamites mesopotamian cappadocians of Pontus and Asia and Pamphilia Egypt and of the part of Libya about Cyrene stranger of Rome jew and proselyte crete and arabian this be after that imprecation of they his blood be on we and on our child so do God seek to overcome their evil with his goodness matt. 27. but when they which have before persecute the servant and crucify the lord of glory himself now resist the holy ghost act. 7. and 13. be uncircumcised in heart and ear and judge themselves unworthy of eternal life God let out his vineyard to other husbandman and the fall of the jew become the riches of the World then come the wrath of God on they to the utmost and they become a travel nation indeed travel now above 1500. year from be a nation Deut. 28. jos. bel. jud. l. 7. c. 24. and Moses his prophecy be verify in their scatter from one end of the world to the other eleven hundred thousand be say to have perish in jerusalem alone where Christ have be crucify beside all other sl^ughters in all other part of judaea in that fatal war under Vespasian and Titus 97000. be sell to be distract slave through the world Galatinus say 200000. thirty of they for one piece of silver gal. arcan l. 4.21 which have give thirty piece for he which come to make they free yet have not the land spew out all her inhabitant but grow so queasy and full of qualm that the remainder in adrian's time entertain Bencochab for their Messiah who with 200000. Jew in his army be say to have rebel and breed such combustion that this son of the star so his name sound be after call Barchosba the son of lie it be prodigious * * see my pilgrimage l. 2. c. 10 not hyperbolical alone to tell what the jew tell of their follow slaughter 700000. slay in Egypt and in judaea so many as pass all modesty to relate after they Dion Nicaeus tell of fifty castle and nine hundred and eighty of their best town raze 580000. slay dion adrian beside innumerable multitude which perish by famine fire disease and other baggage of invade camp Aeliu^ adrianus banish the jew from Cyprus and judaea erect a new city instead of jerusalem call of his own name Aelia jew destruction and set image of swine over the gate as porter to keep out the jew yea prohibit by edict the jew to look towards it from any high place traian before be instigate by their rebellion to destroy many thousand of t^em in Egypt Cyrene and Mesopotamia and ever since those which be contrary to all man jew dispersion have find all man contrary to they and have live if such slavery and baseness be a life like Cain wander over the world brand with shame and Scorn Spain England France Germany Poland Italy Turkey all the indies as far as China have have they inhabitant have have indeed for many have give they terrible expulsion the rest use cruel and unkind hospitality so that they be stranger where they dwell and traveller where they reside still continue in the throw of travel both of misery and mischief but I have handle this matter more full in my pilgrimage and both Benjamin Tudelensis a travel jew and other traveller in the follow relation will give you strange travel of they through Asia Africa and Europe in all their dispersion to this day retain their blood name rite as dispose by a high and most merciful providence which in his time will show mercy on they to see he by the eye of faith see my pilg. l. 2. c. 21. rom. 15.26 rom. 11.15 who by the hand of cruelty they have crucify and all Israel shall be save and return to the church by a more general conversion than have yet be see and as their rejection have prove the reconcile of the world so the receive of they shall be life from the dead all time be in God hand but he which have promise be able to perform and perhaps if Rome the spiritual Babylon be captive and ruin which have obtrude so long on they the monster of image worship transubstantiation worship of so many saint with other seem of refine ehtnicism and impose on convert the loss of all their substance the way shall be make more plain for they which we hope be grow to some ripeness in this age when about so many year have pass since the call of the gentile as from jacobs family in Egypt grow to the face and proportion of a people and nation unto their destruction and full out as many as be from josephs death in Egypt to the destruction of the temple under Titus and more than from Moses his to that other and extermination under Adrian we be no prophet and must learn by event the certainty of god before secret counsel in mean while let we pray hallow be thy name thy kingdom come Ga^ 4 1^ luc. 15. (...) that this travel nation may one day travel in birth of Christ till he be form in they and with the prodigal son may travel from their wander and at once return to their father and to themselves that we may all meet in the unity of faith and god will may be do in earth as it be do in heaven there be but one shepherd and one sheepfold amen as the jewish nation have be literal traveller so the christian church be always travel spiritual to she home and from herself and the jewish deportation to Babylon be a figure of the antichristian captivity in Romish and popish superstition of which we have take occasion to speak more full elsewhere * * to. 1. l. 8. c. 6. as at first the world be people by peregrination successive from Noah ark and Babel tower so in the worldly vicissitude of all thing a world of peregrination have happen in the world and that of world of man together in Nationall invasion plant supplant colony and new alteration of the face of the world in each part thereof thus the israelite supplant the canaanite and dwell in their room Deut. 2.9 12 20 as do the moabite to the giantly emims the edomite to the horim the ammonite to the Zamzummims and other nation to other to recite these be to recite all story in manner of the world Lazius and other have in part undertake it for even in Palestina alone how many succession have be of Canaanites israelite assyrian after call samaritan and jew together of those which the roman place or permit of saracen of Frankes or western christian in so many million as two hundred year space send out of Christendom thither of drusians syrian and a very Babylon of nation none and all ever since this Britain of we beside those which first give it name who remainder still enjoy Wales have admit roman sprinkle and colony and after that a general deluge of saxon jutte and angle tempest and storm out of Denmark and Norway and last the norman mixture and combination neither be there any region of ancient note which have not sustain chance ^nd change in this kind but we mind not such near peregrination as these usual be but long voyage and remote travel and such also we have already mention in Sesostris the egyptian in the phoenician in the assyrian under Semiramis to India beside Eudoxu^ and other person and such be the fable or outwear story of ethnic antiquity touch the atlantine Osiris Bacchus Hercules Perseus Daedalus and those which retain some more truth though obscure enough of the argonaut Ulysses varro distinguish relation of time into (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be fabulous obscure and historical Menelaus Aenaeas Hanno himilco jambolus and other some of which shall follow in the follow relation that of Alexander be more renown and first open the east to the west and to Europe give the eye of geography and history to take view of India and the region adjacent and here be the first solid foot-print of history in this kind though here also traveller have be as far from the truth as from their home and have too often travel of vanity and Lie chap. 4 fabulous antiquity of the peregrination and navigation of BACCHUS Osiris HERCULES the argonaut Cadmus the grecian navy to Troy MENELAUS Ulysses aeneas and other it be not the fable or falsehood which we seek in fabulous antiquity but that truth which lie bury under poetical rubbish for nothing but nothing can rise of nothing some truth therefore give occasion to those fable as Thamar and dinahs beauty occasion their ravishment the devil a liar from the beginning lust to deflower that beauty and then like Ammon add a second force in hatred turn she as much as he may out of the World hence the fable of poet idolatry of ethnike dotage of rabbin frenzy of heretic fancy and ly-legend of papist to all which when history can make they good mystery be seek to cover their badness and bald nakedness and be they never so bad before like the shear of a friar or vail of a novice nun sudden they be hereby become errant honest person nay venerable and religious and thus have that impostor not only insinuate and procure admission and credit to lie John 4. but thence have raise the very faith of infidel which worship they know not what and obtrude I know not what fraud and religious lie forsooth upon unchristian and anti-christian christian to who because they receive not the love of the truth to be save 2. thess. 2. God have send the efficacy of error that they may believe a lie this be the devil triumph and man madness out of which confusion if we can try out the pure truth yet those divine relation and revelation premise will appear more lovely and admirable from these ethnic fable I may here mention Saturn travel into Latium be eject heaven Jove fable five encompassing of the world Apollo daily circuit Mercury frequent message to all part who be also the traveller God and have his statue in highway junos jealous wander Bacchus and Hercules be renown by the poet for their peregrination perhaps as before be observe no other but Solomon and hirams ophirian voyage travel of Bacchus Bacchus they tell be the son of jupiter and Proserpina who be tear in piece by the titan jupiter give his heart to Semele to drink and thereby conceive of this other Bacchus hygin fab. 167 eurip. in bac. whereupon jealous juno transform into the shape of beroe Semele nurse persuade she to desire jupiters company in majestical appearance as he accompany juno which be her destruction the babe take out and sew in jupiters thigh and after put to Nysus to nurse whereupon he be name Dyonisius I shall distract you to tell the disagree tale of poet touch his birth and life for lie never agree as also his miracle which ever make up the great part of a legend tiger ounce and panther with pan nymph cobal and satyr be his companion and attendant he be draw in a chariot by tiger and hold a thyrsus in his hand for a sceptre which be a spear or javelin adorn with the leave of vine and ivy and march thus mad both to India in the east and to Spain in the west which of pan be call whence Spania and Hispania have be derive a learned Spaniard say that in the eight hundred and ten year before the build of Rome Bacchus invade India moisten it with blood Oros. l. 1 ^ 9 fill it with slaughter pollute it with lust which before have be subject to none and live content and quiet in itself some apply that of Noah to he and make he the inventer of wine hony and sacrifice say also that he reign at nysa a city in Arabia some add other kingdom and that he have Mercurius Trismegistus his counsellor and leave Hercules his egyptian lieutenant Antaeus in Lybia Busiris in Phoenicia conquer all the east build nysa and erect pillar in the eastern ocean as do Hercules on the western his story be also confound with that of Osiris this be the name which the egyptian give he as Herodotus affirm Her Euterpe diod. sic. l. 1. fast. l. 3. and Diodorus relate his epitaph in hierogliphical letter in these word I be Osiris the king which travel through all the world to the indian desert Ovid also sing his journey they describe first through Aethiopia and then Arabia and so to Persia Media S^ab l. 1. eurip. etc. Bactria and India after his return to Hellespont Lydia Phrygia Thrace Greece and whither travel wit please we shall lose ourselves to follow he further as they do which with worst profaneness celebrate his drunken holy daily Theseus and Hercules live in one time of which Theseus be famous for his act in Crete Theseus and Hercules Thebes Thessaly with the amazon and his descent into hell with other his voyage and navigation but far far more famous be Hercules for his travel and for his twelve labour his peregrination be another labour add to each of they the nemaean lion lernaean Hydra phrygian boar arcadian hart augean stable cretan bull thracian Diomedes with his man-eating horse celtike Alexia alpine passage italian ten stymphalide bird amazonian belt atlantike dragon Balearian Geryon Lybyan Antaeus egyptian Busiris lydian service to Omphale thessalian centaur and Tartarean Cerberus proclaim his travel over and under the world as his pillar to the end of the world and his help Atlas that the world travel on he neither travel he by land alone the argonaut but by water also he navigate with those famous argonaut which make we another voyage to find they Hyginus have register their name jason a thessalian Orpheus a thracian asterion of Peline Polyphemus of Larissa Admetus eurytus and echion Ethalides Coeneus Mopsus the soothsayer pirithous Menaetius eurydamas eribotes Ameleon eurytion ixition oileus hygin fab clytius and iphitus Peleus and Telamonius butes Phaler^s tiphys the master of the ship Argus the ship-maker Hercules and Hylae his companion nauplius Idmon Castor and Pollux Lynceus which can see thing hide underground and in the dark and idas periclymenus Amphidamus and Cepheus ancaeus Lycurgi Augaeus asterion and Amphion Euphemus which can run dry-foot on the water ancaeus erginus Meleager Laocoon iphitus Naubo zetes and Calais son of Aquilo with wing head and foot which chase away the harpy Focus and Priasus eurymedon Pal^monius actor Thersanon asclepius Atriach jolaus Deucalion Philoctetes Ceneus son of coronis Acastus voluntary companion to jason these with their country and parentage have record their voyage be to Colchos but many of of they come not thither Hylas be stollne by the nymph in maesia who Hercules and Polyphemus seek be leave behind tiphys die by the way and ancaeus son of Neptune succeed in his master place Idmon be slay by a boar butes throw himself into the sea allure by the siren music in their return also Euribates be slay in Libya Mopsus die in Africa of a serpent bite now for the voyage of the argonaut they say that polias jasons uncle be command by oracle to sacrifice to Neptune to which if any come with one shoe on the other off than his death shall not be far off jason come thither and wade through the river leave one of his shoe in the mire which be stay not to take out for fear of come late to the holy Pelias see this ask jason what he will do if he have a prophecy that any man shall kill he I will send he say he to fetch the golden fleece this be the fleece of the ram which some say be the name of a ship have a ram on the beak that have carry Phryxus to Colchos who sacrifice the ram to jupiter and hang up the fleece in the grove of Mars and thus Pelias out of his own mouth sentence he Argus make the ship which of he be call Argos which they say be the first ship of long fashion these first come to Lemnos where they be so kind entertain that jason by Hypsipila the queen have two son and stay till Hercules chode they away next they come to cyzicus * * diod. siculus add the deliverance of heptone from the whale the kill o^ king Laomeron and take o^ Troy in their return for break his pr^mise of horse to Hercules l. 4. harpy in propontis which liberal feast they and be go thence by foul weather they be put back in the night where cyzicus mistake they for enemy be slay in fight thence they sail to Bebrycia where amycus the king challenge they to a single encounter at whorlebat in which Pollux slay he Lycus a neighbour king be glad hereof and give the argonaut entertainment where Iphis or Tiphis die and Idmon be slay Phineus the son of Agenor a thracian be blind by jupiter for reveal the god secret and the harpy set to take the meat from his mouth the argonaut consult with he of their future success must first free he of this punishment which zetes and Calais do chase they to the strophades Phineus show they how to pass the symplegades follow the way which a dove send forth of the ship show they thence they come to the i will dia where the bird (@) shoot quill which kill man who by Phineus his precept they fear away with sound such as the curetes make and use thereto shield also and spear thus be enter the euxine sea to dia they find poor naked shipwreck the son of Phrixus Argus Phrontides Melas and which travel to their grandfather Athamas there encounter that misfortune jason entertain they and they bring he to Colchos by the river Thermodoon and come near Colchos cause the ship to be hide and come to their mother chalciope sister of Medea * * diod. make Medea and Circe sister daughter of Hecate l. 4. to who they relate jasons kindness and the cause of his come she bring Medea to jason who as soon as she see he know that it be the same who in her dream she have see and love and promise he all furtherance have learn by oracle that he shall so long reign as the fleece which Phrixus have consecrate remain in Mars his temple he therefore impose on jason to yoke the bras-footed firebrethe bull to the plough and to sow the dragon tooth out of the helmet whence arm man shall sudden be produce and kill each other this he do by Medea help and likewise cast the dragon into a sleep which guard the fleece and so take it away hear that jason and his daughter Medea be go send his son Absyrtus in a ship with soldier after he who pursue he to istria g g timaeus say that they go to Tanais and thence cross over land to the ocean and sail about by cade into the straits ody m in the adriaticke sea where Alcinous compound their quarrel so little to Absyrtus his like that follow he to Minerva isle jason slay he and his follower build there a city call of his name Absoris some tell of the syrtes which the argonaut pass carry their ship on their shoulder twelve day but the variety be inextricable and innumerable after his return by Medea help he make away his uncle Pelias to who she have promise to restore his youth and give his kingdom to Acastus his son which have accompany he to Colchos the exile of Medea and the rest of the tale you may have among the poet I be more than weary with relate so much this voyage be so admire of antiquity that this Argo which Homer call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be not only praise to the star by the poet but place among the star by their Minerva and the constellation famous to these time the argonaut after this institute the olympian game the poet be full of such chimaera mix lye-truth h h Strab. l. 1. speak of the poet argonaut say (@) against Troy not spare any of their god or hero jupiter have steal Europa transform into a bull or as some say in a ship of that name or have a bull in the Beke Cadmus and thasus her brethren be send by Agenor their father to seek she the phenician navy be divide betwixt they thasus have long seek in vain return not but in the aegaean sea build a city of his name Cadmus build Thebes and after that but what and why do I while you in these uncertainty yet have I touch a little of his story who be fame the first inventor of the grecian letter and of history but we will turn your eye to the most fable of all poetical fable and in a piece of a hour with a swift pen will dispatch ten year work with 1000 ship the prince in the trojan siege and their ship be these Agamemnon bring from Micenae one hundred ship Menelaus his brother from thence also 60. phoenix of Argos 50. Achilles of Scyros 60. Automedon his chariot driver 10. Patroclus of phthia 10. Aiax of Salamine 12. Teucer his brother as many Ulysses of Ithaca 12. diomedes of Argos 30. Stenelus of Argos 25. Aiax the locrian 20. nestor the pylian 90. thrasymedes his brother 15. antilochus son of Nestor 20. eurypylus of Orchomene 40. Macaon of Attica 20. Podalyrius his brother 9 tlepolemus of Mycenae 9 idomeneus of Crete 40. Meriones from thence as many eumelus of Perrhebia 8. Philoctetes of Melibaea 7. Peneleus of Boeotia 12. Pithus a baeotian also as many and his brother Chronius 9 arcesilaus 10. prothaenor 8. of Argos 30. ascalaphus 30. schedius 30. and Epistrophus his brother 10. elephenor Calchodontis and Imenaretes all likewise of Argos 30. the son of from Athens 50. agapenor from arcada 60. Amphimachus of Elea 10. of Argos 15. (@) of Mycenae 19 polysenes from Aetolia 40. meges the dulichian 60. Thoas 15. podarces his ^rother 10. prothous the magnesian 40. cycnus the argive 12. nireus from thence 16. antiphus the thessalian 20. Polyboetes the argive 20. Leophites of Sicyon 19 you see the particular amount far above the thousand usual name the voyage be too short and the siege too long for this place Menelaus have recover his eyesore fair Helena be say to have be eight year wander the world and Ulysses long Menelaus his error be about Cyprus Phoenicia Egypt travel of Menelaus Strab. l. 1. and the neighbour aethiopian and arabian so Strabo expound Homer erembos in his first book and in his sixteenth yet there add also the troglodyte he produce some which place the sidonian in the persian gulf I know not how just Homer verse where Menelaus relate his travel to Telemachus be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) cypress Phoenicia Egypt have past the ethiope sidon ' eremb I go at last and Libya aristonicus the grammarian and after he Eustathius travel of Ulysses interpret it of sail round about Africa as be say of eudoxus and other before (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a thing to i altogether unprobable and easy to be sail by the poet or his commenter in a inkle sea with a quill mast then by the rude seaman of those time Menelaus his error we see continue more than eight year yea be not yet end but breed new travel in grammarian brain Ulysses return from Troy come to the the lotophagi and after that to Polyphemus the giant with one eye in his forehead thence to it Aeolus to the to Ae^aria infamous by Circe charm to Avernus to the siren to Scylla Sicilia Charybdis to aeaea to the phaeaces and at last to Ithaca the like fable grammar-school boy can tell you of Aenaeas out of Virgil and other poet I be weary of travel in such a loose sandy soil where so few footeprint and path of truth be to be find and for Aenaeas his travel I will present you they in another fashion as Hondius have in his map describe they HONDIUS his map of the navigation of Aeneas the trojan see of all these in photius his Hel^od and Achilles be extant o her fabulous relation of traveller we have mere feign as that of heliodorus his aethiopike history Achilles Tatius jamblichus all in love-story Lucius Patrensis his metamorphosis whence Lucian have his Lucius and thence Apuleius his Antonius Diogenes his Thule and other like they be not fabulous history but parable mystical fable and poem in historical form as Utopia and Arcadia that I add not more than a good many other among we of worse note which idle wit have make both mother and daughter of idleness or fruitless foolish business without brain or heart I have more mind to give you a history though even here we can secure Graecia in Historia some thing be uncertain in the best yet better a totter truth than nothing the philosopher and wiseman of Greece be traveller for knowledge of which some travel with knowledge also and have leave geographical monument merchant for gain and mighty potentate for dominion and glory the merchant have their reward in that which they seek the other for better knowledge of time deserve more leisurely view chap. v. a brief recital of the famous expedition mention in ancient history of the assyrian egyptian scythian aethiopian persian and other as these last have be tell by poet as fable that be truth seeked and wrought upon by their wit for great delight so the story of the first assyrian monarchy and egyptian dynasty have little more solidity Ninus by the greek and latin story be renown for his ambitious march Ninus and travel through all Asia from the red to the euzine sea and through Scythia to the bactrian he conquer say Diodorus the armenians and their king Barchanes p. Oros. l. 1. c. 4. Pharnus also king of Media and all Asia from Tanais to Nilus the egyptian phaenicians syrian cilicians Pamphilia Lycia diod. l. 2. Caria Phrygia Misia Lydia Troas propontis Bythinia Cappadocia the barbarian upon Pontus cadusians tapyrans hyrcan drange parthian persian susians caspians and many other ariaeus the arabian king be his colleague in arm in these expedition after which he build Ninus or ninive the wall one hundred foot high ninive build broad enough for three cart to pass together on the top with 1500. turret 200. foot high the square unequal the two longer 150. furlong the two short 90. he make a second expedition against the bactrian and then marry Semiramis a syrian which he take from her husband Menon Semiramis who hang himself in foolish grief Semiramis succeed and exceed his exploit she invade Ethiopia and whereas if you believe ctesias Ninus have with he in his last expedition against Zoroastres the bactrian 1700000. footman and 200000. horseman with 10600. hook chariot the scripture more true ascribe Babylon to Nimrod ninive to ashur she build as they say Babylon with a stupendous garden in Chaona and palace at ecbatana cut out highway in Persia pass through Egypt to Libya to the oracle of jupiter Ammon subject Aethiopia and make three year provision to invade Staurobates king of India slay 300000. beef of their hide to frame counterfeit elephant and with 3000000. ^t be ctesias also which tale it of footman and 500000. horseman and 2000 ship with Elephantine counterfeit carry on camel she make that indian invasion where Staurobates encounter she with great number threaten to crucify she on Indus be the naval fight wherein the indian have the worse and lose 1000 ship but in the field the assyrian army be overthrow thus they proceed in the assyrian empire for 1300. year together Theutamo Memnon and say that at the war of Troy Theutamo the twenty from Ninus relieve Priamus with 20000. man and 200. chariot under the conduct of Memnon as for Sardanapalus the thirty and last of they the truth be as in the former a certain uncertainty Eusebius reckon the time of Semiramis to have be the same with Abraham so that Moses who josephus Clemens African^^ tatianus make to be 850. year before the trojan war jos. seal Euseb. Chron. be by his more probable reckon make much late yet as he say ancient than the greekish antiquity and their god also be bear as Scaliger calculate out of his positions 394. year before the destruction of Troy now what pett^e king the world have in the best people part in Abraham time the four chapter of genesis show even of those region which some therefore make but viceroy under the assyrian very dare ninue his number savour of nimrods Babel which after age can make swell with such vanity it may be a question I think the negative out of question whether the world have then so many soul so soon af^er the flood the egyptian as those indian and assyrian army be say to contain the like may be say of the egyptian king expedition which conquer to Pontus and Tanaus the scythian which conquer he and almost all Asia as some say before Ninus by Genebrard be suppose to be Osiris the first Pharaoh Sesostris and for Sesostris we have already in part acknowledge his greatness and withal his lateness in the time of rehoboam the son of Solomon he be say to have have in his army 600000. footman diod. l. 1. and 24000. horse 8020. chariot of war in the red sea four hundred ship he conquer beyond Ganges the mede the scythian unto Tanais and the rest of Asia into Europe he pass as far as Thrace and leave pillar as monument for his victory engrave with the representation of a man privity if they be valiant of a woman if effeminate not long after be that expedition of zerah the ethiopian with a million of man zerah the aethiopian 2. Chron. 9.14 2. kin. 16. and 17. overthrow by king asa as that of the queen of sheba some think she reign over Arabia and Aethiopia to Solomon a little before Tiglath Pileser king of Assyria take Damascus and Shalmaneser carry away the ten tribe into Assyria and Media and place babylonians cutheans and other in their room Senacherib soon after invade judah but Tirhakah king of Ethiopia come out against he 19 this Tirhakah be think to be that tearcon which Strabo mention Thearcon Strab. l. 15. where he deny that India have be invade by any but Bacchus and Hercules before Alexander deny that of Semiramis and allege megasthenes both to that purpose and that Sesostris the egyptian megasthenes his testimony of old expedition Nabuchodon^sor Cyrus dan. 2. and 4. and tearcon the ethiopian pierce into Europe yea that nabucodonosor or nanocodrosor more celebrate by the chaldaean than Hercules come to the straits or Hercules his pillar as do also tearcon also that idanthyrsus the scythian pierce as far as Egypt but none of they go say he to India megasthenes acknowledge that Cyrus come near the indian in his expedition against the massaget but not thither as for nabucodonosor asian and egyptian expedition and his dominion in manner over the world we have divine testimony in daniel tree and golden image 1 of Cyrus also who conquest be know and large peregrination from the west part of Asia where he captive Croesus and subdue he with the adjoin dominion and all the region thence through Syria Armenia Media Persia to the massaget and scythian Cambyses Darius Xerxes Her. l. 7. his son Cambyses add Egypt and that foolish expedition against the aethiopian Darius with 800000. man invade the scythian Xerxes as Herodotus have record invade Greece with 1700000. footman 80000. horseman 20000. chariot man one thousand two hundred and eight sail of ship ctesias which use elsewhere to say the most have but 800000. man beside chariot and one thousand ship as for other scythian and amazonian invasion with other of other nation for their uncertainty I omit they the greek also have their many both expedition and defensive war against the persian before Alexander time Themistocles Xenophon and many other of they be renown and thus the persian empire have bring we to Alexander which succeed it of who expedition we shall anon take special and more leisurely view HONDIUS his map of the roman empire chap. 5 the travel of the ancient philosopher and learned man brief mention now let we examine the voyage of philosopher and learned man into remote part for wisdom and learning Diogenes Laertius make two kind of philosophy the one jonike the other italike this begin from Pythagoras the other from Thales both which with many of their successor be great traveller as for Thales his epistle to Pherecydes a syrian another travel philosopher be yet extant in Laertius in which he mention he and Solon travel in these word for neither be I and Solon the athenian so foolish and mad that when we have sail to Crete and pierce into Egypt there to confer with the priest and astronomer we will not with like care sail to (@) for Solon will come also if you think good for thou be hold with like of that place seldom pass into jonia neither art move with desire of stranger but as I hope thou only apply thyself to write but we which write nothing * * lest traveller may be great writer even I which have write so much of traveller and travel never travel 200. mile from thaxted in Essex where I be bear herein like a whetstone which be blunt cause sharpness or a candlestick hold many candle without which itself be unseen in the dark and as the compass be of little compass and motion yet teach to compass the world or as the polestar be lest move of all and most of all move and guide the traveller envy not a marginal room to he who have vie volume so spacious to thou in which how little be the travel of the great traveller or how can a great traveller have travel of so much travel through Greece and Asia thus have you one testimony of two grandee Thales and Solon this late in his return from Egypt visit Cyprus and after go to Croesus who adorn himself in great glory and pomp ask Solon if ever he have see goodly spectacle yes say he cock pheasant and peacock Croesus be after by Cyrus sentence to the fire cry o Solon Solon Solon and be demand the reason answer that Solon have tell he that no man may be account happy before his death wherein Cyrus read the mutability of his own fortune give he his life and a competent estate thence Solon go into Cilicia and build to Croesus be a epistle also of Anacharsis another travel philosopher bear in Scythia and brother to the scythian king make some mention of his travel in these word I o king of lydian come into Greece to learn their manner study and instruction and need not gold esteem it enough to return to the scythian a better man and more learned yet I will come to thou to Sardis much esteem thy friendship and familiarity he be Solon guest at Athens Laer. l. 2. whither he come in the forty seven Olympiad Socrates the first bringer in of ethic or moral philosophy be a traveller also and follow the war by land and Sea Xenophon his scholar Xenophon be both in art and arm and travel famous and have leave monument thereof write by himself his voyage to Delphos and thence to Cyrus and after his persian journey to agesilaus king of Sparta and with he against the theban and after that to Helis and Corinth be record by Laertius in his day ctesias a traveller and historian live which write the persian assyrian and indian story but often travel from truth Aristippus Aristippus be a cyrenian by birth by study a athenian as be many other of his countryman by base flattery a trencher-worme to Dionysius the sicilian tyrant Ptolemeus a aethiopian be his scholar and Antipater a cyrenean Epitemedes Paraebates hegesias anniceris be also Cyrenaikes hold voluptuous opinion as also Theodorus and another Aristippus magnify sensual pleasure the ecclesiastic history of Socrates and sozomen mention the travel of Empedocles which throw himself into the sicilian and of Democritus which spend eighty year in travel through diverse country Meropius also Plato Laert. l. 3. and be mention with other but we will come to man better know Plato be famous both for philosophy and travel he travel to Euclid at Megara to Theodorus the mathematician into Italy to the pythagorean philolaus and eurytus Euripide^ thence to Egypt to the priest and with he Euripides also and intend to visit the persian magi but be prohibit by the asian war return to Athens he set up the academy thrice he travel in warfare to tanagra to Corinth to Delos thrice also he sail into Sicilia first to see it at which time Dionysius the tyrant displease with his free speech cause he to be sell in aegina but be free Dionysius write to he not to reproach he Plato answer he have not so much leisure as to think on Dionysius he sail thither to the young Dionysius twice his disciple be speusippus the athenian xenocrates of chalcedon Aristotle the stagirite Dion of Syracuse of heraclea timolaus of cyzicus of Pontus and other of other country bion. his school yield a pretty geographical map of country Bion be bear near Boristhenes but add honour to his country by his study he be sell for a slave and buy by a orator which make he his heir he sell all and go to Athens after his study there he live at Rhodes lacydes carneades Menippus lacydes the chief of the new academy be a cyrenaean carneades be also of the same nation Clitomachus be a carthaginian and his true name be Asdrubal he go to Athens and there bcame the scholar of carneades and his successor Menippus be a phenician by birth and live a Cynik at Thebes Aristotle be bear the first year of the 99 Olympiad Aristotle at seventeen year he become Plato scholar and so continue twenty year after that he go to Mitylen^ and when Alexander be fifteen year old to king Philip in the second year of the 109. Olympiad and have commend the care of young Alexander to his cousin calisthenes in the second of the 111. return to Athens and teach in Lyceo thirteen year and then go to chalcis and there die Calisthen^^ calisthenes travel with Alexander till the persian conquest have make he swell beyond the measure of a man and some greek foolosopher philosopher I dare not call they but among the muse some have always be hedge-whore and the learning of some in all age have lick the trencher and fly-blowed the sore of great man with the base of vice flattery kiss the hinder part suck * * so the barber of Le^is the eleven Arrian l. 4. q. (@) plut. alex. the emerald feed on their excrement themselves the excrement of mankind but whither have passion transport i Agis a argive and Cleo a sicilian some add Anaxarchus also say Curtius will needs open heaven to Alexander and prefer he to Hercules Bacchus Castor and Pollux Alexander stand behind the hang while Cleo make a speech to persuade the persian rite and with they to deify and incense their king which be grave refute by calisthenes for to he especial be the speech direct that they which go before other in learning shall in this innovation also that it be not for he and Cleo to make god or for the king honour to be behold to they for his divinity which can not give a king (@) on earth to he and much less heaven Alexander conceal his malice till upon occasion of torture some which have conspire his death he torture also even to death calisthenes give he that recompense for save his life when have slay Clitus in a drunken rage he will have add in a sullen and mad penance his own death and be by calisthenes wisdom reclaim this be his preparation to the indian expedition many other learned man follow Alexander and write his story viz. Marsyas hecataeus Abderita Aristobulus Clitarchus Anaximenes onesicritus Nearchus Ptolemaeus Lagi after king of Egypt Antipater another of Alexander captain and a historian Aristus asclepiades add Archelaus strattis Eamenes Diodorus who story we have cite by arrianus Strabo Plutarch etc. but then the world travel of traveller of all sort learned and unlearned zeno be a cyprian by birth of phaenician parentage and at Athens begin the stoic sect whither he come with purple out of phenicia to sell Laert. l. 7. and suffer shipwreck in the piraeum upon which occasion solace himself with a book he follow Crates Cleanthes be his successor and after he sphaerus a Bosphoran l. 1.8 which travel also to Alexandria to Ptolemeus Philopater Heraclites the ephesian be a travel philosopher of who acquaintance Darius Histaspis be ambitious and write to he about it but of all the philosopher none be more famous than the first founder of that name Pythagoras Pythagoras either in travel with or for science he be bear at Samos thence pass to Lesbos and there hear Pherecydes the syrian return to Samos Polycrates the famous minion of fortune commend he to Amasis king of Egypt he learn the egyptian mystery and language and travel thence with epimenede into Crete and after that into Italy to croton and there begin the italike philosophy before mention but who can tell his travel plin. l. 30. c. 1. jambl pag. 39 jamblichus his scholar say that Pythogoras learn his philosophy partly of the orphic partly of the egyptian priest partly of the chaldee and magi. learned Pliny say of he that to learn Zoroastres his he do you believe it have be aethalides the son of Mercury and after that have be Euphorbus in the war of Troy who be dead his soul pass into Hermotinus and travel to branchidae to Apollo temple after who death a new transmigration befall he into Pyrrbus a delian fisherman and at last you have Pythagoras it seem he have be also in India where the brachmanes or Bramenes to this day observe the rite and opinion which the western world ascribe to Pythagoras as not eat of thing which have have life transmigration of soul and the like Histaspis the father of Darius the king be report to have travel into India and learned their magic and philosophy which the magi in Persia after profess Philostratus have write a long legend of Apollonius tyanaeus his pilgrimage to the brachmanes in India to Babylon Egypt and Arabia to nysa to Taxilla to jarcha the principal indian brachmane to his egyptian and aethiopian gymnosophist etc. but I reckon he a hospital beggar with who I will have nothing to do pyrrho a athenian philosopher scholar of Anaxarchus be say to have travel both to the persian magi and indian gymnosophist and learned of they that he can learn nothing nay learn not so much but doubt of that also India also yield some travel philosopher to the grecian of who the most famous be that calanus which follow Alexander to pasargadae some say to Babylon and there burn himself a end suitable to his severe profession beyond the stoike austerity a epistle of he be register at large by saint Ambrose Archimedes also travel into Egypt and leave famous monument of his art in many part of the World but we have be too long in travel of this argument more be we behold to the travel of historian such as Herodotus Strab. lib. 15. curt. 10. fr. elian. etc. amb. ep. 7. diod. sic. l. 4. c. 9 see of Polybius and Pythias hist. Herod l. 4. Scyllax send by the persian to discover the grecian coast before that famous invasion megasthenes Diodorus siculus Strabo Polybius and many other which travel into Italy Egypt Aethiopia Greece Asia and diverse part of the world that they may give the world unto posterity herein also they deserve mention which then be count fabler as Pythias Massiliensis who Strabo and other reject yet his report of short night etc. be now know truth some have write of travel and sail by the coast as arrianus his circumnavigation of the red or indian sea and of the black or euxine sea the (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) of marcianus heracleote publish in greek by David Hoeschelius rare jewel for knowledge of ancient geography but not so fit our common reader the like we may say of Scyllax mention by Herodotus Artemidorus the the learned know where to read they the vulgar will not regard they if they be here time have devour the very name by they mention and not the city and port alone yet for a taste we will give you a voyage of two of the ancient and first that of Hanno chap. 7 phoenician voyages and especial that of Hanno a carthaginian captain DIodorus siculus report of the phoenician of who navigation in the indian and african ocean and spanish plantation d. sic. l. 4. c. 7. sup. c. 1. @ 1^ we have speak before that sail to diverse mart they plant many colony in Africa and some also in the west part of Europe that they sail also out of the straits into the ocean Gadira or Cadiz build by the phaenicians and build on the european continent the city Gadira or Cadiz and therein erect a sumptuous temple to Hercules which to his day be hold in great reputation of sanctity the rite therein observe after the phoenician manner wherein many famous roman commander after their great exploit have pay to this God their vow holy the phoenician sail alongst the lybian shore in the ocean be many day carry with tempest unto a island very great and fertile with pleasant champain and mountain goodly island goodly wood garden house fountain wholesome air seem to be the dwelling rather of god then men. the Tyrrhe^i which be strong by sea will have send a colony thither but be forbid by the carthaginian which fear lest their citizen allure by the goodness of the country shall betake themselves thither and beside Galuano Ouied^ and other apply it to the american Antiles they will reserve it for a place of refuge if any adversity shall happen to their city Aristotle also in his book (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) have some such thing of carthaginian merchant which sail from Spain into the western ocean but I think both may be apply rather to some one of the land of the canary or cape or saint Thomas or to some part of the african continent Gerardi io. histor Grae. l. 4 which they may think not sail further to be a island or to some fiction then to America Aristotle in that treatise mention Hanno plin. l. 2. c. 67. which think rather to be the work of the ^ounger Aristotle call ponticus Laertius mention eight Aristotle then of that great oracle of learning and miracle of nature but of as it be false term many author have make mention Pliny so speak of it as if he have sail about Africa in these word by which word it be apparent that Hanno and himilco in those flourish time of Carthage be send by public decree upon discovery Himiclo to the coast of France Britain and other part of Europe Hanno southwards to coast around the african shore himilco the like testimony he have in his five book l. 5. c. 1. a whereby we see that Pliny doubt of the truth of relation yea it be a proverb as Atbenaeus which casaubon in his note upon he with also have observe as good a testimony of juba and Hanno for historian as Virgil of bavius and maevius for poet yet as I will not altogether clear he so I think that ignorance of those place in those time make he seem the more fabulous as Marco polo and other do till our grandfather day which appear in that they make that a circumnavigation about africa which reach not one quarter of the way from the pillar of Hercules to the arabian gulf Artemidorus the ephesian do mention it i. Solin c. 27. pomp. mel. orb l. 3. c. 10. and Mela also with Solinus Mela come near the truth which say that Hanno sail a great part of the coast and return for want of provision not of sea-room he and solinus and Pliny have cite much out of he which perhaps may receive a better interpretation than antiquity can give as appear by ramusios annotation on that voyage and by help of a Portugal pilot expert in those coast compare with the present navigation we will first give you the text and then the commentary but first we will add out of Gal^ano touch himilco that he be say to have sail to gotland and Thule within 24. degree of the pole where the day in june be two and twenty hour and to have spend in that discovery two year I know not what good proof he have of that relation Pliny who he cite say that the northern ocean be sail for the most part by the procurement of Augustus to the cimbrian promontory and the scythian coast and that from the east when Seleucus and Antiochus reign the north sea above the caspian be sail and call by their name Seleucida and Antiochida but that he join the caspian with the ocean make it less credible be contrary to late experience pl. l. 2. c. 67 no better credit have that report of nepos touch indian which have for trade sail out of India and come about by the northern ocean and by tempest be bring into Germany present by the king of the sucuians to Quintus Metellus celer then proconsul of Gallia which haply be of some nation ^ the ba^tike sea by tempest lose themselves and not find any which can understand ^^eir language be by some smattering grammarian or trusty traveller which by dare (...) adventure on applause for skill in geography or else by the giver which (@) the mention of the indian name will much commend his present obtrude on the no less ignorant spectator for indian a thing easy say and not easy disprove where none have see any indian but now to Hanno the navigation of Hanno a carthaginian captain on the coast of Africa without HERCULES pillar which he dedicate write in the punic tongue in the temple of Saturn after translate into the greek and now into the english with brief annotation the carthaginian determine that Hanno shall sail without Hercules pillar and those build city of the liby-phinicians he set sail with threescore ship of fifty oar a piece conduct with he a great multitude of man and woman to the number of thirty thousand with victual and all other necessary we arrive at the pillar and pass they and have sail without they two day we build the first city call it Thymiaterium it have around about it very large champaign after turn towards the west we come to a promontory of Africa call Soloente cover all over with wood and have here build a temple to Neptune we sail half a day towards the east till we arrive at a fen which be situate not far from the sea very full of great and long cane and there be in it feed elephant and many other creature then have go about a day sail beyond that fen we build city on the sea coast call they by their proper name murus Caricus Guta acra melitta and Arambis depart from thence we come to the great river lixus which descend from Africa by it there be certain man call feeder of cattle tend their flock with who we continue so long that they become very familiar moreover up in the country above they the negro inhabit who will not traffic with any and their country be very barbarous and full of wild beast and environ with high mountain from which as they say issue the river lixus and round about the mountain inhabit man of diverse shape which have their abide in cane they run swift than horse as the lixians report from thence take some interpreter we sail by a desert country towards the south two day and then we veer one day towards the east where in the bottom of a gulf we find alike island that be five furlong in compass which we inhabit name it cerne and by the way that we have sail we judge that that island be opposite to Carthage for the navigation from Carthage to the pillar and from thence to cerne seem equal part from thence and sail by a great river call Crete we arrive at a lake which have in it three land great than cerne from whence sail the space of a day we come to the further part of the lake there we see very high mountain which overlook all the lake where be savage people clothe in beast skin who chase we away with stone not suffer we to land sail from thence we come to another great and large stream full of crocodile and river-horse from thence turn back again we return to cerne sail then twelve day southerly not go far from the coast which be people with Negro who upon sight of we flee away and speak so as the that be with we understand they not the last day we arrive at a mountain full of great tree the wood whereof be odoriferous and of various colour have now coast two day by this mountain we find a deep and troublesome race of sea on the side whereof towards the land be a plain where by night we see fire kindle on every side distant one from the other some more some less have water here we sail by the land five day so that we arrive in a great bay which our interpreter say be call H^sperus his horn in this there be a great island and in the island a lake which seem a sea and in this there be another island where have land by day we see nothing but wood but in the night many fire be kindle and we hear fife and the noise and sound of cymbal and drum and beside infinite shout so that we be exceed afraid and our diviner command we to abandon the island then swift sail from thence we pass by a country smell of spice from which some fiery river fall into the sea and the land be so hot that man be not able to go in it therefore be some what affright we sudden hoist out our sail and run along in the main the space of four day we see by night the country full of flame and in the midst a exceed high fire great than all the rest which seem to reach unto the star but we see this after in the day time which be a very lofty mountain call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be the chariot of the god but have sail three day by fiery river we arrive in a gulf call Notuceras that be the south horn in the inner part thereof there be a little island like unto the first which have a lake in it and in that there be another island full of savage man but the woman be more they have their body all over hairy and of our interpreter they be call Gorgones we pursue the man but can take none for they flee into precipice and defend themselves with stone but we take three of the woman which do nothing but bite and scratch those that lead they and will not follow they therefore they kill they and flay they and bring their skin to Carthage and because victual fail we we sail no further it appear that wisdom for discovery in that infancy of navigation * * some make Hanno at lest as ancient as Philip^e ^e father of Alexander think he to be that captain which be send against Agathocles mention by Trogus or his shadow justine l. 22. Livy men^ions another and Pliny l. 8. c. 16. s^ith of another Hanno that he be exile for tame lion about 2000 year since think small vessel fit by which he may keep near the shore the edge whereof cause he to sail east or west as the land trend the carthaginian be of Phaenician original from Tyrus and lybian habitation and empire call their city Lybiphaenician of which Thymiaterium seem to the Portugal pilot in Ramusio to be Azamor in 32. and a half where run a spacious plain to Morocco the promontory Soloente seem cape cantin in 32. degree after which the coast run in much eastward and the abundance of river cause the great fen mention beyond which they build those city the same or near to those now in the kingdom of Morocco Azafi Goz aman Mogador Testhua etc. after they pass the cape Gerard and encounter the river lixus where the poet fable place Hercules his Antaeus and the hesperides garden the pilot think it the river of Sus which run into the sea at messa in 29. degr. 30. min. beyond that begin mount Atlas the less which run eastward quite through Barbary and to which the roman come the sand prohibit their approach to the great Atlas after this Hanno come to cape cape Boiador and cape blank and then turn to the east come to the i will argin which he call cerne and think to be as far from the straits in the course of their sail as it be betwixt those straits and Carthage for as for the height it be plain that they neither use compass nor observe degree and for Ptolemeis degree they be almost every where false or uncertain rather from his conjecture than the mariner calculation and in transcribe make worse in so many barbarous and ignorant age his place be of more use in show their bear east or west north or south short or beyond or wide then for exact gradation the land of cape in 13. be hesperide the canary or fortunate land he can not see creep near the shore and for river horse and crocodile they be no rarity in Africa from cape the race of the sea may seem terrible to their small vessel where the river of saint Mary and Rio grandee in 15. degree have trouble water such fire as he mention be see to this day of those which sail on the coast of Senega and Guinea because the negro eat little in the day time for heat but at night have their fire without door and there refresh themselves many of which a far off present such light at sea see jobsons voyage and large no^es inf. l. 7. the merry negro to fray away wild beast and to express their mirth make such music with shout and cry Sierra leona be that chariot of the god in 8. degree the continual thunder and lightning at some time of the year present such a fiery spectacle as Hanno report yet augment for great wonder as also be his fiery river that whereas the world talk of a fiery zone not habitable through heat he may lie a little to save his credit from imputation of a great liar if he have report the temperature near the line the like humour of incline to vulgar fancy appear in his tale of the Gorgones and for the monstrous woman hairy skin they may be of the baboon or of those part some of which as jobson and battle our countryman which travel those part will tell you be great than woman and the nothing in manner differ from their shape these be as be probable within four degree of the line the island be think to be that of Fernando Poo but my learned friend master Hoelstin a German which be now prepare a learned treasury of geographical antiquity to the press suppose that he pass not the cape or that palmas chap. 8 jambulus his navigation to Arabia and Aethiopia and thence to a strange island from whence he sail to palimbothra in India if voyage and relation seem incredible much more may that of jambulus record by Diodorus in what age he live be uncertain and as uncertain what island it be that he be say to come to d. sic. l^ which may seem to some to be Zeilan or java I rather think sumatra that it be whole fabulous I can think but that all be true therein I be worthy also to have my tongue slit if I shall affirm he do mix fable to the truth to make his story more plausible and imitate the poet and without annotation the truth may easy be know from the fable of Plato republic and common woman and strange creature with other tale but if you will thus the story lie jambulus be learn from his childhood and after his father death who be a merchant he exercise also merchandize pass through Arabia to buy spice he be take by thief with the associate of his journey at first with one of his fellow sl^ues jambulus twice take he be appoint to be a keeper of cattle but after that together with he he be take by certain aethiopian and convey beyond the maritime Aethiopia see that they be stranger they be take for a expiation of that country the aethiopian that inhabit those part have a custom which they have ancient receive from the oracle of their god and observe it twenty age that be six hundred yeeere for a age be finish in thirty year they have a little vessel prepare able to endure the tempest of the sea which two man may easy steer they put into six month victual for two man bring the man aboard they command they to direct their vessel towards the south according to the answer of the oracle and tell they that they shall come to a goodly island and courteous people that live happy and by that mean if they safe arrive in the island their country shall be in peace and prosperity six hundred year but if be terrify through the length of the sea they shall return back they shall bring as impious and debauch person great misery to all their nation they report that the aethiopian feast diverse day by the seaside and keep their holy wish they a lucky voyage and that the accustom expiation be accomplish after four month sail and many a storm they be carry to a island of round form five thousand furlong in compass when they draw near to the island jambu^^ some of the inhabitant send forth a boat to meet they other run to they wonder at these new come stranger and entertain they very kind and courteous impart to they such thing as they have the man of this island be not like to we either in their body or manner yet all have the same form inhabitant describe but they exceed we four cubit in stature they wind their bone this way and that way as they please a a so do the now like sinew their body be strong and nimble than we for if they have take any thing into their hand no man can pull it out of their finger they have no hair except on their head eyebrow eyelid and chin on the other part of their body they be so smooth that there do not appear the least down they be fair comely and have well shape body the hole of their ear be much wide than we also their tongue differ from we for their tongue have somewhat peculiar by nature or Art cleave tongue liar emblem nature have give they a cleave tongue which be divide in the bottom so that it seem double from the root so they use a diverse speech and do not only speak with the voice of man but imitate the sing of bird but that which seem most notable they speak at one time perfect with two man both answer and discourse for with one part of their tongue they speak to one and with the other to the other temperate air Homer the air be very clear all the year long as the poet have write that the pear do ripen upon the pear and the apple upon the apple and the grape upon the grape and the fig upon the fig. also they say the day and night be always equal about noon when the sun be over their head it make no shadow they live according to their kindred and society which yet exceed not four hundred they dwell in meadow the earth bring forth plentiful fruit free without any tillage for the goodness of the island and temperature of the air make the earth of it own accord wonderful fertile this reed be a just description of Maiz or indian wheat there grow many reed bear plentiful fruit like to a white vetch when they have gather these they steep they in water till each of they be swell to the quantity of a dove egg afterward of these beat they make bread of a wonderful sweetness there be also in that island great spring of water whereof some flow forth very hot for the use of bath and cure disease and some be cold very sweet and wholesome they respect all kind of learning especial astrology they use letter whereof they have eight and twenty according to the value of signification their letter yet but seven character each whereof be vary four way they live very long namely one hundred and fifty year and for the most part without any sickness if any have a fever or be sick in his body they enforce he to die according to their Law they write not by the side China form of line in writing common woman as we do but from the top in a straight line to the bottom they have a custom to live to a certain age which be finish they diverse of their own accord kill themselves they have a double plant upon which whosoever lie down be bring into a sweet sleep and die the woman marry not but be common to all in like manner the male be bring up and common to all they often take away the child from the mother that they may not know they whereby it come to pass that there be no ambition among they or factious affection but they live peaceable without jar there be small creature in the island who blood be of a admirable nature and virtue their body be round fabulous creature and like to tortoise two streak cross one another on the middle of they in the extremity of each of which be a ear and a eye so that they see with four eye and hear with so many ear they have but one belly wherein they convey that which they eat they have many foot round about wherewith they go both way the blood of this beast be affirm to be of a wonderful efficacy for any body cut with gash while it breathe sprinkle with this blood present cleave together and in like manner if a hand be cut off or any other member while life last the part will be join together if it be apply to the wound while it be fresh every family nourish great bird of a diverse nature wherewith they try what their son will be for set their child on these fowl if they be not affright while they be carry through the air they bring they up but if they faint through fear or cowardliness they cast they down as unworthy to live any long and unprofitable for any exerciese the elder of every family as king command the rest who all obey he when he be one hundred and fifty year old they take away his life according to their law and the elder next he take the principality the sea wherewith the island be environ be very tempestuous and cause great wave the water be fresh the bear and many star which appear to we be not see of they there be seven land of the like greatness like distance between some truth of the country and of the same people and law although the earth do bring forth food of it own accord abundant for all yet they use it moderate they desire plain dish seek only nourishment they eat their flesh roast and boil they reject the cook art and all kind of sauce as unprofitable they reverence the god and that which contain all thing and the sun and the other heavenly creature they take fish and bird of diverse sort there grow of their own accord fruitful tree olive and vine from which they draw great plenty of oil and wine the island produce great serpent but harmless who flesh they eat which be extraordinary sweet they make their clothes of soft and shine down take out of the midst of cane wherewith their purple garment die with sea oyster be make there be many kind of creature and such as will hardly be believe they observe a certain order of life and eat but of one kind of meat in a day for one day they eat fish on another bird and then beast sometime they feed only of oil they be addict to diverse exercise some serve some fish other exercise their trade other be busy about other necessary affair some except the old man minister in common or serve one another by turn on their holy and feast day they sing hymn in commendation of their god and chief of the sun to who they dedicate themselves and their island they bury their dead on the shore heap sand upon the carcase when the sea flow that with the flow and increase of the water the place may be make great they report that the reed from which they gather fruit increase and decrease according to the moon the sweet and wholesome water retain the heat of the fountain unless it be mingle with cold water or wine jambulus and he which come with he tarry in the island seven year jambulus his return and at length be force to depart at their will as wicked person and accustom to evil condition therefore prepare their boat and victual it they be compel to depart in four month they come to a king of India through sandy and shallow place of the Sea the other perish in a tempest jambulus be drive into a certain village and carry by the inhabitant to the king into the city Palibothra far distant from the Sea the king love grecian and great esteem their learning he give he many thing and first send he safe into Persia and then into Greece afterward jambulus write these thing and many thing concern India before unknown to other chap. 9 great Alexander life act peregrination and conquest brief relate king Alexander as they report derive his pedigree by the father from Hercules by the mother from Aeacus from the one descend his father Philip Alexander pedigree and from the other his mother Olympia shee the first night of her nuptial dream that she see lightning enter into her womb and thence a great flame present kindle Philip also not long after seem in his sleep to seal his wife belly the seal engrave with a Lion by these aristander the divine foretell that she be with child because a seal use not to be set on empty thing also that she shall bring forth a child who shall have the nature and spirit of a Lion but when a while after Philip in the night see through a cranny of the door a dragon lie by she it abate his love to she fear magical charm or the familiarity of some deity notwithstanding Olympias counsel Alexander that he will assume a mind worthy of his father other say that she say Alexander will make she by challenge to be jupiters son hateful to juno his birth on the ides of August she be deliver of Alexander who although he be of a goodly feature yet he bow his neck somewhat to the left side and a certain whiteness mix with red beautify his face also such a odour issue both out of his mouth and member his fragrancy that his inner clothes do breath forth a wonderful fragrant savour which as it perhaps proceed out of the temperature of his hot body so sure he be by his natural hotness give to wine and anger while he be young he refrain himself from pleasure more than beseem one of his year his youthful magnanimity manifest his courageous mind who when his equal in year ask if he will willing contend in the olympian game willing say he if I be to contend with king he great excel in swiftness of foot he always meditate upon some great and extraordinary thing that he may purchase fame therefore the persian ambassador not a little marvel at the courage of the youngman see he question no trivial or childish thing of they but the situation of country and danger of passage and power of the king of persia. he do seem to be angry at his father victory what say he will my father leave for i to do if he achieve all noble exploit Bucephalus about those time Philip buy Bucephalus for thirty three talent a very fierce horse stomachful unmanaged and abide no rider now when he will suffer none to back he Alexander be angry with they who can not through fear or ignorance tame the horse and offer himself to break he to who his father if thou do not for thy boast what punishment will thou have then he answer I will pay for the horse Philip smile set the price he see he move with his shadow turn his head to the sun then let go his cloak lay hold with his hand upon his mane mount he still blow and trample the sand under his foot let go the reins and cry out aloud he spur he and make he run then hold in the reins he easy turn he while the people shout his art his father weep for joy kiss he when he alight say my son Macedonia can contain thou thou must seek a kingdom competent afterward Philip note the disposition of Alexander that he will rather be induce to virtue by gentleness then rough deal commit he to Aristotle to be instruct in the precept of philosophy wherein and in physic he so profit that sometime he help his sick friend he learn Homer iliad of Aristotle call it the soldier knapsack lay it with his dagger always under his pillow when he be seventeen year old his father war against the byzantine he sway the sceptre of Macedon his first martial act and when the megarians rebel he discomfit they in battle and expel the barbarian call their city Alexandropolis he first also break through against the sacred band of the theban wherefore the macedonian call he king and Philip emperor not long after Philip be slay Alexander be twenty year old begin to reign the barbarian revolt many suppose that they be to be appease with clemency and mildness then Alexander we must not say he maintain our dominion with gentleness but force and magnanimity lest if we seem to abate of our lofty courage we be scorn of other and gather his troop together he repress the mutiny of the barbarian chase away the king of the triballi overthrow the theban sack the city and level it to the ground he sell thirty thousand of the citizen six thousand that remain kill themselves in the mean while Isthmus near Corinth the grecian hear that the persian will short invade they elect Alexander to be their leader who assoon as he come to Isthmos where their general parliament be assemble go to Diogenes who he find sit in the sun then courteous salute he he demand if he want any thing but he answer only this stand aside out of the sun Alexander admire the constancy of the man depart say if I be not Alexander I will be Diogenes Diogenes Delphos thence he go to Delphos to consult with the oracle about his expedition it be a unlucky day wherein it be not lawful to give oracle Alexander notwithstanding go in haste to the temple begin almost by force to draw along the priest of the oracle with he my son say the priest thou be unconquerable he be joyful at these word say I have no need of any other oracle and return to the camp where abode the army of thirty thousand footman and five thousand horseman he do not go aboard the ship before he have distribute all his chattel land and lordship among his friend he to Perdiccas ask what will you leave for yourself answer only hope have sail over the hellespont he go to Ilium and then visit Achilles sepulchre and adorn his statue with garland his expedition against the persian say o thou most happy who have so faithful a companion live and dead so great a poet to renown thou in the mean while the chieftain of Darius the king of Persia hasten to pass over with a great power alex. meet they at the bank of the same river and get the high ground as soon as he have marshal his band join battle with the barbarian the fight wax hot on both side Rhesaces and spithridates Darius his captain one with a spear the other with a battle-axe with a full career encounter Alexander who be easy to be know by reason of his target and the plume on his helmet be a great bush of white feather avoid nimble the one he strike Rhesaces with his spear and with his sword make at the other who without delay take away his helmet with his battle-axe to his hair but while he lift up his hand for another blow he be strike through with a lance by Clitus Alexander have vanquish the commander Clitus save his life his victory put the rest to flight in which flight twenty thousand of the barbarian two thousand horseman be slay but Alexander lack not above thirty four soldier have get this victory he take the strong city Sardis with other town Miletus and Halicarnassus have determine to try the upshot with king Darius if he will join battle with he he take Phoenicia and C^licia from thence march to Pamphilia he subdue the Pisidans and phrygian after take gordium where have be of old king Mida^ his palace he overcome the paphlagonians and cappadocians but king Darius rely on the number of his force for he have a army of six hundred thousand remove his camp from Susis his diviner have flatter he in the interpretation of a dream of the shine of Alexander army and Alexander minister to he who enter into Belu^ his temple be take out of his sight he think base of he also for stay so long in C^licia there be Alexander detain in great danger of his life have wash himself in a cold river and fall into a sudden sickness when other physicans give he over Philip a acarnanian promise to recover he in a short space and although there come a letter from Parmenio warn he to take heed of Philip treason who be corrupt by king Darius yet he drink up the potion bold and with all deliver the letter to philip. he read it very heavy but bad Alexander to be of good cheer in the mean time while the potion enter into his bowel the king lie almost dead but such be the efficacy of the medicine that he present recover his former health Darius approach Alexander get the high ground order his battle and after a great slaughter put the barbarian to flight ten thousand be slay and many more take second battle Alexander victory Alexander himself be wound Alexander get the tent money rich stuff chariot and bow of Darius all adorn with Gold moreover Darius his mother Wife and two daughter virgin be take with the rest to who he say compassionate their fortune see they weep and lament that Darius be alive and that they shall have no hurt and indeed herein be Alexander king of himself they suffer no hardship or dishonour his temperance but live unseen of any as it be in sacred cloister or virginal closet Alexander do so refrain from they and all other that he use to say in jest that the persian damsel be eyesore he be also very temperate in his diet for between every cup he accustom to spend a long time in discourse have divide the spoil hi^ next exploit be the dominion of the sea and overcome Cyprus he subdue all Phoenicia except Tyre which he besiege seven month with mount Cyprus Tyrus engine and two hundred galley and at length after diverse skirmish take it by assault but when he have add Gaza and Egypt to his conquest he resolve to visit the temple of jupiter Ammon a very difficult journey and dreadful by reason of the want of water Ammon oracle and store of sand yet his good fortune prevail shower make the sand firm and crow guide he he come thither without any harm whereas Cambyses his army have be bury in the sand enter the temple he salute the chief of they who answer all hail Alexandria build o son of jupiter which he receive so joyful that ever after he carry himself more haughty in Egypt he found Alexandria a greek colony after this the ambassador of the king of Persia come to he with letter embassage f^om Darius proffer ten thousand talent and all Mesopotamia and his daughter in marriage and Darius himself to become his friend and associate if he will cease from war such condition that if I be Alexander say Parmenio I will accept they so will I say Alexander if I be Parmenio he have they tell Darius that he shall receive all courtesy of the grecian if he will come to they the three battle with the persian and second with Darius if he will not let he know that we will he ^ill he will come to he speedy then go out of Egypt into Phoenicia he take all the country between Euphrates and the second time remove his camp against Darius and now the army come in sight each of other wherein Darius have a million of man the battle be fight not at Arb^la but at Gausanela the bactrian horseman run upon the macedonian provoke alex. to fight who encourage his man and pray to jupiter that he will give he aid and victory a eagle be report to have be show he by aristander his divine fly above he over his head and thence direct her flight against the persian which fill the macedonian with hope and cheerful courage forcible be the impression and Alexander pierce into the midst of the enemy camp where behold Darius well guard in the midst of his troop he give a terrible assault and rout they Alexander victory many be slay Darius be of a tall stature comely face kingly countenance and sit aloft in a chariot cover with gold which Darius leave leap upon a barren mare seek to save his life by flight the dignity of this victory altogether overthrow the persian empire Babylon take Susa and make Alexander king of Asia then he take Babylon and Susis the royal city where he find forty thousand talent of silver with royal householdstuff and of hermionike purple keep one hundred and ninety year still fresh to the value of five thousand talent now do Alexander advance into Persia whither Darius have flee there he find asmuch silver as before in Susis and asmuch royal furniture and good as lade ten thousand yoke of mule and five thousand camel he tarry four month in his winter lodging and as the report be when he feast under the golden roof of the king hall he say that he have obtain the fruit of his labour see he so magnificent banquet in the palace of proud Xerxes Perfepolis burden Thais a athenian a beautiful strumpet be present entice the king with her flattery and say I be the happy woman of Greece if I may in this our mirth fire Xerxes palace who sometime burn my Athens the king smile the harlot fire the house the king bewitch with wine and her allurement the rest further the flame suffer such a goodly building to be consume to a^hes Alexander be natural munificent and keep a kind of stately magnificence in give which he do illustrate with infinite testimony of his bounty less esteem those that refuse then these that crave about this time Darius have now the three time gather a army Alexa^der in eleven day pass with great journey 3200. furlong conduct his army through rough place that want water so that the whole army well near languish with thirst a certain common soldier bring a helmet full of water to Alexander who look upon all of they pant for heat and thirst give it he again untouched think it unfitting that he alone shall cherish himself and the other faint who continency the soldier admire resolve to undergo any trouble as long as they follow such a leader then after a few day the army of king Darius be gather together do flee assoon as they come in sight of the macedonian the persian be thus discomfit the macedonian pursue they find king Darius in his chariot strike through with many wound and almost dead speak some few thing but when Alexander come thither by chance he take very bitter his ignoble death dar^us slay by treason of his own and cast his coat upon his carcase and add the royal ensign he give charge to carry it honourable to his mother Bessus the murderer Alexander cause to be tie to two tree bring by force together which rend he in sunder Hyrcania subdue Darius be overthrow he bring into his subjection Hyrcania and all the city adjoin to the caspian Sea after go into Parthia he attire himself in a habit be a mean between a persian and a Mede that he may accustom the macedonian the more willing to adore he pass over the river Orexartes which he think to be Tanais he war on the scythian and chase they one hundred furlong scythian expedition thither Clitarchus polycritus onesicritus antigenes and hister say the Amazon come to he which chare Ptolemaeus A^ticlides Philon amazonian tale Philippus hecataeus Philippus Chalcidensis and duris the Samian say be a devise fable and this appear to be true by Alexander himself who write to Antipater a exact relation of all thing mention the scythian king offer of his daughter in marriage but have nothing at all of the Amazon it be say that Lysimachus when he hear One^icritus read that relation smile and say where be I th^n at length behold the beauty and noble demeanour of Roxanes Darius his daughter he marry she that so he may perpetual tie the barbarian to he who he do also so reverence that he do not but solemn enter in to she but when he proceed to bring the rest of Asia to his obedience he cause Philotas Parmenio his son a man of eminent place to be slay also a little while after be drink he strike Clitus through with a lance a man of a noble courage which have free he from Sp^thridates battle-axe yet he present repent and snatch the lance out of Clitus his wound Philotas and Clitus slay will have turn it into himself but be restrain by the stander by and have die with grief but that aristander the divine and the philosopher calisthenes and Anaxarchus persuade he to patience calisthenes be as ill repay as Clitus which before we have mention after this Alexander set forth towards India and there perceive his army by reason of the greatness of pillage to be slow and dull he burn up the baggage of the macedonian campe. after which he become a inexorable and severe punisher of fault and a terror to his own he kill Menander one of his great familiar for neglect his charge and slay Orsodates have rebel with his own hand he carry babylonian or chaldaean with he who he use in superstitious expiation near the river oxus proxenus find a fountain of oil and fat liquor resemble oil in colour and taste whereas that region know not olive this Alexander take as a divine miracle in his favour the diviner take it for a token of a difficult but glorious war he take two strong rock in his way which seem impregnable when the macedonian refuse to pass through the river to lay siege to nysa he take his shield and be ready to swim over himself but their embassage for peace stay he to taxiles a indian king he give a thousand talent of silver HONDIUS his map of Alexander expedition the voyage of NEARCHUS and his fleet set forth by ALEXANDER the great from the river Indus to the bottom of the persian gulf in this history of voyage I think it not a miss to give some account brief of the fleet which Alexander set forth from Indus to the persian gulf command by Nearchus gather out of the eight book of arrianus who have take it out of Nearchus his own discourse thereof I have the whole relation at large by i translate as those also of arrianus his sail about both the erythraean and euxine sea but time have so alter the name port and people that I dare not give you they at large this brief be thus Alexander provide his ship in Hydaspes a river which run into Indus and man they with Phenicians Hydaspes perhaps that which now be call ^hat cypriot egyptian man best skill in marine affair he choose also for captain the greek islander of jonia and Hellespont and diverse other among the rest Nearchus which write this navigation of cretan ancestry a amphipolitan by habitation who he make general of the Fleet. after thing set in order he sacrifice to the god of his country and to such other as the diviner prescribe to Neptune Oceanus the sea nymph and to the river Hydaspes and to acesines which flow thereinto he institute also musical and gymnicall game prize for mastery also distribute the remainder of the sacrifice to the army a hundred and 20000. soldier follow Alexander who himself go with the ship down Hydaspes he have 800. ship some long some of burden be afraid to adventure so long a sea voyage as from Indus to the persian gulf lest his glorious lustre of victory and fortune hitherto attend he may so be drown the monson serve the Etesia then cease which there blow in summer he commit the fleet to Nearchus which put forth to sea on the twenty day of bo^dromion in the eleven year of king Alexander reign Nearchus sacrifice also before his departure to jupiter the saviour and likewise institute game on that day of his departure he come to a great river call stura about 100 furlong and stay there two day river stura on the three day he come to another river call Caumana thirty furlong further where the water begin to be salt and the tide ascend thence he sa^led twenty furlong to within the river move thence they see the white frothy surge at the mouth of the river and in a ditch or channel make of five furlong he anchor his fleet when the tide come 150. furlong thence he come to the i will Crocala near to the which be the indian arrhabe thence he remove have mount Irus on the right hand isle Crocala i will i will and the i will Halitenea on the left to a port which he call Alexander port before which be Bubarta a small island there he stay four and twenty day and gather sea mouse and oyster wonderful great the wind cease he go sixty furlong near the isle where they be force to go twenty furlong within land for fresh water have pass 300. furlong the next day i will Sara^ga Sacalasis they come to the region saranga and fetch water eight furlong within land depart thence he come to Sacalasis and pass two rock so near that the ship edge on they as they pass by after 300. furlong he anchor in Morontoboris a round deep and safe harbour with a narrow entrance call the woman port. the next day he leave a island to sea ward of he and yet so near the shore that the sea seem a gut or narrow ditch that day he sail sixty furlong on that shore be a wood and shady island the next day he sail through a narrow channel the ebb have leave a great part dry and have pass 120. furlong he come to the mouth of the river arabius where be a great and safe harbour they fetch water sixty furlong up the river in a lake at the harbour be a island full of oyster and all sort of fish end of India the oritae this river confine India the next region be possess by the oritae their first anchor on the orite-shoare be pagali have sail 200. furlong near a craggy rock the next day 300. furlong to Bacana and because the shore be rocky he be force to anchor far from land in this way three ship be lose in a storm but the person be save be near the shore all their sail be with oar and by shore he sa^led thence two hundred furlong to Comala and there go on shore and set up tent to refresh his people weary with their * * be not this age think you like to ^aile to Peru or hispaniola ship a rari^y long navigation and desire to have some rest here leonnatus to who Alexander have give commission for the oritae overthrow they in a great battle and slay 6000. the weather beat ship be repair and ten day provision be take in and those sailor which be weary of the sea be leave with leonnatus some of his company supply their room the fleet proceed 500 furlong and anchor at the river the inhabitant dwell in small cottage and wonder at the navy as a strange novelty they come to the shore with lance of six cubit sharpen and burn at the end easy chase by those which be send on shore against they which also take some which have hard and sharp nail wherewith they kill fish and cut soft wood for they have no use of iron the hard they c^t with stone their garment be beast or fish skin here Nearchus stay five day and repair his navy proceed three hundred furlong he come to the utmost border of the oritae who for the most part dwell up within the land and use indian attire and arm but differ in language and custom Nearchus have sail now 1000 furlong from I^dus mouth to and 1600. by the oritae now also their shadow fall southward and at noon they have no shadow the star also differ in their height and appearance after the oritae be the gedrosi among who Alexander find more difficulty then in all the rest of India the gadrosi Nearchus have sail 600. furlong come to bagisara a convenient harbour the town pasira be sixty furlong up from the Sea next day he pass by a high overhang rock which run far into the sea and dig well have store of water but brackish sail other six hundred furlong he come to calime where Cor^ina lie one hundred furlong into the sea a island who inhabitant send Nearchus sheep who flesh taste like sea-fowle they be feed with fish there be no grass there next day they sail two hundred furlong to carbis the town cysa be thirty furlong from Sea here be small fisher-boat but the fisherman at sight of the fleet run away he pass next a high and craggy cape reach one hundred and fifty furlong into the sea unto Mosarna a safe harbour there he take Hydracces a gedrosian pilot for Carmania the way from hence to the persian gulf be not so evil as the former have sail 750. furlong he come to the Balomon shore and after 400. furlong to barna a town where be garden of myrtle and diverse flower culture of tree and more civility of the^men 400. furlong further he come to dendrobosa where they fish in small boat not row like the greek but like digger beat the water on both side after 800. furlong he come to cyiza a desert shore the ichthyophagi and five hundred furlong from thence to the border of the ichthyophagi or fish-eater they invade the town to get corn which now fail they but find little except meal of roast fish of which they make Bread thence he go to Bagia a rock sacred to the sun thence to Talmena a good port 1000 furlong from Bagia thence to canasis a desert city 400. furlong thence 750. furlong to mount canate thence 800. furlong to thence to Dagasira 300. furlong madner of the ichthyophagi thence 1300. furlong to the utmost confine of the ichthyophagi in great want of provision here be a cape run far into the Sea the coast of the ichthyophagi be about 10000 furlong where all feed on fish yet be there few fisherman bu^ the ebb leave the fish on shore some have net which reach two furlong make of palmtree leave the soft fish they eat raw the great and hard they roast in the sun and then beat they into powder and make a kind of bread thereof some sprinkle the powder with wheat meal their beast have no other food for there be no grass there be store of crab fish-f^d beast oyster and shellfish salt also and oil produce by the soil itself some sow a little corne. their house be make of whale bone the whale cast much water into the air whale the people wonder what it be and hear that they be fish the oar fall out of their hand with fear but after be hearten the ship go near together and with great shout and noise of oar and sound of trumpet fear the whale how differ this from a greenland whale-voiage and make they sink into the deep the prodigious tale of the i will Nosala sacred to the sun on which if any go ashore he shall never be see after Nearchus prove false by his own experiment as also another tale go thereof that a nymph there dwell which lie with man that come thither and after turn they into fish the Carmani persian gulf he call it also the red Sea after he be come to Carmania he anchor before a cape where the persian gulf go inward and then sail no long to the west but betwixt the west and north for most northerly be come to he sail thence 800. furl to the rock maceta of a day sail whence cinnamon and spice be carry to the assyrian after 700. furl he come to and 100 furl further to the river Armozia now Ormus the region be call Armozia cultivate and fertile except of olive here they go ashore desirous to rest from their labour and there find a grecian which tell they that Alexander camp be not far off five day journey from the Sea here Nearchus repair his navy and mean while send to the king and after go himself he and he by their change weatherbeaten countenance and grow hair be not know by those who Alexander have send to he some have make Alexander believe his fleet be lose which find otherwise he weep for joy a king worthy of good sea-service swear by the grecian jupiter and by the lybian Ammon that he more joy in those tiding then in the empire of all Asia after this he institute musical and gymnicke game and pomp to jupiter to Hercules to Apollo the chaser away of evil and to Neptuns with the other sea-god especial Nearchus be eminent and glorious the whole army cast flower and garland on he Alexander after this will have send another to bring the fleet to Susa which Nearchus envy to any other entreat that the whole glory may be entire to himself and be send back after sacrifice to jupiter the saviour Nearchus exhibit a gymnicke game for try of mastery which we call prize and set sail he pass by a small island call organa and another less call oaracta 300. furlong from the place whence he set forth where be many vine palm and fruit here they say be the sepulchre of erythrus or king red which give name to this red Sea the island be 800. furlong long of which have sail two hundred legend of erythrus draw from edom in the arabic gulf to this persian such be the effect of legend and supersticious-tradition he see another island forty furlong long sacred to Neptune and report to be inaccessible at their depart three ship stick fast by reason of the tide which at the next flood be afloat again after forty furlong sail he anchor in another island 300. furlong from the continent thence to the i will Pylora in which be D^don a town which have nothing but fish and water after 300. furlong sail he come to a cape run far into the sea thence 300. furlong to the i will cataa sacred to Mercury and Venus whither dedicate goat and sheep be yearly send which there grow wild hitherto the Carmani extend about 3700. furlong by the shore these live like the persian their neighbour thence Nearchus sail to the i will Caicandros forty furlong and thence to a inhabit island where pearl be find fifty f. thence to mount ochus begin of the persian and thence to apostate 450. f. and after 400. f. to a bay celebrate with many village thence 600. f. to the mouth of the river Oreon thence 800. f. to river sitacus all this course be on the persian shore she luie for the most part and fennv thither Alexander have send provision of corn and they stay one and twenty day to refresh themselves and repair their navy sail thence 750. f. he come to hieratis by the river heratemis the next day to the river where be a fertile place call mesambria a 200. furlong to Ta^^nus to the great river above who entrance 200. furlong be the persian king palace in this way he see a whale dead fifty cubit long with oyster grow on the skin dolphin also big than those in our sea he proceed 200. furlong to the river rhogonis fifty furlong to the river Brizana thence to arosis the bige river in all his course the end of the persian border that shore contain 4400. furlong begin of the susians there begin the susians and within land the Vzians as the mardi to the persian and the cossaei to the m^des have sail on the susian shore 500 furlong he come to a fishie lake near which be the i will Margastana then he pass shold which scarce admit ship single discern by stake or pole purposely fix there the miry ground take a man up to the waste in such way we sail 500 furlong Euphrates and babylonian thereafter in a night and day he sail 900. f. to the mouth of Euphrates near Diridotis a village of the babylonian a mart for the spice of Arabia from thence to Babylon Nearchus say be 3300. f. Nearchus hear that Alexander be go to Susa sail back towards P^sitigris that sail up the stream he may meet he have the susians on the left hand and the lake into which Tigris run 600. f. from the river itself at a town of the susians have sail 150. f. he stay till the return of his messenger from the King at last both army be join with incredible joy and Alexander exhibit diverse kind of game with sacrifice and much honour be do to Nearchus Alexander also crown he and leonnatus with a crown of gold Alexander send other on the right hand to discover all the coast of Arabia and thus Europe must acknowledge Alexander the chief eastern discoverer as the roman arm first open to we the west we will add a little out of ecclesiastical writer chap. x. the travel of MVSaeVS THEBaeVS and other mention by saint Ambrose * * Edit. Paris 1614 this tractate be in the Vatican Florentine and Milan library attribute to saint Ambrose other doubt whether that father be the author or Palladius etc. Cotten tree or shrub serica be hereby be know to be far short of China near which Alexander never come aromata muziris of other also mention in the ecclesiastical history of Eusebius RUF^INUS Socrates and sozomen bishop of the relate to the author of the tractate suppose to be saint ambrose that he intend to go into India to see the brachmans have travel through almost all the region serica in which he say there be tree which bring four not only leaf but very fine wool also of which they make garment call serica and that there be a memorable pillar of stone thus inscribe I Alexander come hitherto and that have pass through many country he come at last to ariana near the river Indus and by the intolerable heat be enforce to return into Europe not have see the brachmans he report that he have hear of Thebaeus a certain scholar which go into India to see and confer with indian philosopher call brachmans and gymnosophist but he be there captive for ship himself with certain merchant in the red sea he first come to the town of the Adulites or the bay after that to the promontory aromata and a mart of the troglodyte and hence to place of the assumite and many day after to muziris the mart of all India on this side Ganges and have stay a while there he pass over to the i will taprobane this be govern by four prince one of which be the chief who the other obey and to he be subject a thousand land as he report of the arabian and persian sea and those which they call Mammolas a a perhaps the now the island have five river very great the temperature such that at the same time the same tree produce blossom and fruit some green some ripe the man live on fruit Rice and milk and the chief man eat mutton and goat flesh on solemn day he be take as a spy and keep six year in prison but the governor which have so use a roman citizen be by the emperor command flay he report true and false thing blend and among other of the brachmans thus Thebaeus in many thing a fabler they live naked in the region adjoin to the river Ganges they have no beast tillage use of iron nor any kind of instrument to do any work they have a excellent air and temperate climate they always worship God of who they profess a distinct knowledge both of his providence and divinity they always pray but in their prayer look not to the east but direct to heaven they eat as the beast what they find on the ground leaf and herb they have the herb Inula and the tree Acanthus the man live on the further side of Ganges on the ocean coast the woman on this side to who their husband use to have recourse in july and August for those month b b this be not the cause but summer and winter differ in those place near the hill of balagate not so much by heat and cold as by fair and foul weather winter be in the same propinquity of the sun on one side and summer on the other at the same time to which perhaps be here allude amb. c^p l. 2. ^^^ 7. ^dit Froben seem cold there because the sun than come near to we and when they have continue forty day with their wife they return home when a woman have have a child or two her husband forbear she altogether and if in five year a woman have no child she be divorce and thus their number be but small the river be pass over with great difficulty by reason of the tyranny of which infest those place and of a certain beast so great that he devour a whole elephant this beast be not see when the brachmans time of passage be there be dragon also report to be seventy cubit long I see one who skin be two and forty foot aunt as great as a man span scorpion a cubit long etc. if this scholar Thebaeus be worthy credit there be in the same tractate add out of the writer of Alexander life many speech and discourse of the brachmans which I forbear here to insert they indeed be in many point admirable if some greek have not rather make experiment of their wit and faculty in philosophical discourse than deliver a true history at least mix truth and seem together as we see here in this bishop and his Thebaeus those gymnosophist as megasthenes also relate condemn calanus which follow Alexander who epistle be extant in a work of saint Ambrose less suspect which I have here also insert out of saint Ambrose his seven epistle calanus to Alexander thy friend persuade thou to lay hand and violence on a indian philosopher not so much as dream of our work for thou may remove our body from place to place but thou shall not compel our mind to do that which they be not willing any more than thou can make stone or tree to speak a great fire cause burn smart to live body and work corruption but we be above this for we be burn alive no king or prince can extort from we to do what we have not determine nor be we like the philosopher of Greece which have study word instead of deed to get themselves a name and reputation with we thing be companion to word and word to the thing our deed quick and speech short we have a bless liberty in virtue Eusebius c c Euseb. const. l 4 c 50. indian ambassador to Constantine as before to Augustus in the life of Constantine mention a indian embassy send to he with rich present of almost all kind of gem and beast differ from our^ with picture and statue whereby the indian acknowledge he emperor and king of all unto the remote coast of the ocean that as the Britain in the further west obey he at first so now at last the indian in the extreme east So^ hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 15. m. hist ec. l. 2. c. 23. Socrates and Sozomene in their ecclesiastical history have relate how in Constantine day Christian religion enter the inner India which as some think till that time have not hear of Christ Meropius a philosopher of Tyre be desirous to see India provoke by the example of metrodorus the philosopher which before that have travel through that region sail thither with two boy of his kindred skilful in the greek tongue when he have satisfy his desire and be now ready to return the league betwixt the indian and roman empire be break and the philosopher with all his company be take and slay the two youth except which be present to the indian King the king take like of they and make one of they name aedesius his cupbearer and frumentius so be the other name his secretary soon after the king die and give they liberty the queen see the young king a child desire their care and assistance till he be grow to manhood they yield and frumentius manage the government who inquire among the roman merchant which come thither whether there be any christian among they give they a place by themselves to serve God after the christian manner and in process of time build a church to pray in these christian instruct some of the indian in the mystery of the faith add they to their society when the king be come to man estate frumentius and aedesius deliver up their account and desire leave to return to their country the king and his mother earnest but in vain entreat their stay aedesius go to Tyre to see his friend frumentius go to Alexandria and acquaint athanasius then new bishop with the premise and the hope of indian conversion desire he to send a bishop and clergy thither s. athanasius send Bishop into India athanasius consider well the business consecrate frumentius bishop say he have no man fit for that purpose who thus honour return and preach the faith to the indian build many church and by the grace of God work many miracle heal both body and soul of many Ruffinus write that he hear these thing of aedesius himself iberians convert who also at Tyre obtain the dignity of priesthood the iberians now call Georgians be a the same time convert by mean of a captive christian woman which by miracle persuade the king and people to receive the faith of Christ which send ambassador to Constantine to enter into league and to obtain a bishop and clergy which the same Ruffinus report Palladius his swiftness and travel Soc. l. 7. c. 19 he hear of Bacurius a great man of that nation before we leave Socrates it be meet in this argument of travel to mention his report of Palladius a man of so strong constitution and admirable ability that he in three day can ride from Constantinople to the confine betwixt the persian and roman empire and return thither again to his master Theodosius the emperor in three other day yea he swift post to all part of the world to which he be send insomuch that one say of he this man by his swiftness make the Roman^ empire as large as it be to be very narrow the persian king be amaze to hear these thing report of he chap. 11 a brief and general consideration of * * this be intend the beginning of our promise european pilgrimage but no man assist the pilgrim which force he to leave off and in token of his intent to give this t^ste thereof Europe @. i. of Europe compare with the other part of the World three part of the world have be three time * * the four time it be now on the pres^e io. 2.10 gen. 15.1 1. cor. 15.28 da^its see in ber. visit by our more laborious than learned muse the four for who sake that triple-worke receive so often survey have seem forget Asia Africa and America have first be discover to our reader not as enjoy the first and best place but offer their ready service and best attendance unto Europe the least in quantity and last in discourse but great in those thing which for greatness and goodness deserve the most applause and admiration our method have not observe that feast-master rule at the beginning to set forth good wine and when man have well drink then that which be worse but we have keep the good wine until now follow his example who in the first creation make man last in human and reasonable design allot the last execution to the first intention in religion mystery send the gospel after the law give heaven after earth and reserve himself for the last service to be our exceed great reward when God shall be all in all unto his servant he I beseech that here also he will turn our water into wine that we may be able to give festival entertainment unto our guest that as Europe excel the other part of the world so my muse may here exceed her wont self and present it unto you in ornament of art industry and sincerity befit such a subject hard be our hap to suffer shipwreck in the haven to fail in the last act will mar the comedy to be a stranger at home and like the lapwing to fly most and cry loud be far from the nest be to travel of vanity and bring forth folly Luke 15.17 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. or with the wild prodigal in the gospel to be still travel from himself we be now in manner at home when most remote never out of european limit and therefore need not ^eare as before burn or freeze zone huge ocean new constellation unknown land unpassable desert uncouth monster savage beast more beastly and monstrous man we need not follow the outwear foot-print of rare uncertain traveller where truth herself be suspicious in such foreign disguise habit nor need we doubt to want guide except the store become a sore and plenty troublesome only we may fear in this task frequent censurer not rigid Cato or severe judicious judge but capricious novice which have come to their land soon than their wit will think the world may condemn they of ill-spent time if they shall not spend a indigested censure on the bookish travel of other Bu^ I shall be like they if I shall fear they shallow and empty however I have adventure on this european stage wherein we be first to consider the more general occurrence and after that the particular region of the former sort be the name bound excellency language @. 2 the name of Europe the ancient have differ much nor be the question yet agree on about the limit of Europe var. ling lat. l. 1. some comprehend Africa under this division make but two part of the world other add the same to Asia thus Varro divide the universe into heaven and earth this into Asia and Europe allow to that the southern part to this the northern so Silius sing of Africa L^can otherwise this opinion be allege by Sallust saint Augustine orosius Paulinus sal. bel. jug. aug. c d. l. 16. c. 17. Oros. l. 1. c. 2. Paul ^p Isoc in pane ^r Her. l. 4. follow by Isocrates and other but the most attribute to Europe only a three and that the least part in their partition of the elder World no less contention have be about the etymology of the name which Herodotus say be unknown other fetch from I know not what E^ropae the daughter of Agenor ravish by jupiter in form of a bull. the truth shall indeed be ravish by our poet if the fable be receive for she be transport from Phoenicia a region of Asia into Africa * * hom. Iliad ^ M^schus Ly^oph theocr. apollod Horat ovid. Senec M^nil etc. Euseb. Chron l. ^ other say into Cyprus and if we agree to other that it be into Creta yet (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) unlikely it be a small island for a small stay for she be after that carry into Africa can give name to so great a part of the World nor have we much more satisfaction in europus the son of one Himerus king of some part can you tell where of Europe Europa reign over the sicyonians say pausanias at that time when Abram be bear if we follow Eusebius and may be the likely author of this name some ascribe it to the goodliness of the european Tract as be beautiful to the sight Becanus derive it from * * gor. Orig. l. 9 ver. by transposition as Tereus of terue which signify great or excellent and hop a multitude rather chase a dutch then greek etymology that people inhabit Europe soon as he conceive than this and in another book note by himself for a second impression he like better that it shall be compose of e i marriage excellent hop hope allude to that prophecy of Noah that japheth shall dwell in the tent of Shem who posterity be divorce the church of the gentile in japhets progeny shall succeed in a more stable and everlasting marriage Ptolemey better think it may be call Celtica almost every region thereof be ancient either whole or in part people with the celtae which Ortelius Paulus Merula and other have show in the particular some have call Europe Tyria of that Tyriam ma^den aforesaid ravish by a bull a bull-formed or as other a bull-signed ship after Paleph^tus a man who name be bull a band of soldier say other bear a bull in their banner the mythologians can tell you more if this be not too much some have of japhet call it japetia the abasine and eastern inhabitant of Asia call the europaean franks which name I suppose be occasion by their expedition and conquest in the holy land and the country adjoin by the western force see of this l. 8 c. 1.2 3 and 4. in the composition whereof the french be a principal ingredient that I mention not a french council to further it and the crown of jerusalem fall to Godfrey of Bullen and his heir to reward it whence it happen that the europaean than be and ever since be by the saracen and eastern asians call Frankes as perhaps for the same cause the turk call those of the popish faith still those of the greekish religion romaans of their chief city Constantinople otherwise name new Rome @. 3 the quantity and bound the quantity of Europe be much large especial towards the north than Ptolemey and the elder geographer have write at wardhouse and the north cape the long day be reckon two month and seven hour in 71. degree 30. minute whereas at the hill Calpe one of Hercules pillar and at Cab^ Mai^i in Morea account the most southern part in 36. degree the day be but fourteen hour and a half at the long much difference have be about the eastern confine Plato Aristotle Herodotus and other extend it to the river Phasis or that isthmus betwixt the euxine and caspian sea Dionysius Arrian^s Di^dorus Polybius I^rnandes add nothing to the river Tanais which Ortelius pass over and take in both V^lga and all the muscovite and tartarian horde as far as the river ob. Ptolemey imagine a line from Tanais northwards which well agree to the method of our history as include the most part of the russian empire all the other part be bound and wash by the sea palus Maeotis the euxine and egean on the east incline to the south the mediterranean on the south on the west and north the ocean number 2400. Italian mile in the latitude and 3000. in the longitude @. 4 the quality and excellency the quality of Europe exceed her quantity in this the least in that the best of the World for how many both sea and desert take up spacious region in Asia Africa and America whereas in Europe neither watery fen nor unstable bog nor inland sea nor unwholesome air nor wild wood with their wild savage inhabitant nor snow-covered hill nor stifle frost nor long long night nor craggy rock nor barren sand nor any other effect of angry nature where she seem in some or other part thereof the hard stepmother can prohibit all habitation and human society in the most part nature have show herself a natural and kind mother the providence of God and industry of man as it be conspire the european good which of the sister be comparable in a temperate air which in a soil so general fertile so diversify in hill and dale so goodly meadow cheerful vineyard rich field fat pasture shady wood delightful garden variety of creature on it of metal and mineral in it of plant and fruit grow out of it which so water with fountain brook Rivers bath lake out of her own bowel such sweet dew and comfortable shower from heaven so frequent insinuation of the sea both for commerce with other and proper marine commodity which so people with resolute courage able body well qualify mind so fortify with castle edify with town crown with city and if in some of these thing Asia Africa and America may seem equal or in any thing superior Pl^^ yet even therein also they be inferior by just and equal inequality make tributary and servant to Europe the first captive by Alexander the first and second by the roman the last and the most commodious place of the first with all the sea trade by spanish and Portugal discovery and conquest first second last all and more than they all since and still make open and obnoxious to the english and dutch which have discover new northern world and in their thrice-worthy marine arm have so often embrace the inferior globe Asia yearly send we her spice silk gem Africa her gold and ivory America receive severe customer and taxe-master almost every where admit european colony if I speak of art and invention which be man proper good immortal inheritance to our mortality what have the rest of the world comparable first the liberal art be most liberal to we have long since forsake their seminary in Asia and Africa and here erect college and university and if one Athens in the east the ancient european glory now by turkish barbarism be infect how many many christian athense have we in the west for it as for mechanical science I can reckon our ancestor invention now lose as that malleable glass in the day of Tiberias that find in old sepulcher still burn after 1500. year vid. Pancirol and Salmuth and reparti^ I can glory of Archimedes his ingenuous engine but I can recite late invention the daughter of wonder what eye do not almost loose itself in behold the many artificial maze and labyrinth in our watch the great heavenly orb and motion imitate in so small a model what ear but european have hear so many musical invention for the chamber the field the church as for bell Europe alone bear the bell and hear the musical consort thereof in the steeple diversify yea thence descend to bird and squirell where have the taste be feast with such variety for delight for health be not distillation the art also of candy and preserve mere european if I shall descend low who invent the stirrup to ascend the saddle to ride the horse who devise so many kind of motion by clock-worke beside clock and dial to measure time the measurer of all thing who invent wild fire that scorn the water force and violence who out of rag to bring such variety of paper for man manifold use who so many kind of mill who ever dream of a perpetual motion by art or or innumerable other mathematical and chemical device and what have Mars in the world elsewhere to parallel with our ordnance and all sort of gun or the muse with our print alas China yield babe and babble in both compare with we and we the rest of the world have they borrow of we or not at all and for the art military the exact science discipline weapon stratagem engine resolution success herein have honour Europe with the macedonian and roman spoil of the world and even still the turkish puissance be here seat the english dutch french italian spanish courage have not degenerate from those ancestor which tame and shake in piece that tame and terror of the world the roman monarchy but what speak I of man art arm nature have yield herself to european industry who ever find out that loadstone and compass that find out and compass the world who ever take possession of the huge ocean and make procession round about the vast earth who ever discover new constellation salute the freeze pole subject the burn zone and who else by the art of navigation have seem to imitate he which lay the beam of his chamber in the water and walk on the wing of the wind and be this all ps. 104. ^ be Europe only a fruitful field a well water garden a pleasant paradise in nature a continue city for habitation queen of the world for power a school of art liberal shop of mechanical tent of military arsenal of weapon and ship and be she but nurse to nature mistress to art mother of resolute courage and ingenious disposition nay these be the least of her praise or his rather who have give Europe more than eagle wing and lift she up above the star I speak it not in poetical fiction or hyperbolical phrase but christian sincerity Europe be teach the way to scale heaven not by mathematical principle but by divine verity JESUS CHRIST be their way their truth their life who have long since give a bill of divorce to ingrateful Asia where he be bear and Africa the place of his flight and refuge and be become almost whole and only european for little do we find of this name in Asia less in Africa and nothing at all in America but late european glean here be his scripture oratory sacrament minister mystery here that mystical Babylon and that papacy if that be any glory which challenge both the bishopric and empire of the world see B^z c. ^ and here the victory over that beast this indeed be glory by Christian reformation according to the scripture God himself be our portion and the lot of Europe inheritance which have make nature a indulgent mother to she have bow the heaven over she in the kind influence have trench the sea about she in most commodious affluence have furrow in her delightful profitable confluence of stream have temper the air about she fructify the soil on she enrich the mine under she diversify his creature to serve she and multiply inhabitant to enjoy she have give they so goodly composition of body so good disposition of mind so free condition of life so happy success in affair all these annex as attendant to that true happiness in religion truth which bring we to God again that he may be both Alpha and Omega in all our good even in civility also Europe be the young of the three but as Benjamin the best belove make heir to the rest exchange the pristine barbarism and incivility which author blame in our ancestor with Asia and Africa for that civility of manner and glory of act and art which they as near the arke rest place soon enjoy by moh^metan pestilence long since becomne barbarous the best of the one fit call Barbaria and the best monument of the other be but name ruin carcase and sepulchral monument of her excellency @. v. of the language of Europe as for their particular manner disposition custom we shall in due place observe jos. scal. Europe l^ng and ap Meru^a ^ 2. l. 1. c. 8. their mother tongue and original language I will here out of Scaliger our european Mithridates relate of these he now reckon in Europe eleven seven of small note four of great which yield many dialect seem differ language out of they these be the greek latin dutch and Slavon from whence by inflexion traiection mutation and mixture be derive many other thus the slavon have daughter or dialect the russian polonian bohemian illyrian dalmatian and Windish tongue some of these also not a little in themselves diversify they use two sort of letter the russian deprave from the greek with some barbarous addition and the dalmatian of saint Hierom invention much unlike the former the dutch have three principal idiom teutonisme saxonisme and danisme the first contain both ^he high and low dutch the second the nordalbing Friesland and English dialect the three danish Sweden and the norwegian mother of that of the islander the latin have propagate the italian spanish and French the greek in so many land and land so far distant can but be much different the small language yet original without commerce and derivation from other be the epirotike or albanian in the mountain of Epirus second the cosak or tartarian three the hungarian which the hun and auares bring thither out of Asia four that of finnemark which yield also the Lappian five the irish which be use likewise of the redshankes six the welsh or british the same with that of the ancient gall as master Camden have prove speak diverse in Wales Cornwall and little Britain seventhly the Biscaine the remainder of the old spanish in use on both side the pyrenaean hill these be all in ecclesiastical affair subject to the constantinopolitan and roman bishop and use five sort of letter the greek latin and gottish beside those two former mention the greek principal possess the south east the latin with her daughter the south the dutch the northwest part of Europe and the north-east the slavon and thus have we give a taste of that which sometime be intend a european feast in which if I seem to have break promise I have not do it alone and poverty clear i of perfidy if yet my rashness be accuse in promise upon hope of other assistance let he that have relieve those want throw the first stone at the promiser how ever I will rather confess the action then stand suit nor do I now beg help in that kind it be too late my body be wear and old before and beyond my year and to have bear so long two such burden as a pulpit and press that be heaven and earth will perhaps have tire my quarrel plaintiff too to have ascend the one twice or thrice a week ordinary and descend the other with so frequent succession and long continuation Hercules and Atlas be both weary of one burden patience yet and pardon for I have pay here a great part of my debt I have give thou the christian sect and Europe ecclesiastic part with her other secular part also in great p^^t both in map and history present especial there where she^ be lest know and if not so full as the former in my pilgrimage yet poor man be welcome paymaster when they come with part each week or month or with day-labour-set-offs though they can at once discharge the whole debt indeed my genius most lead i to remote and lest know thing that where few other can give intelligence I may supply the intelligencer place of near and know thing I have give thou the world seven part of of the World and Antarctica the southern continent and both americas beside Asia Africa and Europe know to the ancient yea I have give thou a Asia in Asia and a Africa in Africa never know to the ancient as likewise I may affirm of the northern part of Europe who can dull and deaf thy ^ares with french dutch spanish italian affair neither be we destitute of some intelligence and slight knowledge of Spain France and Germany Italy and other part which you will find handle in one or other place of this work as much as concern our travel purpose as for Spain the king title be a sufficient lecture which some thus express p. by the grace of God king of Castille lion Arragon both sicill jerusalem Portugal Navarre Granada Toledo valencia Galicia Maiorca and minorca sivil Sardinia Corduba Corsica Murcia jaen Algarbia algeria Gibraltar canary land east and west indies of the land and continent of the ocean archduke of Austria duke of burgundy Lorraine Brabant Lunburg Luxemburg Geldres Milan etc. earl of Habspurg Flanders tirol Barcelona Artois Hannalt Holland Zealand namur Z^tphen etc. marquis of the empire lord of biscay Friezland Mecklin Vtreck ouer-isell Gruningen ruler in Asia and in Africa this do more full present the present Spain to your view then to tell the situation mountain and river of which every map and traveller can inform you France also be not to be now measure by the ancient geographical limit but by the present royal so much be most proper France as be comprehend in that most compact best seat well people and goodly of kingdom the part you shall see in the diocese hereafter follow Germany in large sense by some be bound by Rhine vistula the Danow and the ocean be divide into kingdom cap. vlt. dukedom county and Marquisates the kingdom be Denmark Norway Sweden Boheme the rest concern Germany and other part of Europe I teach not here I point at rather these thing and therefore will return to our former discourse of language and therein produce a better linguist and artist then myself our learned countryman master Brerewood in his laborious travel and industrious inquiry of language and religion chap. 12 inquiry of language by edw. BREREWOOD late professor of astronomy in Gresham college GReece as it be ancient know by the name of helas be enclose betwixt the bay of Ambracia with the river arachthus that fall into it on the west of the ancient largeness of the greek tongue Strabo l. 8. and the river on the north and the sea on other part so that Acar^ania and Thessaly be towards the continent the utmost region of gre^ce but yet not the country only contain within those limit but also the kingdom of Macedon and Epirus be the next adjoin province Maced^n towards the north Epirus towards the west have ancient the greek tongue for their vulgar language for although it belong original to helas alone yet in time it become vulgar to these also second it be the language of all the isle in the aegaean sea of all those land I say that be betwixt Greece and Asia both of the many small one that lie between Candie and Negropont name cyclades there be of they fifty three and of all above Negropont also as far as the straight of Constantinople three of the isle of Candie Scarpanto Rhodes and a part of Cyprus and of all the small land along the coast of Asia from Candie to Syria four not only of all the west part of Asia the less now call Anatolia and corrupt Anatolia lie towards the aegaean sea as be very thick plant with greek colony senec. consol. Helu c. 6. pli. l. 5 c. 29. Isocrat in Panegeric long med. Lucian in Dialog. Amarib of which some one Miletus by name be register by Seneca to have be the mother of seventy five by Pliny of eighty city but on the north side also towards the euxine sea as far say Isocrates as Sinope and on the south side respect Africa as far say Luci^^ as the chelidonian isle which be over against the confine of Lycia with pamphylia and yet although within these limit only greeke be general speak on the maritime coast of Asia yet beyond they on both the shore eastward be many greek city though not without barbarous city among they and special I find the north coas^ of Asia even as far as Trebizond to have be exceed well store with they but it may be further observe likewise out of history that not only all the maritime part of Anatolia can understand and speak the greek tongue but most of the inland people also both by reason of the great traffic which those rich country have for the most part with grecian and for that on all side the east only except they be environ with they yet nevertheless it be worthy observe that albeit the greek tongue prevail so far in the region of Anatolia as to be in a manner general yet for all that it never become vulgar nor extinguish the vulgar language of those country for it be not only particular observe of the galatians by Hierome Hieron in proem l. 2. come epist Galat. Strab. l. 14. that beside the greek tongue they have also their peculiar language like that of Trier and of the carians by Strabo that in their language be find many greek word which do manifest import it to have be a several tongue * * lib. long med. and plin. l. 6. c. 2. but it be direct record by Strabo out of ephorus that of sixteen several nation inhabit that Tract only three be grecian and all the rest who name be there register barbarous and yet be not omit the cappadocians galatians lydian maeonians cataonians no small province of that region even as it be also observe by Pliny and other that the twenty two language plin. l. 7. c. 24. val. max. l. 8. c. ^ Gell. l. 1^ c. 17. whereof Mithridates king of Pontus be remember to have be so skilful as to speak they without a interpreter be the language of so many nation subject to himself who dominion yet we know to have be contain for the great part within Anatolia and although all these be evident testimony that the greek tongue be not the vulgar or native language of those part yet among all none be more effectual than that remembrance in the second chapter of the act where diverse of those region as Cappadocia Pontus Asia Phrygia and pamphylia act. 2.9 and 10. be bring in for instance of differ language five of the great part of the maritime coast of Thrace not only from Hellespont to Byzantium which be * * Do^sa Itin. pag. 24. Cariand in Periplo jornand reb. getic c. 5. that part of Constantinople in the east corner of the city where the serraile of the great tu^ke now stand but above it all along to the outlet of Danubius and yet beyond they also I find many greek city to have be plant along that coast scylax of be my author with some other as far as the straight of Caffa and special in taurica yea and beyond that straight also eastward along all the sea coast of circassia and Mengrelia to the river of Phasis and thence compass to Trebizond I find mention of many scatter greek city that be to speak brief in all the circumference of the euxine Sea six from the east and north to turn towards the west it be the language of all the west and south land that lie along the coast of Greece from Candie to corfu which also be one of they and withal of that fertile Sicily in which one island I have observe in good history above thirty greek colony to have be plant and some of they goodly city special agrigentum and Syracuse Strab. l. 6. in medi^ which late Strabo have record to have be one hundred and eighty furlong that be of our mile two and twenty and a half in circuit seventh not only of all the maritime coast of Italy that lie on the tyrrhene sea from the river Garigliano liris it be former call to Leucopet^a the most southerly point of Italy for all that shore be near about two hundred and forty mile be inhabit with greek colony and thence forward of all that end of Italy that lie towards the ionian sea about the great bay of and Taranto which be so thick set with great and goodly city of grecian that it gain the name of Graecia but beyond that also of a great part of apulia lie towards the adriatic Sea neither do these maritime part only but as it seem the inland people also towards that end of Italy speak the greek tongue for I have see a few old coin of the brutians G^ltz in Numismat tab. 24. Galat. in descrip. Callipolis bar. l. 5. antiquit. Rocca Tract in Italica and more may be see in Goltzius have greek inscription wherein I observe they be name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) with a ae and two it and not as the roman writer term they and I have see one piece also of pandosia a inland city of those part with the like neither be the vulgar use of the greek tongue utter extinct in some of those part of Italy till of late for Galateus a learned man of that country have leave write that when he be a boy and he live about one hundred and twenty year ago they speak greek in Callipollis a city on the east shore of the bay of Taranto but yet it continue in ecclesiastical use in some other part of that region of Italy much late for Gabriel barrius that but live about forty year since have leave record that the church of Rossano a archiepiscopal city in the upper Calabria retain the greek tongue and ceremony till his time and then become latin nay to descend yet a little near the present time angelus Rocca that write but about twenty year ago have observe that he find in some part of Calabria and apulia some remaynder of the greek speech to be still retain eight and last that shore of France that lie towards the mediterraine sea from Rodanus to Italy be possess with grecian for a a strab l. 4. long princip. thucid. l. 1. Massilia be a colony of the phocean and from it many other colony be derive and b b Strab. plin. l. 3. c. 5. place along that shore as far as nicaea in the begin of Italy which also be one of they and yet beside all these forename I can reckon up very many other disperse colony of the greek both in Europe and Asia and some i^ Africa for although I remember not that I have read in any history any colony of the grecian to h^ue be plant in Africa any where from the great syrtis westward except one in Cirta a city of Numidia place there by micipsa the son of masinissa as be mention in Strabo yet thence eastward it be certain some be Strab. l. 17. for the great city of Cyrene and Alexandria be both greek and it be evident not only in c c 3. mela. l. 1 c. 8. Strabo and Ptolemie but in Mela and other latin writer that most of the city of that part carry greek name and last saint Hierome have direct record that Lybia which be proper that part of Africa adjoin to Egypt be full of greek city these be the place where the greek tongue be native and vulgar speak either original or by reason of colonies but yet for other cause it become much more large and general one be the love of philosophy and the liberal art write in a manner only in greek another the exceed great trade and traffic of grecian in which above all nation except perhaps the old phaenicians to who yet they seem not to have be inferior they employ themselves a three beyond all these because those great prince among who all that Alexander the great have conquer be divide be grecian which for many reason can not but exceed spread the greeke^ongue ^ongue in all those part where they be governor among who even one alone seleucus by name be register by Appian to have found in the east part under his government Appian l. syriac at least sixty city all of they carry greek name or else name after his father his wife or himself and yet be there a four cause that in the aftertime great further this enlargement of the greek tongue namely the employment of grecian in the government of the province after the translation of the imperial seat to Constantinople for these cause I say together with the mixture of greek colony disperse in many place in which fruitfulness o^ colonies the grecian far pass the roman the greek tongue spread very far especial towards the east in so much that all the orient which yet must be understand with limitation namely the oriental part of the roman empire or to speak in the phrase of those time the diocese of the orient which contain Syria hiero. isinor origin l. 9 c. 1. Palestine Cilicia and part of Mesopotamia and of Arabia be say by Hierome to have speak greek which also Isidore special observe in Egypt and Syria to have be the Dorique dialect and this great glory the greek tongue hold in the apostle time and long after in the eastern part till by the inundation of the saracen of Arabia it come to ruin in those province about six hundred and forty year after the birth of our saviour namely in the time of the emperor heraclius the arabian bring in their language together with their victory into all the region they subdue even as the latin tongue be suppose to have perish by the inundation and mixture of the goth and other barbarous nation in the west but at this day the greek tongue be very much decay not only as touch the largeness of the decay of the ancient greek tongue and of the present vulgar greek chap. 2. and vulgarnesse of it but also in the pureness and elegancy of the language for as touch the former first in Italy France and other place to the west the natural language of the country have usurp upon it second in the skirt of Greece itself namely in Epirus and that part of Macedon that lie towards the adriatic sea the sclavonique tongue have extinguish it three in Anatolia the turkish tongue have for a great part suppress it and last in the more eastward and south part as in that part of Cilicia that be beyond the river Pyramus in Syria Palestine Egypt and Lybia the arabian tongue have abolish it abolish it I say namely as touch any vulgar use for as touch ecclesiastical use many christian of those part still retain it in their liturgy so that the part in which the greek tongue be speak at this day be in few word but these first Greece itself except Epirus and the west part of Macedon second the isle of the aegean Sea three Candie and the isle eastward of Candie along the coast of Asia to Cyprus although in Cyprus diverse other language be speak beside the greek and likewise the isle westward of Candia along the coast of Greece and Epirus to corfu and last a good part of Anatolia but as I say the greek tongue be not only thus restrain in comparison of the ancient extension that it have but it be also much degenerate and impair as touch the pureness of speech be overgrow with barbarousness but yet not without some relish of the ancient elegancy neither be it altogether so much decline from the ancient greek as the italian be depart from the latin as bell^nious have also observe Bellon l. 1. c. 3. l. 3. and 5. and by confer of diverse epistle of the present language which you may find in Crusius his Turcograecia with the ancient tongue may be put out of question which corruption yet certain have not befall that language through any inundation of barbarous people as be suppose to have alter the latin tongue for although I know Greece to have be overrun and waste by the goth yet I find not in history any remembrance of their habitation or long continuance in Greece and of their coalition into one people with the grecian without which I conceive not how the tongue can be great alter by they and yet certain it be that long before the turk come among they their language be grow to the corruption wherein now it be for that in the write of cedrenus nicetas and some other late greek although long before the turk invasion there be find notwithstanding they be learned man a strong relish of this barbarousness insomuch that the learned grecian themselves acknowledge it to be very ancient and be utter ignorant when it begin in their language which be to i a certain argument Gerlech in epist. Turcograe^ l. 7. p. 489 that it have no violent nor sudden beginning by the mixture of other foreign nation among they but have get into their language by the ordinary change which time and many common occasion that attend on time be wont to bring to all language in the world for which reason the corruption of speech grow upon they by little and little the change have be unsensible yet it can be deny and d d Zygomal^^ in epist. crus Turcog pag. some of the grecian themselves confess so much that beside many roman word which from the translation of the imperial seat to Constantinople begin to creep into their language as we may observe in diverse greek writer of good antiquity some italian word also and slavonian and arabic and turkish and of other nation be get into their language by reason of the great traffic and commerce which those people exercise with the grecian for which cause as have observe bell. obser. l. 1. c. 3 it be more alter in the maritime part and such other place of foreign concourse then in the inner region but yet the great part of the corruption of that language have be breed at home and proceed from no other cause than their own negligence or affectation as first for example by mutilation of some word pronounce and write (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. second crus Turc p. 44.224.242.391.398.399 etc. by compaction of several word into one as (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) etc. three by confusion of sound as make no difference in the pronounce of three vowel namely ^ i v and two dipthongue and all which five they pronounce by one letter i as (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) they pronounce ico stithi lipi. four by translation of accent from the syllable to which in ancient pronounce they belong to other and all those four kind of corruption be very common in their language for which reason and for some other which may be observe in Crusius Burrana etc. the greek tongue be become much alter even in the proper and native word of the language from what ancient it be Burran in Coron. Ger^ach crus l. 7. Turcog p. 489. yet nevertheless it be record by some that have take diligent observation of that tongue in the several part of Greece that there be yet in Morea betwixt Napoli and Monembasia nauplia and Epidaurus they be call some fourteen town the inhabitant whereof be call Zacones for lacones that speak yet the ancient greek tongue but far out of grammar rule yet they understand those that speak grammatical but understand not the vulgar greek as likewise remember another place near heraclea in Anatolia Bellon obseru. l. 2. c. 111. that yet retain the pure greek for their vulgar language but the few place be except it be certain that the difference be become so great betwixt the present and the ancient greek that their liturgy e e Burdovitz in epist. Chitrae a^u^ in li. stat^ ecclesiar p. 47. which be yet read in the ancient greek tongue namely that of Basil on the sabbath and solemn day and that of chrysostom on common day be not understand or but little of it by the vulgar people as learned man that have be in those part have relate to f f Chitrae and Turcog^ae^ crus p. 127 and 415. etc. of the ancient largeness of the roman tongue in the time of the roman empire chap. 3. other and to myself which may be also more evident prove to be true by this because the skilful in the learned greeke can understand the vulgar the ordinary bound of the roman empire be on the east part Euphrates and sometime Tigris on the north the river of Rhine and of Danubius and the euxine sea on the west the ocean on the south the cataract of Nilus in the utmost border of Egypt and in Africa the mountain Atlas which begin in the west on the shore of the ocean over against the canary land run eastward almost to Egypt be in few place distant from the mediterrane sea more than two hundred mile these I say be the ordinary bound of that empire in the continent for although the roman pass these bound sometime special towards the east and north yet they keep little of what they win but within those bound mention the empire be firm establish but here in our great isle of Britain the pict wall be the limit of it pass by Newcastle and Carlisle from Tinmouth on the east sea to solway Frith on the west be g g spartian in Had^iano and in Scue^o first begin by the emperor Adrian and after finish or rather repair by Septimius Severus to this greatness of dominion Rome at last arrive from her small beginning and small her beginning be indeed consider the huge dominion to which she attain for first the circuit of the city wall at the first building of it by Romulus in mount Palatine can not be full one mile and. Fulu l. 2. a (...) c. 3. g (...) c. 14. Strab. l. 1. for the hill itself as be observe by Andrea Fulvio a citizen and antiquary of Rome have no more in circuit and that Romulus bound the of the city which extend some what beyond the wall with the foot of that hill in compass Gellius have leave register second the territory and liberty of Rome as Strabo have remember extend at the first where it stretch far scarce six mile from the city and three the first inhabitant of Rome Dionys. hal. l. 2. antiq. rom. V^pisc in Aureliano as I find record in Dionysius of Halicarnassus be not in number above 3300. at the most yet with time and fortunate success Rome so increase that in aurelianus his time the circuit of the city wall be fifty mile as vopiscus have record and the dominion grow to the largeness above mention contain above 3000. mile in length and about 1200. in breadth and last the number of free citizen even in the time of Marius that be long before foreign city and country begin to be receive into participation of that freedom be find to be 463000. as Eusebius have remember of free citizen I say for they only come into cense but if I shall add Euseb. in Chro. Olymp. 174. their wife and child and servant that be general all the inhabitant h h Lipsius mag rom. l. 3. c. 3 a learned man have esteem they and not without great likelihood of truth to have be no less than three or four million beyond these bound therefore of the roman empire to speak to the point in hand the roman tongue can not be in any common use as neither to speak of our king dominion in Ireland Scotland nor Northumberland as be no subject of the roman empire and that within these bound it stretch far and wide in such manner as I will afterward declare two principal cause there be one be the multitude of colony which partly to repress rebellion in the subdue provine partly to resist foreign invasion partly to reward the ancient soldier partly to abate the redundance of the city and relieve the poor sort be send forth to inhabit in all the province of the empire another be the donation of roman freedom or communication of the right and benefit of roman citizen to very many of the provincial both city and region for first all Italy obtain that freedom in the time of Sylla and Marius Appian l. 1. civil long aunt med at the compound of the italian war as Appian have record all Italy I say as than it be call and bound with the river of Rubicon and Arnus that be the narrow part of Italy lie betwixt the adriatic and the tyrrhene sea second julius Caesar in like sort enfranchise the rest of Italy Dion l. 41. that be the border part name then Gallia C^salpina as be remember by Dion but not long after the foreign province also begin to be enfranchise tacit. l. 1. plin. l. 3 c. 3. digest l. 1. tit leg in orb Romano France be endue with the liberty of roman citizen by Galba as I find in Tacitus Spain by Vespasian as it be in Pliny and at last by Antonius Pius all without exception that be subject to the empire of Rome as appear by the testimony of Ulpian in the digest the benefit of which roman freedom they that will use can not with honesty do it remain ignorant of the roman tongue these two as I have say be the principal cause of enlarge that language yet other there be also of great importance to further it for first concern ambassage suit appeal or whatsoever other business of the provincial or forreignes nothing be allow to behandled or speak in the senate at Rome but in the latin tongue second the law whereby the province be govern be all write in that language as be in all of they except only municipal city the ordinary Roman Law three the i i digest l. 42. tit Leg. Decret. praetor of the province be not allow to deliver their judgement save in that language and we read in Dion Cassius of a principal man of Greece that by Claudius be put from the order of judge for be ignorant of the latin tongue and to the same effect in Valerius Maximus dion l 57 val. max. l. 2. c. 2. that the roman magistrate will not give audience to the grecian less therefore I take it to the barbarous nation save in the latin tongue four the general school erect in sundry city of the province whereof we find mention in Tacitus Hierome and other in which the roman tongue be the ordinary and allow speech tacit. l 3 annal. Hieron in ep Rusticum tom. 1 as be usual in university till this day be no small furtherance to that language and to conclude that the roman have general at least in the aftertime when Rome be become a monarchy and in the flourish of the empire great care to enlarge their tongue together with their dominion be by Augustine in his book special remember I say it be so in after time for certain aug. 101 l. 19 c. 7. that the roman be not very ancient possess with that humour of spread their language appear by Livy in who we find record that it be grant the cumanes lib. hist. ro. l. 40. for a favour and at their suit that they may public use the roman tongue not full one hundred and forty year before the begin of the emperor and yet be Cuma but about one hundred mile distant from Rome and at that time the roman have conquer all Italy Sicily Sardinia and a great part of Spain but yet in all the province of the empire the roman tongue find not alike acceptance and success but most enlarge and spread itself towards the north and west and south bound for first that in all the region of Pannonia it be know velleius be my author second l. 2. strab l. 3 and 4. (...) that it be speak in France and Spain Strabo three that in Africa Apulcius and it seem the sermon of cyprian and Augustine yet extant of Augustine it be manifest that they preach to the people in latin but in the east part of the empire as in Greece and Asia and so likewise in Africa from the great syrtis eastward I can in my read find that the roman tongue ever grow into any common use and the reason of it seem to be for that in those part of the empire it become most frequent where the most and great roman colony be plant and therefore over all Italy it become in a manner vulgar wherein I have observe in history and in register of ancient inscription to have be plant by the roman at several time above one hundred and fifty colony as in Africa also near sixty namely fifty seven in Spain nine and twenty in France as it stretch to Rhine twenty six and so in illyricum and other north part of the empire between the adriatic sea and Danubius very many and yet I doubt not but in all these part more there be than any history or ancient inscription that now remain have remember and contrariwsie in those country where few colony be plant the latin tongue grow nothing so common as for example here in Britain there be but four 1 York 1. eboracum 2 Debuna 3 isca 4 Camalodunum Onuphr in imp. rom. 2 Chester 3 caeruske in monmouth-shire and 4 maldon in Essex for London although record for one by Onuphrius be none as be manifest by his own k k tacit. l. 14. annal. Onuph l. author in the place that himself allege and therefore we find in the british tongue which yet remain in Wales but little relish to account of or relic of the latin and for this cause also partly the east province of the empire savour little or nothing of the roman tongue for first in Africa beyond the great syrtis I find never a roman colony for Onuphrius that have record l l digest l. 50. tit. leg pancirell Comment. Noti^ Imper. orientalis cap. 138. for one allege Ulpian for author be deceive by some faulty copy of the digest for the correct copy have and for be to be read in dacia as be right observe for in it the city of Zerne be by second in Egypt there be but two and to be brief Syria only except which have about twenty roman colony but most of they late plant especial by Septimius Severus and his son B^ssianus to strengthen that side of the empire against the parthian and yet I find not that in Syria the roman tongue ever obtain any vulgar use the rest have but very few in proportion to the largeness of those region of which little estimation and use of the roman tongue in the east part beside the want of colonies forementioned and to omit their love to their own language which they hold to be more civil than the roman another great cause be the greek which they have in far great account both for learn sake insomuch that Cicero confess Graeca say he and for traffic cicer. in orat. p^e^^ to both which the grecian above all nation of the world be ancient give to omit both the excellency of the tongue itself for find and copiousness and that it have forestall the roman in those part and certain in how little regard the roman tongue be have in respect of the greek in the eastern country may appear by this that all the learned man of those part whereof most live in the flourish of the roman empire have write in greek and not in latin as philo josephus Ignatius justine martyr Clemens alexandrinus Origen Eusebius athanasius Basil Gregory Nyssene and Nazianzene Cirill of Alexandria and of jerusalem epiphanius Synetius Ptolemie Strabo Porphyry and very many other so that of all the writer that live in Asia or in Africa beyond the great syrtis I think we have not one author in the latin tongue and yet more evident may it appear by another instance that I find in the three general council hold at Ephesus where the letter of the bishop of Rome have be read by his legate in the latin tongue it be request by all the bishop that they may be translate into greek to the end they may be understand it be manifest therefore that the roman tongue be neither vulgar nor familiar in the east when the learned man gather out of all part of the east understand it not of the weak impression therefore of the roman language in the east and large entertainment of it in the west that the roman tongue abolish not the vulgar language in the foreign province of the roman empire chap. 4. Galat. p. 98. Viu l. 3. the truden discipline and a^ aug. li. 19 ^ 7. 3 scal. in diatrib ling. Europa 4 m^rul cosm. part. 2. l. 2. c. 8.5 and other part of the empire and of the cause of both I have say enough but in what sort and how far it prevail namely whether so far as to extinguish the ancient vulgar language of those part and itself in stead of they to become the native and vulgar tongue as Galateus have pronounce touch the punic and vine with many other of the gallique and spanish I be next to consider first therefore it be certain observe that there be at this day fourteen mother tongue in Europe beside the latin which remain not only not abolish but little or nothing alter or impair by the roman and those be the 1 irish speak in Ireland and a good part of Scotland the 2 british in Wales Cornwall and Britain of France the 3 cantabrian near the ocean about the Pyrene hill both in France and Spain the 4 arabic in the steepie mountain of Granata name the 5 finnique in finland and Lapland the 6 dutch in Germany Belgia Denmark Norway and suedia the old 7 Canchian I take it to be that for in that part the cauchi inhabit in east Friesland for m m ortel in tab. Fris oriental although to stranger they speak dutch yet among themselves they use a peculiar language of their own the 8 Slanonish in Polonia Bohemia Mosconia Russia and many other region whereof I will after entreat in due place although with notable difference of dialect as also the british and dutch in the country mention have the old 9 illyrian in the i will of on the east side of istria in the day of liburnia the 10. Greek in Greece and the land about it and part of Macedon and of Thrace the old 11 epirotique n n 13 bert. in descrip. hungar. in the mountain of Epirus the 12 hungarian in the great part of that kingdom the 13 jazygian in the north side of Hungaria betwixt Danubius and tibiscus utter differ from the hungarian language and last the 14 tarturian of the precopense between the river of Tanaas and borysthenes near Meotis and the euxine sea for of the english italian spanish and french as be derivation or rather degeneration the first of the dutch and the other three of the latin see I now speak only of original or mother language I must be silent and of all these fourteen it be certain except the arabic which be know to have enter since and perhaps the hungarian about which there be difference among antiquary that they be in Europe in time of the roman empire and six or seven of they within the limit of the empire and indeed how hard a matter it be utter to abolish a vulgar language in a populous country where the conqueror be in number far inferior to the native inhabitant whatsoever be be practise to bring it about may well appear by the vain attempt of our norman conqueror who although he compel the english to teach their young child in the school nothing but french and set down all the law of the land in french and enforce all plead at the law to be perform in that language which custom continue till king Edward the three his day who disannul it purpose thereby to have conquer the language together with the land and to have make all french yet the number of english far exceed the norman all be but labour lose and obtain no further effect than the mingle of a few french word with the English and even such also be the success of the Frankes among the gaul of the goth among the italian and spaniard and may be observe to be short in all such conquest where the conqueror be yet in number far inferior mingle themselves with the native inhabitant so that in those country only the mutation of language have ensue upon conquest where either the ancient inhabitant have be destroy or drive forth as we see in our country to have follow of the saxon victory against the briton or else at least in such sort diminish that in number they remain inferior or but little superior to the conqueror who reputation and authority may preu^^le more than a small excess of multitude but that I digress no further because certain country be special allege in which the roman tongue be suppose most to have prevail I will restrain my discouse to they alone and first that both the punic and gallique tongue remain in the time of Alexander Severus the emperor about two hundred and thirty year after our saviour birth appear by Ulpian who live at that time and be with the emperor of principal reputation teach that o o digest l. 32. may be leave not only in latin or greek but in the punic or gallique or any other vulgar language till that time therefore it seem evident that the roman tongue have not swallow up these vulgar language and itself become vulgar in stead of they aur. victor in epitome but to insist a little in either several first touch the punic Aurelius victor have record of Septimius Severus that he be but of which emperor sister also dwell at leptis it be the city we now call Tripoli in Barbary and come to see he Spartian^^ have leave write that she so bad speak the latin tongue yet be a a antonin in Hieron in proem l. 2 com. epist. Gala^ in fine leptis a roman colony that the emperor blush at it spartian in second long after that Hierome have record of his time that the african have somewhat alter their language from the phoenician the language therefore then remain for else how can he pronounce of the present difference three Augustine somewhat young than Hierom though live at the same time write not only that b b August ciu. det. l. 16. c. 6. he know diverse nation in Africa that speak the punic tongue but also more particular in c c id. Serm. 25. the ve apost another place mention a know punic proverb he will speak it he say in the latin because all his auditor for Hippo where he preach be a roman colony understand not the punic tongue and some other d d id. Expos in Chart. epist ^d roman med 1. Africa l. 1. descript. Africa cap. ling. Africanis Strab. l. 4. in pri^cip tacit. in julio Agricola l^^prid in alexand long p^st med. passage can I allege out of Augustine for the direct confirmation of this point if these be not evident and effectual enough last Leo Africanus a man of late time and good reputation affirm that there remain yet in Barbary very many descend of the old inhabitant that speak the african tongue whereby it be apparent that it be never extinguish by the roman second touch the ancient gallike tongue that it also remain and be not abolish by the roman in the time of Strabo who flourish under Tiberius Caesar government it appear in the four book of his geography write that the aquitani differ altogether in language from the other gaul and they somewhat among themselves nor after that in Tacitus his time note that the language of France differ little from that of Britain no nor long after that in Alexander Severus his time for beside the authority of Ulpian before allege out of the digest it be manifest by lampridius also who in the life of the say Alexander remember of a Druide woman that when he be pass along in his expedition against the german through France cry out after he in the gallike tongue what need that observation of the gallike tongue if it be the roman go thy way quoth she and look not for the victory and trust not thy soldier and though Strabo be allege by some Strab. l. 4. leng med to prove the vulgarnesse of the latin tongue in France yet be it manifest that he speak not of all the gaul but of certain only in the province of Narbona about Rhodanus for which part of France there be special reason both for the more ancient and ordinary converse of the roman in that region above all the rest for of all the seventeen province of France that of Narbona be first reduce into the form of a province and the city of Narbona itself be a mart town of exceed traffic in those day be the e e vel. l. 1. first foreign colony that the roman plant out of Italy Carthage only except and yet furthermore as Pliny have record many town there be in that province infranchize and endue with the liberty and right of the latin and yet for all this Strabo say not plin. l. 3. c. 4. that the roman tongue be the native or vulgar language in that part but that for the more part they speak it three concern the spanish tongue howsoever vine write that the language of France and Spain be utter extinguish by the roman and that the latin be become f f vid. Annot. (@) August ciu. l. 19 c. 7. id. l. 3. the tradend Discip. as also and g g marin reb. Hispanic l. 5. c. 4. some other of the same nation vaunt that have not the barbarous nation corrupt it the latin tongue will have be at this day as pure in Spain as it be in Rome itself in Tully time yet nevertheless manifest it be that the spanish tongue be never utter suppress by the latin for to omit that of Strabo h h l. 3 p^ul id. l. 4. in princip that there be diverse language in the part of Spain as also in i i marian. reb. Hisp. l. 1. c. 5 marin sicul. Hispan l. 4. c. and alib. another place that of the speech of Aquitaine be like the language of the spaniard then of the other gaul it be a common consent of the best historian and antiquary of Spain k k b. l. 3. c. 1. plin. 3 c. 1. Vell. l. 2. that the cantabrian tongue which yet remain in the north part of Spain and have no relish in a manner at all of the roman be either the ancient or at least one of the ancient language of Spain and although l Strabo have record that the roman tongue be speak in Spain yet he speak not indefinite but add a limitation namely about baetis and that in that part of Spain the roman tongue so prevail the reason be easy to be assign by that we find in Pliny namely that in baetica be eight roman colony eight municipal city and twenty nine other endue with the right and liberty of the latin last to speak of the Pannonian tongue Pannonia contain Hungary Austria stiria and Carinthia it be certain that the roman do not extinguish it for first paterculus who be the only author that I know allege for that purpose say not that it be become the language of the country for how can it be but even then new conquer by Tiberius Caesar but only that in the time of Augustus by Tiberius his mean the knowledge of the roman tongue be spread in all Pannonia and second Tacitus after Tiberius his time have record tacit. morib ge^m pro^e fin that the os. in Germany may be know to be no germane by the Pannonian tongue which * * lib. ^od m^di^ a little before in the same book he plain acknowledge to be speak even then in Pannonia and as for these reason it may well seem that the roman tongue become not the vulgar language in any of these part of the empire which be yet special instance for the large vulgarity of it so have I other reason to persuade i that it be not in those part nor in any other foreign country subject to the empire either general or perfect speak not general I say because it be hard to conceive that any whole country special because so large as the mention be shall general speak two language their own native and the roman second there be not any law at all of the roman to enforce the subdue nation either to use vulgar the roman tongue or not to use their own native language and very extreme and unreasonable have such lord be as shall compel man by law both to do and to speak only what please they neither do I see any other necessity or any provocation to bring they to it except for some special sort of man as merchant and citizen for their better traffic and trade lawyer for the knowledge and practice of the roman law which carry force throughout the empire except privilege place scholar for learning soldier for their better converse with the roman legion and with the latin traveller gentleman officers or such other as may have occasion of affair and deal with the roman but it sound altogether unlike a truth that the poor scatter people abroad in the country dwell either in solitary place or in the small town and village either general speak it or can possible attain unto it a example whereof for the better evidence may at this day be note in those part of Greece which be subject to the dominion of the turk and venetian Bellon l. 1. c. 4. for as have observe the people that dwell in the principal town and city subject to the Turk by reason of their trade speak both the greek and turkish tongue as they also that be under the venetian both the greek and italian but the country people under both government speak only greek so likewise in Sardinia as be record by * * Gesner in Mith^ in Lingua Sardic and Rocra dialect in ling. Sardec porcac^h l. dello Is^l^ other the good town by reason of the spanish government and trade speak also the spanish tongue but the country people the natural sardinian language only and the like by our own experience we know to be true in the province subject to our king namely both in Wales and Ireland it seem therefore that the roman tongue be never general speak in any of the roman province forth of Italy and certain much less can I persuade myself that it be speak abroad in the province perfect first because it seem unpossible for foreign nation special for the rude and common people to attain the right pronounce of it who as we know do ordinary much mistake the true pronounce of their native language for which very cause we see the Chaldee tongue to have degenerate into the syriake among the jew although they have converse seventy year together among the chaldean and moreover by daily experience we see in many with what labour and difficulty even in the very school and in the most docible part of their age August in ps. 123. and 138. and l. 2. the doctrine chris. c. 13. and Tract 7 in joan. the right speak of the latin tongue be attain and to conclude it appearth by Augustine in sundry place that the roman tongue be unperfect among the africans even in the colony as pronounce for fo^ for dolour and such like insomuch that he confess he be fain sometime to use word that be no latin to the end they may understand he of the beginning of the italian french and spanish language chap. 5. the common opinion which suppose that these nation in the flourish of the roman empire speak vulgar and right the latin tongue be that the mixture of the northern barbarous nation among the ancient inhabitant be the cause of change the latin tongue into the language which now they speak the language become mingle as the nation themselves be who while they be enforce to attemper and frame their speech one to the understanding of another for else they can not mutual express their mind which be the end for which nature have give speech to man they degenerate both and so come to this medley wherein now we find they which opinion if it be true the italian tongue must of necessity have it beginning about the 480. year of our saviour because at that time the barbarous nation begin first to inhabit Italy under odoacer for although they have enter and waste Italy long before as first the goth under alaricus about the year 414 then the hun together with the goth and the heruli and the gepid and other northern people under attila about an. 450. then the wandale under cross the sea out of Africa about an. 456. to omit some other invasion of those barbarous nation because they prosper not yet none of these settle themselves to stay and inhabit Italy till the heruli as I say under odoacer about an. 480. or a little before enter and possess it near hand twenty year he be proclaim by the roman themselves king of Italy about sixteen year and his people become inhabiter of the country but they also within twenty year after their entrance be in a manner root out of Italy by theodoricus king of goth who allot they only a part of Piedmont above Turin to inhabit for theodoricus be by zeno then emperor invest with the title of king of Italy and have overcome odoacer somewhat afore the year 500 rule peaceable a long time as king of Italy and certain other of the goth nation succeed after he in the same government the goth in the mean space grow into one with the italian for the space near hand of sixty year together and although after that the dominion of Italy be by narses again recover to the empire in the time of justinian and many of the goth expel Italy yet far more of they remain Italy in that long time be grow well with their seed and posterity the heruli therefore with their associate be the first and the goth the second of the barbarous nation that inhabit Italy the three and the last be the longbard who come into Italy about the year 570. and long time obtain the dominion and possession in a manner of all Italy namely above two hundred year and during the succession of twenty king or more be never expel forth of Italy although at last their dominion be sore break by Pipin king of France and after more deface by his son Charles the great who first restrain and confine it to that part which to this day of they retain the name of Lombardy and short after utter extinguish it carry away their last king captive into France now although diverse * * blond in Ital. Tint^ l. 2. c. 2. and antiquary of Italy there be which refer the beginning of the italian tongue and the change of the latin into it to these three inhabitant of Italy the longbard by reason of their long and perfect coalition into one with the italian people yet certain the italian tongue be more ancient than so for beside that there remain yet to be see as man * * li^s l^ng lat. cap. 3. and Merul. 2. Cosm^gr l. ^ c. 18. Paul Diac^^ ^ist mi^cel l. 17. long aunt med worthy of credit report in the king of France his library at Paris a instrument write in the italian tongue in the time of justinian the first which be before the come of the longbard into Italy another evidence more vulgar to this effect be to be find in Paulus his miscellane history where we read that in the emperor mauritius his time about the year 590. when the langbard have indeed enter and waste Gallia cisalpina but have not invade the roman dition in Italy that by the acclamation of the word plain Italian which a roman soldier speak to one of his fellow afore who beast have overturn his burden the whole army march in the dark begin to cry out and so fall to fly away but the french tongue if that afore mention be the cause of it begin a little before in the time of Valentinian the three when in a manner all the west part of the empire fall away and among the rest our country of England be first forsake of the roman themselves by reason of grievous war at their own door and not long after conquer and possess by the saxon who posterity for the most part we be namely about the year 450 France be then subdue and peaceable possess by the franks and burgundions nation of Germany the burgundions occupy the eastward and outward part of it towards the river of Rhen^ and the franks all the inner region for although France before that have be invade by the Wandali and alani and after by the goth who have obtain Aquit^yn for their seat and habitation by the grant of the emperor honorius expel the former into Spain about a^ 410 yet notwithstanding till the conquest make by the franks and burgundions it be not general nor for any long time mingle with stranger which after that conquest begin to spread over France and to become native inhabitant of the country but of all the spanish tongue for this cause must necessary be most ancient for the Wandali and alani be expel France about the year 410 begin then to invade and to inhabit Spain which they hold and possess many year till the goth be expel by the franks and burgundians out of France into Spain expel they out of Spain into Africa the barbarous nation thus like nail drive out one another and not only they but with they all the remnant of the roman garrison and government and so become the entire lord and quiet possessor of all the country from who also the king of Spain that now be be descend notwithstanding even they also within less than three hundred year after be drive by the saracen of Africa into the northern and mountainous part of Spain namely asturia biscay and Guipuscoa till after a long course of time by little and little they recover it out of their hand again which be at last full accomplish by Ferdinand not past one hundred and twenty year ago there have pass in the mean time from the moor first entrance of Spain at Gibraltar till their last possession in Granada about seven hundred and seventy year whereby you may see also when the roman tongue begin to degenerate in Africa if that also as be suppose speak vulgar the latin tongue and if the mixture of barbarous people be cause of the decay and corruption of it namely about the year 430. for about that time the Wandali and alani partly weary with the gottish war in Spain and partly invite by the governor bonifacius enter Africa under the lead of a part whereof for a time they hold quiet for the emperor valentinianus gift but short after in the same emperor time when all the west province in a manner fall utter away from the empire they also take Carthage and all the province about it from the roman and although the dominion of Africa be regain by Bellizarius to the empire almost 100 year after in justinian time yet in the time of the emperor Leontius almost 700. year after our saviour birth it be lose again be anew conquer and possess by the sarracen of Arabia and to this day remain in their hand bring together with their victory the language also and religion mahumatanisme into all that coast of Africa even from Egypt to the straight of Gibraltar above 2000 mile in length about which time also namely during the government of Valentinian the three Bulgariae Servia Hungary Austria stiria Carinthia Banaria and Suevia that be all the north-border of the empire along the river Danubius and some part of Thrace be spoil and possess by the hun who yet principal plant themselves in the low Pannonia whence it obtain the name of Hungary out of which discourse you may observe these two point first what the country be in which those wander and war nation after many transmigration from place to place fix at last their final residence and habitation namely the hun in Pannonia the wandale in Africa the east goth and langbard in Italy the west goth in Aquitaine and Spain which be both original but one nation gain these name of east and west goth from the position of these country which they conquer and inhabit the other barbarous nation of obscure name be partly consume with the war and partly pass into the more famous appellation and second you may observe that the main dissolution of the empire especial in Europe and Africa fall in the time of Valentinian the three about the year 450. be cause by the barbarous nation of the north as after do the like dissolution of the same empire in Asia by the arabian in the time of heraclius about the year 640. and together with the ruin of the empire in the west by the inundation of the foresay barbarous nation the latin tongue in all the country where it be vulgar speak if it be right speak any where in the west become corrupt wherefore if the spanish french and italian tongue proceed from this cause as a great number of learned man suppose they do you see what the antiquity of they be but to deliver plain my opinion have search as far as I can into the original of those language and have ponder what in my read and in my reason I find touch they I be of another mind as some learned man also be namely that all those tongue be more ancient and have not spring from the corruption of the latin tongue by the inundation and mixture of barbarous people in these province but from the first unperfect impression and receive of it in those foreign country which unperfectness notwithstanding of the roman tongue in those part although it have as I take it beginning from this evil frame of foreign tongue to the right pronounce of the latin yet I withal easy believe and acknowledge that it be great increase by the mixture and coalition of the barbarous nation so that i think I have observe three degree of corruption in the roman tongue isidor origin l. 9 c. ^ Tertul. in Apologet gent. cap. 6. by the degeneration whereof these language be suppose to have receive their beginning the first of they be in Rome itself where towards the latter end of the commonwealth and after in the time of the empire the infinite multitude of servant which exceed exceed the number of free bear citizen together with the unspeakable confluence of stranger from all province do much impair the pureness of their language and as Isidore have observe bring many barbarisme and solaecisme into it insomuch that Tertullian in his time when as yet none of the barbarous nation have by invasion touch Italy for he live under Sept^mius Severus government charge the roman to have renounce the language of their father cicer. l. 3. the second step be the unperfect impression that I touch before make of the roman tongue abroad in the foreign province among stranger who tongue can not perfect frame to speak it aright and certain if the italian themselves as be remember by Cicero fail of the right and perfect roman pronounciation I see not how the tongue of strange nation such as the gaul and spaniard be shall exact utter it and the three be that mixture of many barbarous people to which other attribute the beginning of the language in question which make the latin that be before unperfect yet more corrupt than they find it both for word and for pronounce so that I rather think the barbarous people to have be a cause of increase the corruption and of further alteration and departure of those language from the roman then of begin they and i think I have very good reason so to be persuade beside all the argument above mention which I produce both for the remain of the vulgar language and for the unperfect speak of the roman tongue in the province first because the goth wandale langbard as also the franks and B^rgundians language be by the consent of * * Irenic E^eg Germ. l. 1. c. 31 Laz^us l. 10. the migration gent gorop origin Antw^rp l. 7. Gesner in mithridate Rh^nan lib. 2. rer. Germ. Leunclau in Pandect. Tu^ri^ @ 71. learned man the german tongue which have but small affinity or agreement with either the italian french or spanish tongue second because among all the ancient writer and they be many which have write of the miserable change make in these west part of the world by those infinite swarm of barbarous people I find not one that mention the change of any of these language to have be cause by they which i think some ancient writer among so many learned as those time and those very country abound withal and who writing yet remain will certain have record objection touch the extent of the latin tongue and the beginning of the mention language with their solution chap. 6. but though we find mention in sundry ancient writer of change these language into the roman who yet I understand of that unperfect change before touch yet nothing be find of any recharge of those language from the roman into the state wherein now they be but it be become a question only of some late searcher of antiquity but of such as determine in this point without either sound reason or good countenance of antiquity these reason perhaps join with the other above allege whereby I endeavour to prove that the latin tongue perfect speak be never the vulgar language of the roman province may persuade you as they have do i that the barbarous nation of the north be not the first corrupter of the latin tongue in the province subject to Rome nor the beginner of the italian french and spanish tongue yet some difficulty I find I confess in writer touch these point which when I have resolve my opinion will appear the more credible one be out of Plutarch in his platonic question Plutar. in quest. quest. 9 affirm that in his time all man in a manner speak the latin tongue another before touch that Strabo record the roman tongue to have be speak in Spain and France and Apuleius in Africa which also may appear by sundry place in Augustine Strab. l. 3. and 4. apul. in Florid^^ who sermon seem as cyprian also to have be make to the people in that language a three how it fall if these vulgar tongue of adulterate latin be so ancient that nothing be find write in any of they of any great antiquity a four how in Rome and Latium where the latin tongue be out of question native the latin can so degenerate as at this day be find in the italian tongue except by some foreign corruption to the first of these I answer either that as divine be wont to interpret many general proposition Plutarch be to be understand not so that the latin tongue be speak almost in every nation but not of every one in any foreign nation or else that they speak the latin indeed but yet unperfect and corrupt as their tongue will frame to utter it to the second I answer first that Strabo speak not general of France or Spain but with limitation to certain part of both the province of Narbon in France and the Tract about in Spain second that although they speak it yet it follow not that they speak it perfect and aright except perhaps in the colony so that I will not deny but it may be speak abroad in the province yet I say it be speak corrupt according as the people tongue will fashion to it namely in such sort that although the matter and body of the word be for the most part latin yet the form and sound of they vary from the right pronounce which speech notwithstanding be name latin partly for the reason now touch and partly because they learn it from the roman or latin as the spaniard call their language romance till this day which yet we know to differ much from the right roman tongue Nitha dissen Ludou l. 3. and as nephew to Charles the great in his history of the dissension of the son of Ludovi^us Pius call the french then usual whereof he set down example the roman tongue which yet have no more agreement with the latin then the french have that be now in use three to the objection of cyprian and Augustine preach in latin antonin in Itin^rario plin. (@) in epi. l. 8. I answer that both a a plin. sec. hist. nat. l. 5. c. 4. l. 1. Appian l. bel. P^nicis in fine Hippo whereof Augustine be bishop and b b En^rr Ps 138. Carthage whereof cyprian be archbishop be roman colony consist for the most part of the progeny of roman for which sort of city there be special reason although neither in the colony themselves as it seem the roman tongue be altogether uncorrupt both for that I allege before out of spartianus of Severus his sister dwell at leptis and for that which I remember out of Augustine for Hippo where they speak c c l. 2. doc. chr. c. 13. and d d Tract. 7. in joan^em and for and and dolour and yet be both leptis and Hippo Roman colony and yet it appear further by Augustine that in their translation of the scripture and in the psalm sing in their church they have these corruption where yet as it be like their most corrupt and vulgar latin have not place to the three I answer that two reason of it may be assign one that learned man will rather write in the learned and grammatical then in the vulgar and provincial latin another that the work of unlearned man will hardly continue till our time tschud Descript. A^pinae cap. 36. gene^r l. 4. ^hr Secul. 11. see even of the learned ancient writing but few of infinite have remain furthermore it be observe of the german tongue by Tschudas and of the french by Genebrard that it be very little above 400. year since book begin to be write in both those language and yet it be out of all doubt that the tongue be much ancient to the four I say that there be no language which of ordinary course be not subject to change although there be no foreign occasion at all which the very fancy of man weary of old word as of old thing be able enough to work which may be well prove by observation and instance of former change in this very tongue the latin whereof I now dispute quintil. just orator l. 1. ca. 6. for Quintilian record that the verse of the Salij which be say to be compose by Numa can hardly be understand of their priest in the latter time of the commonwealth for the absoluteness of the speech and Festus in his book ^est in diction latin who live in Augustus Caesar time have leave in observation that the latin speech which say he be so name of Latium be then in such manner change that scarce any part of it remain in knowledge the law also of the roman king and of the F^lu Vrsin not Anton Augu. Lug^h and ^ call the law of the twelve table collect and publish in their own word by Fuluius Vrsinus be no less evident testimony if they be compare with the late latin of the great alteration of that language furthermore Polybius have also record that the article of league betwixt the people of Rome and of Carthage Polyb. l. 3. make present after the expulsion of the king from Rome can very hardly in his time be understand by reason of the old forsake word by any of the best skill antiquary in Rome in which time notwithstanding they receive very few stranger into their city which mixture may cause such alteration and the difference of time be but about three hundred and fifty year and yet to add one instance more of a short revolution of time and a clear evidence of the change that the roman tongue be subject to and that when no foreign cause thereof can be allege there remain at this day as it be certain * * vid. Paul merul ^os^^ p^r 2. l. 4 c. 18. and Celsum cit. tad in Tractat. Orig. ^ng Ital. cap. 7. etc. record in the capital at Rome though much deface by the injury of time a pillar they call it that be deck with beak of ship dedicate to the memory of a roman consul upon a naugle victory obtain against the carthaginian in the first punic war not past one hundred and fifty year before Cicero time when the roman tongue ascend to the high flourish of elegancy that ever it obtain and thus the word of the pillar be those that may be read as I find they observe with the late latin under they Macistratos castreis Exfociont pucnandod cepet Navebos marid^ mari. consol. Primos navebous Claseis Cartaciniensis dictator Altod. consul class Carthaginiensis Socieis captom Numei navaled Praedad Poplo etc. trireme nave Naval^ praeda. etc. where you see in many word e. for i. c. for g. o. for u. and sometime for e. and d. superfluous add to the end of many word but to let foreign tongue pass of the great alteration that time be wont to work in language our own tongue may afford we example evident enough wherein since the time near after and about the conquest the change have be so great as I myself have see some evidence make in the time of king Henry the first whereof I be able to understand but few word to which purpose also a certain remembrance be to be find in holinsheds chronicle in the end of the conqueror reign in a charter give by he to the city of London of the ancient language of Italy Spain France and Africa chap. 7. but if the discourse of these point of antiquity in handle whereof I have declare that while the roman empire flourish it never abolish the vulgar language in France or Spain or Africa how soever in Italy if that discourse I say move in you perhaps a desire to know what the ancient vulgar language of those part be I will also in that point out of my read and search into antiquity give you the best satisfaction that I can and first for Italy certain it be that many be the ancient tongue in the several province of it tongue I say not dialect for they be many more in apulia the mesap^an tongue in Tuscanie and Vmbria the Hetruscan both of they utter perish yet in the book of ancient inscription inscrip pag. 143.144.145.146 set forth by gruter and Scaliger there be some few monument register of these language but not understand now of any man in Calabria both the high and low and far along the miritime coast of the tyrrhene sea the greek in Latium now campagna Roma the latin in Lombardie and Liguria the old tongue of France whatsoever it be of which last three the two former be utter cease to be vulgar and the three no where to be find in Italy but to be seek for in some other country and although beside these five we find mention in ancient writing of the sabine the Oscan the tusculan and some other tongue in Italy yet be they no other than differ dialect of some of the former language as by good observation out of Varro Festus Servius Paul and other may be easy prove second of France what the ancient tongue be have be much dispute and yet remain somewhat uncertain some think it to have be the german other the greek and some the welsh tongue caesar. l 1. bel. lo Gallic in Strab. l. 4. in princip but if the meaning of these resoluer be that one language whatsoever it be be vulgar in all France they be very far wide Caesar and Strabo have both record that there be diverse language speak in the diverse part but to omit the speech of Aquitaine which Strabo write to have have much affinity with the spanish and of that part in Caesar call Belgia that at the river of Rhine confine with Germany which for that neighbourhood may partake much of the german tongue to omit those I say the main question be about the language of the which as inhabit the middle part of France be least of all infected with any foreign mixture caes. l. 5. Gallic long post med. Varro ap Hieron in praefat. l. 2. comment epist. Galat. and li. 15. Orig. cap. 1. and certain that it be not the greek appear out of Caesar write to q. Cicero then besiege by the gaul in greeke lest the gaul shall intercept his letter and second no less evident by Varro write of the massilians that they speak three language the roman the greek and the gallique tongue and three the remnant of that tongue may serve for instance whereof many old word be find disperse in ancient writer that have no affinity at all with the greek the greek therefore be not the ancient native language of the gaul neither be it the german for else it have be but a odd relation and reason of Caesar that a german prince have live so long in Gallia that he speak the gallique tongue and that of Tacitus caes. l. gallico Ta^i^ l. (@) Germanor su^^on in C^ligula c. ^7 ho^tom in^^an c^gall c. 2. l. li^g g. and Graecae p. (@) l. the 12. li^g ^schud in (@) rhet. Al^ c. 8. go^op in Francicis Isac in gall Britan. Cambden in Strab. l 4. in Agricola Cae^ l 6 bel. gallico that the gallique tongue prove the gothines to be no german and that of Suetonius that Caligula compel many of the gaul to learn the german tongue but Hottoman of all that I have read speak most distinct touch the original and composition of the french tongue divide it as now it be speak equal into two part of which he suppose the one and I think it be rather the great part to have original from the latin tongue and the other half to be make up by the german and greek and british or welsh word each almost in equal measure of the deduction of the french word from the greek you may read Perionius postel and other of those from the german Tschudus Goropius Isacius etc. of the welsh Lhuid Camden etc. which last indeed for good reason seem to have be the native language of the ancient celtae rather than either the greek or dutch tongue for of the greek word find in that language the neighbourhood of the massilians and their colony inhabit the maritime coast of province together with the ready acceptance of that language in France mention by Strabo may be the cause as likewise of the german word the franks and burgundions conquest and possession of France may be assign for a good reason but of the british word none at all can be just give save that they be the remnant of the ancient language second it seem to be so by Tacitus write that the speech of the gaul little di^^ered from that of the briton and three by Caesar record that it be the custom of the gaul that be studious of the druid discipline often to p^sse over into Britain to be there instruct wherefore see there be no use of book among they as be in the same place affirm by Caesar it be apparent that they speak the same language three the spanish tongue as now it be consist of the old spanish latin gottish and arabic as there be good reason it shall Spain have be so long in the possession of the roman goth and meore of which the latin be the great part next it the arabic and therefore they themselves call their lang^age romance and certain I have see a epistle write by a Spaniard whereof every word be both good latin and good spanish and a example of the like be to be see in Merula but the language of Valentia and Catalonia and part of Portugal be much temper with the french also now the ancient and most general language of Spain speak over the country before the roman conquest Merul. ^osmogr part. 2. l. 2. c. 8. seem to i out of question to have be the cantabrian tongue that namely which yet they speak in biscay Guipuscoa Navarre and asturia that be to say in the northern and mountainous part of Spain near the ocean with which the visconian tongue also in Aquitaine near the Pyrene hill have as there be good reason for out of those part of Spain the inhabitant of Gascoigne come much affinity and agreement and my reason for this opinion be that in that part of Spain the people have ever continue without mixture of any foreign nation as be never subdue by the carthaginian nor by the moor no nor by the roman for all their long war in Spain before Augustus Caesar time and for the hillinesse and bareness and unpleasantness of the country have nothing in it to invite stranger to dwell among they for which cause the most ancient nation and language be for the most part preserve in such country as by Thucydides be special observe of the attique and arcadian in Greece thuord l. 1. paul a pr^ncip dwell in barren soil o^ which nation the first for their antiquity vaunt of themselves that they be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and the second (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as if they have be breed immediate of the earth or bear before the moon another example whereof we may see in Spain itself for in the steepy mountain of Granata name Alpuxarras the progeny of the moor yet retain the arabic tongue for the spaniard call it Araviga which all the other remnant of the moor in the plain region have utter forget and receive the castilian till their late expulsion out of Spain for their vulgar language the like whereof be also to be see in the old epirotike speech and nation which yet continue in the mountainous part of Epirus be for the tongue utter extinguish in all the country beside and to let foreign ins^ances go in the briton or welsh-man in the hilly part of our own country what the reason thereof may be I will not stand now curious to inquire whether that be enure to labour to watch to sundry distemperature of the air a^d much other hardness for otherwise their live will not be get out of such barren ground they prove upon occasion good and able soldier or that the craggy rock and hill like fortress of nature own erect be easy defend from foreign invader or that their unpleasant and fruitless soil have nothing to invite stranger to desire it or that want riches they want also the ordinary companion of riches that be proud and audacious heart to provoke with their injury other nation to be revenge on they either by the conquest or desolation of their country but whatsoever the cause may be certain in effect so it be that the most ancient nation and language be for the most part to be find in such unpleasant and fruitless region insomuch that the byscayne who give i occa^^on of this digression vaunt of themselves among the spaniard that they be the right hidalgos that be gentleman as some also report of the welsh-man here in Britain to say of themselves which yet I that be their neighbour to confess a truth never hear they say now last touch the punic tongue as I be not of Galateus his opinion that it be utter extinguish by the roman pag. 98. so neither can I be of the fantasy for it be no better that many * * Gesner a mithridate in ling. Afric and arab. Roccha dialect in ling. Arabica postel ling. 12. in ling. arab. mas. in gram. Syriaca prop. Init. Bibliand ration Linguar Schidler in Pentagl^tto in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) marc. Gal^ott doct. c. 6. and ali^ other learned man be namely that it be the Arabic that be to say the same language that be vulgar in Africa at this day for it be well know to the skilful in history that the punike be of another offspring not of arabian race and that it be not yet a thousand year since that tongue be by the arabian together with their victory bring into Africa and as certain also it be that the remnant of the african progeny as * * Afric l. 1. descrip. Afr. cap. l^ng Africa flo. in epitome liu. l. 51. Strab. l. 17. plin. l. 15. c. 18. Strab. li. mela. l. 1. c. 7. Li^ li. 33. plin. l. 5. c. 19 Appian l. bel. Curtius l. 4. Leo Africanus have record have a different language from the Arabic but the punic tongue seem to i out of question to have be the chananitish or old Hebrew language though I doubt not somewhat alter from the original pronunciation as be wont in tract of time to befall colony plant among stranger far from home for first Carthage itself the queen of the city of Africa and well may she be term so that contain in circuit 24. mile as Florus in his abridgement of Livy have record and by the utter wall 360. furlong that be 45. mile as it be in Strabo and hold out in emulation with Rome as be note by Pliny 120. year and to conclude before the second punic war have in subjection all the coast of the mediterrane sea from the bottom of the great syrtis in Africa to the river Ebro iberus in Spain which be about 2000 mile of length that the same Carthage I say and diverse other city of Africa of which Pliny name Utica and leptis as be the principal be colony of the phoenician and namely of the tyrian be not only by Strabo Mela Livy Pliny Appian and many other certain author acknowledge and by none deny but also the very name of poeni and be but variation or mutilation of the name import so much and last their language assure it for Hierome write that their language be grow somewhat different from the phoenician tongue do manifest in these word imply it have be the same and what be the phoenician but Chanaanites the phoenician I say of who exceed merchandize we read so much in ancient history what be they but Chanaanites who very name * * (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Arias mont. lib. Chanaan c. 8. Postel in descrip. syriae c. syriae matth. 15.22 Mark 7.26 jos. 5.1 signify merchant for the very same nation that the grecian call Phaenicians (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and the roman in imitation of that name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the greek signify the palm for as touch the deduction of the name Phoenicia either from (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) by Montanus or from (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) by Postellus signify the delicacy of the inhabitant by the first and their observation or adoration of the fire by the second they be but late spring fantasy and have not any ground of reason at all for as much as in all the Hebrew writing of the bible that country be never term by any name sound towards phenicia but in the greek only but in many old coin that I have see I have note the palm tree as the special cognisance of Phoenicia as I have also the olive branch and coney to be of Spain the horse of Mauritania the elephant or the spoil of the elephant of Africa the camel of Arabia the crocodile or the bird of Egypt and diverse other specialty for other country and namely I have see sundry old coin of the emperor Vespasian of several device and imagery stamp for a memorial of his conquest of judaea and take of jerusalem for the inscription be in every of they judaea and in each of they I especial observe a woman sit in a sad and mournful fashion with her back to a palm tree wherein I make no doubt but the desolate woman signify judaea and the palm Phoenicia even as Phoenicia be immediate towards the north at the back of judaea for the exceed store of good palm wherewith that country abound insomuch that in monument of antiquity the palm tree be observe for the ensign of Phoenicia the same nation I say call themselves and by the israelite their next neighbour be call Chanaanites and that they be indeed no other I be able easy to prove for first the same woman that in Matthew be name a Canaanite be in mark call a Syropoenician 2. where mention be make in josua of the king of Canaan they be in the septuagint translation name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 3. to put it out of question all that coast from Sidon to Azzah that be Gaza near to gerar be register by * * gen. 10.19 Moses to have be possess by the posterity of Chanaan of which coast the more northrene part above the promontory of carmel Strab. l. 16. long med. plin. l. 5. c. 12. Ptolem. tab. 4. Asiae Dionys. Alex in Periegesi or rather from the river chorseus Kison the jew call it that near the promontory of Carmell enter the sea to the city of orthosia above Sidon northward be by Strabo Pliny Ptolemy and other refer to Phoenicia although Strabo extend that name along all the maritime coast of Palestina also to the confine of Egypt as Dionysius Periegetes also do place joppa and Gaza and elath in Phoenicia which very tract to have be the several possession of Zidon and and Girgashi and Harki and aruade and chamathi six of the eleven son of Canaan the other five inhabit more to the south in Palestina they that be skilful in the ancient chorography of the holy land can be ignorant see therefore out of this part of the land of Canaan for in this part Tyrus be the carthaginian and other colony of the phoenician in Africa come aug. expos. epist Roman in med it be out of all doubt that they be of the chananite progeny and for such in very deed and no other they repute and profess themselves to be for as Austin have leave record who be bear and live among they the country people of the punike when they be ask touch themselves what they be they will make answer that they be Channai meaning as Austin himself do interpret they Canaanites certain therefore it be that the native punic language be the chanaanitish tongue but that I add for explication this clause or the old Hebrew meaning by the old Hebrew that which be vulgar speak among the jew before the captivity you will perhaps suspect my credit and be offend for I be not ignorant how superstitious divine for the most part be affect towards the Hebrew tongue yet when I have set down the african language to have be the canaanitish tongue I think good to add for plainness sake or the old Hebrew because I take they indeed to be the very same language and that Abraham and his posterity bring it not out of chaldaea but learn it in the land of Chanaan neither be this opinion of i a mere paradox and fantasy but I have * * Postel lib. phoenic c. 2. @. 5. Aria l. Chana^ c. 9 Genebrard l. 1. chr^n a 131. Sca^ig fest. indict sarra and in ep a^ Vbert and Tomson three or four of the best skill in the language and antiquity of that nation that the late time can afford of the same mind and certain by * * isa. 19.18 isaiah it be call in direct term the language of Chanaan and it be moreover manifest that the name of the place and city of Chanaan the old name I mean by which they be call before the israelite dwell in they as be to be see in the whole course of the book of Moses and of joshuah be Hebrew name touch which point although I can produce other forceable reason such as may except my fantasy delude i vex the best wit in the world to give they just solution yet I will add no more both to avoid prolixity and because I shall have in another place fit occasion but to speak particular of the punic tongue which have bring we into this discourse and which I prove before to be the canaanitish language it be not only * * aug. in ser. 35. the verb dom. in Euang. see luc. in one place pronounce by Augustine who know it well no man better to have near affinity with the Hebrew tongue which also the * * as in the punic tongue three augustin in expos. epist. add Roman Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) edom blood Enar. psalm 126. Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Mammon lucre sermon dom. in mont. l. 2. c. 14. Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) bal. the lord quaest in judic. cap. 16. Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) heaven ibid. Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) messe to anoint Tract. 15. in joan. heb (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) a virgin Hieron in c. 7. Isai. Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Gadir a fence or wall Pliny l. 4. c. 22. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and some other that diligence may observe punic word disperse in the writing of Augustine and other as many as come to my remembrance prove to be true but more effectual in * * Aug l. 2. ^ent litter Petil^ani cap. 104. another place to agree with it in very many yea almost in every word which speech see they can in no sort have from the israelite be not of Abraham posterity both because no such transmigration of they be remember in the holy history and for that the punic colony be special mention to have be deduce from Tyre which never come into the possession of the israelite but from the canaanite who offspring they be it follow thereupon that the language of the canaanite be either the very same or exceed near the Hebrew and certain touch the difference that be between the Hebrew and the punic I make no doubt but the great distance from their primitive habitation and their conversation with stranger among who they be plant and together with both the length of time which be wont to bring alteration to all the language in the world be the cause of it and although that punic speech in Plautus which be the only continue speech of that language (...) act. 6. that to my knowledge remain extant in any author have no such great convenience with the Hebrew tongue yet I assure myself the fault and corruption that have creep into it by many transcription to have be the cause of so great difference by reason whereof it be much change from what at first it be when Plautus write it about one thousand eight hundred year ago and special because in transcribe thereof there will be so much the less care take as the language be less understand by the writer and by the reader and so the escape less subject to observation and controlment many be the nation that have for their vulgar language the slavonish tongue in Europe and some in Asia of the largeness of the slavonish turkish and Arabic language c. 8. among which the principal in Europe be the slavonian themselves inhabit Dalmatia and liburnia the west macedonian the epirote the bosinate seruians russian bulgarian moldavian podolians russian muscovite bohemians polonian Silesians and in Asia the circassians Mangrel^ians and Gazarites these I say be the principal but they be not all for Gesner and Roccha reckon up the name of sixty nation that have the slavonian tongue for their vulgar language so Gefner in mithrid in ling. Illyricca in append dialect in Illyrica that it be know to be vulgar speak over all the east part of Europe in more than a three part of the whole even to the utmost bound of it the river of Droyna and Tanais Greece and Hungary and Walachia only except indeed the region of Servia Bosina Bulgaria Moldavia Rus^ia and Moscovia namely all the nation of the eastern part which celebrate their divine service after the greek ceremony and profess ecclesiastical obedience to the patriarch of Constantinople write in a diverse sort of character from that of the dalmatian croatians Istrians polonian bohemians Silesians and other nation towards the west both which sort of character be to be see in postels book of the oriental language of which this last be call the dalmatian or illyrian character and be of * * pastell (@) Dalmat ^occh (...) 161 and ^^ Hieromes divise that other bear for the most part much resemblance with the greek be term the seruian character and be of g g Roccha lib. (@) ^^ Cyril^s invention for which cause as Roccha have remember they term the language write in that character (@) pag. ^^^ but yet notwithstanding the difference of character in the write of these nation they speak all of they the difference of dialect except the same language but yet be not the slau^nike tongue to answer your question for all this large extent the vulgar language of the turkish empire for of the turk dominion only Epir^^ the west part of Macedon Bosina Servia Bulgaria and part of Thrace and that he have in Dalmatiae and Croacia beside the Mengrelli in Asia speak vulgar the slavonian tongue but no where for the more precise limitation neither in Asia nor in Europe be that language speak more southward than the north parallel of forty degree some part of Epirus only except I mean it be not speak as the vulgar language of any nation more southward for else be acceptable and usual as it be in the great turk serrail at Constantinople and familiar with most of the turkish soldier by reason of their garrison and other great employment in those part towards the confine of christian prince all which part as before I say Hungary and Walachia except speak that language for these reason I say it be speak by diverse particular man in many place of the turkish dominion and the janizares and officer for the most part can speak it and many other also of the better sort but yet the general and vulgar language of his dominion except those place afore mention it be not but in Anatolia although the old language still remain be for the most part corrupt greek as also in Armenia they have their peculiar language yet be the turkish tongue very frequent and prevail in they both which be original none other then the tartarian tongue as Michovius l. 1. Sarmatia c. 15. rocch in ling. Tur^ica and other have observe yet partake much both of the armenian and persian by reason of the turk long continuance in both those region before they settle the seat of their dominion and themselves among the grecian for which cause it be not without mixture of greek also but chief and above all other of the Arabic both by reason of their religion write in that language and their train up in school unto it as their learned tongue and yet although the turkish be well understand both in Anatolia and Armenia yet have it neither extinguish the vulgar language of those part neither obtain to itself for aught I can by my read find any peculiar province at all wherein it be become the sole native and vulgar language but be only a common scatter tongue which appear to be so much the more evident true because the very city that have be successive the seat of the ott^man sultan namely Iconium now Cogna in Lycaonia than Prusa in Bythinia three adrianople in Thrace and last Constantinople be yet know to retain their old native language the greek tongue although the turkish tongue also be common in they all as it be likewise in all other greek city both of Greece and Asia but in the east part of Cilicia beyond the river Pyramus as in all Syria also and Mesopotamia and Palestina and Arabia and Egypt and thence westward in all the long tract of Africa that extend from Egypt to the straight of Gibraltar I say in all that lie betwixt the mountain Atlas and the mediterrane sea now term Barbary except Morocco and here and there some scatter remnant of the old african in the inland part the Arabic tongue be become the vulgar language although somewhat corrupt and vary in dialect as among so many several nation it be unpossible but it shall be and although I be far from * * postel in p^aefat Grammat arabic reg. l. 8. the vicissitud rer. their opinion which write too overlash that the arabian tongue be in use in two three part of the inhabit world or in more yet I find that it extend very far and special where the religion of mahume be profess for which cause over and beside the part above mention in which it be as I say become the native language in all the northern part of the turkish empire also I mean that part that lie on the north side of the mediterrane sea as likewise among the mahometan tartar it be think not the vulgar tongue of the syriake and Hebrew tongue ch. 9 yet familiar with very many both because all their religion be write in that language and for that * * Bellon l. 3. c. 12. every boy that go to school be teach it as in our school they be teach latin and greek insomuch that all the turk write their own language in Arabic character so that you see the common language of the turkish empire to be the slavonish the greek the turkish and Arabic tongue serve several for the part that I mention before the syriac tongue be certain * * in praefat. Grammat Syric Sixt. Senen Biblioth. l. 4. in Thargum Canin in praefat. Syric ar. Montan. Mazzorethan Apparat. Bibl. reg Lexic. Genebrard l. 2. Chronog an. 3690. Bellarm. l. 2. 4. and 15. etc. Possevin sacr. in dic^i^^e think to have have beginning in the time of the captivity of the jew in Babylon while they be mingle among the chaldean in which long revolution of seventy year the vulgar sort of the jew forget their own language and begin to speak the Chaldee but yet pronounce it amiss and frame it somewhat to their own country fashion in notation of point affix coniugation and some other property of their ancient speech it become a mix language of Hebrew and Chalde^ a great part Chaldee for the substance of the word but more Hebrew for the fashion and so degenerate much from both the old and right Hebrew remain after that time only among the learned man and be teach in school as among we the learned tongue be accustom to be and yet after the time of our saviour this language begin much more to alter and to depart further both from the Chaldee and Hebrew as receive much mixture of greek some of roman and Arabic word as in the Talmud name of jerusalem gather by r. jochanan about three hundred year after Christ be apparent be far full of they than those part of the Chalde^ paraphrase on the holy scripture which be make by r. jonathan a little before Christ and by r. Aquila who they call Onkelos not long after but yet certain it be both for the great difference of the word themselves which be in the syriake tongue for the most part Chaldee and for the diversity of t^ose adherent of word which they call and as also for the differ sound of some vowel and sundry other consideration certain it be I say that the unlearned jew who vulgar speech the syriake then be can not understand their (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be their lecture of Moses and the prophet use in their synagogue in the Hebrew tongue and that seem to have be the original reason both of the public speech and declaration of learned man to the people usual in their synagogue on the sabboath after the read of the law and of the prophet whereof in the o o act. 13.15 new testament we find some mention and also of the translation of jonathan and Onkelos and other make into their vulgar language for that the difference betwixt the Hebrew and the Chaldee be so great that the tongue of the one nation can not be understand by the other first the tongue themselves which yet remain with we may be evident demonstration of which we see that one may be skilful in the Hebrew and yet not understand the Chaldee and therefore neither can they who speech the Chaldee then be although much degenerate understand the Hebrew second we find that when p p Nehem. ca. 8. v. 7.8 9 ezra at the return from the captivity read the book of the law before the people other be fain to interpret that which be read unto they and three the answer make to Rabshakeh by the officer of king Hez^kiah may put it out of question will he q q reg. l. 2. ca. 18 v. 26. to speak unto they in the Chaldee tongue that the common people of jerusalem in who hear it be may not understand what be speak but yet it may be that as at this day the jew use to do so also in Christ time of converse on the earth they may also read the Chaldee Targamin and certain some r r ju^^us in Bellarm. cont. 1. l. 2. c. 15. @. 11. learned man affirm they do so together with the Hebrew lecture of Moses and the prophet for certain it be that jonathan ben Vziel have before the birth of our saviour translate not the prophet only into Chaldee for it be his paraphrase that we have at this day on the prophet and the language which we now call the syriake be but the jewish Chaldee although in the after time by the mixture of greek and many other foreign word it become somewhat change from what in the time afore and about our saviour incarnation it have be but the pentateuch also at least if it be true which sixtus have record Sixt. ^iblioth sanct. l. 4. in dict. on syra Galatin arcan Verit. l. 1. c 3 namely that such be the tradition among the jew and which galatine write that himself have see that translation of jonathans for of that part of the Chalde^ paraphrase which we have in the complutense and king Philip bible on the book of Moses Onkelos be the author of that on josuah the judge the book of the king and of the prophet jonathan of that on Rut^ Hester job the psalm and the book of Solomon r. joseph caecus beside that of Onkelos the beginning of both which he set down differ one from another in the first word which namely touch the public read of the Chaldee Targamin either together with the Hebrew text or instead of it I may as well conceive to be true as that the foreign s s vid. Salmeron Canonic^ prolegom ^ in Tomo 1. and septuagint prol. 5. Tertull. in ca. 19 jew dwell in Alexandria and other part of Egypt in Asia also and other greek province abroad use public in stead of the Hebrew which now they understand not the septuagint greek translation as be evident in Tertullian and of some other of they in the constitution of t t novel 146. justinian which jew for that very cause be sundry time in the u u act. 6.1 and 9.29 and 11.20 Scalig. in Chron. Euseb. Annun mdccxxxiv and ^un Bellarm. Controu. 1. l. 2. c. 15. @. 21. and drus. praetoritor l. 5. act. ap. 6.1 act of the apostle term (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for by that name in the judgement of learned man the natural grecian be not mean which be always name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) but the jew disperse among the gentile that use to read the greek scripture in their synogogue and here shall be the period of my first Enquiry touch the language and beginning of the second concern the sort of religion abroad in the World in discourse whereof you must be content to accept of modern author because I be to entreat of modern matter and if I hap to step awry where I see no path and can discern but few step afore i you must pardon it and yet this one thing I will promise you that if either they that shall direct i mislead i not or where my reason suspect that my guide wander and I be mislead if my circumspect observe or diligent inquire may preserve i from error I will not depart a hair from the way of truth chap. 13 master BR^REWOODS inquiry of the religion profess in the world of christian mahometans jew and idolater with other philosophical speculation and diverse annotation add all Europe be possess by christian except the utmost corner of it towards the east and the north for the small company of Mahumetans inhabit their peculiar of the sundry part of the world inhabit by christian chap 10. Sarmatia l. 2. c. 3. boem Mo^ib gent. l. 3. c. 7. b^ter Relat. par. 3. l. 1. Ziegltr in Schondia c. Lapponia damian a Goas tract l. 2 Sarmatia c. 5. Munster cosmo. l. 4. c. 3^ b^ter relation pa. 1. l. c. Bothnia village about wilna in Litunia or the scatter of the sundry part of the world inhabit by christian chap 10. Sarmatia l. 2. c. 3. boem Mo^ib gent. l. 3. c. 7. b^ter Relat. par. 3. l. 1. Ziegltr in Schondia c. Lapponia damian a Goas tract l. 2 Sarmatia c. 5. Munster cosmo. l. 4. c. 3^ b^ter relation pa. 1. l. c. Bothnia remnant of idolater in the same province and in Samogitia be not worthy mention but towards the north Lappia Scricfinia Biarmia Corelia and the north part of Finmarke all which together pass common under the name of Lapland and make a region about nine hundred mile in circuit be inhabit by idolater and towards the east all the region betwixt Tanais and borysthenes along Maeotis and the euxine sea the true native country of the ancient goth be more than twice as large as the former and withal much better people be inhabit by the tartar call or who be all mahometans except only a small remainder of christian in some part of taurica but in all the turk dominion that he have in Europe enclose after a peninsular figure between Danubius and the sea and contain in circuit about 2300. mile for Moldavia Walachia and Transiluania I reckon not for the part of his dominion namely from above Buda on Danubius side and from Ragusa on the sea eastward to the utmost bound of Europe as also in the isle of the aegaean sea christian be mingle with Mahumetans all which dominion yet of the turk in Europe though so much in circuit as I say be nevertheless measure by square no great than Spain the continent of it be no way answerable to the circumference both because it run far out in sharp angle towards the west and south namely in Hungary and Moraea and be beside in Greece in many place extraordinary indent with the Sea and in his dominion of the turk in Europe such be notwithstanding the mixture of Mahumetans with christian that the christian * * Relat. p. 2 l. 4. relation gran. Turco Georgenitz affliction Christian l. c. make two three part at least of the inhabitant for the Turk so that the christian pay he his yearly tribute which be one four part of their increase and a saltanie for every poll and speak nothing against the religion and sect of mohammed permit they the liberty of their religion and even in Greece itself although more dissolute than any region of Europe subject to the Turk as have be ancient more waste with intestine discord and long groan under the turk oppression there remain yet nevertheless in * * have more gerlach in epist. crus l. pag. Concil. Carthag 4. and african Carth. 6. Constantinople the very seat of the turkish empire above twenty church of christian and in the city of Salonichi thessalonica above thirty whereas in the late this mahumet^^ns have but three beside very many church abroad in the province under suffragan bishop of who the metropolitan of Salonichi have no less than ten belong to his jurisdiction as there be also record yet to remain under the metropolitans of Philippi one hundred and fifty church of Athens as many of Corinth one hundred together with sundry suffragan bishop under each of they but in Africa all the region in a manner that christian religion have gain from idolatry mahumetanisme have regain from christianity insomuch that not only the north part of Africa lie along the mediterrane sea namely betwixt it and the mountain Atlas even from Spain to Egypt where Christianity sometime exceed flourish as there we read synod of above two hundred bishop to have be gather and a a Martin Polon an. 475. three hundred catholi^^e bishop to have be there expel by king of the wandale and in some one province alone b b vict. l. 1. Persecut Vandalec of the christianity of Af^ica see santos and gramay relat. inf l. 9 c. 12. Zengitana by name it be that wherein Carthage stand to have be one hundred sixty four bishop under one metropolitan not only that north part of Africa I say be at this present utter void of christian except a few town belong to the king of Spain of which only and Tanger be episcopal city but even in all the vast continent of Africa be about thrice as large as Europe there be not any region entire possess by christian but the kingdom of habassia no nor yet which be more lamentable any other where christian be mingle either with Mahumetans but only Egypt or where with idolater but the kingdom of c c pigafer hist. l. 2. c. 2. in these part Christianity be lessen Conga and angola which two about one hundred twenty year ago ann. 1491. begin first to receive christianity all the rest of Africa be entire govern and possess by pagan or Mahumetans to which if I shall add those few place in Africa afore mention near the straight of Gibraltar which the king of Portugal and Castille have conquer from the moor with the other few disperse fortress which the portugal hold in other place on the coast of Africa altogether even betwixt Spain and India be but eleven or twelve I know not where to find even among all the native inhabitant of Af^ike any christian more for as for the large region of Nubia which have from the apostle time as be think profess the christian faith it have again above one hundred year since forsake it and embrace instead of it partly mahumetanisme and partly idolatry and that by the most miserable occasion that may befall namely famine of the word of God through lack of minister for as Aluarez have record at his be in the king of Habassia his court Aluarez hist. aethiopic ^ 137 there be ambassador out of Nubia to increate he for a supply of minister to instruct their nation and repair christianity go to ruin among they but be reject and you be the christian of Egypt namely those of the native inhabitant but very few in respect of that infiniteness of people where with Egypt do and ever do abound as be esteem not to pass * * b^ter relat pa. 1. l. ^ ca. 1 Egitto thom^a ^e^ Conuers gent. l. 7. par. 1. c. 5. 1. l. 3. c. Abossia 50000. and as touch the kingdom of habassia neither be it all christian but a great part of gentile namely towards the west and south bound of it and some part Mahumetans towards the east border neither so large and spacious as many man relation have make it think to be for although I can assent to they who assign to that great kingdom but about 662. league of compass by which reckon suppose they be spanish league it shall be little large than Germany for I know full well by infallible observation th^^ spa^ing limitation of other to be untrue yet neither can I yield to they who esteem it * * horat. malaguz 1. see hereof late and better inte^ligenc^ l. 7 c. 7 and 8 abassia be reduce now to a small circuit Sommar oriental Ramos vol. 1. pag. 3^4 Relat. p. 1. l. 3. c. Loango an. I do not think it now to contain half so many christian which yet be but half christian as any one of those four the author allow too much as Pigafett^ also and in these time it be little except in misery better relation of these pa^ts be since our author death publish by G^dig^u^ and out of he translate hither l^ 7 c. vlt. Strab. l. 2. Pigafet^ reg. cong l. 2. c. ^0 great than the va^te dominion of the emperor of Turkey or of Tartari^ etc. or to they that extend it from the one tropic to the other and from the red sea almost to the west ocean for first certain it be that I may speak a little of the limit of this kingdom that it attain not to the red sea eastward neither within the strait of Babel mandel nor without for within those strait along the bay of Arabia there be a continual ledge of mountain know to be inhabit with moor betwixt that bay and the dominion of habassia so that only one port there be along all that coast Ercoco by name where those mountain open to the sea that at this present belong to it neither without those straits do it any where approach to the ocean all that coast as far as M^zanbiqu^ be well know to be inhabit with arabian and as touch the west limit of habassia I can find by any certain history or relation unskilful man may rumour what they will and I know also that the common charts represent it otherwise I can find I say that it stretch beyond the river Nilus so far come it shore of the west ocean for it be know that all the west bank of Nilus from the river of swear to the confine of Nubia be possess by the Anzichi be a idolatrous and man-eating nation and subject to a great prince of their own thus than it be with the breadth of the empire of habassia betwixt east and west and now to speak of the length of it lie north and south neither do it approach northward on Nilus side further than the south end of the isle of Meroe Mero^ itself i^ inhabit by Mahumetans and the deadly enemy of the king of habassia nor on the sea side further than about the port of Suachem and towards the south although the bound of that kingdom be not perfect know yet that it approach nothing near the circle of Capricorn as ^ath be suppose be most manifest because t^e great kingdom of moenhemage and B^nom^tapa and some other be situate betwixt habassia and that circled but as near as I be able to conjecture have make the best search that I can in the itinerary and relation that be extant of those part the south limit of that empire pass not the south parallel of six or seven degree at the most where it confine with mo^nhemage so that to make a respective estimate of the largeness of that dominion by compare it with our know region of Europe it seem equal to Germany and France and Spain and Italy lay together equal I say in dimension of ground but nothing near equal in habitation or multitude of people which the distemperature of that climate and the dry barrenness of the ground in many region of it will not allow for which cause the torride part of Africa be by Piso in Strabo resemble to a leopard skin the distance of who spot represent the dispersednesse of habitation or town in Africa but if I shall absolute set down the circuit of that whole dominion I esteem the limitation of Piga^e^ta never about the truth namely that it have in circumference 4000 mile about 1500. in length and about 600. in breadth be enclose with Mahumetans on the north and east and with idolater on the west and south such then as I have declare be the condition of christian in the continent of Africa but the inhabitant of the isle along the west coast of Africa as namely madera the canarre the isle of cabo Verde and of s. Thomas and some other of less importance be by the portugal and cast^lians instruction become christian but on the east side of Africa except only * * Paul venet l. 3. c. 38. Zocotora there be no christian isle even such be the state of christian in the firm land and the adjacent isle of Africa and it be not much better in Asia for except first the empire of Russia and yet of it see to. 2. l. ^ c^ ^ and l. 3. c. 1. of the russian Christianity a great part be idolatrous namely the region between the river of Pechora and and some part of Permia second the region of circassia and Mengrelia lie along Moeotis and the euxine sea from Tanais eastward as far as the river Phasis three the provine of Georgia and four the mountain Libanus in Syria and yet the last of these be of the turk dominion except these few I say there be not any region in all Asia where christian live several without mixture either of Mahumetans or of pagan for although Vitriacus a man well experience in some part of the orient as be bishop of Acon and the pope legate in the east jacob a (@) hist. orient (@) at what time Palestina and Syria be in the hand of christian have least register that the christian of the easterly part of Asia since the tartarian time Christianity be near extirpate out of Asia exceed in multitude the christian of the greek and latin church yet in his time for he write almost four hundred year ago Christianity begin to decline and since his time it have proceed infinite to decay in all those part of Asia first by the inundation of the idolatrous tartar who subdue all those region and after by the entertain of mahumetanisme in many of they the time be indeed and but about four hundred year ago when the king of Tenduc who the history of those time name presbyter johannes a Christian but a nestorian prince rule far and wide in the north-east part of Asia as have under his dominion beside Tenduc which be his own native and peculiar kingdom all the neighbour province which be at that time for a great part christian but after that his empire be bring to ruin and he subdue by Chingis a rebel of his own dominion and the first founder of the tartarian empire which happen about the year 1190. the state of christian religion become in short time strange alter in those part Paul Venet. l. 1. c. 8. for I find in Marcus Paulus who live within fifty year after Vitriacus and be a man of more experience in those part than be as have spend seventeen year together in Tartary partly in the emperor court and partly in travail over those region about the emperor affair that except the province of Tendu^ which as I say be the kingdom of presbyter john residence for it be the prince of that kingdom which be right and usual by the ancient historian name Scaliger l. 7. Annot. in Ethiop presbyter John howsoever the mistake fantasy of many have transport it out of Asia into Africa and by error bestow it on the king of habassia except that province of Tenduc I say whereof * * for scaliger imagination that it be the king of the habassine that enlarge his dominion so far in the north-east of Asia till he be drive into africa by the tartar have neither any foundation at all in history not probability in reason namely that a king in Africa shall subdue the most distant part of all Asia from he and there hold residence all the region betwixt belong to other prince moreover it be certain know of presbyter John of Asia that he be a nestorian whereas he of habassia be and still be a jacobite beside it have be record from time to time of the christian of habassia that they be circumcise which of those of the east be never report by any etc. Scaliger himself in his late edition have alter his conceit Marcus Paulus confess the great part to have profess the christian religion at his be in Tartary the rest of the inhabitant be partly Mahumetans and partly idolater in all the other province of those part beside that he observe the christian to be but few as namely in the kingdom of a a Vtriac Histor orient c. 78 Otho phrifing^ns l. 7. c. 33. and (@) Tanguth of b b l. 1. c. 45. chinchi^tales of Su^cuir of c c l. 1. c. 47. Caraiam of d d l. 1. c. 48. Cassar of e e l. 2. c. 39 Carcham of f f l. 1. c. 38. Ergimuli of g g l. 1. c 40. C^rguth of Eg^igaia and in the other region of Tartary mention no christian at all two city only I find in he except the one be h h l. 1. c. 62. Cingiangifu in Mangi that be China where he note that many christian dwell and the other i i l. 1. c. 63. quinsay in which late yet although the great city in the world he have record to be find but one church of christian but these place except before mention k k l. 2. c. 61. I can find no certain relation neither in Paul venetus nor any other of any christian of the native inhabitant l l l. 2. c. 64. in all the east of Asia but idolatry keep still her old possession and overspread all but yet indeed in the more southerly part of Asia especial in those where Christianity be first plant and have take deep root as Anatolia Syria Palestine chaldaea Ossyria Mesopotamia Armenia Media Persia the north part of Arabia and the south of India christian be not only to be find but in certain of those region as in Anatolia Armenia Syria Mesopotamia somewhat thick mingle with Mahumetans as they be also in the south of India not far from the promontory of Comorijn in some reasonable number in the kingdom of C^^tan of Cranganor and of Choromandel but mingle with idolater but yet be not this mixture of christian with they of other religion in any part of Asia after the proportion of their mixture in Europe where I observe the christian to make the prevail number but they be far inferior to the multitude of the mahometans and of the idolater among who they be mingle and yet touch their number decrease every day in all the part aforesaid India only except where since the portugal hold Goa which they have erect into a bishopric and entertain malabar and some other part of India what with commerce and what with amity the number of christian be great multiply in sundry place of that region but yet not so as to compare in any sort with the mahometans and much less with the idolater among who they live thus it be with christian in the firm land of Asia but in the land about Asia Christianity be as yet but a tender plant for although it have make some entrance into the isle call namely into thirty of they for so many only of 11000. term by that name be subject to the king of Spain th. jes. Conu gaunt l. 1. c. 1. by the industry of the castilian as also by the preach of the portugal into ormuz in the bay of Persia and into Ce^lan in the sea of India and some few other of the infinite multitude of island disperse in that eastern sea yet have it hitherto find in all those place rather some fair beginning than any great proceed only in japonia Christianity have obtain notwithstanding many hindrance and opposition more prosperous success insomuch that many year since there be record to have be by estimation about Plat. Bon^ stat. Relig. l. 2. cap. 30. 200000. christian in japonia HONDIUS his map of the christian World last in America there be four large region and those of the most fruitful and populous part of it possess and govern by the spaniard that be Nueva espana can open their mouth wide in extol their own exploit these 12. year christianity have there go backward see l. 5. c. 2. and l. 10. c. 2 Castilia otherwise term Reino Peru and part of brasil the first three by the castilian and the four by the Portugal^ all which together may by estimation make a region as large as Europe in which as also in the island special in the great island of hispaniola Cuba jamaica and puerto-rico ^he Christian region be so large spread that * * amand. ziric in Chro. cric an. 151^ one have presume to equal in a manner the christian of America to those of the latin church in Europe and * * Surius in chr. an. chr. 155^ vid. epist. Petri Gauden in com. s. Francis p. 22^ and spi mart. a Valent ibid. p. 23^ another have leave record that within a few year after the entrance of the gospel among they there be no less than seven million or as other report fourteen million that in the sacrament of baptism have give their name to Christ but especial in the kingdom of Mexico or Nueva Espanna Christian religion obtain that plentiful and prosperous success that we find record of sundry of the preacher employ about the conversion of that people that they baptize each each one of they above 100000. and that in few year insomuch that as be story by Surius it be to be find among the record of Charles the five that some old priest have baptize 700000. another 300000. and certain other very great multitude but yet what manner of christian many of those proselyte be I be loath to remember or report and it may be by this time they be better affect and instruct than they be for certain Ouiedo and Benzo man that have long live and be well experience in those part have leave record the first of * * ouied histor. ind. occident l. 17. c. 4. Benz. hist. no^^ Orbu l. 2. c. 19 see ^o. 1. l. 5. c. ^ and l. 7. c. ^^ and l. 8. c. 4. etc. Cuba that there be scarce any one or but very few that willing become christians and both Ouiedo of they and Benz^ of the christian of Nueva Espanna that they have nothing almost belong to christianity but only the bare name of christian be so utter mindelesse and careless of christian religion that they remember not any thing of the covenant and profession they make in their baptism only they keep in mind the name they receive then which very name also they forget soon after but all the rest of America except the region afore mention which compare to the part possess by the castilian and portugal to make estimation by the map that we have of those region for the north and west coast of America be not yet perfect discover may be as six to one be possess by idolater have declare the amplitude of christianity I will proceed to show the state of other religion in the world (@) part of (@) w^rld possess by Mahumetan^ ch. 11 the religious of ^he world bring to (@) fou^e head or general kind and with all what part of it the professor of those religion do several inhabit and last what proportion they may have each to other and all of they to christian to endeavour therefore your satisfaction in this behalf there be four sort or sect of religion observe in the sundry region of the World namely idolatry mahumetanisme judaisme and Christianity of christian I have already speak now therefore will I relate for your better contentment of the other three and first of Mahumetans mahometans then possess in Europe as I say before have in that part but small mixture of christian all the region betwixt Tanais and Boristhenes don and Nieper they be now call be about a twenty part of Europe beside a a Mathias sarmat l. 2 c. 3. some village in Lituania about Wil^a where the use of their religion be by the king of Poland permit they for in Greece Macedon Thrace Bulgaria Servia Bosina Epirus the great part of Hungaria and some part of Dalmatia which may be together about one fourteen part of Europe although the government be whole the turk yet Mahumetans scarce pass one three part of the inhabitant but in Africa mahumetanisme be spread exceed far for first to consider the maritime coast it possess all the shore of the atlantic ocean from cape blanco b b they reach to and beyond the river of Gambra see jobson l. 9 c. 13. as likewise on the east to Sofala santos l. 9 c. 12. far then our author have relate to the straight of Gibraltar be about 1100. mile second on the shore of the mediterraine all from that straight to Egypt about 2400. mile except only on the one coast and on the other some seven town in the possession of the spaniard three on the east side of Africa all the coast of the bay of Arabia even from suez to cape Gardafu about 1600. mile except only one port Ercoc^ be of the dominion of the king of Habassia and thence double that cape southward all the shore of the aethiopique sea as far as mozambique that be over against the midst of Madagascar about 1800. mile and in all the coast of Africa hitherto mention be altogether about 7000. mile that be by some excess more than half the circumference of Africa the professor of mahumeds religion have both possession and dominion together with the c c Paul ve^et l. 3. c. 39 Linschot l. 1. c. 3. maritime part of the great i will of Madagascar and many other land along the coast of Africa and yet even beyond mozambique also as far as to the cape Corrientes it be under the circle of Capricorn although they have there no rule yet they be find mingle with idolater but yet nevertheless observe it be that along the east shore of Africa namely from Suachem to mozambique be towards 3000. mile of the mention coast Mahumetans possess only the margin of the land on the sea shore and have get but little foot in the inland part except in the kingdom of dangali and adel confine together the first within and the second without the straight of Babel Mandel which yet be but small province and this also to extenuate their number be also true that from the kingdom of adel and cape Guardafu to mozambique there be find among the mahometans some mixture of idolater although the dominion be only in the mahometans hand but yet on the north and west part of Africa it be far otherwise and far worse mahumetanisme have overspread all the main land of Africa between the mediterrane sea and the great river Niger and along the course of Nilus as far as the i will of Meroe which lie also about the same parallel with the river Niger and be possess by Mahumetans and yet d d Af^ic l. 1 c. Relig. efnor beyond Niger also it have invade and obtain all the kingdom of the nigrite that border on that river so that all Barbary and biled-elgerid and Libya desert and the region of negro be become of that religion except first some maritime part towards the atlantic sea namely from cape blanco southward which be inhabit by gentile second the kingdom of Borno and some part of Nubia and three certain scatter multitude of the old african progeny that still retain their ancient gentilism and be find in diverse place here and there in the mountain and wild part of Barbary of biled-elgerid and of Libya these I say be except all Africa beside from the mediterraine sea somewhat more southward than the river Niger be overspread with Mahumetans which add these before mention along the east coast of Aethiopia may by estimation take up four nine part of Africa and yet in Asia mahumatisme be far spread be embrace and maintain chief by four mighty nation namely the arabian persian turk and tartar e e the m^g^l as great (@) prince as these permit all religion but his great commander and best soldier be common mahometan yea his son etc. Arabia be indeed the nest that breed and foster that unclean bird and have it be the cage also for ever to enclose it it have be but too much space and liberty for Arabia be in circuit above 4000 mile and except a small mixture of christian in Elt^r f f see of th^se place inf l 8. c. 13. a port town towards the inmost angle of the bay of Arabia and Petra Krac now it be call a midland town and two monastery about the hill of Sinai all be possess with Mahumetans but from Arabia that poison have in such sort disperse itself through the vein of Asia that near the one half be at this day corrupt by it for although it have not hitherto attain to the north coast of Asia which be partly inhabit by christian namely from the river of Dwyna to Pechora and partly by idolater from Pechora to the east ocean nor yet to the east coast which from the most northerly part of Tartary to the most southerly part of India g g rel p. 3. l. 2. c. mahometan except some few place in the kingdom of Si^^ idolater in like sort general obtain yet nevertheless it be as I say namely that a very great part of Asia be infect with that pestilence for first all the southerly coast of Asia from the bay of Arabia to the river Indus be possess by Mahumetans and if we proceed further along that shore even beyond the river of Indus also the great kingdom of Cambaya and Bengala for a great part of they and about one four part of the inhatant of malabar be observe to be Mahumetans and second to consider the inland part all from the westerly bound of Asia namely the river Tanais with the euxine aegaean and Mediterrane sea as far eastward as the mountain imaus which be more than half the length of Asia be possess by they except first the h h Guaguin descr Tartar in Kirgessi near imaus who be idolater and second the mixture of christian among they who yet have very small proportion for their multitude to Mahumetans in any province of all the mention vast circuit for howsoever about 320. year ago have leave record of those part of Asia that there be to be find in they thirty christian for one mahometan descr. ter. sanct pag. 2. c. 2. @. 9 yet certain that in these present time the excess of multitude be grow great on the mahometans side in respect of christian the experience of many put out of question and if we shall proceed yet further eastward in the inland part of Asia and pass in our speculation beyond the mountain imaus even there also sundry province be observe as i i Paul Venet. l. 1 c. 41.42.43 Peim Cotam lop where Mahumetans be the main and sole inhabitant and many more k k id. l. 1. c. 38.40 47.62.63.64 etc. Cassar Carcham Tanguth Cerguth Tenduc etc. where they be mingle among idolater which may for a great part countervail those region of Asia which christian and idolater take up on this side that mountain so that in my estimation have about these point confer history with geography in the most circumspect and considerate manner that I be able about nine part of twenty of Asia be possess by Mahumetans thus then be mahumetanisme spread over the one half almost of the firm land of Asia and yet moreover in the land also that be about Asia that religion have find large entertainment for not only a good part of the small l l nicol Viagin^lle^^ndie barbos ap Ramus Vo^ 1. V^ag^^ p. 313.318.319 b^t^r relat p. 3. l. 2. mahometan see a perfect relation of the l. 9 cap. u^t isle of Malidivia namely those of they that be inhabit for they be above 7000. in all and most without habitation be possess with Mahumetans but moreover all the port of the i will of Ceilan except Colombo which the portugal have the sea coast of sumatra the port of java with the i will of Sunda the port of Banda of borneo and of Gilolo with some of the land be in the hand of Mahumetans of the great spread and enlargement of which religion if the cause be demand of i I shall make answer that beside the justice of almighty God punish by that violent and wicked sect the sin of christian for we see that by the conquest of the arabian and turk it have chief seize on those region where christianity in ancient time most flourish both in Africa and Asia and partly in Europe one cause I say of the large spread of their religion be the large spread of their victory for it have ever be the condition of the conquer to follow for the most part the religion m m Christian religion to show the power and wisdom of Christ have contrariwise conquer the conqueror and by this mean the goth hun vandal Frankes Saxons norman dane and other heathen conqueror of christian have yet be conquer by their religion a grace deny saracenicall conquest because almost all the nation which now be mahometan be before in part or whole christian but rather in faith then work to which succeed the saracenicall religion without the church and papal superstition within the one profess morality of work without faith in he which be the way the truth and life the other on that fundamental faith of the trinity incarnation etc. build their hay and stubble of will-worship and merit of work the one whole exclude christianity the other corrupt it both in steed of that great mystery of godliness our justification by faith in Christ obtrude man morality and a righteousnes^e of our own even therefore unrighteousness of the conqueror a second their peremptory restraint even on the pain of death of all disputation touch their religion and call any point of it into question a three their suppression of the study of philosophy by the light whereof the grossness and vanity of many part of their religion may be discover which be inhibit to be teach in their university and so have be about these four hundred year whereas till then it great flourish among they in Cordova in Fez in maroccho in bagde and other city and yet as and * * Bellon Obser. l. 3. c. 30. Georgiovitz l. 2. the rit^b Turcar. cap. (@) other write the turk fall now again to those study afresh n n see withers his seraglio l. 9 the saracen at the first be so far from reject philosophy and art that within the first hundred year after the Hegira they there most flourish and abilqualid jacob Almansor who captain conquer Spain erect and endow eighty two college for art as many hospital and above five hundred m^squits himself best wed every Thursday in hear disputation and in his library which contain five and fifty thousand book and after the barbarian deluge christian recover lose learning by help of arabs a four cause may well be assign the sensual liberty allow by it namely to have many wife and the like promise of sensual pleasure to succeed after this life to the religious observer of it in paradise wherewith man for the great part as be of thing wherewith their sense be affect and whereof they have have certain experience be more allure and persuade then with promise of spiritual delight present only to their hope and for which present and sensible pleasure must in the mean time be forsake now touch idolater they possess in Europe a region as I before observe about 900. mile in circuit although the ordinary geographical charts represent it but false more than twice so large of the sundry region of the world inhabit by idolater chap. 12. contain Lappia Corelia Biarmia Scricfinia and the north part of fin^uarch all which together may by estimation make about one 60 part of Europe or a little more more I mean in magnitude rather than in multitude for it be indeed a little great than so beside which province there be also to be find in diverse place of o o boem morib gent. l. 3. c. 7. relat p. 3. l. 1. c. Lituania Lituania and Samagotia some scatter remnant of idolater but in Africa their multitude be very great for from cape blanco on the coast of Libya the most westerly point of all Africa be about the north latitude of twenty degree even all the coast of Africa southward to the cape of esperanza and thence turn by the back of Africa as far as the cape of mozambique be over against the midst of Madagascar in the south latitude of fifteen degree all this coast I say be not much less then half the circumference of Africa be inhabit by idolater only on the east side from mozambique to cape de Corrientes which be the south latitude of twenty four degree they be mingle with Mahumetans and on the west side in the kingdom of congo and the north part of angola with christian but yet in both these place of their mixture idolater be the great multitude but now if we consider the inland region of Africa all between the river Nilus and the west sea of Aethiopia from about the north parallel of ten degree to the south parallel of six or seven degree but from that parallel of six or seven degree even all Aethiopia southward on both the side of Nilus from the east sea of Aethiopia to the west even to the most southerly point of all Africa the cape of buona Speranza be possess by idolater except only some part of congo and angola afore mention towards the west sea inhabit by christian and the utmost shore of the east sea from mozambique northward which be replenish with Mahumetans and yet beside all the region before mention even all the kingdom of p p Af^ican l. 7. c. Borno Borno and a great part q q Aluarez hist. Aethiop c. 30. of Nubia be possess by they to speak nothing of the infinite multitude of the r r Afric l. 1. ancient african disperse in sundry tract of Barbary of biled-elgerid and of Libya which still continue in their ancient paganism so that over and beside these last very near about half Africa be possess by idolater and yet in Asia idolater abound more then in Africa even as Asia be large than Africa for the continent and for the people better inhabit for of Asia also very near about the one half or rather a little more be possess by idolater for first if we consider the maritime part all from the river of Pechora eastward to the ocean and then turn downward to the most southerly point of India and of all Asia the cape of Cincapura and from that point return westward by the south coast to the outlet of the river Indus all that maritime Tract I say be entire possess by idolater save only that in the near part of India between Indus and Ganges there be among they some mixture both of Mahumetans and christian and in the further part the city and territory of malacca be hold by portugal and some part of the sea coast of the kingdom of siam by moor so that by this account a good deal more than half the circumference of Asia be possess by idolater and although in the inland part their proportion be somewhat less then in the maritime yet if we consider well the whole dimension of Asia we shall find by good estimation as before I say that the one half or rather a little more be replenish with idolater for the better declare of which point you may understand strab l. 2. ptol. in tab. Orb. general that as Strabo and Ptolemy have observe of the mountain Taurus that beginning in the west part of Asia in the confine of Lycia and Pamphilia over against the chelidonian isle it run eastward even to the ocean keep between the parallel of thirty and forty degree and so divide the north part of Asia from the south even so must we observe of the mountain s s vid. ptol. in tab. univer and merc. in tab. Asiae imaus that beginning on the shore of the north ocean it run along through the midst of Asia to the south keep still about the same meridian namely about the longitude of 130. degree and cross at right angle in a manner the mountain Taurus divide the east part of Asia from the west imaus therefore in this sort divide Asia into two part not much unequal divide also in a manner between the idolater and mahometans of Asia for although the hither part of Asia west of imaus and possess of Mahumetans take up more in the longitude of the earth namely east and west yet the further part east of imaus spread more in latitude north and south which may make some recompense towards that excess but if withal we subtract those part of the hither Asia that be cover with the persian and caspian sea beside large part of the euxine and Mediterrane the further Asia I think will full equal it now although many mahometans be also find on the other side of imaus towards the north-east of Asia both several in sundry province and otherwise mingle with idolater or christian or with both as before be partly observe yet many more whole region of idolater to countervail those mahometans be find on this side imaus both towards the south in the kingdom of the near India and towards the north betwixt imaus and the river Pechora all which coast of Asia be inhabit by idolater and last in the midst betwixt both the Kirgessi and some other of their neighbour nation and not only in the firm land of Asia be idolatry thus spread but in those many thousand land that he disperse in the vast ocean on the east and southeast part of Asia t t pa. ven. l. 3 c. 8 which over against China be record upon the report of mariner long practise in those sea to be 7448. and about u u id. l. 3. c. 42. India to be 27000. and which may for their largeness if they be all lay together make a continent as large as three four part of Europe in those land I say idolatry over-spreadeth all except only those few which I before observe to be possess by the spaniard and by the arabian final of all other part of the earth yet discover idolatry spread further in America which be but little less than the eastern continent that we term the old world be at least six part of seven inhabit with heathenish and idolatrous people for except the region above mention possess namely by the portugal and castilian and yet the inner and wild tract even of those remain still for a great part in their ancient paganism and many notwithstanding their baptism withal worship idol tha. jes. con. gent. l. 1. c. 1. together with some late convert make in the region about and above the bay of california of who as yet history make so little report that of their number I can make no estimate and last two or three fortress hold by the spaniard on the coast of Florida with the english colony in Virginia and the french in canada these I say be except all the rest of America be as I say about six seven part remain in their old idolatry and thus have I declare the three principal sect as touch religion that be at this present find in the several part of the world with their particular region but beside these observe there be two or three irregular nation be for their religion mingle as it be of some of the former sect as first in Asia the Curdi see l. 9 c. 4. and 5. inhabit in the mountainous country above Mozal between Armenia and Mesopotamia second the drusi dwell in Syria about the skirt of Libanus the religion of which nation such as it be partake somewhat both of mahumetanisme and christianity and three the morduite in Europe possess the middle confine betwixt the precopite tartars and the muscovite that be in a manner as touch their religion mingle of all three sect for they be both baptize like christian and circumcise like Mahumetans and withal worship idol now will I entreat a little of the professor of the four sort and sect of religion that be find in the world namely of judaisme for of the jew disperse in several part of the World chap. 13. relat. p. 3. l. 2. c. although the jew have not for their mansion any peculiar country but be disperse abroad among foreign nation for their ancient idolatry and their late unthankfulness in reject their saviour the son of God so that even in jerusalem there be not to be find at this time a hundred household of jew only of all the town of Palestina Tiberias which Amurath the great Turk give to Aluarez Mendez^a jew and staffiletto be somewhat people with they neither have they at this present for any thing that be certain know any other region in the world several to themselves yet because there be some province wherein they be observe special to abound as other also whence they be exclude and banish I will consider a little of their present condition the first country of Christendom whence the jew be expel without hope of return be our country of England whence they be banish 1290. by king Edward the first not long after they be likewise banish France 1307. by Philippus pulcher only of all the country of France in the jurisdiction of Auignon the pope state some be remain out of Spain 1492. by Ferdinand and short after out of Portugal 1497. by Emanuel out of the kingdom of Naples and Sicily 1539. by Charles the five in other region of Europe they be find and in some of they in great number as in Germany Boheme Polonia Lituania Russia and part of Italy special Venice and Rome in Greece also a great multitude wherein two city beside all they of other place Constantinople and thessalonica be esteem to be about sixteen hundred thousand jew as also they be to be find by plentiful number in many part of the turk dominion both in Asia and Africa and for Asia special in Alepp^ in Tripoli in Damascus in Rhodes and almost in every city of great trade and traffic in the turkish empire as likewise in diverse part of the persian government in Arabia also and last in India namely about Cranganor and in some other more remote region and to come to Africa they be not only find in the city of Alexandria and cair in Egypt but as in many other region and place of Africa so principal in the city of Fez and tremis^n and special in the hill of Sensava and deman in the kingdom of maroccho many of which last be by LEO Africanus african l. 2. c. 3.6 etc. special note to be of that sect which the jew name * * for of the jew as touch their religion there be in these time three sect the first which be the great of they be name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) who beside the holy scripture embrace the Talmud also for authentical and for that cause they be also term (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the second be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which receive only the scripture and the thir^ (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be the samaritan at this day but very few which of all the holy scripture admit only the pentateuch or book of Moses of they all see my pilgrimage lib. 2. Karraim and by the other jew of Africa be repute no better than heretic but yet beside these and such like dispersion of the jewish nation that may be elsewhere in the world there be a fantasy of many learned man not unworthy some diligent consideration that the tartar of Scythia who about the year 1200. or a little before become first know abroad in the world by that name and hold at this day a great part of Asia in subjection that those tartar I say be of the * * post^l Descript. Syri^ ca. 1. geneb^ad Chron l. 1. Relat. p. 1. l. 2. c. vitim^ par^e de^^ Tartary and p. 3. l. 2. c. G^nde^ israelite progeny namely of the ten tribe which by Salmanazar and some of his predecessor be carry captive into Assyria which although it be as I say no other than a vain and cappricious fantasy yet have it not only find acceptance and entertainment with sundry learned and understand man but reason and authority be produce or pretend to establish it for a truth for first it be allege that the word Tatari or for so indeed they be right call as * * Leunclau in pandect h^st Tu^ci^ (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Heb. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) syr. learned man observe and not signify in the and hebrew tongue a residue or remainder such as these tartar be suppose to be of the ten tribe second because as the patron of this fantasy say they have always embrace the ancient character of judaisme circumcision and three the authority of suppose esdras the very spring I take it whence have flow this stream of opinion be allege namely that the ten tribe take this course to themselves that they will leave the multitude of the heathen and go forth into a far country where never mankind dwell 2 Esd. 13. v. 41.42.43.44.45 that they may there keep their statute which they never keep in their own land and that they enter in at the narrow passage of the river Euphrates the most high show they sign and stay the spring of the flood till they be pass over and that their journey be great even of a year and a half and the region be call Arsareth but to the first of these argument I may answer that the tartar obtain that name neither from Hebrew nor original and appellation but from the river Tartar say Leunclavius and Leunclau in pand. histon @. 3. other or else from the region say H^itho where the principal of they ancient dwell second that the name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the Hebrew or signification import a residue or remainder can but full ill as it seem be apply to the tartar in relation of the israelite * * boem morib gent. l. 2. c. 10 Haitti lib. cap. 16. who they exceed surpass in multitude as overspread half the vast continent of Asia or thereabouts for all the nation of Asia from the great river of Wolgha and oby eastward and from the caspian sea the river oxus the country of India and China northward be contain under the appellation of tartar and yet without these bound many tartar there be both towards the west and south and what if the innumerable people of so many nation as be know to inhabit and overspread the huge continent of America be also of the same offspring certain if I be not great deceive they be no other for first that their original must be derive from Asia be apparent because as he that read the relation and history of those country of America may easy observe they have no relish nor resemblance at all of the art or learning or civility of Europe and their colour testify they be not of the african progeny there be not find in all that large continent any black man except a few about the river of saint Martha in a small country call Quarequa which by force and violence of some tempest be suppose to have be transport thither from the part of Guinie or Aethiopia therefore it seem that they have their original from Asia which yet will appear more credible if it be observe which by the spaniard discovery be well know to be true namely that the west side of America respect Asia be exceed much better people then the opposite or east side that respect towards Europe and as for these reason it be very likely that America receive she first inhabitant from the east border of Asia so be it altogether unlike that it receive they from any other part of all that border save from Tartary because in America there be not to be discern any token or indication at all of the art or industry of China or India or or any other civil region along all that border of Asia but in their gross ignorance of letter and of art in their idolatry and the specialty of it in their incivility and many barbarous property they resemble the old and rude tartar above all the nation of the earth which opinion of i touch the american descend from the tartar rather than from any other nation in that border of Asia after the near vicinity of Asia to America this reason above all other may best establish and persuade because it be certain that that north-east part of Asia possess by the tartar be if not continent with the west side of America which yet remain somewhat doubtful but certain and without all doubt it be the least disjoin by sea of all that coast of Asia for that those part of Asia and America be continent one with the other or at most disjoin but by some narrow channel of the ocean the ravenous and harmless beast wherewith America be store as bear lion tiger wolf fox etc. which man as be likely will never to their own harm transport out of the one continent to the other may import for from Noah ark which rest after the deluge in Asia all those beast must of necessity fetch their beginning see they can not proceed by the course of nature as the unperfect sort of live creature do of putrefaction or if they may have putrefaction for their parentage or receive their original by any other new sort of generation of the earth without special procreation of their own kind than I see no necessity why they shall by God special appointment be so careful preserve in Noah ark as they be in time of the deluge wherefore see it be certain that those ravenous beast of America be the progeny of those of the same kind in Asia and that man as be likely convey they not to their own prejudice from the one continent to the other it carry a great likelihood and appearance of truth that if they join not together yet be they near neighbour and but little disjoin each from other for even to this day in the isle of Cuba jamaica H^spaniola Burichena and all the rest which be so far remove from the firm land that these beast can swim from it to they the spaniard record that none of these be find wherefore it seem to digress no far that the nation of the tartarian spread so exceed far as it do josep. acosta D^ nou. Orb. l. 1. c. 21. can certain be the posterity of those captive israelite neither to answer the second objection do their circumcision in any sort enforce it for neither be circumcision among the tartar ancient than mahumetanisme but be receive among they together with it as Michonius have remember so that to this day Michon Sa^ma^^^ l. 1. c. 5. of these tartar see to. 2. l. 1 and 2 in (@) polo Haic ^ ^enk^ns etc. it be not entertain for aught I can find in history among those tartarian which have not receive mahumetanisme out remain in their ancient idolatry as for the most part both the tartar of Catai^ beyond the mountain imaus towards the east ocean and the tartar of Sarmatia towards the north on both side the river of oby do neither if it shall be grant that circumcision have be ancient among they then mahumetanisme be that a argument of any importance to prove they to be of the israelite progeny it be certain know that the ceremony and custom of circumcision have be and still be usual among many nation of who there be never any suspicion that they descend from the israelite for Diodorus have record of the colchia^s philo and Strabo of the egyptian 1. part ^ c. 1. phil. l. circumcision Strab. l. 16. Herodot l. 2. a med Strab. l. 16. ^ong ^^st med Herodotus of both those nation and of the aethiopian beside that they use circumcision and that that custom among the egyptian and aethiopian do seem very ancient even as it be also by both those nation retain till this day and yet beside these country already mention the like be also record of the troglodyte by Strabo and by 10 10 sic. l. 3. c. ^ Aga^harchid l. ^e mar. ^ubr c. 49 ap. p^ot in cyprian l circumcision in Niceph Callist. l. 8. c. 3^ I^rem. 9.26 Hieron in comment Epi^han Panar l. 1 30. other of the phaenicians and arabian by cyprian and Nicephorus and to leave this accumulate of human testimony it be not obscure acknowledge by the prophet jeremy to have be usual beside the israelite with the egyptian edomite ammonite Moa^ites and the inhabitant of the desert that be the * * for that the israelite and sarracen be the same nation be manifest by Hierome and sozomen and other which be ancient term Sc^nitae as Am^^ianus have observe namely of the grecian (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) because they dwell in tent for such to be the (@) of their habitation be not only affirm by Hierome Comment. in Isai ca. 21. sozomen Histor l. 6. c. ^8 A^^ian l. 22 post med but signify and not obscure by David Psal. 120.5 vid. jerem. 4^ ^8 ^9 lament his dwell in the tent of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) by which name Arab^^ be term in the Hebrew be of their dwell in the desert by the arabian themselves name Sarracens ^or signify a desert and Sakan to inhabit in the Arabia^^ tongue or else if not of their place yet at least as learned man certain think Scaliger in Animadu Eus^b pa. 17. a 88 f^ller Miscellan. Theolog. l. ^ c. 12. of their property they may obtain that name of sarracen namely because they live much by rapine for that the word S^^acke in arabic do import to which above all nation they ever be and still be addict for the deduction of the name Sarracens from ismaelite or sarracen of Arabia of which nation Hierome also to who those region be well know as Epiphaenius also of the most of they have leave testify that they retain circumcision even in his time touch some of which although it may be probable conjecture that they receive it in some sort from the israelite if not as their progeny which yet in some sense may be say of the inhabitant of the desert be the posterity of Ishmael the son of Abraham and likewise of the edomite be the seed of Esau the son of Isaac yet at least by imitation of Abraham family to who also in blood they be ally as the ammonite and moabite * * by sozomen l. 6. c. 38. the posterity of lot * * Sara as if they claim descent from her b^ing indeed haga^^ns the progeny of h^gar be a mere fancy and fable they claim it not Abraham brother son and who have live long in his familiarity and family although I say of these nation i^ may be conjecture that their ceremony of circumcision be take up by imitation of the israelite yet that the same rite or custom be also derive original from they to the whole nation of the arabian which be exceed great or to the egyptian Ambr. l. 2. Abraham P^triarcha c. 12. or other neighbour province I know not why any shall conceive or if they do yet appear it to be otherwise because they circumcise not in the eight day which be the inviolable custom of the israelite but the egyptian in the fourteen year as be record by Ambrose and the arabian in the thirteen and some of they both sex as 10 10 Bellon obs^r l. 3. c 28. George^ (@) l. ^ (@) Tur^ar c. ci^cumci^^^ne learned man have record even as the 10 10 Sar^ gent. l. ^ c. ^0 turk also at this day who receive the rite of circumcision from the arabian be know to circumcise in the eight or twelve or fifteen year or soon or late as opportunity may serve of these nation I say how circumcision shall proceed from the israelite to they I can conceive no more than I can of the great nation of the a a pigafet Regn. cong l. 1. c. 5. b^ter Relat. pa. l. 1. c. loange Anzichi on the west side of Nilus beyond Nubia or of the inhabitant of jucatan in America whereof the first yet be and the second till they come under the government of the spaniard be mere idolater for of these also the second have and the first still have circumcision in use and although these instance utter dissolve the force of this reason touch the tartarian circumcision though it be admit to have be ancient in use among they as be usual with many other nation of who no suspicion at all can be conceive to be of the israelite progeny yet this may furthermore declare they not to be of that race because namely nothing else be to be find among they that may favour of Israel for first they be mere idolater and without knowledge of the true God as be record by Marcus Paulus by Haith^ and other second they have no remembrance of the law at all three they neither observe the sabboath nor other rite and ceremony of the israelite but touch their matrimony marry without impeachment the very Paul Venet. l. 3. c. 47 Haith l. Tartar c. 1. wife and sister of their father and touch their feed abstain not at all from unclean beast but feed on the flesh of d d Vicent Spec. ^ 32. c 6. Paul V^net l. 1. c. 55. Guiliel Itin. Tartar c. 9 horse dog cat and dead carrion and drink their blood all utter forbear and forbid among the israelite four they have no record nor regard of their ancestor and lineage from who or by who they be descend whereof israelite be ever curious five they have no affinity of language at all with either the Hebrew or Chaldee tongue neither have any use of those letter nor of any other till together with mahometan religion the arabic character come in use among some of they neither in a word do I find any thing at all wherein the tartarian favour of israelite for touch their abstinence from swine flesh which we find record of they neither be it general among they but peculiar to those that be Mahumetans nor if it be so be that any good argument because we know that the ancient e e Sigism come rer. Mosco^ guil. itinerer Tartar l. 5. boem Morib l. 2. c. 10 scythian and f f Hero ^ot l. 4. egyptian and arabian do and almost all mahometans at this day do the same which yet be well know to be in no sort descend from the israelite g g aelian Animalib l. 10. c. 17. 1 Esd. 2.13 now touch the authority of forge 1 esdras which have stir up as it seem this vapourous fantasy in the brain of new-fangled antiquary neither do that which he write of the ten tribe agree at all with the tartar nor if it do can yet the circumstance of that history agree with the truth it agree not with the tartar I say for whereas they be note in that revelation to be y y vers. 39 a peaceable people and that they z z verse 41. leave the multitude of the heathen that they may keep their statute which they never keep in their own land neither of both those property have any convenience or agreement at all with the tartarian for how be they a peaceable people that with their war have trouble and overturn almost all Asia and sundry country of Europe and hold a great part of the former in subjection to this day or how keep they the statute of the israelite that be mere idolater and utter ignorant of all jewish law and ceremony and touch the history itself of the israelite departure out of Assyria as it be set down in that apocryphal esdras howsoever it may otherwise agree with the tartar there be no wise or considerate man I think that can bring his understanding to give credit to it for first it contradict the undoubted canonical history of the chronicle and of the king 1 Chro. 5.26 2 kin. 17.23 in both which it be record of they that they be carry away into ashur and dispose in several part of the empire namely * * if (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be Cholchi and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Iberia and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Armenia so call for the mountainousnesse of it and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) than all confine together and bound the north side of the assyrian empire which stretch northward but to that i^thume between the euxine and the caspian sea so that the israelite be by that mean seat far of from their own country and place in the part of the empire most waste and desolate of inhabitant as the confine of war nation usual be but if Calach be Calacine and cha^or the hill chaboras be part of Tauru^ and sever Assyria from Armenia and Media and hara the other hilly part in the north side of Assyria as seem more agreeable to the observation of Benjamin Tudelensis for about those part he find in his travail the great multitude of the israelite then in the place allege I will understand by ashur not the empire or dominion but the peculiar kingdom of Assyria Calach and Chab^r and hara and gozan unto this day which limitation of time unto this day must at least of necessity import the time wherein that history of their remain in ashur record in the book of the king and of the chronicle be write of which late either esdras himself be the author as in the judgement 10 10 k. Da^ Kimchi and r. Shelomo Sixt. Bibliot^ l. 1 of learned man he be repute and therefore can not as it seem be the author of that apocryphal history or at least if esdras be not the author yet that the author whosoever he be live and write that history of the chronicle Abulens in praef. paralipom in question 5. after the return of the jew from the captivity or in the end of it that be in esdras time be evident by the end of the book where Cyrus his benignity for restore the jew and his proclamation for their return to jerusalem be record and that in the very same word wherein esdras in the begin of his own book have register they at that time therefore it be evident that the israelite be not depart out of the dominion of ashur no nor long after that in josephus his time who have record that even than the ten tribe remain beyond Euphrates joseph Antl^ l. 11. c. and be there grow into innumerable multitude neither yet many hundred year after josephus be dead for r. Benjamin a jew that live but about 440. year ago and travail diligent those part of the world and many other to u^^te his disperse countryman have in his itinerary leave observe not only Benjamin (...) 70 7^ (...) 76.77 (...) 81.86 (...) that he find exceed (@) great multitude of the israelite to be then remain in those province of the ancient dominion of ashur than he find in other place possess e e pag. 75. and (...) large region and g g pag. ead many city so that in the city of some one region h h pag. 77. 300000. Jew be by he number observe special that in the part of Media many thousand israelite of the progeny of they that salmanase lead into captivity be then remain but withal he set down particular and precise f f pag. 76. etc. the very place of those region where certain of the tribe be seat and there grow into great multitude as namely in i i pag. 87. one place the tribe of Reuben gad and Manasse and in k k and the most high they show they sign and stai^d the spring of the f^^ud Euphrates till they be pas^^d over vers. 44. another the four tribe of dan Asher zebulon and Nephtali but yet if there be neither authority of holy scripture nor experience to refel this fable and the fancy that have spring of it yet ordinary reason at least of man that be not ignorant of geography and be mean skill in the affair of the world 2 Esdr. 13. may easy discern the futility of it for first what need be there of such a miracle as to l l justin. hist l. 2. in princip stay the course of Euphrates for the israelite passage from Assyria or Media towards Tartary the river lie far to the west both of the one region and of the other and no way cross or impeach their journey which lie northward between that river and the caspian sea or how may those poor captive israelite disarm as they be and disperse in sundry province of the assyrian empire and be under the oversight and government of assyrian precedent be able to leave the place where by the king commandment they be to inhabit or if the israelite be able by force to depart and free themselves from the dominion of the king of ashur yet be they so wise also they take this counsel to themselves that they will leave the multitude of the heathen ver. 41. as to forsake the place where they be peaceable settle and venture their small remainder upon peril and uncertainty namely to find out a place where never mankind dwell or if their stomach serve they so well and their wit so ill as in such manner to forsake Assyria yet be they also able to make themselves way even a way as he say of eighteen month passage through the fierce and mighty nation of Scythia who neither the conqueror of the israelite the assyrian I mean nor the persian and I may add also the grecian and the roman be never able to subdue but be in the aftertime subdue by they for that the part of Scythia shall be without inhabitant and in Scythia it must be where they will find that country where never mankind dwell or else it be not in Tartary be scarce credible and go forth into a country where never mankind dwell v. 41. as whereof we read in history to have contend with Egypt for antiquity of habitation and to have prevail and for the abundance of people to be term insomuch that the great occasion of swarm abroad of those nation of Scythia and of their overwhelm of Asia and Europe with their infinite multitude and colony be in history record to be lack of room for habitation in their own country and last to make a end of this tedious discourse with the end of their imagine tedious journey what ancient geographer or historian be there set our esdras aside that ever remember of such a region as Arsareth where they be say to have seat themselves Beros l. 3. pt^le georg. l. 5. c 13. and in tab. 3. Asiae true it be indeed that I find the city of Arsaratha mention both in Berosus fragment and in Ptolemy place near the issue of the river Araxes into the caspian sea and it be perhaps one of the israelitish colonies plant in the confine of the empire of Assyria for it may well be that Arsaratha be but (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be the city or the hill of the remainder or perhaps (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the last letter of the first word cut off in the greek pronunciation for sound sake the land of the remainder but the tale of eighteen month journey will no more agree with this city than the region of Arsareth do with geography or history so that i think this forge story of the israelite voyage and habitation in such remote region where never mankind dwell savour of the same fantastical and talmudical spirit that m m Esd. 6.42 another tale of the same author do touch the collection of all the water into a seven part of the earth the other fix be leave uncover or n n cap. cod v. 5^ a three of the elephant and the whale Behemoth and Leviathan namely that God appoint the sea to one of they and the land to the other because they be so great that the sea can not hold they both for else belike if the sea have be large enough we may have go a fish for elephant for how be the sea gather into a seven part of the earth aelian De Animalib l. 12. c. 8. who expansion be not only by the most skilful philosopher esteem but find by experience of navigation hitherto make to overspread as near as may be discern about half the compass of the earth or be of that breadth and withal of the depth that it be know to be how shall it not be spacious enough to receive elephant and whale together the dimension of the elephant even of the great sort of indian elephant and the earth breed none so large as those of India be say Aelianus nine cubit of height the length in that beast be equal to the height and five of breadth the great that have be see in Europe be o o vid. gill^um in description elephant c. 6. and gor^p l. 2. Orig. Ani^er^ian observe to be far less the dimension of the whale indeed be far great five time say p p aelian l. 16. c 12. Rondelet Piscib l. 16. c. 11. A^rian R^b (@) Aelianus then the large sort of elephant but yet his ordinary dimension be but six and thirty cubit long and eight cubit high as Rondeletius have observe but admit notwithstanding some of they to be fifty cubit of which length Nearchus in arrianus be say to have measure one in the east ocean nay to be six hundred foot long and three hundred and sixty foot thick as a a (...) plin. l. 32. juba in Pliny relate to be find in the bay of Arabia where yet as it be well know by the sound of navigator that sea be not by a good deal three hundred and sixty foot deep or let they be more yet even four acre long that be nine hundred and sixty foot as Pliny have relate of some in the sea of India for although the two last report be in truth no better than fancy and fable Basil (@) aemer Homil. 7. which the impudence of some have make the ignorance of other to believe yet I will exclude none but only Basil as intolerable hyperbolical affirm namely that whale be equal to the great mountain and their back when they show above the water like to island but admit all the rest I say what proportion have those dimension of the whale and the elephant to the huge breadth and depth of the ocean for if I may without offence intersert a short philosophical speculation the depth of the sea to speak nothing of the breadth which every common map do represent be determine by fabianus in Pliny fabian pli. l. 2 c. 102. cloom meteor l. 1. c. 10. Plutarch in pauli Sc^lig Ex^r^ 38. and by cleomedes to be fifteen furlong that be one mile and seven eight or else equal to the height of the great mountain to who height and the deepness of the sea the geometrician as Plutarch have record ancient assign equal dimension or yet rather if you will any thing respect my opinion it be a great deal more for as for the shallow speculation of Scaliger and b b a^d Baccius The^mis l. 1. c 4. and other of the shallowness of the sea determine the height of hill far to surpass the deepness of the sea and that in very few place it attain one hundred pass of depth be indeed true in the narrow channel and straits of the sea but in the free and large ocean it be by the experience of navigator know to be as false as the gospel be true indeed touch the height of mountain I find it pronounce by the great mathematician eratosthenes in theon thron in Comment. construction Ptalom l. 1. that the high sort of they pass not in perpendicular erectnesse ten furlong that be one mile and one four part of which height also it be observe in Pliny that dicaearchus by dioptricall instrument find the hill Pelius in Thessaly to be and in Plutarch that xenagoras another mathematician observe the height of Olympus in the same region plin. l. 2. c. 63. save that in this late there be a addition of twenty pass for the whole number of pass be 1270. neither do I find any great perpendicular height attribute to mountain by any ancient writer cleomedes except who assign to the height of hill as he do also to the depth of the sea fifteen furlong for alhazen I omit because he only restrain the height of hill Cleomed l. 1. meteor c. 10. al^azen propos. 1. as namely not to exceed eight mile without determine what their height shall be but yet all these be to be understand I take it with relation to the mountane in and about Greece with which themselves be acquaint which may in no sort compare with the huge mountain of vast continent such as be the Alp^s in Europe Atlas in Africa Caucasus in India the andes in Peru and such other but whatsoever the height of hill may be above the common superficies of the earth it seem to i after good consideration that the depth of the sea be a great deal more for declaration of which point I require to be suppose first that the earth at the first form of it be in the superficies regular and spherical which the holy scripture direct we to believe because the water cover and compass all the face of the earth and second that the face of the land be in largeness and expansion at least equal to that of the sea and three that the unevenness and irregularity damascen l. 2. 10. which be now see in the superficies of the earth be cause as be note in damascen either by take some part out of the upper face of the earth in sundry place to make it more hollow and lay they in other place to make it more convexe or else which in effect be equivalent to that by raise up some and depress other to make room and receipt for the sea that mutation be wrought by the power of that word let the water be gather into one place Genes. 1.9 Aqui^ in sum. p. 1. q. 69. a. 1. Dionys. Carth. catharan and in Comment. cap. 1. Genes. that the dry land may appear for as for the fancy of Aquinas Dionysius Catharinus and some other divine namely that that gather of water and discovery of the earth be make not by any mutation in the earth but by a violent accumulation of the water or heap they up on high it be too unreasonable because it be utter against the nature of water be a flexible and ponderous body so to consist and stay itself and not fall to the low part about it where in nature there be nothing at all to hinder it or if it be hinder and restrain supernatural by the hand and bridle of the almighty lest it shall overwhelm and drown the land it must follow thereof that God in the very institution of nature impose a perpetual violence upon nature and this withal that at the deluge there have be no necessity at all to break up the spring of the deep and to open the cataract of heaven and pour down water continual so many day and night together upon the earth see the only withdraw of that hand or let go of that bridle which restrain the water will present have overwhelm all but to come to the point it seem upon the former supposition of which the holy scripture establish the first experience of traveller and navigator the second and reason the three that in make estimation of the depth of the sea be not to reckon and consider only the height of the hill above the common superficies of the earth unto which the extraordinary depth or whirlpoole that be find in the sea do proper answer descen beneath the ordinary bottom of the sea as the hill ascend above the ordinary face of the land but the advantage or height of all the dry land above the superficies of the Sea because the whole mass of the earth that now appear above the water be take as it be out of the place which the water now possess must be equal to the place out of which it be take and consequent it seem that the height or elevation of the one shall answer the depth or descend of the other and therefore as I say in estimate the deepness of the sea we be not to consider only the erection of the hill above the ordinary land but the advantage of all the dry land above the Sea which late I mean the height of the ordinary main land even exclude the hill be in my opinion more in large continent above the sea then that of the hill be above the land for first that the plain and common face of the dry land be not level or equal distant from the centre but have great declivity and descent towards the sea and acclivitie or rise towards the midland part although it appear not so to the common view of the eye be to reason notwithstanding manifest because as it be find in that part of the earth which the sea cover that it descend low and low towards the midst of the sea for the sea which touch the upper face of it be know to be level by nature and even distant from the centre be withal observe to wax deep and deep the far one sail from the shore towards the main even so in that part which be uncover the coursing and stream of river on all side from the midland part towards the sea * * by which rule of the proceed of the river by the proclivity of the earth and ever slide from the high ground to the low till they come to the sea be evident to be discern that in continent those region be the high land from which river stream and those the low ground to which they proceed and consequent that of all those be the high which receive no foreign river to which they give passage through they do send forth the long river on all side to the region round about they by which observation be to be discern that Helvetia and Rhetia send forth the long river of Europe which on all side descend from they and their confine Danubius towards the east Rhine north Rhodanus west beside ticinus addua and other that fall into Padus south be the high land of Europe as the region of Pamer and Kirgessi with some other near the cross of the great mountain Taurus and imaus above India whence be direct the great and long river of Asia Indus and Ganges towards the south oxus and towards the west oechardes north cantan east be prove by the same reason to be the high part of Africa and Asia and in my opinion of all the earth and as the region also about the spring of Nilus from which beside Nilus that run towards the north be send forth the river of Magnice towards the south of Zaire west of coavo and Zuama east be Niger except the great river of Africa be by the same reason prove to be the high part of that continent who property we know be to slide from the high to the low evident declare so much and although I be not able precise to determine what the ordinary declivity of the earth may be yet if that be convenient in the work of nature which be require in the work of art that imitate nature it will be find true that before I say namely that in great continent through which river have long course some of one thousand or two thousand mile the height of the ordinary midland above the face of the sea be more then of the hill above the common face of the earth for Pliny in the derivation of water plin. l. 31. c. 6. require one cubit of decline in two hundred and forty foot of proceed for he say in and as may be observe in columella and other be a dimension of one hundred and twenty foot long and Palladius in their conduction of water Columell l. 5. c. 1. arc^itectur l. 8. c. 7. pallad l. 9 tit. 11. require indeed somewhat less namely that in proceed of two hundred foot forward there shall be allow one foot of descend downward which yet in the course of one thousand mile as Danubius or Wolgha or Indus etc. have so much or more will make five mile of descent in perpendicular account and in the course of two thousand or more as Nilus and Niger and the river of amazon have ten mile or more of like descent and although I know well enough that water be as it be heavy and flexible will slide away at any inequality and therefore be altogether persuade that this rule of touch conveyance of water be not to be take as a rule of necessity to be observe in the derive of they as if water can not run without that advantage for in that respect the conueyor of water of these time content themselves even with one inch in six hundred foot as Philander also on have observe but be rather to be understand as a rule of commodity Philand in Vitruu l. 8. c. 11. namely with relation to the expedition and wholesomeness of the water so convey lest rest too long in the pipe it shall contract from they some unwholesome quality or else through the slackness of motion or long closeness or banishment from the air it may gather some aptness and dispsition to putrify although I say such excess of advantage as in the artificial conveyance of water the forename author require be not of necessity exact in the natural derivation of they yet nevertheless certain it be that the descent of river be as it be continual and the course of some of they very long and in many place swift and here and there headlong and furious the difference of height or advantage can but be great betwixt the spring of river and their outlet betwixt their first rise out of the earth and their fall into the Sea unto which declivity of the land see the deepness of the sea do in proportion answer as I before declare and not only to the height of hill it remain that we esteem and determine that deepness to be a great deal more than it have be hitherto by philosopher common repute arist. met. l. 2 c 1 strab l. 1. lo^ge post medium and although the deepness of the sardinian sea which indeed Aristotle acknowledge for the deep part of the mediterranean be special record by Posidonius in Strabo to have be find but one thousand fathom (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which be but a mile and one five part yet what may the depth in that narrow sea be compare to the hollow deepness of the u^st ocean or rather to turn this instance to our advantage if in so narrow a sea as the mediterrane be who breadth attain not where it be large six hundred mile the depth be so great what may we esteem the deepness of the huge ocean to be that be in many place above five time as broad especial see that the broad that sea be if they be withal entire and free from land they be answerable observe to be the deep but whether have I be carry by these elephant and whale to what height and depth of mountain and sea I pray you pardon i for I see I have digress that be transgress now I return into the way again of the quantity and proportion of the part of the earth possess by the several sort of the above mention religion ch. 14. now if out of the former long discourse I shall collect a short sum and estimate the proportion with respect to the whole earth that each one of the forementioned religion have to the other it being first suppose which upon exact consideration and calculation will be find to swerve very little from the truth that the proportion of Europe Africa Asia and America be as one three four and seven and that the professor of the forementioned religion possess the several portion and proportion of each of they which be before set down it will be find I say upon these supposition which the best geography and history do persuade i to be true that christian possess near about a six part of the know inhabit earth Mahumetans a five part not as l l Pofiel in praef. gram. arabic lud. Regius vicessitud l. 8. in fine some have exceed over-lashed half the world or more and idolater two three or but little less so that if we divide the know region of the world into thirty equal part the christian part be as five the mahometans as six and the idolater as nineteen for the poor disperse and distress christian which be find in Asia and Africa mingle among Mahumetans and idolater I receive not into this account both because they be but thin disperse in respect of the multitude of Mahumetans and idolater in those region among who they live be withal under their dominion and because also many mahometans be find mingle among christian in Europe to recompense and countervail a great part of that number such therefore may be the general proportion of christian to mahometans and idolater in the continent of the earth hitherto discover namely in this our neighbour continent of the east comprehend Europe Africa and Asia and in that other continent of the west call America and in the land belong to they both but if the south or antarctique continent be so large as I be very persuade it be even no less then that of the east before mention which contain Europe Africa and Asia together then will the idolater be find to surpass all the other religion in exceed great proportion for that the inhabitant of that south continent be idolater there be no question at all as I take it to be make both because in the part hitherto know as namely in the region of beach over against java they be find to be so and also because they be know to be no other than idolater that inhabit all those part of the other continent that neighbour most towards they from who it be likely they shall have receive the change of their religion if any be for first in Asia both India and the land of the indian sea whereof some lie close on the south continent second in Africa the region about the cape of buona Speranza and three in America the country that border on Magaglians straight which be the near neighbour to the foresay continent of the south be know to be all overspread with idolater now that the south continent be no less than I before esteem it namely then that of Asia Africa and Europe altogether although I may be probable induce to believe so because it be well know both touch latitude to approach in some part near the and touch longitude to run along in a continual circuit about the earth front both the other continent yet have I also another reason of more certain importance to persuade i namely because it be well know that the land to the north side of the line in the other continent the old and new world yet altogether be at least four time as large as that part of they which lie to the south now for asmuch as it be certain first by Archimedes his rule Archim Insid^nti^ l. 1. Propos. 2. * * for touch the first of these supposition it be the property of water ever to fall that way where it find declivine wherefore if the water in the upper face of it be high in one place then in another it will necessary fall from the high position to the low because it be heavy and flexible and have nothing in the open and free sea to let or hinder it and consequent will never rest settle and stable till the face of it be level in a even distance from the centre and touch the second if the earth be une-qual poise on opposite side of the centre then must it follow that the least and light mass of the earth shall press down as forcible as the great and weighty because it attain the centre as well as it but if it be grant which reason do enforce that the weighty part of the earth shall press downward with great force and with mo^e right challenge the centre than the light part it must follow that the light mass or side of the earth must yield and give place to the weighty so far till the centre of that whole mass of the earth take possession of the centre of the world for till then one side will be still heavy than the other and so the opposite half of the earth in respect of heaviness be bring on all side about the centre unto a perfect equilibration and the three may be establish by manifest demonstration because a clod of earth suffer to fall from any point of the air wheresoever on the face of the sea the same do water fall on even and plain land when all be calm and the air not trouble with wind nor the sea with wave will descend by a perpendicular line on the face of the water in such sort I say that the line by which it fall make exact equal and right angle on all side with the face of the water whereon it fall therefore it be manifest that the earth so fall tend direct to the centre of the water because no straight line insist perpendicular on the face or circumference of any special body as the water be except only those that proceed direct to the centre of the sphere but certain it be that the earth be withal direct carry towards it own centre therefore there be but one common centre of the water and of the earth that the face of the sea be in all part natural level or equal distant from the centre of the water for which equality it have obtain the name of and as grammarian say m m Varro l. 6. ling. lat. isidor origin l. 3. c. 12. and and second by the philosopher know rule that the earth be equal poyl on both side of her own centre and three that the centre of the earth and of the water be all one both of they be indeed no other than the centre of the world which though some fantastical head have call into question yet no sound philosopher ever doubt of it follow thereupon that the earth shall in answerable measure and proportion lift itself and appear above the face of the sea on the south side of the line as it do on the north. and consequent that what be want in the south part of the two foresay continent towards the counteruail of the north part which be about three five part of both the other continent lay together must of necessity be supply in the continent of the south and yet I omit all the land that may be about the arctic pole beyond the scythian or sarmatian sea which must be also counterpoise in that antarctike continent for nothing come within the compass of my understanding to be hereto reply except any will perhaps imagine that either the sea on the south side of the be very shallow or that the land of that continent may be much high above the face of the sea than the land of the other two and so equal in mass though less in circuit or that the earth on the south side of the shall be of a more ponderous disposition then on the north in which case some compensation of weightiness may be make for the want of extension but of these three the experience of sailor evident refell the first who in equal distance from the land observe a equal deepness of the sea in both south and north latitude and neither be there any experience nor good reason that can be allege to establish either of the la^er which but that I have already too much offend by digression I can prove I doubt not against all exception but this for a conclusion to this discourse I dare pronounce touch that south continent that it will certay befound in the aftertime when it shall be better discover much large than any globe or map hitherto extant have represent it such therefore as I have declare be the general state of christianity at this present in the world and the proportion of it to other religion but because you require yet further to be special inform of the diverse sort and sect of christian that be abroad in the world and withal of their diverse region and religon at least of those principal character of their religion wherein they special differ each from other I will here set down my second period touch the general difference of religion and of the several part of the world where they be maintain and will now proceed to that particular consideration touch the sect of christianity and endeavour to give you the best satisfaction that my poor read and observation may enable i to perform the sect therefore of christian that carry name and report at this present in the world of the diverse sort or sect of christian in the world and of their several region and first of the grecian chap. 15. beside the protestant and roman in the west of who I will be silent because you know their condition better than myself be 1 the grecian 2 melchite or syrians 3 Georgians 4 moscovite and russian 5 nestorian 6 indian term the christian of saint Thomas 7 jacobite 8 Cophites 9 armenians 10 habassine and 11 maronites of which eleven sect there be three principal namely the grecian jacobite and nestorian with which the rest have for the most part either some dependence and derivation or near convenience and agreement the grecian acknowledge obedience to the patriarch of Constantinople under who jurisdiction be in Asia the christian of Anatolia except Armenia the less Bello^ Obser. l ^ c. 35. and Cilicia of circassia of Mengrelia and of Russia as in Europe also the christian of Greece Macedon Epirus Thrace Bulgaria Servia Bosina Walachia Moldavia Podolia and Moscovia together with all the land of the aegean sea and other about Greece as far as corfu beside a good part of the large dominion of Polonia and those part of Dalmatia and of Croatia that be subject to the turkish dominion of which great extendment of the greek patriarch jurisdiction if you demand the reason I have observe sundry occasion from whence it have proceed for first his original or primitive authority assign or rather confirm to he as bishop of the imperial city by the council of chalcedon Concil. (@) can 28 contain all the province of Thrace and Anatolia isauria and ciliciae only except which belong to the patriarch of Antiochia and they be in all no less than twenty eight roman province second the voluntary submission of the grecian upon their separation from the latin church great increase it for thereby not only Greece Macedon Epirus Cardie and the isle about Greece in all seven province come under his obedience but also Sicily and the east point of Italy name Calabria revolt from the bishop of Rome and for a long time pertain to the patriarch of Constantinople novel Leon ^r^ine (@) l. 2 (...) ori^tals Curop^lat^^^ o^fic Constantinop as appear in the novel of Leo sophus touch the order and precedence of metropolitans belong to that patriarchy and by the like ordination set down by Andronicus Paloeologus in curopalates where we find the metropolitans of Syracuse and catana in Sicily of rhegium Severiana Rosia and in Calabria register among the metropolitans of that jurisdiction three it be enlarge by the conversion of the north region to christian religion perform by his and minister even from Thrace to * * cromer descrip. Po^on l. 1. heiden bel. Mo^^ l. 1. (@) Descript. on (@) c. 2. Russia and the scythian sea the like whereof be the principal cause that so far enlarge the bishop of Rome his jurisdiction in the west part of Europe and four by the turk conquest make upon the western country subject before to the bishop of Rome all which while partly the former bishop and pastor flee to avoid the turk oppression like the hireling that forsake the flock when he see the wolf come and partly while the patriarch of Constantinople to supply that default be fain to provide they of new minister they have be by little and little bring and train to the greek religion now as touch the proper character of their religion I must for the better design and remember of they set before i some instance or pattern to compare it and other sect of religion withal 1. Concil. Sc^^ 18. and sequetib jerem. Patriarch Constant in Resp. 1. germans c. 1 2. cocil Respons. Graec. Guisan quest. 9 3. Resp. cad. q. 5. jeren patr. Resp. 1. c. 1 4. jerem. Resp. ca^ c. 10. and ^1 5. Possevin Robus pag. 43. 6. id. l. p. 40 7. jerem. Respons. cap. 21. 8. novel constantin in Tomo 1. jur. orientalis lib. 2. Zonar annal. tom. 3. in imp. 9 Resp. Guisan quaest. 8. Possevin Moscou p. 44. 10. Posseu l. p. 41. and 42. Villamont vorag l. 2. c. 21. and 12. Possevin l. p. 42. 13. Nilus Episco Thessaly leo. 9 epist. 1. episcop Constantinop and Acridan and in an. 1054. Posseu reb. Moscow p. 38. and sequentib and that be most fit to be the roman church both because their difference with that church special be in writer most observe so that by that mean my discourse may be the short and yet no less perspicuous to you that know the opinion of the roman church so well the principal character then of the grecian religion for none but the principal you require and to mention every slender difference of ceremony will be but tedious and fruitless and be beside without my compass be these that follow 1. that the holy ghost proceed from the father only not from the son 2. that there be no purgagory fire 3. that they celebrate the sacrament of the eucharist in both kind 4. and in leaven bread and think it can be effectual consecrate in bread unleavened 5. that they reject extreme unction 6. and confirmation 7. that they deny the soul of holy man to enjoy the blissful vision of God or the soul of wicked man to be torment in hell before the day of judgement th. a jes. Conugent l. 6. c. 1. 8. that they admit priest marriage namely so that they may keep their wife marry before their ordination but must not marry after ordination 9 that they prohibit utter the four marriage as a thing intolerable insomuch that as we find record their patriarch have for that cause excommunicate some of their emperor although they have no issue leave of their three former marriage 10. that they reject the religious use of massy image or statue admit yet picture or plain image in their church 11. that they solemnize Saturday the old sabbath festival and eat therein flesh forbid as unlawful to fast any Saturday in the year exceept Easter eue. 12. that they observe four lent in the year 13. that they eat not of any thing strangle nor of blood 14. and last that they deny the bishop of Rome primacy and repute he and his church for schismatic exclude they from their communion and so have do as I find in Leo the nine his epistle and in Sigebert above these five hundred year and if you desire to see more difference of the greek and roman church you may see they but they be of less importance than those I have relate in possevine book of the matter of Moscovia of the syrian or Melchites chap. 16. syrians be the same that in some history be term Melchites be esteem for their number the * * Botar Relat. pa. 3. l. 2. ca. Melchiti great sect of christian in the orient the first be proper the name of their nation and the second note the property of their religion they be name to let vain fancy go of the city of Tyre a a Postel (...) p. 30. for postels fantasy derive Suria from (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be mere vain and be never so name in the Hebrew tongue but always (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) by which name also it seem ancient to have be know even among the grecian for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mention in Homer be no other as in * * Gellius l. 14 c. 6 Festus in Dictione Strabo expound he than the syrian Strabo himself also record in other place that the syrian * * Strab. l 16. in fine be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in his time and that the * * Vitria histor. oriental c. 4^ Niger in comme^^^ar 4. Postel in descrip. syriae pag. ^0 natural inhabitant of Syria so call themselves yet nevertheless they be vulgar know by the name of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) among the grecian because the city of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be the main mart town of all those part be the place where they have their trade and commerce with those aramite but when the phoenician tongue begin to degenerate into Chaldee than the name of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be convert into tur the late (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be turn into (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in sound make (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as * * Stra l (@) long they that observe the difference of the Hebrew and Chaldee and the transition of the first into the latter know to be ordinary which in the ancient language of the phoenician be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and certain that Tyre be ancient call sarra be record by the * * Strab. l. 1 post med. Burch^rd descr Hieron in lib. pl^n l. 5. c. 19 roman writer and it be also acknowledge by * * vid. Scaliger ^es^ in and guidon fabric in grammatic Chald^^ etc. Vitriacus Niger postel and other that the place of Tyre for the city be utter ruin three hundred year ago be still call the port of sur which name it seem to have obtain either because it be build on a rock for so that view the place have observe which (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the phoenician tongue signify or else as Hierom derive it of the straightness and scarceness of room as be seat in a small island but nineteen mile in circuit as Pliny note a small territory for such a city or perhaps because it be the strong fortress for that also (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) import of all those region as be found on a rock environ with the sea for it be before b b q. curt. l. 4. Alexander time c seven hundred pace distant from the firm land mighty strengthen by fortification of art populous as be the metropolis of Phoenicia and exceed rich as sometime the city of great traffic in the world of this city then both the region and inhabitant of Suria obtain their name but melchitae as I say they be term mere in respect of their religion wherein namely they altogether follow the example and decree of the emperor for whereas after the council of chalcedon infinite perplexity and trouble begin to arise in the east part principal about the opinion of eutyches and dioscorus of one only nature in Christ which that council have condemn but notwithstanding find many that maintain it and reject the council in those eastern country and thereupon the emperor Leo begin to exact as diverse other of his successor afterward do the suffrage and subscription of the eastern bishop for the better establishment of the council then begin they that embrace and approve the authority of that council because they follow the emperor decree make in behalf of it Niceph. calist. histor. Ecclesiast. l. 18 c. 52. to be term by their adversary melchitae of Melchi say Nicephorus rather (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which in the speech of Syria signify a king as one will say of the king religion whereas they that oppose themselves to the council be distract into no less than twelve several sect and not long after into more as the same * * lib. 18. c. 45.1.2.3.4.5 jacob Vitriaco hist. orient c. 75. Nicephorus have record now although the syrian or Melchites be for their religion mere of the grecian opinion as 1. that the holy ghost proceed only from the father 2. that they celebrate divine service as selemn on the sabbath as on the lord day 3. that they keep that day festival eat therein flesh and fast no Saturday in the year but easter eue. 4. that their priest and deacon contract not marriage be already in order but yet retain their wife before marry 4. Villamont voyag l. 2. c. 22.6.7.8 Villamon 5. that the four matrimony be utter unlawful 6. that they communicate the eueharist in both kind 7. that they acknowledge not purgatory 8. that they observe four lent in the year etc. and in a word although they be mere * * Vitriac Salignicis itiner tom. 8. c. 1. Bamugart Peregrin l. 2. c 9 and of the same religion and communion with the grecian yet be they not of the jurisdiction of the patriarch of Constantinople but of the archbishop of Damascus by the title of the patriarch of Antiochia for Antiochia itself where yet the name of christian be first hear in the world and be long know by the name of (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) lie at this present in a manner waste or break and disperse into small village of which only one of about sixty house with a small temple belong to christian g g Bellon obseru. l. ^ ^ pag. 5. Relat. p. 3. l. 2. c. crus Turco l. 4 p. 296. the patriarchal seat be translate thence to Damascus where as be report be h h lo^^ above one thousand house of christian and there remain for although i i Rel^ p. 3. l 1. c. a^ (...) the patriarch of the maronites and of the jacobite whereof the former keep residence in Libanus and the late in Mesopotamia entitle themselves patriarch of Antiochia and by the christian of their own sect be so acknowledge yet do the melchite who retain the ancient religion of Syria acknowledge none for patriarch but the archbishop of Damascus repute both the other for schismatic as have depart from the obedience and communion of the true patriarch and yet beside all these a four there be of the pope designation that usurp the title of the patriarch of Antioch for k ever since the latiner surprise Constantinople which be about the year 1200. and field the possession of the east empire about seventy year all which time the patriarch of Constantinople be consecrate by the pope as also since the holy land and the province about it be in the hand of the christian prince of the west which begin to be about an. 1100. and so continue about eighty year during which the patriarch of Antiochia also and of jerusalem be of the pope consecration ever since then I say the church of Rome have and do still create successive imaginary or titular patriarch without jurisdiction of Constantinople Antiochia jerusalem and Alexandria so loath be the pope to loose the remembrance of any superiority or title that he have once compass of the Georgians circassians and Mengrellians chap. 17. the Georgians inhabit the country that be ancient name Iberia betwixt the euxine and the caspian sea enclose with sheruan Media east with Mengrelia Colchis west with Turcomania Armenia the great south and with Albania Zuiria north. the vulgar opinion of Historians be that they have obtain the name of Georgians from their devotion to saint George who they principal honour for their patron and who image they always bear in their military ensign but yet as I take it this vulgar opinion be but vulgar error because I find mention make of the nation of the Georgians in those part both in Mela and Pliny afore saint George be bear whosoever he be touch the property of who religion this may be sufficient to observe for all that * * Volaterran l. 11. c. sect. Syri^ Prateol in Georgiani and mela. l. 1. c. 2. plin. l. 6. c. 13. it be the same both in substance and ceremony with that of the grecian * * Paul Venet. l. 1. c. 14. Chitrae ecclesiar p. 23. and 50. and who yet be in no sort subject neither ever be to the patriarch of Constantinople but all their bishop be eighteen profess absolute obedience to their own metropolitan without any other high dependence or relation who yet keep residence far off in the monastery of saint Katherine in the hill of Sinai Prateo Haeret. sect. Georgiani Bernard Lucemburg in catalogue Haeret. in Georgiani next these I must speak a little of their next neighbour the mengrelians and circassians colchi and Zychi they be ancient call seat between the Georgians and the river Tana^s along the coast of Maeotis and the euxine sea as be also christian of the greek communion and beside o o Bellon l. 1. c. 35. Sarmatia l. 1. c. 7. Interiano c. 1 2. par. 3. l. 2. c. of the patriarch of Constantinople his obedience and p convert by his minister cyrillus and methodius to the christian religion which religion notwithstanding at this present be exercise among they not without some depravation and mixture of strange fantasy for the circassians baptise not their child till the eight year and enter not into the church the gentleman especial till the 60 or as other say till the forty year but hear divine service stand without the temple that be to say till through age they grow unable to continue their rapine and robbery to which sin that nation be exceed addict so divide their life betwixt sin and devotion dedicate their youth to rapine and their old age to repentance of the muscovite and russian chap. 18. joan. metropolitan russ. in ep a^ episcop rom. Sigismud Muscou p. 31. Guagin descry Muscou c. 2. Sacran errorib Ruthenor c. 2. 2. Sigism l. p. 41. Sacran Relig. Ruthenor c. 2. Scarga Polon l. 3. c. 2. 3. Scarga Polon l. 3. c. 2. guaguin descript. Moscou c. 2. 4 joan. Metropol russ. p. 32. Guagin descr Muscou ca. 2. 5 Sigism loc. pag. 40. 6. Sigism loc. p. 40. 7. Guaguin ibid. 8. joan. Metropol russ. Sigism p. 31. Guagin loc. Sacran errorib Ruthenor c. 2. 9 10. Sigism lib. alleg pag. 47. Possevi^ Moscou pag. 2. Guaguin Descript. Moscou cap. 2. 11. Sacran errorib Ruthenor c. 2. 1^ Sigism lib. p. 28. Scarga pastor l. 3. c. 2. the muscovite and russian as they be convert to Christianity by the grecian Zonar annal. tom. 3. Cromer Polon l. 3. so have they ever since continue of the greek communion and religion 1. deny the holy ghost to proceed from the son 2. reject purgatory but yet pray for the dead 3. believe that the holy man enjoy not the presence of God afore the resurrection 4. celebrate the sacrament of the eucharist with leaven bread and require warm water to mingle with the wine 5. and communicate in both kind 6. but mingle both together in the chalice and distribute it together with a spoon 7. and receive child after seven year old to the communion say that at that age they begin to sin against God 8. omit confirmation by the bishop 9 deny the special efficacy of extreme unction 10. exclude the four marriage as utter unlawful whereas they approve not the second as perfect lawful but only permit it but tolerate not the three except on very important consideration 11. dissolve marriage by divorcement upon every light occasion or displeasure 12. admit neither deacon nor priest to order except they be marry but yet * * Possevin reb. Moscou p. 1. 13. Posseu lib. p. 44. 14. joan. Metropol russ. supr. p. 31. 15. Posseu in Moscovia pag. 42. Sacran error R^then cap. 2. 16. ^7 Sigism lib. pag. 33. Relat. par. 3. l. 1. c. Moscovia prohibit marriage to they be actual in order 13. reject carve or massy image but admit the paint 14. repute it unlawful to fast on Saturdays 15. or to eat of that which be strangle or of blood 16. observe four lent in the year 17. refuse to communicate with the roman church and to conclude excepe the difference in distribute of the eucharist and exact of marriage to their priest and deacon there be not any material difference in point of religion that I find betwixt they and the grecian with who they not only maintain communion but be also and that not long since and of right still ought to be of the same jurisdiction and government for 10 10 Possevin rer. m. scou com. 1. pag. 1. Guaguin descrip. Moscou cap 2. their chief metropolitan or primate who be the archbishop of Moscow be wont to be confirm by the patriarch of Constantinople but be now and have be about some sixty year nominate and appoint by the prince the emperor of Russia and upon that nomination consecrate by two or three of his own of who even all sort together bishop and archbishop there be but a a Possevin Sigism in Moscow pag. 28. eleven in all that large dominion of the emperor of Russia thus be it with those sort of christian hitherto relate touch their religion and governor all which as you may easy perceive be of the same communion and in effect of the same religion with the grecian and beside these some large part of the king of Polonia his dominion for Podolia and for the most part b b rel. pa. 1. l. 1. c Russia Guaguin descr. Moscou cap. ^ Russia nigra or rubra as some call it the large Russia subject for the great part to the duke of Moscovia they term Russia be of the greek religion and although the bishop of south Russia subject namely to the king of Polonia submit themselves almost twenty year ago an. 1594 to the bishop of Rome as baron tom. 7. annal. in fine and Possevin in Apparsacr in Rutheni have record yet be it not without special reservation of the greek religion and rite as be manifest by the article of condition extant ap. th. a jes. Conu gent. l. 6 pag. 3. cap. 1. pag. 328. and seq tender by they to the church of Rome and accept before they will accept of the union so that it be not any revolt from the greek religion but only in effect from the jurisdiction of the greek patriarch to the pope and that also with sundry limitation and in c c Sigism ^^b Moscou pag 27. wilna the metropolis of Lituania although the archbishop profess obedience to the pope yet be there also in that city as Sigismond have observe more temple of the greek religion there be thirty of they then of the Roman. d epist. add Ch^trae Relig. russor so that if we shall collect and put together all the christian region hitherto entreat of which be all of the greek communion and compare they with the part profess the roman religion we shall find the greek far to exceed if we except the roman new and foreign purchase make in the west and east indies the nestorian who have purchase that name by their ancient imitation of the nestorian chap. 19 and maintain of Nestorius his heresy inhabit though every where mingle with Mahumetans or with pagan a great part of the orient for beside the country of Babylon and Assiria and Mesopotamia and Parthia and Media wherein very many of they be find that sect be spread and scatter far and wide in the east both northerly to Cataya and southerly to India so that in Marcus Paulus his history of the east region and in d d guil. de Rubr. Itin. tart c. Paul Venet. 1. l. 1. c. 38.2 l. eod. cap. 39.3 cap. ^0 4 c. 47.5 c. 45. and 49.6 c. 48.7 c. 62.8 c. 64. l. 2. c. 39 l. (@) c. 61. and 64 etc. Paul Di^con histor. miscel. lib. 18. other we find mention of they and of no sect of christian but they in very many part and province of Tartary as namely in 1 Cassar 2 Samarchan 3 Carcham 4 chin^hintales 5 Tanguth 6 Succhuir 7 8 tenduch 9 Caraiam 10 Mangi etc. insomuch that beyond the river Tigris eastward there be not any other sect of christian to be find for aught I can read except only the portugal and the convert make by they in India and the late migration of the armenians into persia. the reason of which large spread and prevail of that sect so far in the orient if you inquire I find to that purpose record by Paulus of cos^hoes the king of Persia that he for the mortal hatred he bear the emperor heraclius by who he have be sore afflict with a grievous war enforce all the christian of the persian empire to Nestorianisme permit no catholic to remain in all his dominion by who preach the christian religion be far there enlarge and propagate into the east as it seem both because those of the persian dominion be more eastward than other christian and because it be certain that all of they till this day acknowledge obedience to the nestorian patriarch in Mesopotamia which country be then part of the persian dominion it be no wonder if sow their own tare and Christ wheat together they propagate with the gospel also their own heresy short after which time the sarracen of Arabia Mahumetans conquer Persia and bring their religion together with their victory into all that large dominion s^nd vist monarch l. 7. an. 1556. Paul Venet l. 1. c. 15. Brocard des. Terr sanct Le^nclau pa^d histor. Turc @ 3. there remain but little outward mean and slender hope of their repair and reformation from any sound part of the church from which they be more now then afore divide except what affliction and time and the grace of God may work and repair in they now touch their ecclesiastical government the patriarch of the nestorian to who all those of the east part acknowledge obedience a number of who Suffragan bishop an^ Metropolitans you have reckon up in sanders book and who they call jacelich say Paulus venetus and other but mistake it or else they of the east pronounce it amiss for Catholic as be observe by Leunclavius have his seat in the city of Muzal on the river Tigris in Mesopotamia or in the patriarchal monastery of saint Ermes fast by Muzal th. a jes. l. 7. pag. 3. c 4. in which city though subject to mahometans it be e e Aubret Episco orb pag. ^5 mas. in ortel in Thesaur in S^levita plin. l. 5^ c. 25. Strab. l. 16. long (@) med. record that the nestorian retain yet fifteen temple be esteem about forty thousand soul th. a jes. l. 7. par. 1. c. 4. and the jacobit three which city of Muzal I either take with Masius and Ortelius to be the same that ancient be call Selutia and in both because Seleutia be as Strabo say the metropolis of Assyria even as * * guil. b^ll sacr l 2. c. 8 musal be record to be and also because I find the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of those part commit by the father a a Concil. nicen. arab. l. 3. c. 33. and 34. Vitriac hist. orient c^ 31. tit. bell l. 21. c. 8. scal. Chron. Euseb. A.M.D. 210 2 Ben in Iti^erar in see more exact relation of bag. l. 9 c. 9 etc. my pilgrimage l. 3. c. 2. @. 3. Strabo l. 16. plin. l. 6. c. 26. ptol. g^og l. 6. c. 18. and 20. Dion hist. l. ^0 plin. l. 6. c. 26. of the nicene council to the bishop of seleucia assign he with all the name of catholic and the next place of session in counsel after the bishop of jerusalem which name and authority in those part the bishop of mosal now have or if seleucia be some other city now destroy as for certain reason I be induce rather to think yet at least the patriarchal seat be from seleucia translate to m m Muzal the patriarchal seat of the nestorian be either a remainder of the ancient ninive as Vitriacus and tyrius who therefore in his history call the inhabitant of that city have record or at least build near the ruin of it namely over against it on the other side of the river Tigris as by Benjamin who diligent view the place be observe for ninive which he note to be dissolve into scatter village and castle stand on the east bank of Tigris on Assyria side whereas Muzal be seat on the Wes^ bank on Mesopotamia side be yet both join together by a bridge make over Tigris Muzal for the opinion of Scaliger namely that seleucia be the same that be now call bagd or new Babylon my observation in Geographie and history will not suffer i to approve first because seleucia be remember by Strabo to be three hundred furlong seven and thirty mile and one or two Pliny say a great deal more distant from Babylon whereas bagd be build close by the ruin of it second because I find the position of seleucia in Ptolemie to be two three part of a degree more north than that of Babylon whereas bagd be more south three because in Dion and other seleucia be name for a city of Mesopotamia which bagd be not but in the province of Babylon as be beneath the confluence of Tigris and Euphrates the bishop of Muzal then be patriarch of the nestorian but yet at this present if the a a relat. par. 3. l. 2. c. tho. conver l. 7. par. 1. c. 3. and 4. relation of these time be true there be a distraction of that sect which begin about sixty year ago in the time of pope julius the three the nestorian in the north part of Mesopotamia about the city of Caramit submit themselves to another patriarch of the pope erect that revolt from the bishop of Muzal take also on he the title of the patriarch of Muzal which the pope bestow on he have first render and profess obedience to the see of Rome in which obedience it be say that those nestorian about Caramit do still continue now touch the specialty of these nestorian religion in relation to the roman they believe 1 Vtriac hist. orient c. 8.2 id. 101 at first that there be two person in our saviour as well as two nature but yet confess that Christ from the first instant of his conception be perfect God and perfect man Th. jes. ibid. second that the bless virgin ought not to be term (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which yet now in some sort they b b bot. relat. par. 3. l. 2. c. nest. thom. co^ gen l. 7 c. 2.3 4 vitri^c hist. orient 78. Villamont voyages l. 2. c. 23.5 vill. lo. citat. 6 Et. 7. Sul^^ nest. profess tom. 4. Biblioth. Vet. p. 1054. 8 Guliel rubric itiner Tartar c. 17. of the indian or christian of saint Th^mas chap. 20. qualify confess she to be the mother of God the son but yet refuse to term she the mother of God three that Nestorius condemn in the three and four general counsel and Diodorus Tarsensis and Theodorus Mops^ostensi^ condemn for Nestorianisme in the five be holy man reject for their sake the three general council hold at Ephesus and all other counsel after it and special detest the mall of nestorianisme cyril of Alexandria th. a. jes. ibid. four they celebrate the sacrament of the eucharist with leave bread five they communicate in both kind six they use not auricular confession seventh nor confirmation eight they contract marriage in the second degree of consanguinity th. jes. ibid. nine their priest after the death of their first wife have the liberty of the second or three or often marriage th. jes. ibid. ten they have not the image of the crucifix on their cross the christian of India vulgar name the christian of saint Thomas because by his preach they be suppose to have be convert to christian religion and his body as be think remain among they bury in the city of Maliapar on the coast of Chor^m^ndel inhabit in the near part of India namely in that great promontory who base lie between the outlet of the river Indus and Ganges stretch out the side far towards the south well nigh 1000 mile till meet in the point of they make together with the base line forementioned betwixt Cambaya and bengali the figure almost of a equilateral triangle in the more southerly part of this great promontory I say near to cape about the city of Coulan and Cranganor on the west side and about Maliapar and Negapatan on the east side do these christian of saint Thomas dwell be esteem afore the portugal frequent those part about c c Orient. ap. Ramus vol. 1. Viaggi p. 332. 15000. or d d B^rbosa eod. vol. p. 312. 16000 family or after another account e e bot. rel. p. 3. l. 2 c. India 70000. person but on the west coast the far great number of they be find and especial their habitation be thick about angamale f f bot. rel. p. 3. l. 2. c. Christ India th. jes. conver gent. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 4. 15. mile from the city Cochi^ northward where their archbishop keep residence now as touch their government their archbishop till twenty year since or little more acknowledge obedience to the patriarch of Mozal * * for Mozal as I say before be either seleucia or succeed into the dignity of it and seleucia be record to have be inhabit by the citizen of Babylon whereof it be a colony and such a colony as in short time ^t * * th. a ^e^ gent. l. 7. part. 1. c. 4. exhaust Babylon itself of all the inhabitant pass by reason of the more commodious situation to dwell at seleucia so that seleucia be inhabit by the babylonian and so become in stead of Babylon the principal city of the province of Babylonia and Assyria the city * obtain the name of Babylon of her inhabitant as well as seleucia of her founder as Pliny have record and the patriarch of it the title of the patriarch of Babylon and although * * 1. de Viaggi p. 313. Barbosa note that subordination of the christian of India to be to the Patriarah of Armenia which no doubt he receive from the indian relation among who he be yet certain it be that he mean no other than this patriarch of Mozal because those armenians which he mean be by himself observe to have for their vulgar language the arabik tongue and to celebrate their divine service in the Chaldee both which agree with christian of Mozal but neither of both with those of Armenia who language both in the vulgar and sacred use be know to be no other than the armenian tongue as also because the indian be know to have be nestorian to which heresy the armenians be most opposite as be in a manner jacobite but as it seem that patriarch be say to have be of Armenia for the nearness of Mozal to the confine of Armenia by the name of the patriarch of Babylon as by those christian of India he be still term and certain that the patriarch of Mozal g g plin. l. 6 c. 26. challenge their obedience as be of his jurisdiction appear by the profession of abil-isu a patriarch of Mozal of pope Pius the four his invest 1562. as be to be see in h h sand visib monarch l 7. p. 642. sanders book but then the archbishop of these indian revolt from his former patriarch submit himself by the portugal persuasion to the bishop of Rome retain notwithstanding the ancient religion of his country which be also permit by the pope in so much that in a synod hold in Goa for that purpose he will not suffer any alteration to be make of their ancient rite or religion as one that live in those part at that time have record but that bishop be dead his successor in another synod hold by the archbishop of Goa at i i Possevin in Apparat. in Diaperiense diamper not far from maliapur 1599 make profession together with his and priest both of the roman obedience and religion renounce in such direct sort the patriarch of Mozal and nestorianisme that they deliver up all their book to the censure of the archbishop of Goa and suffer their liturgy in the point that relish of nestorianisme to be alter even in such sort as now it be to be see in the last edition of Biblioth. vet. tom. 2. in 1 Osorius rel. Emmanuel l. 3. bot. rel p. 3. l. 2 c. Vecchia ^ India 2 od^ard barbos p. Ramus vol. 1. p. 313. 3 josephi^ c. 134. 4 joseph ind. ^ c. 134. 5 os^r Posseu in in Diamperiense Concil. thet. co^ l. 10. ca. 15. 6 jos. ind. c. 133. 7 8 9 Posseu in i^ praef. test. syriac but before this alteration of their religion be procure by the portugal those christian of India be nestorian as have the dependence that I relate on the patriarch of the nestorian they can not well be any other some specialty of who religion I find thus record 1. that they distribute the sacrament of the eucharist in both kind 2. that they celebrate it with bread season with salt say my historian and in stead of wine because India afford none in the juice of raisin soften one night in water and so press forth 3. that they baptize not their infant till they be forty day old except in danger of death 4. that they use not extreme unction 5. that thei^ priest be marry but exclude from the second matrimony Osor. rob. Emanuel l. 3. 6. that they have no image of saint in their church but only the crosse. 7. that detest the mall of Nestorianisme cyril of Alexandria they honour Nestorius and dioscorus as saint which yet i think be strange be of so contrary opinion as they be the first for two person in Christ as well as two nature the second for one nature as well as one person but it may be that dioscorus be by the relater mistake for Diodorus who be indeed a great nestorian and for it condemn in the five general council 8. that they deny the primacy of the pope 9 that their new testament which in their church they former read and still do in the syriak tongue be by the nestorian in sundry place which be now alter by the roman corrupt to the advantage of that heresy wherein yet I think the reporter be deceive because the same corruption object to they whereof some be no corruption at all but agree right with the original text much better than do the vulgar latin by compare whereof he examine they and censure they for corruption the same I say be find in the edition that we have be so far from be corrupt by the nestorian that it be bring out of Mesopotamia into Europe to be print by Moses Marde^u^ from the patriarch of the contrary sect namely of the jacobite but yet notwithstanding I be indeed certain persuade that the n n the imperfection of the syriake edition consist partly in sundry defect namely 1. of all the revelation 2. of the epistle of saint jude 3. of the second epistle of saint Peter 4. of the second and three ep^stles of saint John 5. of the history of the woman take in adultery in the eight chapter of saint john gospel contain the first eleven verse and 6. of the 7. verse of the 5. chapter of the first epistle of saint John of which the two want be no less find in sundry ancient greek copy as Erasmus Beza junius and other have observe and partly beside these defect in some very few faulty translation translation of the new testament whosoever be the author of it be nothing near of that antiquity Bellar ve^b^ l. 2. c. ^ which the syrian as Bellarmine and other report of they pretend it to be namely to have be the work of saint mark first because saint mark die in the eight year of Nero Hieron scrip. Ecclesiast. in marc. Erasmus Beza in Annot. loc. praedict. as Hierome with other have certain record after which time many part of the new testament be write as namely saint john gospel the act of the apostle for all the history from the 24. chapter to the end relate occurrent after saint mark death the epistle of saint Paul to the galathians ephesian philippian colossian to Philemon and the second to Timothy second because that translation be not to be find once mention in any of all those ancient and learned writer that live in those east part and diligent seek out and observe the several edition and translation of the holy scripture and three because the dialect discover it to be of a far late age then that of the apostle which they will soon find to be so to omit some other evidence that shall compare the word record in the new testament by the evangelist which all be note by Hierome and by other with the book as for example Hieron l. Hebr. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mat. 6.25 Mamouno (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) joan. 19.13 Gephiphto (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) mat. 27 33. Gogoultho (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) act. 1.19 Chakaldemo (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 1. cor. 16.22 and to be short there be not almost any word record in the new testament which vary not from that ancient pronounce that be usual in the apostle time either in consonant or vowel or both which can not be the alteration of any short course of time of the jacobite chap. 21. damas. l. post med. Niceph. hist. Ecclesiast. l. 18. c. 52 the jacobite obtain that appellation as and Nicephorus have record of one jacobus surname Zanzalus of Syria who live about 530. be in his time a mighty inlarger of eutiches sect and maintainer of his opinion touch the unity of nature in our saviour and his follower be at this day in great number know by the name of jacobite in Syria in Cyprus in Mesopotamia in Babylon and in Palestine for the patriarch of jerusalem who keep his residence still in jerusalem in which city there yet remain a a Chitrae stat. ecclesiat p. 25. ten or more church of christian be also a jacobite but although in all these forementioned region these jacobite be find where they be esteem to make about b b namely 15. crus in Turcog l. 4. p 297. 160000. family or rather c c bot. relat. pa. 3 l. 2. c. 50000. as Leonard the bishop of Sidon the pope visitor in those part have record ap. th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. cap. 14. yet chief they inhabit in Aleppo of Syria and in Caramit and the mountain tur of Mesopotamia but yet their religion under other title be extend much far in so much that it be record to be spread abroad in some d d breitenbach c. Vitriac hist. orient c. 76 forty kingdom all which jacobite of the place before specify have and long have have a patriarch of their own religion for I find the e e Paul Diacon hist. miscel. l. 18. Zonar annal. to. 3. in Heraclio patriarch of the jacobite speak of in the emperor heraclius his time to who they render obedience the patriarchal church of which sect be in the f f M^rae in episcop orb pmiddot 35. bot. relat. p. 3. l. 2. c. monastery of Saphran near to the city of Merdin in the north part of Mesopotamia but the patriarch himself keep ordinary residence in the city of Caramit the ancient metropolis of Mesopotamia and which at this day consist for the great part of christian for that Caramit * * Caramit be amida that be in the turkish tongue black amida because it be wall with black stone be the same city which the ancient writer call amida Sabellicus and other have leave observe and amida to have be ancient the metropolis of Mesopotamia g g S^bellic hist. l. 18. I find in the subscription of the ancient counsel plain record but till Eutichianisme so mighty prevail in those part as to work in they a detestation of the council of chalcedon h h conc. chal. action 1. etc. and a departure withal from their ancient obedience they belong till than I say to the jurisdiction of the patriarch of Antiochia as be i i provinciar province of the diocese of the orient which we find in the k k conc. constan. 1. con. 2. second general council to be the circuit and limitation of that patriarch authority which be the reason that the patriarch of the jacobite keep ever the name of Ignatius entitle himself patriarch of Antiochia and that the l l 36. patriarch of jerusalem who be also as I say a jacobite acknowledge he as some record for superior have therein if it be so but in some sort return to the ancient obedience wherein the bishop of jerusalem stand to the patriarch of Antiochia even till the time of the council of chalcedon for than begin jerusalem to be erect into a patriarchship and as we read in the m m conc. Chalced. action 7. action of that council with the consent and allowance of the patriarch of Antiochia the three province of Palestina which till then 451. belong to Antiochia be withdraw from it 1.2.31.4 jacob a Vitriaco hist. orient c. 76. Villamont l. 2. c. 22. 2 Bucebing hist. Eccles. par^ 2. p. 331. saligniac itiner to. 8. c. 1. th. je l 7. pa. 1. c. 14. 4 and assign to the bishop of jerusalem for his patriarchal jurisdiction now as touch the character of their religion 1. they acknowledge but one nature and but one will and one operation catechism jacobitar ap. th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 15. in Christ as there be but one person and in token of that they make the sign of the cross with one finger only which the other christian of the east do with two 2. they sign their child before baptism many in the face some in the arm with the sign of the cross imprint with a burn iron 3. they use circumcision saligniac Itin. tom. 8. c. 1. even of both sex 4. they confess their sin to God only not to the priest and as other record but very seldom so that many communicate without auricular confession Leonard Sidon ap. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 14. Alphons Castro l. 4 cont. Heres. tit. itiner l. 2. c. 9 5. they admit not of purgatory nor of prayer for the dead th. a. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 23. 6. they consecrate the eucharist in unleavened Bread salign Itin. Hieros tom. 8. c. 1. they minister the sacrament of the eucharist in both kind 7. the priest be marry 8. they believe all the soul of just man to remain in the earth till the day of judgement expect Christ second come catechism jacobit 9 they affirm the angel to consist of two substance fire and light catechism jacobit 10. they honour dioscorus and jacobus syrus as saint but yet condemn eutyches as a heretic Patriarch jacobit ap. th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 14. these be the property that I find register of the jacobite religion namely of they that be proper so call and still retain the ancient opinion of jacobus syrus but it seem that their principal error and which occasion their first schism and separation from the church namely the heresy of Eutiches touch one nature in Christ be for the most part long since abolish for as Vitriacus have long ago record Vitriac hist. orient c. 76. they deny to he than the pope legate in those part and demand the question that they believe one only nature in Christ and be further ask why then make the cross they sign themselves only with one finger their answer be that they do it in acknowledgement of one divine nature as also they do it in three several place in acknowledgement of three person in that one nature and beside of late time Leonard another legate of pope Gregory the thirteen in those part have record of the patriarch profession make to himself that although they hold indeed but one personate nature to be in in Christ result of the union of two nature not personate yet they acknowledge those two nature to be unite in his person without any mixtion or confusion and that they themselves differ not in understanding but only in term from the latin church th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 14. and although as it be story by some writer of these time some there be among they that still retain that error yet certain that it be no general and receive opinion among they be most manifest for we have extant the confession of the n n tom. 4. Biblioth. vet. p 1050. jacobite of Mesopotamia and of those of o o baron in fine Tomi 6. annal. Egypt and p p Zag Relig. and Morib Aethiop damian go of Aethiopia and of q q confess Armenior num. 26 28.29 etc. Armenia that be to say all sort of jacobite out of which it be evident that that error of Eutiches be clear renounce as articular acknowledge that the human nature of Christ be take of the virgin and of the same substance with we and remain after the adunation with the deity without any mutation of property distinct from the divine nature r r vid. Concil. Chalced. action 1. and theod. l. 4. in Eutiche all which the heresy of Eutiches deny the sect of christian name Cophti be no other the christian of Egypt and it be the name of their nation rather of the Cophti or christians of Egypt chap. 22. mas. in Syror. in Legat. Eccles alex. Apostol. tom. 6. annal. in fine ortel in in Egyptus scal. Chron. an. mdccxxxiv drus. de Trih sect. l. 2. c. 14. tit Philacterij^ Damas l. (...) post med. 1 bot. rel. p. 3. l. 3 c. christia deal Egitto then of their religion in respect whereof they be mere jacobite for as Masius have observe the egyptian in some ancient monument be term Aegophti who vulgar we name Cophti or Copti and so they also name themselves as may be see in the confession of these egyptian record in Baronius and certain that the egyptian themselves name their country chibth Ortelius after Thevet have record as also it be observe by Scaliger that in the Talmud it be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and by Drusius out of r. David and r. Shelomo that Egypt be by they name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) but not without some traiection of letter (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) r. David in praef. l. Radic r. shelom in exod. 13. but touch their religion to omit curiosity about the name they differ not as I say from the jacobite insomuch that as damascen have observe the same sectary that first be term because among the egyptian that heresy of one only nature in Christ find the mighty patronage be after of jacobus syrus above mention name in Syria jacobite and till this day Severus dioscorus and jacobus the principal parent and patron of that sect be by the egyptian honour in the memorial of their liturgy th. jes. lib. 7. pag. 1. cap. 5. 1 use circumcision yet I be not very certain whether for religion or which I observe it before to have be as a ancient custom of that nation which custom yet be report Th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 6. p. 3. l. 3. the Christ Egitto to be now abrogate among they by the persuasion of the bishop of Rome legate in a synod hold at Cairo about thirty year ago 1583. 2. they confer the inferior sacred order under priesthood even to infant present after baptism altogether their parent promise for they and perform in their stead till they be sixteen year old or thereabout what they promise in their behalf namely chastity and fast every Wednesday and Friday and in the four lent of the year th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 5 they repute not baptism of any efficacy except minister by the priest and in the church in what necessity soever th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 5. 3. neither baptize their child afore the forty day though they shall die without baptism th. je ibid. 4. minister the sacrament of the eucharist in both kind 2 (...) Cosm de Levant c. 4^ 5. they minister the sacrament of the eucharist in leaven bread th. jes. ibid. 6. give the sacrament of the eucharist to infant present after their baptism id. ibid. 7. to sick person they neither minister extreme unction nor the eucharist id. ibid. 8. althowgh they acknowledge the holy ghost to proceed from the father and the son yet in relate o^ the nicene creed they leave out those word and from the son as the grecian do id. ibid. 9 they admit not of purgatory nor of prayer for the dead th. jes. l. 7. p. 1.23 10. they contract marriage even in the second degree of consanguinity without any dispensation Tecla Abissin ap. th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 13. 11. they observe not the lord day nor other feast except in the city Tecla Abissin ibid. 12. in celebrate of the eucharist they elevate not the sacrament Tecla Abissin ibid. 13. reject all the general council after that of Ephesus express condemn the council of chalcedon id. ibid. 14. read the gospel of Nicodemus in their liturgy Prateol Heresib in Cophti 15. repute the roman church heretical and avoid the communion and conversation of the latin no less then of jew and although baron in fin tom. 6 annal. have register a ambassage from Marcus the patriarch of Alexandria to pope Clement the eight wherein he be say to have submit and reconcile himself and the province of Egypt to the pope yet the matter be after examine be find to be but a trick of imposture as th. jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 6. have record thom. gent. l. 7. par. ^ c. 5. 3 thom. jes. bot. loc. cit 16. maintain the opinion of one nature in Christ yet in such sort that although in the general position touch one nature in our saviour they follow eutyches yet in the special declaration at this day they differ very much from he for they acknowledge he to be true and perfect both god and man and that the divine and human nature be become in he one nature not by any confusion or commixtion of they as eutyches teach but only by coadundation wherein although they catholic confess that there be no mutation of property in either nature be unite in Christ from what the divine and human nature several obtain in several person yet be not well able as it seem to distinguish between the nature and the person they dare not say there be in Christ two nature for fear they shall slip into Nestorius heresy of two person which heresy of one only nature in our saviour begin with eutyches although after disperse itself into many branch have ever since the time of the council of chalcedon by which eutychianisme be condemn and for it the patriarch of Alexandria l l conc. Chalce^ action 3. dioscorus depose be nourish and maintain as by other christian of the east so special by the egyptian insomuch that not only sundry patriarch of Alexandria and Antiochia but special of Alexandria together with many other bishop of the east part their and adherent be record to have maintain and advance that heresy of eutyches but we find moreover many synod of those part register or remember in Euagrius evag. l. 3. c. 5.6.22.30 33. etc. Sect. action 5. Niceph. l 16. c. 2.4 and 5. and l. 18. and sequent Leontius Nicephorus and the book call m m Synod. 97.101.103.108 c. 45.109 etc. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) bring to light by pappus etc. wherein in the behalf of that heresy the decree of the council of chalcedon be condemn in which council although we read of the great confluence of bishop that ever meet about the establishment of any point in christian religion and yet beside the six hundred and thirty bishop present in that council there be extant in the n n fin Concil. chal. tom. 2. Concil. book of counsel the suffrage of about thirty provincial synod that by their ep^stles to the emperor Leo confirm it together with all the bishop of the west by who it be likewise receive yet notwithstanding all this that heresy so prevail in the east part and special in Egypt whereof we now entreat that from that time to this it be never clear of it but as there be never heresy that so grievous wound the church of God as that of eutyches except perhaps Arrianisme so be no part of the church so deep and deadly wound by it as that of Egypt so that even at this day although the wound be in some sort heal yet the wemme or scar still remain for it be not many year since by certain jesuite agent for the bishop of Rome some conference be have with the patriarch of Alexandria and his synod bot. relat. par. 3. l. 3 c de Egitto wherein although they confess if true relation be make of that conference that Christ be true God and true man yet do they purposely refrain from mention two nature in Christ lest they shall by little and little sl^p into the heresy of two person now as touch their ecclesiastical government they be subject to the patriarch of Alexandria o o Chitrae stat. ecclesiar p. 21. who patriarchal seat be at this present translate and so long have be to the city of Cairo in (...) alex. ap. tom. 6 in fine either of which city Cairo and Alexandria there remain at this day but three christian temple apiece whereas recor^eth of his time about three hundred and twenty year ago that in one of they Cairo there be above forty burch descr ter. sanct par. 2. c. 3. but yet to the jurisdiction of this patriarch belong not only the native christian of Egpypt who be but very few consider the exceed populousness of that nation for they be esteem as I say before not to pass fifty thousand which in his time be by he record to have be above 300000. id. p. 2. c. 3. together with the small remainder of christian that be find about the bay of Arabia and in mount Sinai eastward or in Africa as far as the great syrtis westward but the christian likewise of Ethiopia acknowledge obedience to he Aluarez histor. Ethiop c. 137. for although Aluarez in his story of Ethiopia have relate as he do also some other matter touch the ancient condition of the church too gross and bold that the christian of Nubia till their defection from christianity be of the pope dependence and jurisdiction and receive their bishop by his consecration and say nothing of the patriarch of Alexandria yet certain that they be not so be manifest for beside that Saligniacus himself the pope protonotary and who travel have teach he some knowledge of the east part direct deny the nubians profess of obedience to the bishop of Rome observe that they be govern by a prelate of their own who they term the priest of the Law itiner tom. 8. c. 2. beside that direct testimony of his I say there be other evidence first because there can be produce any instance out of any ecclesiastical history either ancient or modern as I be certain persuade to that effect second because the father of the nicene council as we find in n n nicen. Concil. l. 3. c. 36. gelasius be know to have assign Ethiopia whereof Nubia be a part to the patriarch of Alexandria his jurisdiction three because the patriarchship of Alexandria lie direct between Nubia and Rome as be immediate at the back of Egypt four because the nubians be in religion jacobite Vitriac hist. orient c. ^6 brocard descript. sanct as a roman cardinal and other have record and as their baptise with fire remember by and Saligniacus do manifest import burch descr t^rr sanct p. 2. c. 3.5.7 saligniac Itin. tom. 8. c. 2. of which sect the patriarch of Alexandria be know to be which have the pope the assignment or confirmation of their prelate it be utter unlike they shall have be five because in time of their necessity be leave destitute of bishop and minister if they have pertain to the bishop of Rome his jurisdiction they will rather have have recourse to he for repair of the decay and ruinous state of their church who both plentiful can and no doubt ready will have relieve they rather then suffer they to depart ^s they have do from the christian faith to he I say they will rather have resort for supply then to the king of Habassia o o Aluarez loc^ prox as they do be of another patriarchal jurisdiction certain therefore it seem that Nubia while it be Christian belong not to Rome but to Alexandria by who if the nubians in their distress be not relieve no man can wonder that know the great want and misery of the church of Egypt now touch the habassine or midland aethiopian of the habassine chap. 23. stra. l. 2. and l. 17. whether they have obtain that name by reason of their habitation in house which the egyptian call Auase^ as Strabo have observe for the ancient book have (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in difference from they which dwell near the bay of Arabia be call Troglodua (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) because they dwell in cave not in house as Pliny and other have record whether I say plin. l. 5. c. 8. Solin p^lyhist c. 3^ for that reason they have obtain the name of abassins or no let more curious man inquire but as touch their religion they be in manner mere jacobite and their king who by error we call Prestor John be sundry time in history term the prince of the jacobite and their leave out of their memorial in * * Liturg. Ethiop tom 6. Biblioth. vet. pag. 59 and 65. Zag Relig. and Morib Ethiop ap damian a g^s. their liturgy the council of chalcedon by which the heresy maintain after by jacobus syrus be condemn whereas the counsel of nice of Constantinople and of Ephesus be remember do import so much and in very deed consider the dependence that the church of Habassia have of the patriarch of Alexandria it be almost unpossible but they shall be so for as Zaga Zabo a habassine bishop have leave record although they have a patriarch of their own who they call in their own language Abuna our father and he choose by the habassine monk of saint Antony order remain in jerusalem yet be they limit to choose one of the jurisdiction of Alexandria and a * * you may observe which I in my read have do that all the patriarch and other bishop of the east be monk of the order either of saint Basil or saint Anthony for the patriarch of Constantinople of Antiochia and of Armenia be monk of saint basils order the patriarch of Alexandria of Ethiopia of the jacobite and of the maronites be of saint Anthony and the patriarch of the nestorian either of both monk of saint Antony he must be and beside that the confirmation and consecration of he belong to the patriarch of Alexandria and by he he be send with ecclesiastical charge into habassia and to be short their prayer in their * * Liturg. Ethiop tom. 6. Biblioth. Vet. p. 62. present liturgy for the patriarch of Alexandria term he the prince of their archbishop and remember he before their own patriarch evident declare their dependence and subjection to that Sea which supreme ecclesiastical power touchi^^ Aethiopia to have belong very ancient to the patriarch of Alexandria may appear by the Arabic book of the nicene council * * Concil. nicen. l 3. can. 36. translate by pisanus where that authority be find assign to the patriarch of Alexandria touch that Abuna of Aethiopia by the name of catholic and withal to that catholic of chief bishop of Aethiopia the seven place in the session of general counsel namely next after the bishop of seleucia who seat be next the patriarch of jerusalem by the decree of the same nicene father be allot but if you desire a register of some special point of their religion 1.2.3.4.5.6.9.10.11 Zag zab. de Relig. and morib Ethiop ap. 4. Aluarez hist. Ethiop c. 11.5 Aluarez 1. they circumcise their child the eight day after the manner of the jew even female also as well as male wherein they differ from the jew 2. they reverence the sabbath Saturday keep it solemn equal with the lord day 3. they eat not of those beast which in the old law be censure for unclean 4. they consecrate the sacrament of the eucharist in unleavened bread contrary to the custom of all the east the armenians except nevertheless Tecla a habassine monk and priest say that they celebrate ordinary in leaven bread but on the day of the institution of the lord supper the Thursday before Easter they do it in bread unleavened over all habassia a th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 13. Abissin ap. th. a jes. loc. alleg 5. and communicate in both kind which they receive stand and all of they as well of the laity as clergy at leastwise every week the priest minister the bread and the deacon the wine with a spoon Tecla Abissin joel. Zag zab. rel. but yet only in the temple it be not lawful for any not the king or patriarch elsewhere to communicate after the receive whereof it be not lawful for they to spit that day till the set o^ the sun Zag zab. ibid. 7. and that even to their young infant present after they be baptize * * Abisin ap tho. a jesus co^^ verse gent. l. 7. pa. 1. c. 13. which in their male be forty day after their birth and in female eighty except in peril of death for than they be present baptize Tecla Abissin ib. till which time be complete their woman also enter not into the temple Zag zab. ibid. 8. they profess but one nature and one will in Christ yet without any mixtion or confusion of the divine and humane substance Tecla ap. th. a jesuit l. 7. pa. 1. c. 13. 9 believe the reasonable soul of man to be traduce from parent by seminal propagation Zag zab. de Relig. Aethiop in fine th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 8. 10. believe the soul of the infant depart afore baptism to be save because they be spring from faithful parent and namely the virtue of the eucharist receive by the mother after conception to sanctify the child in her womb Zag zab. ibid. th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 8. aluar. hist. Aethiop ca. 22. 11. they present upon commission of sin resort to the confessor and at every confession though it be every day receive the sacrament of the eucharist Zaga Zabo 12. they have only paint not massy image in their church 13. they accept only the three first general counsel reject that of chalcedon for determine two nature to be in Christ and for condemn dioscorus the patriarch of Alexandria Tecla abis. ib. 14. elevate not the sacrament in celebrate of the eucharist but keep it cover neither reserve it after the communion 15. to excommunicate obstinate sinner be peculiar to their patriarch which yet be not usual among they Aluarez (@) except in case of murder Zag zab. ibid. 16. their priest and other inferior ecclesiastical minister as also monk live by their labour have no tithe for their maintenance nor be suffer to crave alm Zag zab. loc. 17. but the confer of bishopricke and other ecclesiastical benefice except the patriarchship belong only to the King Zag zab. ibid. 18. use neither confirmation nor extreme unction Zag^ Aluarez lib. c. 5. 19 admit the first marriage in their bishop and priest but not the second except their patriarch dispense 20. eat flesh every Friday as on other day betwixt easter and whitsunday as on every Saturday also through the year aluar. c. 13. Zaga Zabo except in Lent 21. baptise themselves every year on the day of the epiphany in lake or ponds concern which first and last point namely of their circumcision and annual baptism I have somewhat to observe namely first touch their circumcision that they observe it not so much perhaps of religion as of a ancient custom of their nation for although their circumcise on the eight day seem to imply that they receive it from the jew yet their circumcise of both sex Herodot l. 2. par. a stephanus Byzant (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as certain agu that they do not so and if the habassine be of the race of the ancient aethiopian the doubt may be the less because Herodotus and other have record it for a ancient ceremony of that nation or if they be not of the aethiopian race but of the progeny of the arabian as by Vranius in stephanus byzantius it shall appear record they for a nation of the arabian near to the * * which seem to be true both because in the ethiopian * * Liturg. Ethiop in tom. 6. Vet. pat. p. 59 liturgy they term their own kingdom the kingdom of sheba and also because the king of Habassia * * Zag Zabo de Morib Ethiop damian deduce lineal their descent from the queen of sheba that come to see Solomon which sheba be to the skilful certain know to be in Arabia and either the same that we call Arabia or some part of it and certain it be observe by learned man that Arabia in the eastern tongue be name (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) as Arabia (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and Arabia Petraea (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) or (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) sabaean even in this case also the occasion and original of circumcise among the abassine will be discern well enough namely because it be special story to have be a very ancient ceremony among the arabian among who it may have beginning by reason of the descent of many of the arabian from Ishmael and son of Abraham by Keturah plant in Arabia of which Sh^ba by name record for one but yet if the abassine observe circumcision not as a ancient national custom gen. 25.3 ^ shindler in Dictionar pentaglot in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) but in any sort for religion sake than it may be excuse in such manner as b one of their own bishop have profess namely that it be do only in remembrance and love and imitation of our saviour because he be circumcise and not for any other opinion of holiness at all and second touch their annual baptise in the feast of the epiphany which they with many ancient of the church suppose to be the day of our saviour baptism it be declare by the c c religion Ethiop long ^^t med aethiopian bishop above mention to be practise among they not as any sacrament or any conceit of sanctification to be obtain by it but only as a memorial of Christ baptism because as on that day he be baptize in jordan even as the d d Possevin Re^ Moscou p. 6 moscovite also do the like on the same day in river and for the same reason which appear the more evident to be so because this yearly baptise be no ancient ceremony of the habasin but a fashion of late take up among they as Aluarez that live long in those part have relate as be namely the institution of e e Aluarez hist. Ethiop c. 95. his grandfather that then reign in Habasia be about one hundred year ago the armenians for traffic to which they be exceed addict be to be find in multude in most city of great trade special in those of the turkish empire of the armenians chap. 24. obtain more favour and privilege among the turk and other mahometans f f vid. Postel lib the 12. tit. Armenica by a patent grant that nation under mahumet own hand than any other sect of christian insomuch that no nation seem more give to merchandise nor be for that cause more disperse abroad than the armenians except the jew but yet the native region of the armenians and where they be still find in the great multitude and their religion be most support be Armenia the great name since the turk first possession of it Tu^c^monia beyond Euphrates and Armenia the less on this side Euphrates and Cilicia now term Ca^mania now the armenians touch their ecclesiastical government be ancient of the jurisdiction of the patriarch of Constantinople as be g g provinciar orient Concil. chalcedon can ^8 province of the diocese call which together with the province of the diocese Asiana and of Thrace three of the thirteen diocese into which the whole empire be divide be by the council of chalcedon assign or else confirm to the patriarch of Constantinople for his jurisdiction but at this day and very long since even before photius his time as be evident by his circular epistle the armenians be depart both from the government of that patriarch and from the communion of the grecian who at this present they have in more detestation than any other s^ct of christian and that principal for the very same occasion epist. baron tom. 10. annal. an. 863. for which the jacobite of Syria withdraw their obedience from the patriarch of Antiochia namely the heresy of one only nature in Christ and ever since that depa^ure they acknowledge obedience without any further or high dependence to two patriarch of their own who they term catholic namely one of the great Armenia the family under who jurisdiction exceed the number of 150000. beside very many monastery Leonard Sidon ap. th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 19 who at this present h h Episc. Orb. p. 36. relation p. 3. l. 2. c. Dioscoriani keep residence in the monastery of Ecmeazin by the city etc. Leonard Sidon ap tho. a jes. loc. by the city of eruan in Persia be translate thither by occasion of the late war betwixt the persian and the turk but his ancient seat be Seb^stia the metropolis of Armenia the great and the other patriarch of Armenia the less the family of who jurisdiction be esteem about 20000. Leonard Sidon who ancient keep at k k Concil. Chalced. a^tion 1. in subscrip b. melitene the metropolis of that province but now be resident in the city of Sis not far from Tarsus in Cilicia the middle limit on of those two patriarch jurisdiction be the river Euphrates such at this present be the state of the armenian church and the jurisdiction of their patriarch but it shall seem by that I find record by upon the report of the legate of Armenia send from the catholic to the bishop of Rome in his time Otho phrise l. 7. c. 32. that the jurisdiction of the catholic of Armenia be then far large as namely that he have above a thousand bishop under his obedience except Otho perhaps mistake as I very believe he do obedience for communion^ for as touch the communion which the arminians maintain with other jacobite it extend indeed very far but the jurisdiction of Armenia for aught I can find in any record of antiquity contain only four province namely the two armeniaes before mention the great and less and the two province of Cilicia in which small circuit that such a multitude of bishop shall be find be utter uncredible especial because we find register extant both of the bishop of the two armeniaes tom. 1. oriental l. 2. in the novel of leo. sophus the emperor touch the precedence of metropolitans and likewise the bishop of Cilicia in c c bel. sacr^ l. 14. c. 12. novel 31. c. 1. tyrius and all of they put together exceed not the number of thirty and although I find that d justinian divide the two armeniaes into four province which yet to have be after reduce again into two the novel of Leo even now mention assure we yet be not for that cause the number of bishop increase any whit the more 1. Niceph. h^st eccle l. 18 c. 53 confess Art 26 27 28 29.30 etc. 2 alfon a ^astro l. 5. cont. Titul 12. boem morib gent. l. 2. c. 10. 3 4 Niceph. li^^r Armenior now touch the property of their religion 1. they be charge with the opinion of one nature in Christ yet not as eutyches imagine it one namely by a permixtion and confusion of the divine and human nature but yet by such a conjunction and coalition of they that they both together make but one compound nature in our saviour as the body and soul but one compound nature in man but nevertheless it seem by the confession of the armenians which we have extant touch the trinity send by the mandate of the catholic of Armenia to the patriarch of Constantinople not fifty year ago that at this present they have utter renounce that fantasy 2. they believe the holy ghost proceed only from the father 3. they celebrate the sacrament of the eucharist with unleavened bread as the roman do 4. they deny the true body of Christ to be real in the sacrament of the eucharist under the species of bread and wine Guido sum. heresib they mingle not water with wine in the eucharist a ancient opinion and property of they for I find it Concil. Constant 3. can. 32. 5 boem morib gent. l 2. c. 10 6 Guido in sum. heresib al^o^s a castr. l. 12. cont. tit. 1. boem loc. 7 Bellon Obser. l. 3. c. 12. Postel in Lingua Tz^ruiana 8 9 nichol. Peregr orient l. 4. c. 19^ boter rel. pa. 3. l. 2. c. Dioscoriani 10 Vitriac hist. orient c. 79. 11 12 of the maronites chap. 25. record of they and condemn in the six general council but they retain it notwithstanding still 5. they receive infant present after baptism to the communion of the eucharist affirm that baptism can be confer without the eucharist guid. sum. heresib they deny the virtue of confer grace to belong to the sacrament Guido loc. alleg they reject purgatory and pray not for the dead th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 17. 7 they believe that the soul of holy man obtain not blessedness till the universal judgement th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 17. they admit marry priest and as have record descr terr. sanct pa. 2. c. 2 @. 9 admit none to be secular priest except they be marry they rebaptise those that come to their communion from the latin church guid. sum. heresib but exclude their second marriage 8. they abstain from eat unclean beast 9 they eat flesh on friday between Easter and Ascension day 10. they fast lend most strict without egg milke-meat flesh oil wine etc. only with fruit herb root and pulse 11. they celebrate not Christmas day when other christian do decemb. 25. but fast on it and instead of it celebrate the feast of our saviour baptism namely on the day of the Epiphanie 12. they solemnise the feast of the annunciation the six day of April the purification the fourteen of February etc. the maronites who be so name not of a heretic call maron as many false write Prateol sect. heretic in verb. Maronitae but of a holy man of that name for we find mention in the book of counsel the monastery of saint maron Concil. Constantinop men. act 5. the monk only whereof at first be term maronites they be find in small number in Aleppo Damascus Tripoli of Syria and in Cyprus but their main habitation be in the mountain Libanus which although it contain in circuit about a a Possevin Sacr. in Mar^nitae seven hundred mile and be possess only in a manner by the maronites who for that privilege namely to keep themselves from the mixture of Mahumetans pay the Turk * * namely for every one above 12. year old 17. sultanines by the year the sultanine weigh a dram of gold about seven shilling six penny of our money and for every space of ground sixteen span square one sultanine yearly as be record by possevine large tribute yet of all sect of christian they be the least as be esteem not to pass in all b b Relat. p. 3. l. 2 c. Possevin Brocard in desc. Terr tacit. historia^ l. 12000. house all in scatter village beside a few monastery by reason of the indisposition of Libanus in most place for frequent habitation for beside the craggednesse or steepness of tha^ mountain which make many part of it in a manner inaccessible the high ridge of it which by Brocardus his relation be so eminent that they may be discern forty league off be also cover in a manner continual with snow which it retain as Tacitus with c c Vitriac hist. orient c. 84. postel descript. syriae pag. 53. l. 1. Paralipo^ hispa^n ca. R^scilion fest. in diction isidor origin l. 34. c. 8. other have leave record notwithstanding the heat of that climate even in the near approach of the sun and be scarce as have be observe by postel in one summer of thirty to be find clear of it for which very cause and no other that mountain seem to have get the name of Lebanon for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the ancient language of those part the phaenician or hebrew tongue signify white and (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) whiteness even as for the like whiteness of snow Gerundensis have remember ca^us the high part of the Pyrene hill to have obtain that name and as Festus suppose the Alps for the same cause to have gain they that in the sabine dialect be term say he Alpum which the roman in they name album for so touch the original of the name Libanus have I much rather think then be lead by the fantasy of Isidorus and some * * stuk. in com. Arrian Periplun mar. erythrae p. 47. adricom Theatr. terr. sanct in num. 63. theophra hist. Plantar l. 9 c. 5. other namely that Libanus shall purchase that name of frankincense which the grecian call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and the jew (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) for if it be not true which yet Theophrastus and Pliny write that frankincense be get only in Arabia according with that of by reason of which property of place to burn incense be term in if that I say be not true for indeed I find in Dioscorides record of frankincense get in India and in Pedro Cieza of the like in some part of America plin. l. 12. c. 14. virg. georg. l. 2. Tertul. coron. Milit. med. Dioscorid de Medic may l. 1. c. 7 yet be there no mention or remembrance in any history of nature or other as I take it that frankincense be ever get in the hill of Libanus the patriarch of the maronites to come near to our purpose who be note to be a monk of saint Antony and to have under his jurisdiction a a Possevin sacr. in Maronitae eight or nine bishop keep residence for the most part in Libanus in a monastery of saint Anthony and now and then in Tripoli and be one b b Boter rel. p. 3. l. 2. c. Possevin loc. of they that challenge the title of the patriarch of Antiochia keep ever the name of Peter as the patriarch of the jacobite the other challenger of the same dignity do of Ignatius but touch religion the patriarch of the maronites profess obedience at this present to the bishop of Rome yet but late in Clement the eight his time and both he and all the Maron^tes be become of the roman religion be the only nation of the east except the indian late bring also to the roman communion that acknowledge that obedience and have * * Posseu loc. loc. episcop p. 34. tho. a jes. Con^ gent. l. 3. c. 3. a seminary in Rome of Gregory the thirteen his foundation for the train up of the youth of their nation in that religion but before that alteration these be the character of sheir religion 1. that the holy ghost proceed only from the father th. a jes. l. 7. p. 2. c. 6. 2. that the soul of man be all create together from the beginning id. loc 3. not to baptise male child together Interrog. Patriarch ap. th. a je lib. 7. pa. 2. ca. 5. 4. that heretic return to the church be to be rebaptise th. a jes. l. 7. p. 1. c. 6. 5. that the child be make unclean by the touch of the mother till she be purify which after a male child be 40. day and 80. after a female for which reason they baptise not their infant afore those term th. a jes. loc. 6. that they celebrate the sacrament of the eucharist in both kind Possevin in Maronitae Patriarch Interrog. 3. ap tho. a jes. l. 7. p. 2 c. 5. 7. and in leaven bread th. a jes. l. 7. p. c. 6. 8. distribute to all the communicant each one a piece of the same bread which they consecrate in great mass together with these word of the gospel he bless and break and give to his disciple say take eat etc. mat. 26.26 ^d Patriarch Interrog. 3. ap. th. a jes. loc. 9 to distribute the sacrament of the eucharist to child before the use of reason and first present after baptism th. a. jes. l. 7. p. 2. c. 5. @. 9 and cap. 6. 10. not to reserve the sacrament of the eucharist Patriarc maron 11. nor to carry it to any sick person in danger of death th. a jes. l. 7. p. 2. c. 5. 12. to omit confirmation by the bishop patr. maron int. 2. 13. to exclude the four matrimony in every person as utter unlawful id. ibid. Interrog. 5. 14. that marriage be not inferior to single life th. a jes. l. 7. p. 2. c. 6. 15. utter to dissolve matrimony in case of adultery and marry another patr. Maronit inter. 5. 16. that the father may dissolve the matrimony of his son or daughter if he mislike it th. a jes. l. 7 p 2. c. 6. 17. not to ordain young man priest or deacon except they be marry Patriarch maronites inter. 6. Possevin in Appar sacr. in Maronitae but yet to restrain their second marriage th. a jes. ibid. 18. to create child five or six year old subdeacons Patriarch inter. 5. 19 that no man enter the kingdom of heaven before the general judgement th. a jes. l. 7. p. 2. c. 6. 20. not to fast on the lord day nor on the sabbath th. a je loc. 21. in the day of fast not to celebrate mass till the evening patr. maron ap th. a jes. l. 7. p. 2. c. 5. 22. not to eat of any thing strangle or of blood id. l. 7. p. 2. c. 6 23. to exclude woman during their monthly issue both from the eucharist and from the church 8. vitriac histor. o^^ent c. 78. tyrius l. 22. c. 8. 24. their main error be the heresy of the monothelite touch one only will and action in Christ which error although they renounce about 400. year ago and reconcile themselves then to the roman church at wha^ time those part of Palestine and Syria be in the christian hand as * * Vitr^ac and tit. jacobus a Vitriaco and tyrius the one bishop of Acon s^ligniac ^^iner tom. ^ c. 2. and the o^her of Tyre have record yet short after when those part be by saladin the king of Egypt and Syria recover from the christian those maronites relapse and forsake again the roman communion till the late time of pope Gregory the 13 and Clement the 8 with who they ag^ine renew it and this heresy of the m^nothelites spring out of that bitter root of the jacobite touch one only nature in chr^st be the last of that long and wicked train of heresy which upon the contempt of the council o^ chalcedon exceed waste and ruin the east church for after that the detestation of Nestorius heresy touch two person in our saviour condemn in the three general council have so immoderate distemper the fantasy of Eutiches in Constantinople and the patriarch of Alexandria dioscorus with other their adherent that they think not themselves safe enough from the heresy of two person till they be fall into the other and opposite extremity of one nature in Christ the divine and human nature in Christ in their conceit by permixtion and confusion of substance and of property grow into one upon their adunation and withal that the human nature of Christ be not consubstantial to we but of another kind and condition which fantasy the four general council condemn after I say this heresy of Eutiches and dioscorus have grow to that head in Egypt and Syria that like a violent and furious stream who course will not be stay it bear down before it all opposition and among the rest that great and reverend council of Chaicedon that have condemn it and be contemn by it it give occasion for a infinite train of heresy to follow at the breach which it have make with nice^hor Histor Eccles. l. 18 c. 45. and sequent L^^n^ ^ 5 etc. for first to omit infinite extravagant branch that spring from it and infinite deform the church rent with many schism the unity and with as many heresy wound the faith of it it draw after it the heresy of the passiblenesse of the deity because the deity of Christ be become in their conceit the same nature with the humanity that be passable second the absurdity of that be discern it occasion another extreme opposite namely of the impassibility of the humanity of our saviour but on the same ground because namely it be become one nature with the deity which now we know to be unpassible three when the fondness of both be discover it breed a great device touch one nature in our saviour as the wit of heretic will better serve they to devise a thousand shift to delude the truth than their pride will suffer they once to yield and acknowledge it it breed I say a new device namely to be one not by permixtion or confusion of substance as eutyches first teach but only by composition the deity and humanity by coalition become one nature in Christ as the body and soul grow into one nature in man. and four when this fantasy begin also somewhat to abate and relent in many yet still a fraction as it be or rather a consequent of it be retain for indeed it imply by necessary consequence the unity of nature namely that there be but one will and one action of both nature in the person of our saviour and God know what a train and succession of heresy may have follow these if that lord who they have infinite wrong by their wanton and wander conceit of he have not to stop the course and stream of their wickedness and folly bring on they the sarracen of Arabia for even while the church special that of the Eastene part be in a great perplexity and travel with the heresy of the monethelite which I last mention the mahometans of Arabia like a mighty inundation break forth and overwhelm all and they first that first and most have wrong the son of God by foster the forenamed heresy and the infinite brood that spring of they I mean Egypt and Syria and to this day both they and the neighbour nation that have be infect by they remain in thraldom but yet as in the disease and distemper of our body contrary be usual heal by contrary so seem it to have fall out in the distemper of these man religion for as worldly prosperity and wantonness of wit ordinary companion wherewith these nation in those time abound breed in they their ordinary child namely prosperity of the world pride wantonness of wit error which couple in matter of faith and religion be wont to produce no better issue than heresy so on the other side have now at length their heart humble and their wit tame by that poverty and affliction wherein the tyranny and oppression of the arabian and turk have long hold they it seem the lord have take pity on they as it be his property not to despise humble and break spirit and to remember mercy in the midst of judgement and reduce they or most of they to the right acknowledgement of his son again for certain that they and other chtistiad of the east have at least in these late time disclaim and abandon those heretical fancy touch our saviour wherein by their misleader they have be ancient plunge and which many christian of these west part still charge they withal do manifest appear f f first of * * Biblioth. Vet. patr. tom. 4. pa. 1049. and 153. the jacobite g g Possevin lib. in maron rel. p. 3. l 2 c. l. 2. Sarmatia c. 1. Cru^ Turcog l. 7. pa. 4 @. 7. etc. and second of nestorian by their several confession translate out of the syriac tongue by Masius and extant in three of the a armenians by their own confession also translate by ^retorius four of the b Cophti by the profession of their faith extant in Baronius five of the c c confess arme. Art 26.27.28.29.30 habassine by the relation of Zaga Zabo a bishop of their own six of the d d bar^n tom. 6. annal. in fine indian by their reconcilement to the church of Rome mention by possevine and seven of the e e Relig. and Morib Aethiop ap Domiana go maronites by their like reconcilement record by he and by other o^ the several language wherein th^ liturgy of christian in the seu^rall ^^rts of the Wo^l^ be celebrate chap. 26. and thus have I relate the several sect of christian that be abroad in the world with the place of their habitation and the special character that be record of their religion one point notwithstanding of their difference have I leave purposely as yet untouched both for the ampleness o^ the matter and because I conceive you will have it declare several namely touch the different language in which all these several sort of christian celebrate their liturgy or divine service but first to speak a word or two of the public service of the jew and of the mahometans in their synagogue and Meskeds see I entreat before of those religion the jew where they obtain liberty for their synagogue celebrate they in the ancient Hebrew tongue as Michonius with many other have relate mich^u l. 2. 1. Cru^ l 7. p. 487. etc. rigid Turcar. lib. 2. cap. 1. rich l. 2. the morib and instil Turcar. crus Turco l. 7. p. 487 and as be manifest by their own edition of their public prayer print both at Venice and in Polonia in that language but the mahometans have they in the arabic tongue the native language of their prophet as Georgevitz Richerius and sundry other have record so that not only in A^^bia and Egypt and Barbary and Palestine and Syria and Mesopotamia in which part the arabic tongue be become the vulgar language the Alcoran be read and their public devotion exercise in arabic but also in Greece and Anatolia and other part of the turkish dominion where the greek and turkish and slavonique tongue be vulgar as also in Persia in Tartary in India where they have other native and peculiar language the mahometans read the Koran * * Turcar. l. 2. c. Sacerd. durand r^ti^n l. 4. ^ 1. which they suppose be profane if it be translate into vulgar tongue and perform their public devotion in that language but christian in celebrate of their divine liturgy d^ffer touch the language very much indeed I find it record in but upon what warrant and authority I can find that till the time of Hadrian the emperor that be about a hundred and twenty year after Christ their liturgy be all celebrate in the Hebrew tongue and then the oriental church begin first to celebrate they in greek indeed i think it be possible that the christian of the gentile may in honour of the apostle retain the apostle liturgy in the very tongue wherein by the apostle themselves they have be first ordain for it be not to be doubt but * * baron tom. 1. annal. an. chr. 44 @ 14. many year pass about ten after our saviour ascension before the apostle leave Syria and sunder themselves to preach the gospel abroad in the world among the gentile and foreign nation it be not to be doubt I say but the apostle while they remain in jury ordain liturgy in the jewish tongue for the use of those jew who they have convert to Christianity which liturgy by the christian disciple of the jewish nation disperse in many province of the gentile may together with christian religion be carry abroad and glad entertain among the gentile this be possible I say but if it be also true as I have not observe any thing in antiquity shat may certain impeach the truth of it yet that which be speak by of those liturgy in the Hebrew tongue must be understand I doubt not of the Hebrew then vulgar and usual that be to say the syriac tongue not only because in that language we find they in these time celebrate by the christian of the east but also because I can conceive no reason either why the liturgy shall be ordain by the apostle in that language which the jew themselves the learned except understand not if it be do for the jew or else why the gentile shall translate they or use they so translate out of the Hebrew into the syriac see both be to they alike vulgar know and not understand but howsoever it be in that most ancient and primitive state of the church in and immediate follow the apostle time the difference certain among christian in these present time in that behalf be very great some of they celebrate their liturgy in their own native and vulgar and some other in learned and foreign tongue the christian then to speak first of the first sort that celebrate they in their own vulgar language be the armenians habassine moscovite with russian sclavonian and protestant for that the armenians howsoever otherwise in their ceremony belong to divine service they approach near as * * Bellon ols^r l. 3. c. 12. vitriol hist. or. c 79. Brocard descrip. sanct sar. lib. 2. cap. 1. breitenbach Peregrin c. Armen P^stel Lingua Armenica Bellon nichol. Peregrin orient lib. 4. cap. 19 Villamont de voyages l. 2. c 23 boter Relat. p. 3. l. 2. and other report to the rite of the latin church than any other sect of christian that they I say exercise their common divine service in the armenian tongue jacobus a Vitriaco Brocardus Michovius Breitenbachius and many o^hers some of their own experience and other of certain relation have leave record and namely as touch the translation of the holy scripture into the armenian tongue which at this present be in solemn use among they the armenians themselves as a a six l. 4. Biblioth. sanct in joannes Constantinopolitanus sixtus Senensis have record attribute it to no other author then to chrysostom who also out of the history of George Patriarch of Alexandria write of the life of chrysostom remember it special to have be chrysostoms work after his banishment from Constantinople while he live in those part of Armenia to which as we read in b b sozomen hist. l. 8. c. 22. Theodoret l. 5. the cu^and affect post m Roccha in bibliotheca p. 1.7 sozomen he be by the emperor decree confine and there die and certain that the holy scripture be translate into the armenian tongue before Theodoret time who live soon after chrysostom for he flourish about the year 440. Theodoret himself although he name not the author of the translation have leave record as I find also acknowledge by angelus Roccha in his discourse of the Vatican library not only that chrysostom be say to have translate of the scripture into the armenian tongue but that he be also celebrate among the monument of the same Vatican as the c c pag 155. and Mu^ Biblioth. pa. 4. dis^^rs 21. A^uarez histor. Ethiop cap 15. ^ inventor of the armenian character still in use and touch the habassine Aluarez a Portugal that ^ived many year among they have not only leave record that they read scripture in the tigian tongue which be a dialect of the habassin for he note to be that part of habassia which first receive Christianity into which language Sabellicus Supplem histor. lib. 8. record both the old and new testament to have be translate out of the Chaldee but n n p^st^ll (@) T^e^ cos. l. 2. c. 24. V^lamont l. 2. cap. 24. (@) Vet. P^t^to n. 6. p. 55 Mich^^ ^ l. Sarma^ ^ c. 1. Sigis^ l. reb. Moscou p. 46. l. Mosc p. 4. cos. l. 19 c. 12. he with many other that they celebrate their liturgy in their own language though the Chaldee be esteem among they as their learned tongue c. 11. which also the liturgy itself you may find it in the new edition of if you mark the long answer of the people to the priest in their prayer do evident import and no less certain be it also of the muscovite and russian that their liturgy be likewise minister in their vulgar tongue be a kind of slavonian though sometime intermingle greek hymn as Guaguinus have observe Descript. Moscou ca. 2. as be testify by Mathias Michou by Sigismond by possevine by thief and sundry other and as evident be it of the illyrian who we common call slavonian that they also exercise their public divine service in their own language which to have be allow they by the pope at the suit of Cyrill their bishop or as p p bapt. palat. rat. scribe Roccha in Biblioth. Vatican p. 162. other say of methodius but the difference be of no importance for they both live in the same time and be companion in preach the gospel to barbarous nation Aeneas Siluius and other have record and in particular of the liburnians the more westerly part of the slavonian it be affirm by Aventine and of the dalmatian the more easterly part of they by angelus Roccha that they celebrate their liturgy in their own language which Roccha say the dalmatian be most certain persuade to have be of Hieromes devise but yet in determine the antiquity of that custom Roccha that refer it to pope Paul the second be great mistake because we find it to have be much more ancient grant they by pope John the eight that they may both read the scripture and celebrate mass in their own tongue as appear by the same q q Auentin l. 4. a^^al en. Sil^ in h^st c. 13. pope epistle extant to sfentopulcher and even Roccha himself forget himself confess it in another place to have be obtain of the pope by Cyrill who be about six hundred year ancient than Paul the second and certain now I be speak of pope of no other judgement touch divine service in vulgar tongue seem pope innocent the three to have be and perhaps it be also the decree of the council of Lateran charge that in city where there be concourse of diverse nation r r epist. 247. joan. 8. in tom. 3. Concil. par. 2. ap. bin. p. 990. Roccha lib. p. 168. Concil. Lateran c. 9 and decret l. 1 tit. 31. c. 14. that differ in language and ceremony divine service and the sacrament shall be celebrate according to that difference but to speak a little in particular of the vulgar translation of the holy scripture use among the dalmatian it be not only affirm by sundry writer to be the work of Hierome but Hierome himself in his epistle to sophronius seem to s s josias Postel Illyrica erasm 37. Paris Sixt. l. 4. Biblioth. Sanct. in hieronymus Stridonensis Scalig. diatrib Europe ^ and some learned man to intimate so much but yet there be another translation also of the scripture into the slavonicke tongue late than that of Hieromes as t t Sixt. Hieron in epist. sophron. tom. 3. Scalig. loc. iam. Auentin l. 4. annal. Pansa de Biblioth. Vatican par. 4. 23. Scaliger have observe be write in the seruian character as the former be in the dalmatian use in Bulgaria Molda^ia Russia Moscovia and other nation of the slavonian language in the eastern part that celebrate their liturgy after the greek ceremony and profess obedience to the patriarch of Constantinople of which late translation t t Sixt. Hieron in epist. sophron. tom. 3. Scalig. loc. iam. Auentin l. 4. annal. Pansa de Biblioth. Vatican par. 4. 23. methodius the companion of Cyrill in preach the gospel to gentile nation be certain report to have be the author which Cyrill if you question what he be be neither he of Alexandria nor he of jerusalem as Mutius Pa^sa have vain imagine but another far late than either of they who in the slavonicke tongue they call chiurill one that live about the year 860. namely he that in the time of the emperor Michael the three and pope Nicholas the first together with methodius first bring the mengrelians circassians and and after that u u Martyrolog. rom. 9 Sarmatia l. 1. c. 7. postel ling. Rhecoa Biblioth. Vatican p. 161. many of the slavonian to the faith of Christ as Michovius have record neither need we any other testimony to refel the fantasy of touch cyril of jerusalem than Pa^sa himself as namely acknowledge that cyril be the inventer of another sort of illyrian character then by Hierome have be former devise for of the dalmatian character that be use in Dalmatia liburnia istria moravia silesia Bohemia Polonia etc. Hierome be acknowledge to be the author it can not be therefore cyril of jerusalem as be ancient than Hierome and by he register in his catalogue of writer and indeed to make a end what reason or occasion may the bishop of jerusalem have to divise character for the illyrian but to entreat a little more on this occasion of translation of the holy scripture make by the ancient father into vulgar language beside those already mention of Hierome and chrysostom by the one into the dalmatian and by the other into the armenian tongue it be also record by Socrates and Nicephorus and sundry 10 10 socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 27. Niceph. hist. Eccles. l. 11. c. 48. Tripart hist. l. 8. c. 13. Paul Diacon hist. mis^ell l. 12. sozomen l. 2. c. 37. socrat. l. 2. c. 32. Vulcan in praef. and Lingua inscrip Vet. p. 146. other of Vulphilas bishop of the goth one more ancient then either of the former for he flourish in the time of Constantius the emperor and be successor to Theophilus who subscription we find in the first nicene council be the same man to who the invention of the gothicke alphabet be likewise attribute by the same author that he translate the holy scripture into the gothicke tongue a copy of which translation be remember by Bonaventura Vulcanius to be yet remain in some library of Germany and it may be that the gothike translation of the four evangelist mention by gruter in the book of ancient inscription to be of a thousand year antiquity and remain in the abbey of Werdin may be part of that translation of Vulphilas but yet that beside these translation into vulgar language hitherto mention of Vulphilas chrysostom and Hierome the holy scripture be likewise ancient translate into the language of many nation be affirm by Hierome and in particular although the translator name be not record into the egyptian persian indian Hieron in prafat in 4. Euang. theodoret. l 5. scythian and sarmatian tongue nay into all the language of other nation as Theodoret that flourish in the time of the Ephesine and chalcedon counsel almost 1200. year ago have leave testify as also in the follow time yet ancient we read of the like translation of the scripture to have be make by b b vasco in Chro. Hisp. a 7^7 John archbishop of Seville into the Arabic about ann. 717 which then be the vulgar speech of that part of Spain and some part of it into the saxon or english by beda about the same time into the slavonike by c c joan. trevis l. 5. c. 24. methodius about an. 860. etc. into the italian by d d Auentin l. 4. Annal jacobus about an. 1290 etc. and now to entreat of those sect of christian that celebrate their liturgy in learned and foreign tongue which the vulgar people do not understand I find only three language wherein they be all perform namely the greek the latin and the Chaldee or syriac tongue and first touch the Chaldee or syriac in it be celebrate the liturgy of the nestorian as Vitriacus Barbosa Villamont Botero and other have record for Genebrard that pronounce peremptory the Hebrew tongue and not the syriac to be the usual language wherein all the oriental nation minister their divine service betray but too much both his boldness and his ignorance as be not able I be certain persuade to produce any history or other lawful testimony that record the liturgy of any christian in all the east to be perform in the Hebrew tongue but yet it may be observe that where in sundry writer we find it mention that the nestorian exercise their divine office in the Chaldee we be not to understand they of the pure and ancient but of the degenerate or jewish Chaldee which beside the Chaldee and Hebrew whereof it be principal temper and compound have much mixture also both of greek and arabic such as the jew language be after our saviour and his apostle time that be in a word the syriake for the jewish Chaldee to declare this point a little better be of two sort one of those that return not again after the captivity to jerusalem but settle themselves to inhabit about Babylon who language although somewhat degenerate also from the right Chaldee be term the babylonian tongue of which sort the jew dialect of Neardea in Mesopotamia the compiler of the babylonian Talmud be the other of those that return from the captivity who language be proper term the syrian or jerusalem Chaldee vary somewhat far from the native Chaldee then the former by reason of the mixture of foreign word arabic greek roman and other which in course of time it contract in which dialect the Talmud and both name of jerusalem and the book of their late rabbin be write and in the second sort of Chaldee be the holy scripture by the east christians translate and their liturgy at this day celebrate Oser reb. Emmanuel l. 3. Possevin in Appar sacr^n di^am^erien^e Linschot l. ^ c. 15. Bibl. vet patr. in Auct^rio tom. 2. in fine Vitriac hist. orient c. 76. second of the indian that they in like sort perform their liturgy not in the Hebrew as be confident affirm by Genebrard but in the Chaldee or syriac be testify by Osorius possevine Linschot etc. and confirm by their liturgy extant in which be there remember to be translate out of the syriac and so do three the jacobite namely they of Mesopotamia of Babylon of Palestine of Syria and of Cyprus which be peculiar know by that appellation of who Vitriacus long since observe that they read the divine scripture in a language unknown to the lay people and that the language by the new testament e e Sixt. Bibl. Sanct. l. 4. in jacobus Vitriac hist. orient c. 77. barbos in vol. 1. Viaggi Ramus p. 313. l. 2 c. 23. Re^ 3. l. 2. c. Genebrard Chronog l. 3. an. chr. 31. bring from they by Moses Mardenus in Europe to be print for the more commodious disperse of it abroad into their church we now certain know to be the syriac tongue even as it be also know and f f Widmanstad in p^aef^t syriacal record touch the rest of their divine service that it be perform in the same syriac language which they term the Chaldee and it be think that the liturgy common term which we have by Masius translate out of the syriac into latin and be find in be the jacobite liturgy which language g g post. p 3. l. 2. c. Biblioth. Vet. patr. to 6. p. 27. Arias (@) in Admon^^^aesix Bib^^^ Re^ Ver^ion Chaldaica although it be now unknown among they their clerk or learned man except yet that it be vulgar understand when that liturgy be first ordain the long answer of the people to the priest in their prayer which we find in it may be demonstration but touch the old testament which they have also as Arrias write he have hear from their own relation and postel that he have see usual in all those east part in the syriac tongue it be special observe by Arias Montanus to be translate not out of the Hebrew but out of the greek of Origens emendation and four of the copht or christian of Egypt it be likewise h h Relat. p. 3. l 3. c. christianize eg. (@) observe that they celebrate their liturgy in the same language read yet the gospel after it be do in the Chaldee in the arabic tongue which be now and long have be the vulgar language of Egypt and it may further appear beside the testimony of history by the liturgy of Severus Patriarch of Alexandria in use among they translate out of syriake into latin by Guido Fabritius and five the maronites in their liturgy which possevine observe to be the liturgy of Peter Possevin in Appar in Maronit^ Postel l^ng Chaldaica l. 2. c. 24. of james and of sixtus use the same syriac language the arabic be also their u^lgar as beside possevine postel also and Villamont and other have record and so do six and last to make a end of this reckon the poor christian of the isle of Zocotora and island after Barros his dimension of sixty mile in length and twenty seven in breadth without the bay of Arabia for although I find it question touch the religion whether they be jacobite or nestorian juan Barros affirm the first and it may seem so for their nearness to the dominion of habassia and A^anias Barros Asia Decad. 2. l. 1. c. 3. prove the latter because they be uncircumcised which jacobite be not and profess obedience to the patriarch of Mozal who be know to be patriarch of the nestorian Ana^ fabric 3. p. 292. yet in this they both agree that their divine service such as it be be perform in the Chaldee tongue and although Botero relate it to be do in the Hebrew yet he mean out of doubt not the ancient and pure Hebrew but the latter or degenerate language of the Hebrew that be to say the syriac as the other also that affirm the public and solemn devotion Relat. par. 3. l. 3. Christiani Socotena either of these or any other christian in all the east or south part of the world to be read in the Chaldee require also the like interpretation namely to be understand not of the right and babylonian but of the jewish and corrupt Chaldee but now to speak of those christian that celebrate their liturgy in the greek tongue I observe they to be these 1. the grecian themselves namely all they who vulgar speech the greek tongue be inhabit in Greece and a great part of Anatolia of Macedon and of Thrace together with all the land of the aegaean sea jerem Resp. 1 13. and the other many scatter land about the coast of Greece but yet they do it not in the present vulgar but in the pure and ancient greek tongue whereof as I before observe Hieron in praef lib. Paralip^ the common people understand but little use namely on festival day the ancient liturgy of Basil and on common day that of chrysostom as jeremy a late patriarch of Constantinople have record and namely as touch the holy scripture use the septuagint greek translation and special that of Lucian emendation at least it be so with they in Hierom time and I find no mention at all record of any alteration who observe the edition of the seventy interpreter by Lucianus to have be receive in use from Constantinople as far as Antiochia as also that of Origens emendation from Antiochia to Egypt and in Egypt that of hesychius but howsoever it may be touch the edition usual among they yet certain that the grecian have not the scripture translate into the vulgar greek the i i theodos z^gomal^in Cru^ l. Turco^ p. 431. grecian themselves have direct record 2. the syrian namely those that for distinction of religion from the jacobite who likewise inhabit Syria be term so that be to say the melchite for they have the arabic for their vulgar language as they agree in other point of their religion and ceremony and order of divine service with the grecian so do they as touch their liturgy in language also as be observe by k k Vitriac hist. orient c. 75. Mai^ho l. c. 14. breitenbach Baumgart Peregr l 2. c. 9 Villamont l. 2. c. ^2 rel p. 3 l. 1. c. Melchiti Vitriacus Haitho Breitenbachius and many other 3. the Georgians who have for their vulgar speech a peculiar language of a middle temper which well agree with the position of their country betwixt tartarian and armenian as Gesner and postel and Roccha in their book of language have observe exercise notwithstanding their liturgy in the greek tongue as l l Vitriac lib. c 80. ge^ner mithrid in Lingu^ Georgia Postel de^2 ^2 ling tit. ling. Geo^g Roccha dialect in georgiana and in graeca vet Bau^gart loc. Villamont l. 2. c. 23. jacobus a Vitriaco Gesner Postel Roccha and diverse other have certain record 4. the circassians who yet in such sort celebrate their divine service in the greek that their priest themselves by reason of their gross ignorance understand not what they read m m interian 1. Zychi c. 1. Obser. l. 1. c. 35. as Intireano that live among they have remember 5. and last in the greek tongue be celebrate the liturgy of all the monastery that be of the greek religion wheresoever disperse within the turkish dominion in Africa or Asia as in mount Sinai the city of Petra and Eltor in Arabia in jerusalem Alexandria Damascus and in sundry other place as with other have leave record and to come at last to the nation that celebrate their liturgy in the latin tongue to speak of they even this little will be enough namely that all the christian that be find of the roman communion in America and in Africa celebrate their liturgy in the roman tongue as all likewise in Europe except the slavonian above mention and in Asia except the two new roman purchase of the maronites in Syria and of the christian of saint Thomas in India who retain still the old accustom language which as I observe before be in the liturgy of both those nation the syriac tongue I have think good to add this note in the conclusion that christian religion may seem just to be divide into four part in regard of her professor through the world of which the grecian faith possess one reckon to they the russian the romanist or papist another the protestant by their adversary and by the intemperate zeal of some lutheran and other factious person make more to disagree then indeed they do as by the harmony of confession appear and by their uniform acknowledgement of all the main point of religion their difference be about circumstance rite manner of presence and some more abstruse point then whereof the vulgar be capable these by a general name call protestant may be reckon for a three part perhaps not all so great in multitude as either of the former but more flourish than the first in splendour of power and learning only by a inquisition inferior to the second and in number as many as all other profession of christianity here reckon a four part chap. 14 relation of diverse traveller touch the diversity of christian rite and tenant in diverse part of the World @. i. maria a abassine his answer to question touch the religion of the abassine and Cophti you have read in aluares Bermudez and the jesuite relation l. 7. c. 5. and 7. and 8. large relation of the abassine faith and of the portugal remain in habassia as also of three patriarch send thither from the pope but refuse by the abassine these portugal dwell there send one Tecla Maria take out of Thomas a jesus de Conuers om. gent. l. 7. c. 13. Xe^a or sua. a abassine priest in their behalf to Rome who before the cardinal make answer as follow july 1. 1594. the reverend brother Tecla Maria son of Tecla Nebiat of the city Henza Mariam of the province of Xe^a of the kingdom of Ethiopia priest and monk of the order of saint Antony and of the monastery Libanus of the same province age forty five year at the command of the most illustrious and most reverend lord cardinal of saint Severine protector of the ethiopian nation to certain interrogatory make in the Arabic to he thus answer be ask what the ethiopian believe of God and the holy trinity he answer of God and the holy Trinity we believe in one God and three person the father son and holy ghost the father be unbegotten the son beget only of the father the holy ghost proceed from the father and the son be ask whether the holy ghost proceed from the father and the son as from two beginning and two spiration or as from one beginning and one spiration he answer as from one beginning and one only spiration be ask of the incarnation he answer that the person of the son the word of God the father be incarnate by the holy ghost of the virgin Mary be ask how many nature will abassine be monothelite and operations the ethiopian profess to be in Christ our lord he answer that the ethiopian believe after the union one nature one Will and one operation yet without mixtion and without confusion in which opinion he confess that the ethiopian and Cophti and other eastern nation err from the truth be ask whether they hold one nature in Christ result from two he answer the ethiopian say not so but simple profess one nature without mixtion and without confusion and affirm that to be divine be question of image he answer picture incense that among the ethiopian they be only paint and not carve or grave which the ethiopian have in great veneration in respect of representation and relation and incense they be ask of the canonical book of both testament he answer canonical book 81. that both the testament be divide among they into eighty one book all which be have in Egypt but without book he can not remember their name be ask how many general counsel they hold he say that they hold only three gen. counsel the nicene constantinopolitan and Ephesine which he have read but can not now recite touch the chalcedon council he say they condemn it because it determine two nature in Christ and condemn dioscorus the patriarch of Alexandria how many universal counsel be hold after he answer he know not he acknowledge seven sacrament * * this (@) come near the Romis^^ faith in di^ers thing then the (...) institute by Christ baptism confirmation sacrament the eucharist penance unction order and matrimony be ask in what formal word the ethiopian baptize he answer that after many prayer they say I baptise thou in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost the matter he say be natural water the minister a priest or in his absence a deacon beside who he never see any to baptise their male after forty day and female after eighty day except in danger of death and then they baptise present be ask whether the ethiopian circumcise their child ^hee answer that from ancient time to this day in all Ethiopia they circumcise their child in their own house without any ceremony but for a certain ancient custom cut away the prep^^e from the male the from the female be ask whether they believe circumcision necessary to salvation he answer they know that it be now cease baptism circumcision and that it be no long necessary be ask why the ethiopian be say to be baptize with fire and to sign in the forehead he answer that there be none in Ethiopia which be baptize with fire but in some province only they mark themselves with a razor in the forehead either for the health of their eye and sight no baptism with fire or as some say by the command of a certain king of Ethiopia to differ from the mahometans be ask why they baptise themselves every year he answer that the ethiopian every year for the solemnity of the Epiphanie go forth to a river and there many prayer be say by the priest and all be wash in the river and many stay there all night with great festivity for devotion of the baptism of our lord jesus Christ but no man baptise himself as they say see sup Aluares l. 7. c. 5. @. 14. who in rather believe but this man and Zaga Zabo who dam. a go publish and l. Vrreta daub over as well as they can diverse of the ethiopian superstition and yet this be more credible than Vrreta a very dunghill of lie and then Zaga Zabo too thick strew therewith for which cause I have omit they whereas this in most thing of moment say the truth but excuse as far as he may some of their rite in baptism circumcision etc. consecration communion in both kind child communicate purgatory soule-sleepe be demand of confirmation the matter the form the minister he answer confirmation with we be confer by a priest together with baptism and the infant be anoint with chrism in the forehead in the name of the father son and holy ghost ask of the effect thereof he say he know not but he believe that it be give that a Christian may be confirm in the faith be ask whether chrism be make among they every year he answer chrism be send they from the patriarch of Alexandria by who alone it be make and not by the bishop and be send every seven year and seldom with the pilgrim which return from the pilgrimage of the holy land and the old chrism be preserve in all church be ask whereof it be make he say of balsam and oil and of many flower and odoriferous thing be interrogate of the sacrament of the eucharist and the matter thereof he answer that the matter be bread of bread-corne and wine of the grape but in many province of Ethiopia in wine press out of raisin wash with water and steep in the same water the space of certain hour be ask what be the word whereby the bread be transubstantiate into the body and the wine into the blood he answer they be those word when the priest say and he take bread in his hand and lift up his eye to heaven unto God his father he bless say take you and eat you this be my body and likewise take the chalice he bless and sanctify say take you and drink ye^ this be the chalice of my blood which shall be shed for you for the remission of sin the minister he say be the priest only and the effect remission of sin be ask whether all the ethiopian be communicate in both kind he answer that all the ethiopian both clerk and layman be communicate under both kind the priest minister the body and the deacon the blood in a spoon be ask whether infant be communicate he^ answer that infant on the day of their baptism be communicate in this manner the priest put his forefinger in the chalice and be dip in the blood he put it in the infant mouth and after baptism till they be ten year old the priest little finger be put in the child mouth without the blood for devotions sake be ask whether they celebrate in bread leaven or unleavened and what they think of he which celebrate in unleavened he answer the ethiopian celebrate in leaven bread and they which celebrate in unleavened make the sacrament also and we through all Ethiopia on Mandie Thursday every year in the supper of the lord in memorial hereof celebrate in unleavened be ask what the ethiopian think of purgatory he answer the ethiopian believe that the soul after death be detain in a certain place call in the ethiopian tongue Meccan aaraft that be the place of lightning in which the soul of the penitent be keep which have depart out of the world not have finish the satisfaction of their sin be ask whether the soul of the good present after death enjoy happiness and those of evil man he punish in hell he answer there be some in Ethiopia which think that the soul of the good rest in paradise terrestrial in which Adam be create until the day of judgement there be other which believe that the soul of the just present after death enjoy their creator in paradise mortal sin also be ask what sin and how many be mortal he answer those be mortal sin which be do against the lord commandment which be so many that I can number be ask whether the sin of the will which pass not into outward act be mortal he answer they be mortal when a man have give consent to the desire and concupiscence be ask whether any man can be save without the faith of jesus Christ the mediator of God and man universal grace he answer none can be save be ask of they which be now in the law of nature to who no knowledge of the gospel have come he answer I believe that God also have provide for they that by some mean they may be save when they shall have keep the precept of nature indulgence be ask what the ethiopian think of indulgence he answer I believe they be acceptable among all and they call they benediction but I desire to understand the use of they invocation of saint be ask of invocation of saint he answer that the invocation of saint be very well approve among the ethiopian and all do profess their intercession with God simony difference betwixt abassine and Cophti be ask of simony and of those which by favour or compact be ordain priest bishop or patriarch he answer that it be forbid by the holy canon be ask what difference there be betwixt the ethiopian and the Cophti in matter of faith he answer that there be no difference betwixt they and they agree in all thing for they be under the obedience of the same patriarch but in some thing I have see they to differ namely the ethiopian contract not in degree prohibit but the Cophti contract in the second and the degree after it every where with licence and without the licence of their bishop and Patriarch also the Copht^ in the country and village keep no lord day nor holy day note but only in city which the ethiopian do every where also the ethiopian keep the sabbath or Saturday holy which the Cophti do not also the ethiopian every where through all Ethiopia circumcise their son and daughter but some Cophti only at cairo within these few year circumcise not also in the ceremony of the mass the Cophti differ much from the ethiopian for the priest of the Cophti celebrate without the vestment call and the deacon without the dalmatik vestment and with their head cover with a woollen Tobalea and never elevate the lord body and the chalice in their mass which ceremony be not among the ethiopi^ns be demand if he know in what thing the ethiopian and Cophti differ from the faith of the holy catholic Roman church he answer they differ principal in these thing they invocate dioscorus of Alexandria and james the first his disciple and Severus in the church with the holy father they receive not the chalcedon council and saint Leo pope they profess in Christ our lord one only nature will and operation they recite the thrice holy hymn with addition of those word which be crucify for we yet with this exposition that the three sanctification be apply to the most holy Trinity and those word holy holy holy which be crucify for we only to our lord Christ the Cophti and ethiopian use circumcision and these also observe the sabbath be ask when where of who and what order he have take he answer when I be fifteen year old holy order in the church of saint Mary in the monastery of Denob of the province Xeva in Ethiopia I be enter in order by joseph a c^phtite archbishop of Ethiopia josephus cophte in this manner the archbishop before the celebration of mas^e shave my head in five place in form of a cross and anoint i with chrism in the forehead recite prayer in the egyptian tongue and breathe in my face and the same hour in time of the celebration make i a ostiary and or psalmist and Acolyte and nefcadeacon or Subdeacon and deacon of the gospel and give i the holy communion and a long time after when I be thirty year old in the city bed in Dembia of Ethiopia in the church of saint George I be order priest by archbishop mark the successor of the say joseph popish rite of give order be ask whether he hear the archbishop utter in colla^ing order the formal word of each order he answer the archbishop utter they but I hear not nor understand because he celebrate in the egyptian tongue whereof I be utter ignorant be ask whether any material be deliver by the archbishop in collation of each order and whether he touch the same with his hand namely whether in make he ostiary the key of the church and open the door and sound the bell in the lectorship the book of lesson or touch the psalmist in exorcistship the book of exorcism or missal in acolythship the candlestick with the candle put out and a empty pot in subdeaconship the empty chalice with a empty patene over it and pot with wine and water and the basin with a towel and the book of the epistle and whether the be by the archbishop put on his head and the maniple on his left arm and whether he be vest with the tunicle and in his deaconship whether he touch the book of the gospel and the stole be put on his shoulder and he vest with the dalmatic and in be order priest whether he touch the chalice with wine and water and the patene with the ^oste and whether the archbishop and priest impose hand on his head and whether the stole be apply to his breast in manner of a cross and whether he put on the casule without the planet and have his hand touch with the oil of the he answer I certain know that I in all the say order have no material or instrument deliver i by the archbishop in collation of the order nor do I touch any such nor be I vest with any vestiment peculiar to any order nor do the archbishop impose hand on i nor be my hand anoint with holy oil he say also our archbishop in Ethiopia give order to 2000 and more at one time and to each give six order together without examination before and without enquiry examination choice approbation writing or register and in regard of the multitude can give to each and every of they any material to be touch and in the same manner it be observe in all ordination by our archbishop successive although it be otherwise observe in Egypt where so great a multitude be not order at once together and some competent matter be deliver to be touch of the ordain be ask whether he know the say joseph and mark bishop aforesaid to have be schismatic and without the communion of the holy roman church he answer that he know not so much yea he rather certain believe at that time that they be catholic as also all the ethiopian and Cophti and that they obey the apostolic see in all thing and hold communion with the holy roman church and believe that all christian do agree in matter of faith but he learn the th^^gs before say when afterward he be at jerusalem and in Egypt @. 2 relation of the jacobite and armenians write by LEONARD bishop of Sidon pope Gregory the 13. his nuncio to the eastern part the jacobite nation be disperse through the city land and town of Syria Mesopotamia and Babylonia jacobite number obtain the number of 50000. house most of they poor and live on daily labour in Aleppo and Caramit be many rich family which live on merchandise their patriarchal church be in Mesopotamia without the city of morad^m in the monastery Zafram but the patriarch reside for his great commodity and quiet in the city Caramit this nation be subject to the patriarch David but be govern of the bishop Thomas vicar general and brother to the say patriarch under who obedience live at this time John the metropolitan of jerusalem by the jacobite style the five patriarch Michael archbishop of Damascus their bishop james archbishop of edessa call Orfa or Raha mi^as archbishop of saur archbishop in the same province james archbishop of Bisuaria Abraham bishop of Aata^ra Melchez bishop of saint Melchi in tur jesus bishop of the monastery Deiriloemor Abelmedich in the province of tur Elias bishop in Salach Elias bishop of the monastery saint cross in Zaz Gazel bishop in Tarach David bishop in Maaden Pilate metropolitan in musal and the east Gazel archbishop of Miaferichin the archbishop of the monastery of mar Abihai ananias bishop of saint Bertonias John bishop of Hartbert Isaac archbishop of Cyprus Simeon archbishop of Caramit Habib there be many monastery of the same nation church religion and deacon monastery and church and clergy man innumerable which I can not visit be reject by the say vicar general Thomas yet I visit the temple of the jacobite in Tripoli A^^avi^ Damascus Neph jerusalem Aleppo Orfa mar Abihai Gargar among the church of which part I find those of jerusalem and Aleppo well furnish but the rest without image and ill govern for the sacrament be keep in wooden pyx without light or lamp and the baptismal funt want water rite for at every baptism they bless the funt anew the ornament of the altar also be most vile and the office of the mass be perform very base and careless of the holy oil only chrism be keep in church this be call miron and be bless of the patriarch every seven year with many flower and odoriferous thing they have not the oil of the Catachumeni and for the oil of extreme unction the priest bless it in light set on four part in manner of a cross and therewith anoint the sick after many gospel and prayer recite the sacrament of confession be rare frequent and many communicate without auricular confession the patriarch profess that they hold the same in substance with the roman church but the greek and latin can not attemper such word and term as the jacobite in those thing have do armenians their patriarch of the armenians the say bishop of Sidon testify that they be subject to two principal patriarch one of Armenia the great the other of Armenia the less the former reside in the monastery and church of Ecmeazin near the city in Persia the other in the city Cis of Cilicia now call Caramania other patriarch be sometime by the favour of the turk create among they and be exacter of tribute which the armenian family be find to pay the turk other also be elect coadjutor of the same patriarch with consent of the bishop and people further there be other or rather patriarch of the same nation in the remote part of Persia and in Constantinople which although legal they be subject to the patriarch of Armenia mayor their number yet sometime do not acknowledge he the family subject to the patriarch of the great Armenia exceed the number of 150000. beside very many monastery preacher or master bishop religious person and deacon their preacher be call Mortabiti and be obey by the people as the patriarch himself in the province in Persia also in two city there live catholic armenians subject to a archbishop of the dominican order and other friar of that profession romish armenians which observe the latin rite and live under the obedience of the roman Sea the patriarch of Armenia Minor have under his jurisdiction four and twenty prelate archbishop and bishop second Patriarch and the election of the patriarch belong to 12. bishop near the patriarchal church yet sometime the armenian people by favour and command of the turkish officer create their patriarch and after obtain the consent of the bishop and archbishop and by the favour of the principal people a coadjutor with future succession be depute to he who of a master and preacher after the death of the say predecessor be receive and confirm by the people for patriarch to this patriarch be subject about 20000. family and they live in the village castle and city of Cilicia and Syria there be twenty monastery each contain 100 religious 300. priest deacon and cl^^kes many which live of alm and of their own industry @. 3 of Simon SULAKA a papal eastern patriarch among the chaldaean and of diverse other thither send of A^DESV AATALLA DONHA his successor among the asian nestorian I flare the popish multiplication make great harvest of little corn yet I here re^^t what I find and wish that a^l n^storians will abandon those heresy and in that point be Roman and catholic dry the patriarch there have be some roman catholic which have exhibit obedience to the pope some of those which profess Simon Sulaka a monk of saint basils order to be their superior call themselves chaldaean and assyrian acknowledge pope julius the three and reject the name of nestorian Sulaka be by the pope confirm patriarch of that nation with the title of Mozal which church his adversary possess he return to Caramit and there ordain certain archbishop and bishop and reject the nestorian invocation which at that time be usual make by the deacon in the church he seek to spread the roman faith but by the policy of the antipatriarke dry he be take and slay by the turk the confession of faith by the same Sulaka make at Rome be extant in the bishop a dominican be send by the pope to visit and confirm this church who have reform some thing be drive with some assyrian to flee to Ormus and Goa where he die his companion Friar Anthony with the archbishop Ermetes Elias disciple of Sulaka visit many christian in cochin and India of saint Thomas and after his return be make a bishop by the pope to Sulaka succeed Abdesu of the same order of saint Basil which be at the council of Trent under pope Pius the four and from he carry with he the title of Mazal and return to caramit^nd ^nd Seert ordain many priest bishop and archbishop I think he mean saint Thomas christians in India Abdesu or Abil^su and many city of the chaldee yield he obedience but soon after he die in the monastery of the city Seert and Aatalla a brother of the same order succeed and after he Donha Simon the archbishop of and Salamas renounce the antipatriarke and be elect patriarch by the prelate of that nation and confirm by Gregory the thirteen to who he send archbishop Ermes Elias in his name to exhibit obedience who return with his patriarchal pall from Rome 1582 but hitherto they have nothing of mozal but the title of these nestorian see rubruquis polo etc. ^ in to 2. l. 1. and brerew^^ds inquire follow the other patriarch possess the see and they be glad to seek a place of residence where they can as at Caramit and this last at Zeinalbach the rich and mighty of that nation be at Mozal and gesire and acknowledge the other patriarch late call Elias resident in the patriarchal monastery of saint Ermes near Mozal he have under he two and twenty bishop above six hundred territory of which two and twenty be flourish city each contain five hundred nestorian family and in masul 1000 each have about forty person the other territory have two or three hundred nestorian family they have thirty monastery of saint Anthony order in which fifteen or twenty monk live and in that of the patriarch seventy the patriarch and bishop must be monk they extend to Baldach and the east indies @. 4 of the Cophti their synod at cairo the jesuite be the pope agent and of STEPHEN COLINZAS message to the Georgians and two jesuite send to the maronites pope Gregory the thirteen send diverse message to the Cophti whereby a synod be procure at cairo synod at cairo in December 1582. which have three session to reconcile they to the roman church at the first be present bishop and principal man at the three the same man with the jesuite especial John Baptista Romanus in the first be open the cause of their decession in the conventicle of Ephesus assemble by dioscorus whereby eutyches his heresy which deny two nature in Christ be begin condemn after in the chalcedon council they desire to search their write which be few and eat wi^h age. and in the second session be much alteration and the matter put off to the three in that three the law of circumcision be abrogate first and after that anathema be denounce against such as shall spoil Christ of either yet for all this the vicar of the patriarch then be resist the subscribe and a quarrel be pick by the turk against the pope agent as i^ they seek to subject the east to the pope or the king of Spain they be therefore cast into prison and their redemption cost 5000. crown at cairo be a library in which be keep many book of the ancient doctor in Arabic as of saint Jerome Gregory Nazianzene saint Basil etc. and the man have good wit and some thereby prove learn in the time of pope Clement the eight mark the patriarch send a submission to the pope as be pretend but it prove to be the imposture of one barton Paul the three also send to the Georgians 1545. Stephen Colynza elect of newan in Armenit king of Georgia his letter to the pope his nuncio to the king of Georgia and Armenia the georgian king write back to the pope his letter beginning he proceed in swell title of vanity ascribe to the pope and say so much that all his zeal and profession be spend as it seem in that epistle for little effect have since appear pope Clement the eight send two jesuite with a bishop to the maronites in mount Libanus Hierom Dandin a divine be principal the cause of send be that it may by the eye be discern seminary of maronites whether the cost bestow at Rome on the seminary of maronites be well bestow the pope send the patriarch a whole vestiment of silk wrought with gold for a patriarchal moss and many chi^ts of book in the chaldaean tongue print in the city contain the liturgy of saint james saint Peter and saint sixtus they have no book but write and those tear or erroneous with seruice-booke to God and the bless Virgin for they use the Chaldee tongue as we do the latin out of the seminary be send one to be a coadjutor to the patriarch and make bishop and another coadjutor to he in his bishopric their common language be Arabic the pope send also silver chalice and iron instrument to make the host and sacred vest for other priest by the say Dandin he stay two month with his companion a priest in the monastery of the patriarch in which time the old patriarch die and the other be substitute by a synod according to the custom the patriarch perform all kind office to the jesuite as do also the monk which live spare eat little but rice herb and broth. the priest live single but be addict to no study of learning and spend the rest of their time in till the ground poor priest or stir up other thereto that they may have to live on and to pay their tribute their woman be very modest and chaste neither have they any mercenary harlot they have a place at the entrance of the church by themselves and when service be do they depart first no man stir till hey be all go Dandin alter diverse thing among they their old rite as to reserve some case to the bishop or Patriark^ not to constrain priest to marry before they take order that some of the seruiarians shall be appoint on some holy day to preach and write case for other to learn where as before they have no sermon but sometime a homily to use no other missal than such as have be send from Rome that other book shall be examine not as before to admit child to the eucharist l. 8 c. 6. l. 9 c. 9 etc. he which will read more of these maronites may read out of themselves and other in this work as also touch they and all other christian in the east in master Brerewoods Enquirie hereto annex also Thomas jesus our author be far more ample in these thing then agree with our scope I think good yet to add out of a manuscript above a dozen year since communicate to i by the right reverend father in God doctor usher lord bishop of me^th copy out of a jesuite write catalogue of heresy these error as they be there recite by the jesuite and gather out of the maronites book 1580. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 5^^ 22 23 24 25 viz. 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 infant 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 12. 40 7. 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 Sacerdos Abel and Cain and 52 N^^ in Arca 53 54 12. 55 Sacerdos johanne Baptista 56 57 58 20. 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 I have hither also translate some observation of Christopher angel^s a greek monk and priest which have live many year in England and some five year since give i a greek * * it be print also in latin at Cambridge book print by he in London touch their present rite both in their church and monastery many thing I can have add touch the greek and their modern language state and religion out of Crusius jeremias the patriarch and other but this man be a traveller I choose rather to let you hear he in that wherein he have be breed as for dogmatic difference you have have they before and the present greek be not ordinary so learned as to give you a perfect account thereof @. v. of the condition of life in which the greek now live and of their rite of fast feast and other observation gather out of the book of christopheros angelos a greekish monk and Priest the ancient * * simple silliness ^ither of this monk or of this nation or rather base courage palliate with scripture misapply the true cause be that they weaken by division among themselves and from the latin and not assist from prince abroad be not able to hold out a obscure prophecy ought not to hold man hand except they will be treacherous to their state for god will reveal be the rule of our action veil prophecy can but f^resignifie event be not terrible till then and therefore not eligible as God rule not we intimate what he will and not what we ought Deut. 29. diverse tribute to the Turk tithe of their child another fashion grecian hear John the evangelist speak in the thirteen of the Apoc. and first verse and I s^w a beast rise out of the sea and power be grant he to make war with the saint and to overcome they and power be give he over every kindred and tongue and nation and all that dwell upon the earth worship he who name be not write in the book of life of the lamb who be slay from the begin of the world if any man have a ear let he hear if any lead into captivity he shall go into captivity if any kill with a sword he must be kill with the sword and that which follow the greek have this prophecy and many other of this kind of holy man when they see the turk come say this be the beast that saint John speak of and will not fight with the Turk they fight a little in the beginning but afterward yield and for this be not carry away captive in like manner they carry all their good with they and buy all of the king of the turk this thing also do the monk and redeem their monastery and field and house and whatsoever they possess before therefore to this day they retain all their old book and observe their country law and live as the christian and monk in former age if the christian shall at any time get the superiority but let we return to our purpose each of the male pay tribute to the turkish king as likewise the woman that be to say that the man dwell in one house from twenty year and upward pay yearly six shilling but if they be stripling that be to say fifteen year old they pay three only if they be pass fifteen pay four or five till they come to the age of twenty year they will give this tax because the lord say be wise as serpent they be mindful also that John say Apoc. 7.14 those be those which come out of great tribulation and wash their garment and make they white in the blood of the lamb moreover they pay another custom that be to say when the army go to war they be wont to contribute certain piece of money to buy bread and flesh to sustain the army they do not yet all equal pay this but sometime twenty sometime ten shilling in every house sometime more have respect to the army but all the house do not contribute alike in this as in the former in that the rich and poor pay the same sum in this no man give beyond his ability there be also another duty to wit when the king spy be send to exact tribute of the christian in the journey the christian which dwell there allow they victual and thus much concern their tribute the tithe of their child be in this manner when as first the Turk exercise authority over the greek in every city and province he take a account of the house and every four year of ten house take one of their child there be at that time in one city a hundred household of ten time ten household he choose one afterward after that four year be expire he take ten other child of the second that be to say of the next house not of that former whereof he take before and so they do every four year until all the house be finish and then again they begin to take child at the first house until they return again to the first after forty year be pass they return again to the first house and after this manner they do with the other house city and province they have another unjust custom of gather child that be to say when the janissary go from the king to gather boy through the province that be subject to they where they ought to gather they pass through the province as many boy as they find in the way they take without tithe say those boy be our prey but if it happen that any child among they that be unjust take be of those house which be to give a boy than they will take no other boy of those house whereof that boy be because they may not take two boy out of one house in the same year therefore when the boy father hear that the janissary come to gather boy they hide their boy before they come some in mountain some in the house of the great man that be turk because those ruler be citizen and the greek friend and therefore desire to keep the greek son safe and after they restore again their son sometime the boy fly into the mountain and the janissary take the boy father or mother and punish they with death and when the child hear that their parent be punish they come of their own accord and be deliver sometime the child parent die of the punishment for their son and thus much concern their child the greek observe four lent every year the first be call the great and holy Lent this continue eight and forty day together before easter greekish lent four in every year first Lent they fast in that holy Lent eat dry thing for the tithe of their soul on annunciation day they eat fish and feast for joy of the annunciation therefore there remain only five and thirty day for the tithe of the year which be five time seven which make five and thirty day because that for seven week together they fast before easter five day in every week that be to say Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday and Friday they fast not on Saturday and Sunday because they eat oil and drink wine twice in a day therefore they be not call fast day but only after a sort Saturday and Sunday not fast some of the laic in those five day of the week eat oil and drink wine because they respect not the tithe of soul the fast of the monk differ from the laic fast for the laic may sometime eat oil and drink wine in those five day and have absolution of the spiritual priest when they confess to he their particular sin but the monk may not eat oil nor drink wine those five day for when they confess they be punish according to the canon unless they have some disease or some other necessity their second lent be call the lend of day second or Advent Lent because they fast forty day together before Christmas they fast in those day first in the honour of Christ second because Moses fast forty day and then merit or obtain to converse with God and receive the stony table of the decalogue to our example Moses fast there forty day that he may speak with God and receive the table but we fast so many day that we may meet Christ bear for our sin as the wiseman do with gift and as the shepherd speak with the angel and be think worthy to see a army of angel and to worship Christ we also confess our sin and fast and keep under our body worship Christ the three Lent be call the lend of the holy apostle Peter and Paul three Lent it begin one week after Wh^tsontide and continue to the nine and twenty day of the month of june that be to say to the feast of Peter and Paul their four lent begin from the first day of August four Lent assumption and continue to the fourteen day of the same month because on the 15. day they celebrate a great feast to the virgin Mary who on that day ascend from earth to heaven from corruptible thing to incorruptible and go to her son and to her god and our lord jesus Christ and our god amen in her honour they fast fourteen day but these fast differ from the great Lent for in the lent of Christmas difference of fast in Lent and of Peter and Paul they eat fish twice in a day but in our lady lend they eat no fish yet they eat twice a day they begin to fast after this manner the ten Sunday before Easter Sunday to wit manner of fast the nine week before easter that week be call the call week and the Sunday of the publican and the pharisee for on the ten Sunday they read the gospel of the publican and the pharisee that they may learn humility and abase themselves and not judge and condemn other as the pharisee judge the publican and be punish and they sing at evensong and the day follow before day that be the ten Sunday before easter these song with a great and dry voice and very often melodious so that all may hear let we a^oid the pharisee boast let we learn the publican lowliness and other of this kind and they confess their sin and pardon the wrong of their enemy that they may be pure in heart when they begin to fast the follow Sunday which be the nine Sunday before easter and the eight week that Sunday be call the Sunday of the second come and the judgement of our lord jesus Christ wherefore on this day they read the gospel than they shall see the son of man come in the cloud and the rest that follow and the prophecy of Daniel the prophet viz. behold the throne be set and the ancient of day sit down and the book be open to judgement and they read in the church these word of Christ and of the prophecy of Daniel sing with a dry and great voice so that all may hear and many tremble for all hear that judgement and vengeance be at hand o Vti^am they feast very much this Sunday and give many alm and procure friendship with their enemy and will never judge nor backbite they after they be make friend nor remember the injury so long as they live because Paul faith neither thief nor evil speaker etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God this be call Shrovesunday because on this day be a inhibition from flesh for in the day follow that be Monday they begin to fast only from flesh and eat egg m^lke cheese butter and such kind of meat that come from flesh all the week but on Saturday and Sunday which be call the eight Sunday before easter and the seven week before easter the eight sunday before Easter be call cheese Sunday because they eat cheese and egg and all kind of white meat and the greek do great reject this day because the day follow that be to say Monday they begin to fast the day be call the fall of Adam because on that day be read the fall of Adam that be how Adam and Eve eat of the tree of knowledge and for that unbridled lust of eat be cast out of paradise because they neglect the o^inance of God therefore they be banish and because after the fall of Adam then go out of paradise and mourn because he be deceive by his curse desire to eat and be so make the servant of the devil therefore they give large alm and commiserate their enemy as we say before and now they do these thing that they may be pure in heart when they begin to fast but they begin to fast on Monday to wit the first day of the seven week before easter and they fast five day viz. Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday and Friday but they fast eat dry thing that be to say they eat bean pease with vinegar they boil herb in water and eat they with vinegar raisin fig dry apple dry pear dry cherry and honey these they boil altogether in water they eat the fruit but drink the broth as wine etc. on Saturday and Sunday which be call the lord day they eat oil and drink wine and after this manner they live every week until easter they fast also two day every week throughout the whole year viz. Wednesday and Friday two weekely^fast Wednesday and Friday they fast on Wednesday because on that day judas take money to betray Christ and they be afflict with Christ by fast but on Friday they fast because Christ be crucify and they be in heaviness with Christ because he say when the bridegroom shall be take from they then shall my disciple fast on every Saturday and other feast throughout the year the greek be wont at evening to go to the temple Saturdays sundry and other holy day all the grecian woman and child rise very timely that be to say the second hour after midnight on every Sunday and feast day to go to the temple and leave at home one boy or one girl to keep the house and they continue there sing all the night till morning when the sun rise they go out and return home they (@) idle and eat not nor drink till the nine hour after midnight but at the nine hour the priest run to the temple and prepare those thing that belong to the liturgy and take one loaf which a woman or pure man make the day before that be some man which know not his wife the day before or a woman which know not her husband that be on Saturday night or otherwise from the evening of Friday till the morning light of Saturday lay not together that man or that woman bake and knead meal and make that loaf on Saturday or another day he must needs be pure which shall make this bread before they put this bread into the oven they sign it with a certain piece of wood engrave with letter viz. jesus Christ overcome and then they put it into the oven mark with these letter viz. jesus Christ overcome this bread signify the virgin as the virgin be pure so a pure man must bake that bread this bread the priest take in his hand and bless say in the memory of our holy unspotted lady mother of God etc. and other prayer and consecrate that bread to the virgin and after this the priest have a little spear in form of the spear wherewith the soldier pierce Christ and the priest take the little spear and cut off some foursquare piece of the outside of the loaf which contain those letter jesus Christ overcome typify Christ who be bear of the virgin Mary and of this bread they make their eucharist the eucharist be administer the priest or deacon divide that great part of bread which be leave into very small piece of which bread we say that it be the body of the virgin and of this bread he distribute to they which take Christ body and to as many as fast all that day who neither eat nor drink any thing they call this kind of bread the reward because they give it ^o all those which be and which be not partaker of the lord supper as a certain divine gift those thing be finish they go out of the temple and again gather themselves to evening prayer which custom be observe throughout the whole world cross fast. moreover they fast the fourteen day of September in honour of the cross which be find on that day twelve day holy water see the ruff and Abassine ceremony on that day in their place and they celebrate the feast of the cross abstain from white meat because on that day they kiss the cross of Christ and they desire to kiss it fast they fast also the five of januarie from all white meat because the six day of that month Christ be baptize according to the greekish custom moreover the priest that day hallow water whereof the laic drink and that they may be pure drink of that holy water they fast the day before that be to say the five of januarie they observe no fast the four and six day of the week for they eat flesh on wednesday and friday and all white meat which come from flesh as egg butter milk cheese etc. from the day of Christ nativity to the fourteen day of januarie that be from the 25. of December to the fourteen of januarie they fast not yet they fast the five of januarie that they may drink holy water the six day whereof we speak before if the nativity of Christ happen on a Wednesday or a Friday the common people eat flesh and all white meat but the monk only white meat without flesh in honour of Christ nativity also on the six day of januarie whereon Christ be baptize the laic eat flesh and all kind of white meat as we say before but the monk eat only white meat notwithstanding in the eleven week before easter they eat flesh on Wednesday and Friday dog-tale the reason whereof be this in time pass there be certain heretic which have a excellent good dog who be accustom to tie letter about his neck and send he to their friend two or three day journey from they who when they have read the letter send back other to they by the same dog and this they do diverse time at the length the dog die and return not than those heretic for grief fast Wednesday and Friday that they may deride the orthodox christian who fast those day in honour of Christ but when the christian understand this they decree in the eleven week not at all to fast with they but to eat flesh on Wednesday and Friday they call this week archburch moreover throughout easter week that be from the resurrection of Christ until the Sunday follow they eat flesh and white meat the father call it the week of renovation after the same manner on the day of Penticost they eat flesh and make merry but on the Monday next follow that feast they abstain from flesh and all white meat because the priest on that day after noon gather the people into the temple and all the people kneel in the same place and the priest pray that the holy ghost will descend upon they as it do former on the apostle on the day of Penticost and therefore they fast on that Monday that be the day follow but on Wednesday and Friday of that week they eat flesh for joy of the holy ghost but the monk eat only white meat the greekish bishop have a custom that at three set time they give the priest spiritual gift as Christ at three time especial give to his apostle spiritual gift time for order and when they have receive this favour thrice than they be perfect that be to say the apostle receive the first gift when he give they authority and power over all devil and to heal disease Luke 9.1 he give they the second on the day of his resurrection when he say to they John 20.22 receive the holy ghost who sin you remit they be remit to they etc. the three gift he give they in the feast of Penticost when he send his holy spirit upon they which be finish the apostle be perfect after the same manner the grecian bishop make other bishop first the bishop make this or that man a priest but no confession only to sacrifice and sanctify but after that the bishop understand that that priest be a scholar and learned then on the day follow he give he power to be a confessor and if he be unlearned he only sacrifice and if he deserve to be a bishop on the three day two or three bishop make he a complete bishop and by reason hereof every priest have not power to hear confession but he only who have authority from the bishop the priest desire for the most part that the people confess their sin to they in the temple sometime also in other place confession either in a private house or in the field but no man be present beside themselves whether it be in the church or out of the church the greek pray in the temple stand upright rite of prayer etc. in their church but they have some high seat in the temple such as be in many college and they may sometime sit in they and sometime stand when the priest preach than the lay people sit in those seat yet they stand when they sing but when they come into the temple every one take his proper place and then stand with his hat off bend down the three former finger of his right hand which be do he intimate that there be three person in one deity and these finger thus bend down he first lay on the forepart of his head signify thereby that the holy trinity be in heaven then he remove they to his belly signify that the son and the word of God descend to the earth and take flesh and be crucify and bury for our sin then he place they on his right shoulder signify that Christ be rise from the dead and sit at the right hand of the father as David say sit at my right hand till I put thy enemy under thy foot then he lay they on his left shoulder intimate that Christ shall not set we at his left hand at the last day but deliver we from that as he have teach we deliver we from evil and again when he say then will he place the sheep at his right hand and the goat at his left and every one in these several space of time that be from the first period of time wherein he put those three finger on his head until the lay they on his left shoulder say these word lord jesus Christ son and word of God be merciful to i a sinner and he bend his body and so this figure signify the sign of the cross that be put his finger first on his head after on his belly then on his right shoulder and last on his left these action make a cross and signify the cross whereon Christ be crucify for our sin and thus every one make this figure three or four time and then sit down on his seat the greek have a custom that the better sort of they receive the sacrament of the precious body and blood of Christ once twice thrice or four time in the year yet confession of their sin must go before to some spiritual priest they call those spiritual priest who have authority from the bishop and whosoever he be which will confess himself to such a kind of priest aught to come to he and the priest ask he what he desire he answer rite of confession say I desire to confess my sin then the priest go with he to the temple and there in some private place he begin to teach he say see the angel of God stand before thou to receive thy confession take heed therefore that thou conceal no sin neither for shame nor for any other cause for I be a sinner like thyself then the greek begin to confess his sin particular which be do the priest say again take heed that you overslip no sin through forgetfulness then more serious then before he look into himself and whatsoever sin he can remember he ingenious confess to the Priest but if he can remember no more he tell he he have confess all that he remember then the priest impose he penance that he fast so many day and give so many alm which be finish he bless he in these word according to the power which Christ give his apostle say whatsoever you shall bind on earth shall be find in heaven and whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be loose in heaven again according to the power which the apostle give the bishop and the bishop give i be bless of the father of the son and of the holy ghost and let thy portion be with the just which short benediction be end he make a long prayer over his head who arise and leave some money in the place for the priest to pray for he afterward and so he go forth and perform whatsoever the priest enjoin he and when the time come that he must receive the lord supper he must go to that priest or some other who must pray over his head he in the mean time kneel their temple the Quire all the greekish temple have a certain place distinct from the rest of the temple wherein priest deacon and subdeacons only enter and wherein they perform their holy and when the priest will give the holy sacrament to they that will receive it he stand at the door of that place and they that desire to receive it come near the door and stand right before it they come after this manner when the time draw near to receive it they come before the door where the priest celebrate his holy and bend their knee to the east communion and worship God then they turn to the west and kneel say to the people bless we brethren we have sin in word and deed and the people answer say God pardon you brethren then they turn to the south side of the church and say the same word to they as before and they answer in the same manner in like fashion they turn themselves and kneel to the north side of the church say as before and receive the same answer after this they all come near to door of the place where the priest perform his holy and the priest come forth hold the sacrament in his hand and stand in the middle of the door and give to every one the body and blood of our lord the bread and wine mingle together say n. n. servant of God receive in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost and in the very particle of time wherein they receive the sacrament every one with a low voice say to himself lord I will not kiss thou as judas but as the thief I confess thou remember i o lord when thou come in thy kingdom and after these word he take the sacrament and after that holy receive present he receive of the same priest a small portion of the bread call the divine gui^t whereof we speak before when we mention the greekish prayer of the whole year holy bread the greek have certain small vessel in the church call fonts wherein they baptise infant in this manner fonts and baptism when the time come to baptise a infant the kindred of the child heat water with sweet smell herb and put the water into the foresay vessel but while the water warm the priest pray and put oil into the water after the prayer the priest take the child in his arm and put the whole infant thrice quite under the water say n. n. the servant of God be baptize in the name of the father than he duck the infant and draw he out and then add and of the son and then again duck he and draw he out and last add in the name of the holy ghost and then again duck the infant and pluck he out that be three time dive he the water and pull he out of the water as Christ say to his disciple go forth baptise in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost all which be finish he read certain prayer as here in great Britain and restore the child to his kinsfolk excommunication it be a custom among the greek to excommunicate those that be grievous offender because saint Paul say when you be assemble together and my spirit also deliver that man over to Satan and again reprove he severe for example sake a certain wicked man have bear false witness or deal injurious with some man the man wrong city this false witness before some priest or bishop and the bishop ask the false witness whether his testimony be true or not the witness affirm his testimony to be true then the bishop or priest put on his pontifical attire whether he be in the church or elsewhere which garment signify the seamlesse and purple coat of Christ and other thing and at that time the bishop or priest be a type of Christ because of those holy garment and the grace which he receive of the bishop then he command the false witness to stand before he and begin that psalm wherein it be say o God be not silent of my praise because the mouth of the sinner and deceitful be open against i and the rest which follow in that psalm then he add certain prayer and after say by the authority which Christ give his apostle viz. whatsoever you shall loose in earth shall be loose in heaven and whatsoever you shall bind in earth shall be find also in heaven and by the authority which the apostle give to the bishop and the bishop give i by this authority I excommunicate thou thou shall not converse with christian and shall be separate from the father and the son and the holy ghost and from the three hundred and eighteen father divine of the nicene council and from all saint and thy portion shall be with the devil and judas and thou shall be indissoluble for ever as stone and iron for a testimony unless thou repent these thing be do he dismiss he and if the false witness do not afterward repent but die in his opinion after a year for the greek be wont to dig up the sepulcher of those which die in the former year and also the sepulchre of that false witness and they find he entire his body black his hair yet remain and his nail white and they cast he out of the sepulchre and set he bolt upright against a wall and he stand firm of himself as a solid piece of timber and if you strike his belly it will sound like a drum and therefore he be call Timpaniaeu^ see also Cas^^an^^ in historian in his history call a excommunicate person if you doubt you may speak to your merchant to inquire in palaea-patia thessalonica Alexandria Constantinople or any where else you may also inquire of the greek that be in England who will certify you of the truth about threescore year since or somewhat more the jew which inhabit about cairo bitter envy the christian for they see that the governor be very courteous and therefore they consult together to give he a double tribute for the christian so that he will destroy they because Christ speak false say whosoever have faith as a grain of mustard seed Christopher Furer mention this patriarch and his poison cup pag. 1376. he be alive 35. year after an. 1565. be then 103 year old that of remove the mountain I doubt Graeca to have be hither add from that which m. polo relate to. 2. pa. 70. for Furer shall as well have hear this as that have letter of commendation from he but he mention it not addition and multiplication be no new thing with miracle-monger shall say to this mountain pass hither or thither and it shall go math. 17.20 and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt they mar. 16.19 then the furious governor call the patriarch and say your religion be false because Christ say whosoever believe in i although he drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt he and present command the patriarch that he shall drink poison before he without make the sign of the cross because the jew have inform he that the christian wrought magical by it for when they make the sign of the cross than the poison lose his efficacy and therefore the governor command the patriarch that he shall not make the sign of the cross when he drink the poison then the patriarch call the people pray and fast with they three day and the three day take the communion with they and they go all to the governor then the governor be present and all the jew one of the jew bring a cup full of strong poison and give it the patriarch to drink then the governor say to the patriarch hold the cup in his hand take heed you make not the sign of the cross on the cup then the patriarch blessing the cup mystical ask the governor say where will you that I drink on this side or on this or on this or on this and by this mean he lay his finger on the four side of the superficies of the cup sanctify the cup mystical then the governor say to the patriarch drink where you will not know that the patriarch have bless the cup with the sign of the cross after this the patriarch drink off the whole cup. and after he have drink he bid they bring he some water and they bring some then he put a little water into the cup and wash it then he say to the governor I have drink all the poison let a jew drink only this water that be in the cup that we may see his faith then the patriarch offer the cup to the jew that first bring it he that he may drink it but the jew will not then the governor threaten he say drink that we may see also thy religion and so the jew drink the water in the cup and present burst in ^under then the jew give great quantity of money to the governor say that the patriarch have wrought witchcraft but Christ say whosoever have faith as a grain of mustard seed shall say to this mountain remove thither and it shall remove now let the patriarch call that mountain which be over against we and if it come to we then let the christian slay we then again the prince say to the patriarch that he shall call the mountain or otherwise the christian must die then the patriarch beseech the governor to grant he three day that the greek may take counsel together but the patriarch and people pray with tear day and night and on the three day according to their custom they receive the lord supper and after they have do they all assemble together both greek turk and jew and come to the appoint place and then the patriarch stretch out his hand towards the mountain say in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost mountain come hither and sudden it cleave in piece and come to they but all fear lest it shall cover they then the governor say to the patriarch command that the mountain stand still then again stretch out his hand the patriarch bless the mountain say stand mountain and the mountain stand there and from that time the mountain be call stand-mountaine unto this day but in turkish it be call Dourdag that be stand-mountaine then the governor say to the patriarch that the grecian shall kill the jew but the patriarch answer the governor we christian be not accustom to kill man but for their punishment let they cause that the water which run beneath cairo may come into cairo that all man in the city may drink of it at the jew cost which to this day be do the greek also have monk but only of the order of Basil the great greekish Monk^ but this order be divide into three order the first be call monastical the second be anachoreticall which live apart the three asceticall or if you will exerciticall the first order which be call monastical be in this manner there be monastery among the greek both great and little some of they have fifty monk other a hundred order monastical some one hundred and fifty some two hundred other three hundred other four hundred and other more but the monk of this first order live a common life for they all dine and sup together with their governor at the same table and neither the governor meat nor drink differ from the rest of the monk whether they be illiterate or wise their life in common and whensoever the governor eat or drink they all eat the same bread and the same meat and drink the same drink but for decency the governor senior and priest differ in their garment most of the monk of this first order labour with their hand but the priest and deacon labour not but attend to read and ecclesiastical function but the rest live by the labour of their hand some make the monk shoe some spin sheep wool and goat hair some be brazier and make hatchet of brass hand-labour other betake themselves to keep flock of sheep and hire mercenary shepherd to serve they and be conversant with they a year and when a year be past they go to the monastery and tarry there other go to keep horse and remain out a year and then other be send out by the ancient of the monastery and according to this manner the ancient send out monk yearly to keep horse ox bee sheep and other business and after a year they return to the monastery and in this manner live the monk in the monastery many priest also be send by the ancient into Walachia Moscovia and Iberia that whatsoever the king give they they may carry to the monastery and they abide in the monastery and other be send forth and thus live the monk of the first order in their monastery their habit they wear a hat on their head which hide their ear signify that they hear nothing neither learn man vice but be account as deaf man as Paul say be child in maliciousness they wear also another hat upon that which represent the figure of a sepulchre and hide the head and hang down almost to the girdle intimate that he which wear this figure be dead from worldly thing neither ought he which be clothe in this habit to be careful about worldly affair that be about honour riches kindred friend favour with man nor cherish the body but account himself to be dead not as if he be real dead but with a kind of preoccupated opinion of death as the lord say whosoever will come after i let he deny himself and take up his cross and follow i and David we be kill all the day long for thy sake the second order of monk be call anachoreticall or heremeticall that be when there be any rich man monk eremitical that can live in the monastery than he give as much money to the monastery as will buy a house and the monk live in the monastery give he some great house which be distant two or three mile from the monastery wherein he live with two or three poor monk as the monastical do in monastery but that house have a church vine-yard oliveyard nut cherry almond and other thing necessary to live on abundant and this be the second order of monk of Basil the great the three order of monk be call asceticall or exerciticall that be the order give to exercise monk asceticall or vacant to strict exercise for these be exceed exercise in virtue these live a strict and rigid life they be content only with little house or cave and have neither vineyard nor field yet some of they have great vine but make no wine of they but nourish they to eat the grape they have also fig tree and such like thing wherewith they live namely beanes cherry apple chestnut boil on the fire with water they gather also in the spring time apple Parseley fig cherry and cut they in piece and dry they in the sun and these thus prepare they eat with bread the rest of the year once in a day and twice on feast day some eat once only on feast day these get their live by their sweat and labour for the greekish church do not suffer monk or hermit to beg because they remember that Paul say no abby-lubber nor beg friar he which will not work let he not eat but sometime some rich grecian send alm to the monastery and to the hermit and these exercise man receive they but the course of their life be such some make upper garment of goat and s^eepes wool which the monk wear upon their garment some make hat of straw some make wooden spoon and some of they write book and all these hand-wrought thing they give to the monk dwell in monastery and they supply the hermit with all necessary and this be the three order of hermit monk I write these thing because I be a eyewitness and speak certain true and bold this be the three order of the monk of Basill the great monk fast the fast of the first and second order that be of the monastical and of those who be governor of two or three monk be on this manner they fast through the whole year every week thrice Monday Wednesday and Friday they fast on Monday because on Saturday and Sunday they eat twice in a day and they eat fish and butter and egg and milk and cheese and oil and wine but that their concupiscence may not be increase they fast on Monday on Tuesday and Thursday Saturday and Sunday they eat twice those thing which I mention before the fast of the three day be in this manner the second hour after noon they pray in the temple and go out they go to the table and eat bean with broth without oil and butter and some herb with vinegar or pease or other pulse boil without oil ot butter etc. at evening they go to the temple and after prayer go out they sit near the temple and the butler be wont to go round about carry a cup full of fragment of bread and g^ues to every one of the monk a piece of bread and a cup of water the young sort take they but the elder receive nothing but after they have sit a while they go again into the temple and pray and sometime the space of a hour sometime half a hour and when they go forth the governor stand in the church porch every monk when he go out at the door prostrate himself before he say bless lord but the governor answer say God grant thou this my son and so again they return to their house and it be not lawful for any any long to speak together and so they begin to pray in their house and perform their private devotion and kneel before God every one to ask pardon for himself and for other a whole hour and then they go to sleep till the clock sound midnight and then they all rise and go all to prayer until morning and then go out of the temple they go about their private art and work almost till dinner and then they go to the temple before dinner and when they be come from thence they go to dinner as the day before and when they rise from dinner the governor stand in the door of the dine room and every monk go forth prostrate himself before the governor say bless lord and the governor answer say God pardon thou my son but in the time of their great Lent they bow themselves before the governor both in dinner time and after supper in the temple answer in the same manner and thus do they throughout the whole year moreover if any of the monk chance to sleep and not rise at the beginning when they begin to pray but the first hour of prayer which be call midnight be pass and he rise after midnight he on that day dine not with the other monk but while the rest be eat he stand at the entrance to the table before they all and bow himself before all that be eat say have mercy on i o God according to thy great mercy etc. until all of they rise from dinner and when they rise all will go forth together but he fal^ on the ground and say o holy father bless i a idle person because I have sin and every one of his brethren say God pardon thou brother and when all be go out than he eat and they do after this manner both the elder and young monk they do this willing that all may have a good example to rise always at the time of the first prayer the three order of monk be call the exercise order these exercise eat all the year once in a day except on solemn day and feast day and often then also they eat but once their Lent^ fast if they dine they sup not as we declare before of the fast of the first and second order of monk the monk also have four lent in the year as the laic the first Lent be call the great and holy Lent as be say before because it be the tithe of their soul for the year because in the eight week the laic pardon their enemy and confess and prepare themselves that when the holy Lent come they may be pure in heart and supplicate God for their sin after the same manner also the monk until the seven week before easter forgive one another their trespass and prepare themselves that they also may be pure in heart they begin to fast from Monday that be the seven week before easter they fast Monday and Tuesday but one Wednesday they eat but on the two former day they eat nothing but some on Tuesday about the even eat a morsel of bread with water and after Wednesday they begin daily to eat once until Saturday on Saturday and Sunday on these two day until easter they eat oil and drink wine but on the five other day of the week they eat once and eat dry apple and such like thing whereof we say the exercise eat they eat and the monk in the great Lent but some of the monk of the two order and of the exerciser and Heremits in the great Lent often in three day eat once but in the great even wherein Christ be crucify all the monk fast all the day and neither dine nor sup good Friday but only eat a little bread on Saturday and drink wine moderate that they may abide in the church for they watch all night sing for joy of the resurrection of Christ the greekish monk have a order to rise to pray every night a hour and a half after midnight but on sunday one hour after throughout the whole year they watch from the evening till morning on dominical feast and on the feast of great saint that be in the night of the resurrection of Christ and of the ascension Pentecost and John the baptist and the four and twenty of the month of june on the feast of Peter and Paul on the six day of August because on that day they celebrate a great feast for the transfiguration of Christ on mount thabor and it be call to this day the day of the transfiguration of Christ moreoover rich and poor celebrate a great feast and watch all the night the fifteen day of August because on that day Mary a mother and a virgin be translate from earth to heaven and so on other feast day as on Christ nativity the grecian monk have a custom that when a laic will be make a monk he first go to the monastery and there the governor ask he what he will have monk how make to who he answer that he will be make a monk the governor reply it be necessary that you remain three year in the monastery in which time you may prove and examine yourself after the three year finish if he like not to be a monk he may go away and marry a wife but if he like three year probation than the governor take he and lead he to the temple thus speak to he behold the angel of the lord expect that he may receive the confession take heed therefore that thou desire not to be a monk because of any affliction that be lest thou shall have kill any and therefore for fear of death come hither or have grieve thy parent or have desire to have carnal pleasure with some and can not and for ease thy grief come to be make a monk and not for love to God etc. then he which be to be a monk answer not so honourable father but I desire to live a quiet and peaceable life and to abstain from worldly trouble and tumult to fast watch and in peace to pray unto God then the governor reply again therefore do thou desire to renounce the world and worldly pleasure for the love of God he that be to be a monk answer yea true honourable father God willing will you forsake father and mother brethren marriage the joy and delight of this world as Christ say whosoever leave father and mother etc. for the love of Christ he answer yea true honourable father God willing and after this manner answer to every interrogatory then the governor after prayer attire he in a monkish habit and with a pair of cisser cut from his head a few hair and fasten they mingle with bee wax in some corner near the sacring place signify that he be consecrate to God nor henceforth have power over his own body to marry a wife because Christ say no man put his hand to the plough and look back^ be fit for the kingdom of God the greek obey the divine law very strict when as the lord say forgive and it shall be forgive you forgive one another obedience they forgive their enemy their offence every one say particular these word I hearty forgive my enemy that God may forgive i also they obey the law of the holy apostle for example where Paul say let every soul be subject to the high power for there no power but of God they obey diligent also the precept of the father which be according to the law of God Easter why different from the latin moreover the greek celebrate the feast of Easter according to the ancient custom for these reason first that they may neither keep it before the jew nor with the jew as it sometime happen that this new Passeover be observe by the latin before the jew and sometime with the jew second because the holy nicene council that first and universal one say if any celebrate easter before the jew or with the jew let he be accurse three because near the river Nile see of this sandys sup. l. 6. p. 907. and the city cairo be a great wonder the earth cast forth dead carcase that country begin to cast they forth on the great day of Thursday before the feast in which day Christ make his mystical supper but it cast forth dead body daily till the day of ascension that be the day on which Christ ascend into heaven viz. till the forty day after easter and after that day it cease to cast forth any this wonder both grecian and turkish merchant mention as many as come from those place into Greece as also other testify who go to jerusalem to worship Christ sepulchre and after they go to that place where the body be cast out of the earth to see the miracle but his miracle be according to the number of the old feast the greek do decree twenty year since to celebrate the feast according to the new number but the body be neither cast forth according to that time neither do the holy light shine as it be wont yearly to shine in the holy sepulchre of Christ about the ancient time of easter see Fulcherius sup. l. 8. c. 2. p. 1206. then the greek stay till the ancient time of easter about which time the holy light shine in Christ sepulchre as it be wont yearly and the earth near Nile cast forth dead body and then the greek keep the feast say behold God show we the true time of easter and we care not for human wisdom the greek say that the cross be Christ sceptre and his two edge sword and as a soldier fight with his sword and overcome his enemy so Christ also because he be crucify overcome the devil he can without the cross have save man and vanquish the devil but he will not because it seem good to he to do so but as when a great king go to war the weapon of our warfare be not carnal but spiritual 2. cor. 10.4 Christ crucify apprehend by faith crucify our old man and mortify our lust all the spiritual worship of God will be turn to such carnal and bodily rite as you see in this and almost all the differ christian sect patriarch of Constantinople his g^ergie his maintenance he send his sceptre before he and arm his soldier with strong weapon that they may fight with their enemy and that the people may know the king come whence it come to pass that the glory of the king be spread all abroad before he come to that place whither he send his sceptre before he after the same manner also our lord jesus Christ do he defend we christian arm with his cross which cross signify the passion of Christ and wheresoever the cross appear have this title write on it jesus Christ overcome Christ be preach and praise but not every cross or thing like a cross be call the cross of Christ but that which be inscribe with this title jesus Christ overcome that be call the cross of Christ whether it be of silver or of metal or of wood these letter consecrate that cross to Christ for that cross signify that Christ be crucify for our sin and overcome our enemy therefore David say lord in thy light we shall see light the light of the father be the son the light of the son be the cross etc. the patriarch of Constantinople have now under he seventy and four metropolitans but there be more than thirty of these that have not bishop under they of those which have this have one this two this three etc. all the bishop be seventy two or seventy and three but all the bishop and metropolitans be almost a hundred and fifty the patriarch of Constantinople have his proper seat only at Constantinople he have for his maintenance from that city a piece of gold at every marriage and he have twelve penny of every house once in three year throughout his whole province viz. of every province of the metropolitan that have their seat subject to he he have also a certain small gift of the deacon and priest when he give they their order also every priest in that city yearly give he a piece of Gold when rich christian die they leave to the patriarch of that church house field sheep wealth etc. and every metropolitan and archbishop when they be consecrate by the patriarch give he some small gratuity and every metropolitan yearly give the patriarch this man twenty pound that thirty another five and twenty pound for the king tribute of which wealth the patriarch give annual 6000. piece of gold in name of all the chief priest tribute that the turkish king may let the patriarch remain in Constantinople and the greekish metropolitan archbishop and bishop in his whole kingdom and observe the christian religion the patriarch servant and of all the chief priest be monk his family seventeen or more priest and minister eat of the patriarch bread he have two chaplain two deacon a steward chapel clerk two singer a porter a horsekeeper and a keeper of his great seal and and another of his privy seal in like manner every metropolitan and archbishop have a proper city other bishop these also receive a small reward for the election of bishop also they receive yearly of every bishop twenty fifteen or ten pound moreover of the deacon and priest a small gratuity for their imposition of hand moreover every priest yearly give to the metropolitan or archbishop a piece of gold they take also at every wedding a piece of gold and alm for bu^ying the dead as be say of the patriarch moreover yearly of every family in the city a bushel of corn and wine and oil and silk and of these thing the metropolitans live after the same manner the bishop take a small reward of the deacon and priest for imposition of hand they also receive yearly of every priest a piece of gold and as much for every marriage also as much of every family yearly in his province beside a bushel of corn wine oil and silk the priest live of the superfluity of the church that be to say some church have field vineyard house and such like but if the church have not plenty of those priest live every householder give the priest yearly a bushel of corn a bushel signify here the three part of a horse load moreover the greek have yearly six and thirty feast day twelve of they be call dominical that be pertain to Christ and the bless virgin the other four and twenty be of saint John the baptist of the holy apostle and famous martyr on all these feast day the priest must administer the communion and every family give to the priest two penny he pray particular for every donor before he begin to sacre moreover on these feast day the greek entertain many stranger and sometime make five or six feast in a village and the priest must be present at every feast and bless the viand and they give the priest bread flesh wine money and other thing which will be sufficient for his family the whole week and thus do the priest live moreover if any live in the city or province of the greek will be make deacon deacon they must first marry and then the bishop make they deacon but if they will not marry they must first be make monk and then the bishop with their suffrage make they monkish deacon and they may not after marry because the bishop have separate they also the monk sleep always with their coat gird about they so also the laic sleep with their wife with their clothes on because Paul say scripture abuse I will have those that have wife to be as if they have none and those that have none as if they have chap. 15 collection out of PETER STROZA secretary to pope Paul the five his treatise of the opinion of the chaldaean touch the patriarch of Babylon and the nestorrians in Asia it happen that among those poor man who foot be on Maundie Thursday according to the wont solemnity wash by pope Paul the five in the first year of his papacy there be two chaldaean one a monk the other a layman which a little before have make their pilgrimage to Rome which carry some present to Elias the patriarch of Babylon from the pope and give he a book of the profession of faith propound to the man of the east which come to Rome whereby and by their extol the pope gentle usage the say patriarch Elias send legate to the pope to give he thanks and to acknowledge he for their common father and lord with acknowledgement of his subjection and profession of the same faith endeavour to make it appear that the difference betwixt Rome and they be only in word and not in sense these legate fall among thief and other be send which with much difficulty come to Rome where hear how odious the name of Nestorius be to decline the suspicion of nestorian heresy they take some page out of the book of their profession and rite be persuade thereto by a jew late convert they return in this manner and little be do Elias consult with his bishop and send Adam the archdeacon of the patriarchal chamber abbot of the chaldaean monk to render account of their faith and humble to desire correction if ought therein be erroneous he bring a letter and profession the three year after the departure of the former the letter be this from the patriarchal chamber prayer and blessing be give to you the letter of Elias Patriarch of Babylon to the pope a. 1610. from humble Elias of the east who by the grace of God serve the holy see of Babylon continual adoration and perpetual inclination and everlasting kneel before your holy foot o bless father and head of father sun of christianity and name on which be situate the edifice of the church of church my lord and my father the pope lord and father of all the patriarch which be in the universe your charity towards we may be please to take notice that your letter have come to we and your firm faith and the blessing which you send my lowliness and I receive blessing together with my people and have give thanks to Christ for that I be make worthy of the blessing of your holiness and of your illustrious memory and you have number i among the son of your fatherhood beside my merit I present send a thanksgiving and letter and my Faith but wicked man meet my legate and take all thing from they and they return to i empty again I send other which come not to your holiness which grieve i with my bishop and archbishop and I say what shall I do I can go because the prince our oppressor permit i not neither can I go to jerusalem they hold we as slave and permit we not to do our will at last I send thy faith and letter of thy purity with my faithful son and counsellor father Adam to show they in all our region that we may see what be fit to be do of we oriental and he remain in these region a whole year and we all consult together and have send to your holiness the same father Adam and I have send with he my faith and letter and say that he shall treat with your holiness of these thing further than be write because he be the head of father and Abbat of the oriental monk and we have none of more note as all the east confess and now o father with bow head we adore before thy seat without fraud and guile and thy precept be receive of i according to his precept which deliver thou the key nor will I deny that voice speak to Peter I have give thou the key and what thou shall bind on earth shall be find in heaven and what thou shall lose on earth shall be lose in heaven and I will not resist as do other heretic against the precept of the holy apostle and orthodox father which affirm that the see of great Rome shall hold the principality and she be the head of all see far be it from i see what the pope presence can do with a poor patriarch remove from i vanity and lie lest I be poor and steal and take the name of my god in vain pro. 30. but I confess that the roman church be the mother of church and he which do not confess it let he be anathema and our babylonian see be not elect of itself as of other heretic which have multiply patriarch in the world without law but by the precept of the pope and counsel of the roman church be the see of Babylon choose and so it be find write among we in the chronicle namely that the oriental father be ordain at Rome but afterward it come to pass that when they send man for confirmation they be slay in their journey and when they do so a long time all perish this be tell to the church and pope the pope decree in a council and say let we ordain they a patriarch and let we permit they to choose their patriarch that they die not in the way for confirmation nor any evil happen to they and so we shall sin and they remain without the roman fold and thus we have receive power till this time and we have do nothing of ourselves as the rest which have tread under foot the canon of the apostle and law of the father and have fill the earth with patriarch without * * yea what need and very needy one be they and this too which make he tell more than Rome itself ever dream of Rome greatness in the east as other have also do of the south need for this cause the see of Babylon be call the five for the four see of the four evangelist and because the patriarch be elect with the roman confirmation and he have give we power to make pastor than be the see of Babylon call which do accompany the four see and be number the five as one of they for o father behold my faith have come to your holiness with letter and you may see if there be fraud in our profession or error or recoil from our mother the roman church admonish and we will do teach and we will obey and if in all thing we be true before your see and there be no fraud in our faith we desire of your benignity that you forget not the poverty of your servant because many of our profession have undergo danger when they have come to you for some have die other be slay by enemy and few have return and let this suffice your holiness from our lowliness that from the further part of the east we hear * * this be the eastern fashion to receive the letter and mandate of their prince on their head your precept on our head and eye and we come against all nation with our blood and sustain calamity that we may adore before your excellency and we lowly and subject may receive blessing from the great mother church of Paul and Peter who urge we to do this but the christian faith and your love to our lowliness and let this suffice that we have show to your wisdom but this whole labour we sustain for the roman church and your minister at jerusalem hold all that be of my profession as foreigner and rebel from the church of Rome and do not gratify we as before because their interpreter be of profession which hate we and those your minister inquire not the truth we desire your holiness to admonish they and to hold those of our profession as of you and to be gentle to they I have send letter to your teacher to command those of our profession in jerusalem because it be write in our annal that our archbishop which be in Cyprus and those of our profession which inhabit jerusalem and the clergy in the monastery of saint james in Nisibis be number among the son of the church of Rome for your fatherhood love to our lowliness and now who be I and all i and all the eastern part we be lisp before your holiness but as obedient servant be subject to your lordship and with a mind far from schism kiss your holy foot and earnest desire health to your holiness and flee to your prayer and the prayer of your fellow servant Peter and Paul that we may be make worthy of the remission of sin in the terrible judgement day of God the word to who and his father and the holy ghost be honour and glory for ever amen his profession of the faith follow part whereof we have translate we believe in God the father who be the maker of heaven and earth and all thing therein visible and invisible and in the son which be of he and which be equal with he in essence and be not less than his father and maker of all thing and the spirit of sanctity which proceed from the father and be not begetter nor beget and he be a glorious substance and equal in substance with the father and the son the father be begetter and not beget and the son be beget not begetter and the spirit of sanctity proceed not begetter nor beget etc. God the word descend into the virgin and be join with man which be compact in she in the power of the spirit of sanctity and be make one with man as the conjunction of fire with iron and we believe that he receive a body and soul and understanding etc. and though they say against we that we confess not that the virgin be the mother of God * * Nestorius himself in a epistle to pope (@) have these word of the bless virgin (...) etc. the (...) call nestorian and we but the mother of Christ that be the mother of Christ God over all yet this be nothing for this be set for the confirmation and reprobation of the false opinion of Apollinaris which say that the deity be without humanity and to the confusion of the wickedness of which say that Christ be a mere man to wit humanity without divinity etc. we in the denomination of Christ comprehend the two nature of the deity of the humanity and confess not a simplicity in Christ as they traduce we etc. in another epistle write by the say Elias to the pope he confess that the difference acknowledge be bring to these head first the lord pope with all the father of the great church of Rome call the virgin saint Mary the mother of God but we of the east call she the mother of Christ second they confess two nature of Christ two power and two will but we confess one power and one Will three they confess one person in Christ and we confess two person four and they say that the spirit proceed of the father and the son and we confess that the spirit proceed of the father five also the father of Rome say that that which come out of our lord sepulchre * * see Fulcherius l. 7. c. 2 be not true light and we with all we receive it as true light he say he consult with Adam aforesaid and with Gabriel the ancient archbishop and chief grammarian in his jurisdiction which Gabriel answer that they have receive of their ancestor that there be no division betwixt we and the church of Rome but in ceremony and they in all their region observe their own ceremony and as far say he as I can understand there be none other division but that one understand not the other but touch thy request behold father Adam be before thou which have be prove in the desert from his youth and I say to our father Adam what say thou of these thing he answer give i three day space and the three day I will answer as much as my infirmity be able and as much as may suffice and the three day he bring his writing and it please i and all i and I give he letter with my faith and thy epistle and faith and send he to the country and our flock write that if they have any thing to answer he shall bring it a year after he return with letter that all of our profession submit themselves and now I have send he etc. the treatise of the say Adam in seven chapiters be publish by the say Stroza the pope secretary in which he labour to reconcile the roman and oriental church in the difference aforesaid which by the say Stroza be learned discuss and the truth enucleate and clear from nestorian shuffle which the learned reader may peruse in Stroza himself the unlearned can hardly do it though we have trouble ourselves to trouble he with the translation the effect be Adam be reclaim in those point aforesaid to the orthodox faith and send with the pope publish also in the book aforesaid date on the five and twenty of march 1614 and Adam write another treatise in maintenance of his correct faith learn at Rome by he date ann. 1974. all publish together by the say Stroza and Myraeus say that John Antony and Peter Metoscita two jesuite be send back with this Adam by the pope to make a more full reduce of the nestorian chap. 16 a brief survey of the ecclesiastical polity ancient and modern or of the several patriarch archbishop and bishop see through the christian world also of the jesuite college and number and of other monastical order Myraeus have write a treatise call Christiani and another of ecclesiastical polity or the state of christian religion in Europe Asia Africa and the new world divide into four book and as many more of monastical original out of who principal and out of some other I think fit to collect such thing as may serve for our present historical purpose for the reader knowledge as well of the extension of christian religion in these time as the opinion and differ rite before deliver our author begin with Italy as be himself more than enough italionate the prince now potent in Italy be the pope the Spaniard which be king of Naples Sicil and Sardinia and duke of Milan the prince of Piedmont which now be the duke of Savoy the great duke of Tuscaine the duke of Mantua Mutina and Parma the republike or free state of Venice Genua and luca. Rome be the seat of our author religion and by he honour with that blasphemous title of as for Rome compendium they be give too but too compendious and be indeed of principal respect in the church of Christ ever since the apostolical preach of the gospel and the apostle of the gentile testify that their faith be then renown through the whole world which be so fatten with the blood of their primitive bishop and martyr rom. 1.8 that no where be a more fertile harvest then there during the reign of the ethnic emperor Constantine subject his imperial sceptre to the cross her bishop also receive great splendour of power and pomp and be the imperial city be therefore repute the first see or seat of the patriarch which then be three the roman Alexandrian three patriarch in the roman empire luc. 2. Constantinople and antiochian which divide the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the roman world so they call their empire betwixt they the constantinopolitan be after both add to the number and prefer above the alexandrian and antiochian and equal also with the roman save his mere primacy of order for the same cause that now it be also become new Rome and the imperial city by decree of the council of Constantinople a. 381. and more plain express by the chalcedon council a. 451. as for reason draw from scripture I have pray for thou I will give thou the key feed my sheep etc. now adays allege as proper cause of papal preeminence the ancient counsel know they not but allege mere civil respect of the imperial residence and power which yet so puff up the imperious spirit of their successor that in Gregory day the constantinopolitan will needs be style universal bishop which Gregory then withstand as antichristian and yet in few day after his death his successor Boniface obtain of phocas the murderer that swell and exorbitant primacy and papacy see Plat. Onup and all the writer of the pope life in Bonifac. 3 in ecclesiastical to the roman see by phocas to make sure of the roman in that slippery state of his new get empire by blood and treason make the head of all church which power can yet neither by phocas be grant any further than the roman empire extend nor be ever acknowledge in the remote part of the world till in these last time poverty have make some of the poor patriarch I have almost say parrot who their belly and external respect have teach their (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which be never with real subjection acknowledge yea the other patriarch of the empire to this day gainsay it Onuph Plat. in bonif. 3. and by long use the constantinopolitan be style ecumenical or universal patriarch the roman universal pope which title of pope be in ancient time common give to other bishop as in saint Augustine and other epistle be see and the name of archbishop and Patriarch give as preeminent title to the roman bishop yet extant in the roman counsel who now have get a spiritual papacy Gregory the seven above 1070. year after Christ begin to turn the same into a papal monarchy which his successor have more full effect not only in the absolute principality of the church patrimony but in a wide-mouthed challenge of supremacy to depose king and dispose kingdom in that hypocritical pretend but this you shall find in other author and I but touch it and now return to our Myraeus the jerosolimitan bishop in honour of that holy city be dignify with that patriarchal honour five patriarch but late for the council of nice leave to the bishop of Caesaria his metropolitan right entire the council of chalcedon give he the title which some say Leo the bishop oppose so much in pretence of the nicene authority that it be not full ratify till justinian time Bellar. and in the five council a. 553. now for a five see at Babylon you have hear Elias a lie as I conceive not to be find I think ratify by any good history nor be the most part of his jurisdiction ever subject to the roman empire patriarkship of the west or Rome the roman or western patriarch have six diocese Italy illyricum Africa the Spain and Britain which be subdivide into several province of which Italy be say to have seventeen illyricum seven Africa six seventeen six and Britain five br. caesariensis Flavia caesariensis and Valentia by Gregory the great reduce to the two archbishopric of Canterbury and York and long after saint Andrew and glasco two other in Scotland and four in Ireland by authority of pope Eugenius an. 1151. Armach Dublin Cassiliensis and thus much general and brief for the west now for the eastern world it be divide into seven diocese or region Egyptus Asiana eastern division Thracia Macedonia and dacia of the oriental part more proper call Antioch be chief city of Egypt Alexandria of the asian Ephesus of the pontic Caesarea of Thracia Constantinople of Macedonia and dacia thessalonica till justinian make justiniana the metropolitan of dacia the constantinopolitan have three diocese acknowledge by the chalcedon council Asiana Thracia Asiana have eleven province as many Thracia six Macedonia have ancient six province dacia five in the time of Leo emperor pat. of Constantinople which begin to reign a 1386. the constantinopolitan have eighty one metropolitans subject to he and before the norman conquest many more when Sicilia Calabria and many city of the kingdom of Naples be subject to the greek empire and eighty three archbishopric in the same leos time to the patriarch of Alexandria the council of nice ascribe Egypt Lybia and Pentapolis pat. of Alexandria after that there be number six province Egypt Thebais Lybia superior Lybia inferior or Pentapolis Arcadia and Augustamnica and after ten the patriarch of Antioch have the east diocese in which be fifteen province Syria and pat. of Antiochia and and Cyprus euphratensis Mesopotamia Arabia isauria when the Frankes have conquer the holy land the antiochian have six archbishop only subject to he tarsus edessa Apamia and tyrius reckon thirteen Metropolitans in the first time w. tyr. ^ist s. beside nine city metropolitans not and twelve archbishopric which it seem be also autocephali as the former but afterward jerusalem be deck with antiochian spoil pat. of the three being add to the jerosolimitan patriarch tyrius add two other take from the alexandrian patriarch and in late time style Petracensis and and under the Frankes Tyre Caesarea Nazareth and Petracensis other patriarch there be of less note as of seleucia mean Patriarchates who Filesacus suspect to have remove his see to Armenia of Ethiopia who be nevertheless subject to the patriarch of Alexandria of these the Seleucian be to have the six place the ethiopian the seven in counsel and they both with the armenian be style the patriarch of aquileia be mention by Paulus and it be propable that when aquileia be take by the lumbards aquileia the patriarch remove to and be call the patriarch of new aquileia or Friuli also have have that title and Venice have succeed in that Aquileian and Gradensian patriarchate a. 1450. by grant of pope Eugenius the pisan prelate have be also style patriarch and the toletane in Spain as also the Valentian and the archbishop of Goa and the archbishop of Canturbury * * see myr. Notit ep. l. 1 c. 14. Glos. d. 21 c. 1 a traveller Ments lion and Bituricensis but not so common and constant the jacobite nestorian maronites Cophti and other eastern sect with their patriarch we have already consider there be also Franc-Armenians under the archbishop of in who jurisdiction be the town Abbaran Abbragon carna Saltach Hascassen meascen Carsan Xhabun G^uhug Chensug and artach in which be monastery of a armenian a. 1604. be make archbishop of Mexivan in Armenia Maior six day journey from Tauris he be a dominican and come from Armenia in Rome and out of his writing this be relate the Georgians be wont to be subject to the patriarch of Constantinople but now be divide the russian also have procure their metropolitan the title of patriarch as we shall see in d. Fletcher relation they tell also of a patriarch at Damascus at mosul cairo and other place which profess the former title but let we look back to Rome where Myraeus next to the pope the prince as he call he of all patriarch and bishop place the cardinal the priest and deacon of Rome have grow with the papacy to a strange prelacy unknown in the first thousand year after Christ to be not only above bishop and archbishop cardinal marc. cor. Sa^ cer. R.E. of these read Onuphr^us lib. Epis. tit. and 1100 ^ Sacr. r e and other name of ecclesiastical greatness but to be peer to king and emperor and as pope Pius the second call they of these six be cardinal bishop Ostia Porto Savina Palestina Alba the cardinal priest and deacon have their name of the parish church in Rome all which cardinal be wont to be but twelve and when a prelate from any place be choose as appear in our english ecclesiastical story by wendover Paris and other he leave his former prelacy and residence and attend the pope as one of his privy counsel and another succeed to his former place since which time within these three hundred year they have not only increase the number at pleasure and choose the principal prelate of other nation to make themselves strong in each nation permit they there still to reside but have procure the noble person for blood and most eminent for power in each kingdom to admit of that dignity and have heap great preferment in every country on their cardinal which only sheave the fleece and never see the face of their innumerable flock beside this prefer of priest and deacon to patriarch in Rome itself as represent the whole church they have institute five patriarchal church viz. s. John laterane s. Peter five patriarchal church in Rome s. Paul s. Mary the great s. lawrence the church of Laterane have a arch. presbyter who be a cardinal s. Peter bear the title of the church of Canstantinople and have a archpriest cardinal s. Paul represent the church of Alexandria have a abbot and monk s Mary design the church of Antioch have a archpriest cardinal and canon as Lateran and s. Peter s. Laurence represent the church of jerusalem it once have a abbot and monk now be in and have canon regulars where two be join with this-stroke it betoken a union of two bishopricke Ravenna sometime competitor with Rome Fermo the bishopricke of the roman province be sutri-nepi civita-castellana-h^rti viterbo-tuscanella Bagnarea Perugia a university castello plebe Castro arezzo Spoleto Narny amelia Todi rieti the country of s. Francis Ti^oli Anagna Verulo Terracina Sezza segni Alatro Fiorentino ancona-humana loretto-ricanati Ascoli Osmo Camerino Luca have the pall. the archbishop of Ravenna have these suffragans adri Comachio Faenza Brentinore Forli Cesena sarsina country of Plautus rimini Imola Ceruia Fanestria Ferrara a university the archbishop of Bologna institute 1583. have Bologna a university Parma a university Placenza reggio Modema borgo di s. the archbishop of Fermo erect by sixtus the fi^th have suffragans a university Tolentino San Severino Montalto Ripa Beneuent and auin^on follow in their place Naples Capua in the kingdom of Naples the archbishop of Napoli a university Pozzuolo Nola Cerra Ischia Auersa a exempt to which be unite Cuma and atella the archbishop of Capua have suffragans salerno Teano caserta Gaiazzo Carinola Sergna sessa Venafro Cassino and saint Germano Aquino Pondi Gaieta sora. the archbishop of salerno have salerno a university Capaccio Pulicastro Sarno Acierno Marsico campagna Nocera Pagani Nusco Cana. Amalfi under the archbishop of Amalfi be the bishop of capri scala-ravello lettre under the archbishop of sorrento be Massa Stabia the archbishop of Conza have Muro Satriano Cagiano s. Angelo di lombardi-bisaccia Verde the archbishop of Cirenza and have the bishop of Tricarico Potenza Gravina-Anglona peloso the archbishop of Tarento his suffragans be motula Castellaneta oria. under the archbishop of brindisi be Nardo M^nopoli under Otranto Capo Leuco Castro gallipoli Vgento under the archbishop of Bari and Canosa Gio^enazzo Ruvo Conuersano Mo^eruino Pulignano La^iello Bitetto Catzeri Molfetta a exempt the archbishop of and Salpe have Bisiglia Andri to the archbishop of Manfredonia and Citta di s. Angelo be subject vest melphi-rappollo the theatine archbishop erect in civita Chieti 1526. have suffragans ortona citta di penna-atri Valua-Sulmona Aquila marsi Teramo cali. the archbishop have no suffragan bishop the four advance it the bishop of Trivento be a exempt the archbishop of reggio be over the bishop of Catanzaro Crotone Tropea Oppedo Nicastro nicotera Gieraci Squillaci Mileto the archbishop of Cosenza and have Marterano s. Marco Bisignano cassano the archbishop of Rossano have no suffragan the archbishop of San severina have Vmbriato Belcastro Isola Cariati Strongoli the archbishop of Benevento in the pope jurisdiction have Ascoli s. Agatha alive Marano auellino-fergiente Baronia Ariano Botano Bovino Vulturara and Coruino Larino Termoli San Troia Guardia so that in the kingdom of Naples beside the pope Benevento there be nineteen archbishopric number of jesuite and their college in Italy the jesuite have in the continent of Italy beside the province of Sicilia and Sardinia four province the roman neapolitan of Milan and of Venice the roman province have at the college of the paenitentiarie the german college the english college the roman seminary the college of maronites the scot college the residence at the college of tivoli Loreto Perugia Fiorenza Sienna Ancona santo Pulciano Fermo citta castello Ascoli sora. in this province be seven hundred forty seven of the society the province of Naples have in the college the house of probation the new house profess the college of Cata^zaro Nola Bari salerno Consenza Barletta Chieti Aquila Benevento house of probation at college of Bovino Trepia Massa Castell Capua Molfetta the residence of Monopoli Taranto paula in this province be five hundred ninety four of the society in the province of Milan be at Milan the house profess and the college Breiden at Genua the house profess the college and the house of probation the college of Turino como Vercelli Cremona bastia Nizza Alexandria the house of probation at Arona and the residence of in this province be four hundred and eleven of the company the venetian province have the profess house at Venice the college of Pado^a Ferra^a Balogna brescia Forli Parma with another there for the nobility Piacenza Verona Mantova mirandola reggio Faenza castiglione the house of probation at Novellara Imola Busseto the residence of Candia and Vic^nza in this province be three hundred seventy three of the society Sicilia have three archbishopric first the Panormitan Sicilia the bishop to who be subject the bishop of Mazara Girgenti Malta be govern by their great master and knight hospitulars the archbishop of messana have under he the bishop of Lipari Patt^ Cifalu the archbishop of have catania and Siracosa in it also be jesuite college jesuite house and residence one and twenty fellow six hundred thirty eight the i will and kingdom of Sardinia have have fourteen episcopal city Sardinia and now have according to three archbishopric Calaris Sassaris and bishop Bosa castrum aragonense and the archbishop of Calaris or Caglari be primate of Sardinia and Corsica his suffragans be yglesia^-solci suel be unite to the archbishop the archbishop of Sassaris or torre Sassari have algar Bosi Empurias the archbishop of have in Sardinia be house college and seminary of jesuite eight and in they one hundred and ninety of that society and province jesuite Milan Milan be the seat of the spanish viceroy and counsel and also of a archbishop to who be subject the bishop of Cremona Lodi Novarra birth-place of Peter Lombard Alessandria Tortona Viglevano Bergamo brescia Vercelli Aste Casale monferrato Alba Acqui Savona Vintimiglia Pavia have the pall and be a university E^ruria be for the most part subject to the great duke of the family of Medici Toscaine in which florentia Pisa and Sienna have be free state Charles the five 1530. create Alexander de Medici his son in law duke of Florence great duke who son Cosmus by pope Pius the five be create great duke of Toscaine 1569. this Cosmus institute the knight order of saint Stephen against the turk the archbishop of Florence or Fiorenza have Fiezola Pistoia Volcerra Colle burgo s. Serzana Pulciano where cardinal Bellarmin^ be bear and cortona be exempt the archbishop of Sienna which be also a academy have Soana Chiusi Massa-Populonia Alcino the archbishop of Pisa a university also have Aiazzo Sagona aleria Mantua famous for Virgil birth have a duke of the family Gonzaga duke Vincent Mantua a. 1608. institute the military order of the redeemer jesus Christ in honour of his blood suppose there keep Mutina and rhegium have a duke of the family revolve to the papacy 1598. Vrbinum of the family Roborea and Parma and Placentia of the Farnesian Vrbino have a archbishop and six bishopricke subject the leopolitan pisaurian Eugubinus foro-semproniensis and Parma and Placentia with burgo in that principality be to the archbishop of Bologna Venice Genua Luca and Ragusi be italian free state the chief be Venice four italian free state and say to incline to the french as Genua the next to the Spaniard Ragusi support itself by favour of the Turk pay a yearly pension to he Luca have a bishop subject to the pope only and use a pall. Ragusi in time past Epidaurus be in Dalmatia italianate in language and condition it have a archbishop to who be subject the bishop and in the state of Venice be two patriarch one of Venice which succeed to Venice two Patriar^^ etc. the other of aquileia and four archbishop and the patriarch of Venice have Suffragan bishop Chioza Torzello both land the patriarch of aquileia reside in Vdene and to he be subject the bishop of como country of both Pliny Verona Pado^a Treoizi Concordia Zeneda Feltre Bellun pola Parenzo Triesti petin Capo istria Citta Trento and Mantova be exempt the archbishop of spalatro and salona primate of Dalmatia and Croatia have faro-lesina tran Sanadria Scardona subject to the Turk tina Almiza the archbishop or of zara a venetian island have suffragans arbe Viglia Ossaro the archbishop of Corcyra or corfu have the bishop of the island Cefalonia and zante the archbishop of Crete or Candie have under he the bishop of Canea sittia-hierapetra Cheronesso Mellip^tamo Arcadia Sicchimo Budoa sometime subject to the seruian archbishop some add and Genua have in time past extend their empire to Caffa in taurica Cyprus Chio and Lesbos Genua and to Pera. it now command almost all Liguria and Co^sica to the archbishop of Genua be to the genuois be thirteen diocese subject but some of the bishop acknowledge the archbishop of Milan and Florenc^ six bishopric be in the island and kingdom of Corsica subject to that state Mariana aleria Nebiur^ Sagonia and Malta have a college of jesuit Spain first attempt and one of the last of the roman province pacify in the decline of the empire Spain be possess by the wandal sueve and Alans who the goth have expel Gaul the goth expel thence by the Frankes chase the wandal and Alans out of Spain and destroy the sueve the saracens 720. expel the goth and can not by the gothicke remnant be quite exterminate till 1492. at which time the new world also be add to the spanish fortune by colons discovery and by the match of the heir of the house of Burgundy and Austria with the heir of Arragon and Castille and since by conquest etc. the Castilan have in few year from a estate in comparison of some other kingdom poor and almost contemptible grow to the present puissance and almost terrible greatness in Spain and Portugal be these archbishopric who name and revenue out of a manuscript * * the manuscript be sometime present to q. Elizabeth and come to my hand from m. Burrough controller of the navy not so perfect as I can have wish yet as it be not warrant the authority I have transcribe something thence and inse^ted with Myraeus by fault of the transcriber many name be so false write that I be loath to give the adventure to prevent the reader correction ascribe but 200000. ducat to the church of Toledo and 80000. to the archbishop dam. and mar. siculus have their valuation also but more ancient and much since improve this manuscript recite the duke marquess and earl of Spain with their several revenue which be far far less than these of the bishop the duke from 10000 to 70000. which only Braganca exceed and likewise the marquess the earl from 8000. to 20000. say the duke of Infantasgi have 120000. ducat and Medina sidonia 130000. duc. revenue the rest not under 40000. marquess from 10000 duc. to 60000. earl from 10000 to 40000. be thus deliver Toledo his revenue be say to be 320000. ducat more than of diverse kingdom Seville 113000. ducat Granado 80000. ducat Lisbon 130000. ducat Saragosa 70000. ducat Valentia 90000. duck^ts Tarragena 80000. ducat Burgos 90000. ducat santiago 100000. ducat brago 90000. ducat he omit Euora which he reckon among the bishop be lately exalt to the pall. reckon they thus Toledo compostella Seville Granado Caefaraugusta tarragona Valentia Lisbon and ebora to the archbishop of Toledo primate of Spain be the bishop of Cordova segovia cuenca sequenza a university jaen cartagena or Murcia Osma valladolid institute by Clement the eight 1595. make a university also to the archbishop of Brugis in old Castille be subject Pamplona chief city of Navarre Calagorra Palencia to the archbishop of compostella or santiago in Galaecia the bishop of Salamanca a university erect 1240. A^ila Lugo Astorga Zamora Orense Tuy Badaios Mondonedo Coria civita rodrigo Leon exempt and Ouiedo exempt to the archbishop of Seville in baetica be subject Cadiz and the bishop of the canary to the archbishop of Granada erect by Alexander the six malaga and America to the archbishop of Caesauraugusta or Caragosa in Arragon Huesca a old university jaca Barbastro Tarazona Teroel Albarazin to the arch. of tarragona in Catalonia Tortosa Lerida a university Barcelona a university Vicz Girona Vrgel Elna Solsona Perpimian by Paulus to the arch. of valencia segorue Orihuela Mallorca to the arch. of Braga in Portugal Porto Viseo Guardia Lamego Miranda Leyra to the arch. of Lisbon Coymbra a university Portalegre Ceuta in Africa funchal in madera Angra in Tercera congo in Africa cabo Verde or Sant yago San Thome both in the land so call the bishop of brasil at San Saluador or the bay of all saint late take by the dutch. to the archbishop of Euora erect 1540 the bishop of silue in faro Eluas Tanger in Africa unite with Centa pope Adrian the six 1523. give the king of Spain power to elect and present their bishop as Mariana report my manuscript reckon not so many nor go to Africa and the land and perhaps some of the bishop in that time may be vacant or hold by and so the title drown the name differ somewhat perhaps by false writing which may be help by the former catalogue for the valuation I think they not unworthy recital together as they be in the say book express although I must entreat the reader patience for misse-writing the name by some unlearned transcriber which yet I present as I find Damianus go add that the clergy of Spain have twice as much revenue as the bishop beside impropriation of tithe they grant by the pope to the king and and that beside all this the monastery and abbey revenue exceed those of the clergy there be also in Spain certain military order institute to free the country from the moor such be the order of saint james with a long red cross of alcantara with a square red cross of Calatrana with a square green cross which be by pope Adrian appropriate to the king beside the order of Christ and other there be also jesuit divide into five spanish province the province of Toledo have college house and residence one and twenty in they five hundred and seu^ntie jesuite jesuite in Spain the province of Castille eight and twenty in they six hundred and thirteen the province of Arragon fourteen and jesuite three hundred and ninety the baetike province four and twenty and six hundred jesuite the province of Portugal eighteen and six hundred and eighty of the society the isle Maiorica have a bishop and university the canary have a bishop also so have the land of cape with a college of jesuite Tercera likewise and in it and saint michaels be jesuite college madera have a bishop and jesuitical college in France be number one hundred and seventeen diocese fourteen of which have a^chbi^hoprickes which be these with their one hundred and three France the primate archbishop of lion have Austun Langres Mascon Challon Saone the archbishop of Rone in Normandy Baieux Aurenches sais Lizieux Constances the archbishop of Tours have man renes Angers a university Nantes a university Cornovaille Vannes Leon Triquier saint brieu saint malo Dol which wear a pall and be exempt the archbishop of se^s Chartres auxerre Orleans a university and duchy of the king second son Paris a university and seat royal meaux nevers the archbishop of Rheims duke and chief peer of France have Challon laon Senlis Beaunais aliens N^yon Bouloigne Surmer the archbishop Bituricensis or of Bourges primate of Aquitaine a university have clermon Rhodes Lymoges mende Tuy castres tulle saint flour the archbishop of Bourdeaux have again santonge Poitiers a university Perigeux Condom Maillezais luzon sarlat the archbishop of auch have Letoure saint bertrand comenge s. Legier de Conserans Aire Basas tarbe de bigorre Oleron on bearn Lescar baionne the archbishop of narbonne Beziers age Carcassone n^smes a university lodeve s. Pont alec Mompelier a university Vzes the archbishop aquensis or of Aix in Provence have the bishop of ries apt Freius gap the archbishop of vienne geneve now reside at Anessy in Savoy grenoble Viviers die-valence both university s. jean de Maurienne under the duke of Savoy the archbishop of embrun have grass Vence Senez nice in Savoy the archbishop of Arles Marseille s. Paul de Tricastin Orange the principality of the prince of Orange a university and seat of a parliament the archbishop of tolose a university have pasmire Montautban Mirepoix Vaur Rieux lombe s. papoul four of the former bishop and Arausionensis be not subject to the french king in who room you may add and to make up the former number in France also be the chief or original of many order religious and military order as the chuniake order in the diocese of Matiscon found 910. by abbot Berno Grandemont found by Stephen 1126. Cartusia mayor by bruno 1084. 1098. 1120. in the diocese of laudun Ceru^ by John matha 1136. vallis in champain by William a Englishman 1218. fons Ebrald^ in the diocese of Po^tiers by Robert blesel 1117. the hospitulars of saint Anthony in the diocese of Vienna by Gasto 1121. our lady charity 1300. s. Bernard or the reform cistercians by John 1600. the willielmite by saint wol duke of Aquitaine the military order of the holy ghost by Henry the three and of saint Michael and of saint Mary of mount carmel and of saint Lazarus approve by Paul the five the jesuite have five province in France the province call of France jesuit in France have fourteen house college and residence the province of Aquitaine ten in which province be two hundred and eighty jesuite the province of lion fourteen in they four hundred and seventy the province of tolose eleven in they three hundred and ten the province of champain ten and two hundred twenty six jesuite in France though not in the french subjection be the country of Auinion in which city the pope reside seventy year together the archbishop have three Auinion the pope county Savoy Caballon vaison in Savoy be the archbishop to who the bishop augustanus and Sedunensi^ be Piedmont be subject to the same duke the metropolitan city whereof be Taurinum seat of the duke and a university to which be subject the bishop and Saluzo be a exempt the duke of Savoy be chief of two military order of the virgin annunciation and of SS. Maurice and Lazarus Loraigne sometime a kingdom now a duchy two military order (@) have Nancie the metropolitan city Pontamousson a university rule by jesuite s. nicola be of next note Lorraine be subject to diverse bishop among other and city win by Henry the second the principality of orange have the b. of Orange as be say and a university it be subject to the house of nassau Henry of nassau marry the sister and heir of Philibertus Vi^ero^ of Naples slay at the siege of Florence a. 1530. Renatus son of Henry be slaire 1544. William his brother son succeed and be traitorous murder at dulse 1584. his son philip-gulielmus after long detention in Spain die at Brussels an. 1618. and leave his brother prince Maurice his heir by testament who art experience and exploit military have attract into a stupendous gaze the eye of all Europe the low country his name admit we into Gallia belgica or the low country or seventeen land of which four be dukedom Brabant Limburg Lutzenburg and Gelderland seven county or earldom Flanders Artois Hanalt Holland Zealand namur and Zutphen the marquisate of the holy empire and five lordship of east Friesland Mechlin Vtrecht Ouerisel and groningen in these be two hundred and ten city wall and ditch about village six thousand three hundred beside monastery fort palace and manor-house almost innumerable that part which obey the archdutchesse be romish that which acknowledge the state government be of the protestant faith not without arminian and other fancy among many of they in time pass there be but four belgian bishopricke of Cambray arras Tournay and Vtrick but king Philip the second seek to alter the government which occasion the war and this division whereby about one half of the country have not only defend their liberty maugre the austrian greatness american treasure spanish ambition and italian souldioury to the world amazement many hundred thousand o^ christians be slay to purchase the Spaniard this loss but have acquire a free estate with wealth and honour and by they have be so acknowledge who they will willing with conservation of their liberty have obey Philip the second his loss make i almost lose myself 1559. procure the pope to constitute three archbishopric and fifteen bishopricke his inquisition shall escape our inquisition the archbishop of Mecholon to who jurisdiction be subject the bishop of Antwerp of Bruges gant Iperen Rurmund Hertogenbosch the archbishop of Cambray who suffragans be arras Tournay saint omer namur the archbishop of Vtrecht have deventer Groeninghen Harlem Lee^warden Middleborgh the jesuite have there two province Flandra-Belgica which have eighteen house college and residence jesuite in which there be of that crew six hundred and seventeen and Gallo-Belgica which have twenty house college and residence and six hundred fifty two fellow of that order beside augustinian dominicans and I know not what other GErmanie have seven archishop Mentz Collen Trier all three elector Meydburg Salisburg breme Bessanzon to the archbishop of Mentz a university be subject bishop worm Wirtzburg a university Speir strasburg W^rden Chur Heildesheim paderborne Costnitz Halberstad Ausburg bamberg be exempt to Coloigne be suffragans liege Munster minden Osenbrug to Trier metz toul verdun all in Lorraine and now French to M^ydburg M^yssen Merseburg Brandeburg Havelburg to Salisburg a university Freysingen Regenspurg Passa^ Brixen Goritz Lavenmutz Seckaw Vienna in Austria be a university and exempt and L^sbach be also exempt German bishop prince to breme be subject Lubeck Rathenburg Sw^rin to the archbishop of Ves^ntionensis or Besanzon a university be subject basel a university losa^ne Bellay Bresse all these as also the bishop of Trent be prince of the empire and lord in Temp^ralibus except lavenmuch Seckaw chiemse and Goritz Meydburg and breme and eight bishopricke be protestant the late war have since our author write so alter the face of thing in Germany that just account can be give of their religion and state so unsettle and how can thing be well settle where the fox have so many burrowes jesuite the jesuite have as some say three score college in Germany divide into three province the province of high Germany have thirteen college two house three residence five hundred forty six jesuite the province of Rhine have three and twenty and in they six hundred and one the province of Austria five and twenty and five hundred fifty three of the society swisser the swisser canton be thirteen episcopal city six Suitz Vnderwalden Zugh Friburg jesuite college two at Lucerne and Friburg they be also in great part subject in spiritual to the bishop of Constance and of basel who seat be now at Lausanna have a bishop subject to the archbishop Bezanzon grizon the grison be divide into three league in which Chur be a bishop subject to Mentz the valesin have seven commonalty one of which Sedunum have a bishop Pomerland be a dukedom and have four city Stetin sometime a bishop see Griphswald a university and Bohemia in Bohemia Prage be a bishopric to which be suffragans the bishop of Oluunctz in moravia and L^ttomssensis in Bohemia in silesia V^atislavia or Preslaw be a bishopric in Hungaria Strigonium have be the seat of the archbishop and primate which be take by the Turk i^ be remove to Tir^avia and have six Nitrich Raab Agria under the turk Hungaria Vaccia under the Turk as be also Vesprin Colocia be a archbishop in Pannonia inferior under which be the bishop of agram Fairwar in Transiluania Varadin Sirmisch Conad have a university at claudiopolis and a seminary in Austria Vienna be also a university before mention there and at Oenipont in triol and at prague in Bohemia Ferdinand the emperor found jesuite college be Suffragan to Salisburg Grath have a vni^ersity and college of jesuite and be a metropolitan city the bishop Secovien^is there and in Carinthia be subject to the archbishop of Salisburg the kingdom of Poland contain the province of Lituania Masovia Samogitia Cnia^ia Poland Livoni^ Varmia Prussia Russia nigra and other there be two archbishop of the latin church the primate and Leopoliensis to the former be subject these bishop krakow Poznan Ploczk Mied^ikie Preslaw in Sile^ia Leb^^ Vladislaw Chemnicz lucko Vilen^ki or wild Wenden warmerlant a exempt Le^polis or lu^ow be in Russia and have Przemyst Chmielnick Kiou Cami^nick all these together with the bishop be Senators or councillor of the state except Preslaw and Lebus there be also eight russian or greek bishop in Poland Kiou the metropolitan Vlodomir Luceor^ensis or Przemyst Leopoliensis and which be receive into communion by pope Clement the eight Russia nigra be subject to the pole and Russia Alba to the Moscovite there live also in Poland many armenians which have a bishop of their own resident at Leopolis the russian bishop have no parliament voice the jesuite have two province in these part that of Poland contain fifteen college house and residence and 459. jesuite that of Lithuania as many and jesuite 3 36. Prussia Prussia be divide into and the former have two bishop Varmiensis which reside at Brunsberg and the ducal have two but extinct with the order of the dutch knight the one of Kinningsberg the other at Mariaewerda the marquis of Brandenburg possess the country ENgland have two archbishop Canterbury and York England the archbishop of Canterbury be primate of all England and metropolitan the other primate of England and metropolitan to the former be subject the bishop of London Winchester Coventree and Lichfield Salisbury bath and welles Lincoln Excester Hereford Norwich Eli^ Rochester Chi^hester Worcester saint David bangor Landaff saint ass Peterburrow Gloster Oxford and Bristol to the archbishop of York Durham Chester Carlisle to which be add Sodorensis or the bishop of man. Scotland Scotland also have two archbishop one of saint Andrew and the other at glasco to saint Andrew the primate of Scotland Myraeus reckon the bishop of dunckeld Aberdin a university resident in Elgin dumblain brechin Rosse Cathnes Orcknay to glasco Galloway Lismor Colmkil his majesty have be such a restorer as he may in some sort be reckon the founder of the present episcopal both see and government in that kingdom book of discipline 1560. see the book of the proceed at perth Ireland at the dissolution of the bishop they erect superintendents change a good greek word for a bad latin but reserve to those superintendents the great part of episcopal power and after some change his majesty have reduce it to the present state Ireland have four archbishop to the archbishop and primate of Armah be subject Dunensis conner derry Mieth Clocher ardache kilmore Rapho dromore Kiloom Dondalck to the archbishop of Dublin a university kilkenny or Kildar^ Feru^ Leghlin Glend^lagh to the archbishop of cashel Limricke Lismor Rosse Waterford Emmelen Corcke lymbricke Clon to the archbishop Galuben Achade Alache Olfin roscoman Clonfert Kill^loe thus Myraeus Denmark have the archbishop of Lunden erect 1092. primate of the kingdom Denmark roschilt Odensee Slezwick Rype Wiburg Arhusen Norway have Nidrosia the metropolitan see and Bergen Staffanger Hammer Groenlands Scalholt hola Sueden in Suecia the archbishop have subject to he the b b. of Scarborow Lincopen stengenes Abo Aroefen Villimen thus Myraeus who add a little of Russia and Greece which you shall find more full in the discourse of those part both precedent and follow as likewise touch the christian of Asia maronites jacobite nestorian etc. handle by Myraeus in his second book the archbishop of Goa have subject to he the bishop of cochin malaca Macao japon Malaban Meliaxor or San Thome the archbishop of Cranganor erect by Paul the five 1608. be call also the archbishop of the christian of San Thome he have no Myraeus reckon jesuite ho^ses college and residence in the east indian province of Goa 15. and 280. of the society in the province of malabar 14. in they 150. for China and japon you shall learn better in our relation then in Myraeus in the he reckon nine residence and one hundred jesuite neither shall we need his instruction of Africa in his three book our relation be far more full and certain as also of the new world handle in his four book he number therein five archbishop the first of Mexico who be the b b. of Tlaxcala in Pnebla angelos mechoacan in valladolid Guaxara in in saint Lago lucatan in M^rida Chiappa honduras in truxillo Paz nicaragua in leon. this archbishop and those of lima and Domingo be found by Charles the five confirm by Paul the three a. 1547. the archbishop of saint Domingo have port rico Sant jago de Cuba venezuela some add Margarita to the a. of lima cuzco Arequip^ truxillo Guamanga quito Paul the five erect two archbishop see or Potosi in charcas to who be subject the bishop of Baranca Paz santiago in tucuman ayres Pana^^a santiago in chili imperial nuestra de la assumption paraguay the other archbishop be of saint faith of Bogot in new Granado to who be subordinate the bishop of Pop^yan Carthagena saint Martha manilia be a bishopric in the to which be subject the bishop of Cagayan of the name of jesus and Mexico and lima be university the jesuite dominicans franciscans carmelite and the father of our lady of pity be many beside priest canon inquisitor etc. the jesuite have four province that of Peru have seminary residence college and house of probation thirteen and therein 370. of the society that of paraguay ten and therein 116. that of new Granado seven and 100 of the company that of Mexico fourteen and therein jesuit 340. in brasil they have in nineteen house college and residence 180. jesuite and thus have we audit Myraeus his account of bishop and jesuite name not otherwise suitable but by papal Arts. for what concord have antiquity and novelty jesus and jesuite catholic and romish apostolical institution with apostatical neither have the church want bishop in all age and place christian since the apostle or know jesuite in any age but this last or in any church except as busy body but the romish so that what they object to we be true their own with advantage to be both L^iola be far late than Luther and too like the gibeonite which feign themselves ambassador and take old sack upon their ass jos. 9 and old bottell for wine both rend and find up and old shoe and clout upon their foot also the raiment upon they be old and all their provision of bread be dry and moul thus pretend they remoteness be near neighbour to delude the israelite as these near we in time than those other to joshua in place and habitation chant nothing so much as catholic and old when time know they not till yesterday nor do any place yet know they but such as be romish except in travel and treason their old old old be but the old serpent the old man and old refine rubbish to build their new say one in another case (...) the ancient government of the church by bishop by papal monopoly usurp be set on foot by weaken episcopal power in exempt monastery that so all monastery may become papal fort and in manner all the learned and leisurely pen may plead for the patron of their exemption further by both the one and the other investiture first and dependence after with subjection deny to king and when the Waldenses begin to shake down the Lateran the pope dream that dominic or as the franciscans will have it that Francis support the Lateran which prove not a dream in their new devise order of friar which maintain the papacy with no less reputation of learning and fullness of commission in those dangerous day than the jesuite have do since Luther which all the devil can not have keep from fall both then and since if they have not find such old-shooed ambassador to travel over the world for their mother Babylon and their father the pope palliate with the name of the catholic church I will not trouble you with recitation of their other order particular but out of Myraeus will tell you that the Benedictine order can glory beyond the jesuitical in 52000. monastery 15000. writer * * thus Myraeus Hospinian have Abbates cruditione and 15700. 15600. 44000. saint 4000 bishop 1600. archbishop 200. cardinal and 25. pope which in succession of time they have have and if the jesuite pretend his his muster of army against the heretic and set Europe in the present combustion the Benedictine can produce martial order affix to his profession institute for better purpose against Mahumetans the templary sometime as proud as the proud of jesuite the knight of Calatrava of alcantara Montesia and in Spain of Christ of advice of ala in Portugal of saint Maurice in Savoy volator l. 21. of saint Steven in Toscanie and other elsewhere the augustinian have 555. monastery in Italy and in Europe as Volatteranus write 4000 and beside other subdivide order have also their military knight of Rhodes or Malta the dutch knight of our lady in Germany and Prussia the knight of saint jago in Spain of saint Lazarus of jerusalem of jesus Christ institute by dominic against the Albigenses of saint Mary of mount carmel and saint Lazarus the former lazarite be unite to the maltase institute by Paul the five but monastike religion notwithstanding their vow of chastity have so multiply in the west for in the east few order be find to this day that benedict order have procreate 23. Augustine 28. and that late of Francis 15. and for the individuall they be like the grasshopper of Egypt the pope be not so poor as to be able to number his creature of the franciscans alone Sabellicus number in his time at once live 90000. and add that the general to that order offer to pope Pius against the Turk 30000. able warrior of this seraphical family without detriment to their holy they have say he fill the wo^ld be divide into forty province each province into ward or wardenships and these subdivide into conuent and place these mortify minor have in that time find the way Sabel en. 9 l. 6 five of they to the papacy 26. to the red hat as for in^eriour prelacy who can number they the dominicans in the same time abo^e six score year since 21. province conuent 4143. in they live 26460. friar and of they about 1500. master or doctor of divinity beside many of they in Armenia and Aethiopia or Ab^ssia Constantinople anticipate the jesuite glory in this kind the augustinian also be then number 30000. the carmelite more not to speak of the rest this course of life first beg^n by devout person to avoid persecution Antony and other which make use of desert and a solitary life to escape the sword and the world infection by vice together be after imitate by good man both for their own devotion free by this mean from secular interruption and fit for the service of the church both in faith by doctrinal study and exercise in their monastic school and also in charity by beneficence therein to the poor with the labour of their hand and last degenerate into smoky superstition and ambition of get the glory of the world with wealth and ease by seem denial thereof and become a refuge and sinke-sanctuary to malcontent bankrupt man in danger of law and weary of the cross which attend each vocation God have set down this rule to all man to eat their bread in the sweat of their brow which these seem to illude that they which can be to use the orator word may be a masterpiece of hypocrisy which in another sense and by another course can say with the apostle as have nothing and yet even carnal possess all thing but who will hope to number the person of each order term religious when the order themselves can be reduce to due order or number all historian in manner mention they but none can name they all much less marshal they joannes Wolphius in his centenary of memorable Readins thus express many of they with the time of their original a. d. 341. 366. 384. order of saint basil. 399. of saint Augustine 422. of Paul^ romana 495. also 530. also Benedictinorum also 595. 610. in the seven and eight centenary none in the nine a. 912. 950. 977. 1012. 1017. 1030. 1046. 1050. 1076. 1080. 1059. s. a^tonij Vienna 1098. 1110. 1113. 1119. pramonstratens^s 1121. 1137. Rob^rtinorum 1148. 1160. 1170. 1190. 1190. Franciscanorum 1200. 1201. 1202. 1205. 1211. s. 1214. 1215. s. pauli 1217. o. vallis 1228. O.S. 1232. or. s. 1250. 1252. 1257. o. 1258. 1273. o. Augustinensiu^ Eremitarum and 1282. o. s. 1297. 1300. 1303. 1323. 1326. Alcanthare 1349. 1350. 1360. 1365. o. 1366. 1370. s. Brigittae 1371. 1399. 1400. vallis 1405. 1407. s. in alga also also s. also 1408. 1409. s. justinae also Mauritianorum 1420. o. equestris b. 1429. o. Eq. 1433. s. nemus 1453. o. s. 1455. 1464. 1469. 1499. 1500. 1506. 1529. 1537. 1540 o. jesuitarum jesu. 1549. 1561. o. s. 1571. 1579. o. Eq. s. unto these order whereof some time be set may be add many other of who original no certain time be deliver Wolphius have in alphabetical order name these of that kind differ from the former another kind o. o. o. o. equestris O.S. Gertrudis o. helenae o Hispania or. equestris o. o. d. o. o. o. or. Labanda Lazari s. O.S. o. Fratrib knight of the round table o. o. de Corbullo s. petri. o. s. Petri i^ Schunbach o. o. s. Ruffi Sacerd. scotia s. gratiae s. o. valetudinario-seruientium o. but it be time to have do lest such uncouth name make some reader fear he shall thereby conjure up some devil order to disorder I can also out of history add other but these be more then enough papal order enough to break all christian order and rule of simplicity and sanctititie with their superstition and hypocrisy of their rule habit and other superstition understand this of the late for the ancient be both without vow and fit school and seminary for the church as our university now the same Wolfius Hospinian and other author have write at large chap. 17 a discourse of the diversity of letter use by the diverse nation in the world the antiquity manifold use and variety thereof with exemplary description of above threescore several alphabet with other strange write GOD the giver of every good gift have endow man create after his own image with diverse privilege above other sensitive creature not only with dominion over they but with reason and speech both above their natural capacity by the one he compose natural syllogism in himself propose to his understanding dispose in it and by his will elect what seem best of those thing which the external sense as the cinque-port-intelligencer have bring in and the internal the common sense Phantasie and memory as reason handmaid have prepare to discourse by the other as a sociable creature he impart those mind-conception unto other man and those which be many person be make as it be one body reasonable God have add herein a further grace that as man by the former exceed beast so hereby one man may excel another and among man some be account civil and more both sociable and religious manifold and excellent use of letter by the use of letter and write which other want be esteem brutish savage barbarous and indeed much be the literal advantage by speech we utter our mind once at the present to the present as present occasion move and perhaps unadvised transport we but by write man seem immortal confer and consult with the patriarch prophet apostle father philosopher historian and learn the wisdom of the sage which have be in all time before he yea by translation or learning the language in all place and region of the world and last by his own writing survive himself remain through all age a teacher and counsellor to the last of man yea hereby God hold conference with man and in his sacred scripture as at first in the table of stone speak to all and whereas speech pierce the ear pierce indeed and pass often in at the one and out at the other write also entertain the eye and so long by our own or other read speak to either of those noble sense as we will and whereof we will ourselves hush and silent at our pleasure always free from fear flattery and other human passion therefore the dead be esteem the best companion and faithful counsellor in Alfonsus his opinion namely in their write still live to perform those office and want of letter have make some so silly as to think the letter itself can speak so much do the american herein admire the spaniard who first invent letter jos. ant. l. 1. c. 2. seem in comparison of the other as speak ape thus excellent be the use of letter how ancient uncertain josephus mention write ancient than the flood by which knowledge of astronomy be commend to posterity in two pillar the one of stone the other of brick to outlive those two dismal destruction which Adam have prophesy shall befall the world by fire and water that of stone remain to his time plin. l. 7. c. 56. Pliny conceit a eternity of letter as of the world and mankind and suppose that the assyrian be such elsewhere attribute their invention to the phoenician as of astronomy also and the art of war and navigation and after other opinion to the egyptian after other to the syrian it be I see not how probable by some affirm that Moses first receive letter in the two table of the law write by the finger of God master Fuller be of opinion that the phoenician themselves learn they of Abraham ful. Misc. l. 4. c. 4 who seem to he as likely in his long stay with the canaanite to have teach they letter as to have instruct the egyptian in so short a space in astronomy and arithmetic which josephus affirm and most probable it seem that in bless Sh^ms posterity by Heber Noah have leave the best art of the former world job be by some upon good reason hold ancient than Moses who yet often speak of book and writing job 13.26 and 19 23 24 etc. as a thing then familiar use another no less controvert question be of the ancient kind of letter which Scaliger and other think to be the phoenician or as now they be call the samaritan at first use by all the canaanite of which the phoenician be a part and hebrew what letter most ancient 2. reg. 17.17.10 annat in Euseb. chron. see those coin and letter at the end of this chapter jer. praef. in 1. reg but after the deportation to Babylon the cuthaeans or samaritan still continue they be teach by the israelitish priest but the jew grow into use of other which Scaliger say be and after and think it to think that the elder hebrew have any other saint Jerome also affirm that esdras be inventer of the present Hebrew letter after the captivity his word be 22. Postellus attribute the reason of this new invention to the difference of religion g. postel ling. 12. Alphab which begin in but become worse in those cuthaans and other stranger which be place by the assyrian in the city of Samaria who irreconciliable hatred I have elsewhere show in my pilgrimage he allege also such coin say to be as old as since Salomon day see by he p. pilg. l. 2. c. 9 two of which shall follow with their letter he add that the jew affirm the same which still hate the samaritan but high prize those coin as their own antiquity the inscription whereof be jerusalem the holy can not proceed from the cuthaean samaritan joh. 4. which worship in their mountain as the samaritan woman say to our saviour and not in jerusalem Postellus see a grammar in their letter but the language Hebrew the exposition Arabic the character their own which now also want the point which in saint Jerome day they have Scaliger show further how the ancient greek or jonik^ letter like in form to the present latin which seem thence derive be by Cadmus carry from Phoenicia jos. scal. sup and communicate to the greek of he call by Herodotus (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which both he and Pa^sanias affirm that they have see and of which Pliny testify of these anon you shall see a example Scaliger add that the chaldee fashion they from the phaenician now use by the nestorian and maronites these have both capital letter and lesser from which Chaldee letter the modern jewish and Arabic be derive the Chaldee be in a mean betwixt the phoenician and they our learned countryman master Fuller ful. Miscella^ l. 4. c. 4. as he will not yield that the ancient Hebrew be the phoenician language so neither will subscribe to this opinion which make the modern Hebrew letter to be of late devise but as the egyptian have two sort of letter one sacred and hieroglyphical the other vulgar and as with we the writing proper to the public court in court and chancery hand differ from the common writing so the hebrew also may have a two fold writing the one in civil and common affair still read in the samaritan book and coin the other ecclesiastic or sacred use by the priest and levite and in which the holy scripture be preserve which then become secular and vulgar when their emulation against the samaritan admit nothing common betwixt they especial in letter which it appear they learn of one of the samaritan priest of bethel of jeroboam institution and not of leviticall race 1. reg. 12.13 and 2. reg. 17.17 for it be probable that jeroboam base priest either can not or will not write in that leviticall and priestly character but retain unto all purpose that which before have be admit only to civil affair he conceive they to be both of israeliticall original and if either be ancient the sacred still style Hebrew to have the pre-eminence ecclesiastical thing be of more antiquity then civil in which sense irenaeus call the ancient Hebrew letter Iren. advers. h^r l. 2. c. 41. mat. 5.18 these be also more simple and uniform than the samaritan as be see in the jod which our saviour cite as the lest of letter which yet in the samaritan be multiforme and large how ever the case stand herein it be evident they be both very ancient and as it be mother-letter to the rest of the world which as we have note already of the Chaldee jonike and latin so may it be observe in the principal of those other which we shall anon present to your view Pliny report that Cadmus bring sixteen letter into Greece plin. l. 7. c. 56. to which in the trojan war Palamedes add four other th X PH @ and after he Simonides other @ @ PS O. Aristotle say there be eighteen ancient A @ G D E @ I K and and Lgr @ O P P S T Y PH to which Epicarmus add th @ or rather he aver out of a brazen table in the palace inscribe NAUSIKRATES TISAMENO ATHENAIOS so Scaliger express it in late letter (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Scaliger also out of a old scholy upon Euripides his Orestes affirm that the old greek have seventeen letter sixteen of Cadmus his invention and Y add thereto and think this to be Aristotle assertion who will never have reckon ph for one be of late invention these seventeen be A @ G D E @ I K L @ O PP S T Y. before th PH @ be invent by Simonides say Marius victorinus they use to place after T P K the aspirate H as THEOS PHILOS KHPONOS for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) but let the studious herein read scaliger whole discourse or digression in his note upon Eusebius his chronicle who also give the example mention by Herodotus m. EON. APO in the modern letter (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the like he do in diverse other but a old inscription in jonike letter I can not but transcribe from he it be engrave in a pillar in Via Appia thence remove to the farnesian garden whereby it appear that these jonike letter continue in Italy long after they have cease in Greece ODENI THEMITON METAKINESAI eke to TRIOPIO ho. ESTIN EPI. to trito TEI TEI APPIAI A@ROI o @AR LOION KINESANTI DAIMON HODIA KAI KORES ANATHEMA KAI @THONION THEON KAI @ the same inscription in late greek letter (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) @ plin. sup Pliny say that the pelasgi first bring letter into Italy Heurnius city these verse out of a old book touch the inventor of letter but who be so literate as to reduce the letter of each nation to their first founder it seem probable that as nation become more civil so some more heroic spirit in each nation devise new of himself or derive the old from some other nation or make a mixture of both beside that the conquer nation usual have receive in some part both language and letter with their law from the conqueror we see still that those which teach short writing can and do devise new character daily for that purpose that other ordain cypher or character only know to those who the author shall impart the skill unto and these diversify as any intend to impound or pale in his secret or mystery of state or art some of which perhaps in process of time have be make vulgar and ordinary letter these mystical writer have also devise other art of concealment as write with allume water not to be read after it be once dry but lay in water with a onion to be read at the fire etc. now for the variety and differ form art have superabound both in the subject and instrument differ figure of letter and diversity of instrument and material some writing with pencil as the jap^nites and Chinois other with pen other with instrument of iron as the malabar of gem brass also or other metal in table-book leave bark wood stone Aire sand dust metal paper cloth parchment and innumerable other material in the form also and manner with Quippos in stone or thread as in Peru with picture in Mexico and the egyptian hieroglyphike with character each express a word or thing not a letter as the Chinois japonites and our arithmetician and astronomer in the figure of their art some with fiery torch cap. smith inf l. 8. as you may read in captain smiths follow relation the most have use letter which by art be dispose to frame all word and have be the most complete kind of write which ever be but Babel never have more confusion of language than letter have sustain alteration difference both by place and time yea and by the humour of man thus not only diverse language have diverse letter but the same language as it change with time so the letter also be diversify as in the jonike and late greek have be observe from both which the modern greek write much differ in this our country we have have manifold succession of letter in succeed age as be most easy to be see in well furnish library why saxon letter cease and that especial of the miracle of industry in this kind sir Robert Cotton both in book cartel and letter the conqueror as Ingulfus Edmerus and other than live observe will not endure the english language or letter variety of letter use with we at this day whereby the saxon letter be now common extinct and both all record of old and the diverse court of this kingdom yea every copy-booke and each write master masterpiece hang forth to public view easy manifest the pass and present variety of letter in common use at the same time it be impossible therefore to give a example of all either letter or language yet in this so general a history I think it will minister some delight to the reader to have a taste of that immense variety which here out of Theseus Ambrose Postellus Duretus Scaliger Gramaye Lazius etc. we exhibit let the reader take notice also of the vary in line some read as the latin greek diverse way of read and most of the europaean from the left hand to the right sidewayes the hebrew arabike and most of the indian except the malabar and siamite from the right to the left the jugre Cathayans tartar that be the most of the eastern and northeasterne asians write their line downward and multiply they from the left hand to the right japonian charter l. 4. c. 1. @. as you may see in the japonian charter follow and in Patane they use three both language and sort of writing the malayan which I have see in Arabic character write from the right hand that of siam from the left and that of China downwards the people of tangut north-neighbour to China be say to write from the right hand to the left and to multiply their line upward the mexicans have writing in form of a wheel which be read from the centre upward to the circumference american book see a whole history in picture to. 2. l. 5 c. 6. heraldry magical character and diabolical in honduras they have book of paper make of cotton-wool or the inner bark of tree or of metleleave fold like broad-cloathe the writing whereof be partly paint where such thing as have form or figure be therein represent partly in hieroglyphical character as fishhook star snare file etc. in these they keep their record and our herald art keep record of pedigree in a kind of heiroglyphike not much unlike to let pass magical character Theseus Ambrose have publish a confuse kind of scroll the copy of one he say write by the devil I have rather mention that which Eusebius in the life of Constantine record write by divine hand which some say be the cross but by his description appear rather to have be the two first letter of Christ name ch and r combine with promise of victory to the pious emperor not in that sign of the cross but in Christ himself to who be glory for ever amen the phoenician or samaritan letter which some say be the mosaical and first Hebrew with the name of the elder and late syrians and the jonike and late greek letter answer they and answer by the latin we have transcribe out of joseph Scaliger in this form and order by the figure of these character it be easy to be gather that the letter which Herodotus call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) see by he in the temple of Apollo ismenius at the boeotian Thebes (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be devise by Cadmus with no great alteration in the most from the phoenician except in the turn they from the right have posture to the left and add sometime sometime cut off some pattick the latin no less seem derive from the ionian and be in the most the very same your eye may easy discern and judge and scaliger commentary be well worth your consultation herein too long to transcribe or translate hither of the twenty two all have not the use of letter and element of writing among the jonian but sixteen only the rest be call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be note to wit of spirit or number and therefore the first note s stand for the numeral 5 f be (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in steed of wan whereof the aeolians have frequent use which call (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and therefore be not repute a letter because it may be take away without change to the word it stand also for a note of the as in that hexametre (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) it be neither consonant nor vowel there be a Synalaeph^ for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) and no position in (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) h with the old jones be as H with the latin as in that in the former inscription be see they also use e only both long and short syllable as in the same inscription KINESANTI show and TEI for (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) beda lib. have touch those (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) these word 900 but let the learned read Scaliger himself the Hebrew letter and name thereof now in use be these aleph @ Beth @ Gimel @ @ he @ Vaughan @ Zain @ @ @ jod @ Caph @ lamed @ @ man @ @ nun @ @ Samec @ Ain @ Phe @ @ Tsadi @ @ Coph @ rec @ Cin @ thou @ (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) I have also add two coin of the old samaritan letter the high describe from Postellus his introduction of twelve language the low from bezas large annotation matth. 17. his word be that of Postellus of silver also differ somewhat in the figure and the superscription s b. which I conceive signify that it be a double Shekel I have add a obeliske or column inscribe with egyptian hieroglyphike copy out of Gramaye and in the basis thereof have add another describe out of Laurentius Pignorius his where the reader may feast himself with character of that kind I also have elsewhere give some of those egyptian figure inf. pag. 910. socrat. l. 5. c. 16. soz. l. 7. c. 15. these I think good to add for illustration of that mention of the cross in the ecclesiastical history against the egyptian figure in the temple of sarapis which occasion the conversion of many ethnic to Christianity the alphabet follow we have distinguish by figure for the reader better understanding of the exposition add wherein we have most follow gramaye 1 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 2 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 3 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 4 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 5 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 6 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 7 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 8 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 9 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 1. the first be that of the alan or lumbards set forth by Patricius other have be publish by Bonaventura Vulcanius in his and other 2. the old Aleman alphabet of Trithemius much different from those of bry Hermannus Hugo and james Bonaventura 3. a old magic alphabet of Thebanus of which there be other kind too many 4. a alchymicke of Cid Abdalla of which the african have other sort 5. Gramay say it be a old english alphabet sometime publish by sir Thomas Moor 6. the a b c. use by the priest of jupiter Ammon devise by Mercurius Aegyptius 7. the abassine attribute to Solomon many other by many other be so inscribe 8 the assyrian ascribe to Abraham 9 the old apulian which invert and read from the bottom be one kind of the armenian father on saint John chrysostom 10 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 11 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 12 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 13 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 14 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 15 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 16 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 17 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 18 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 19 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the 10. be a old asian alphabet ascribe to Peter the hermit 11. the old attic of jamael 12. the old norman a. b. c. of Rollo and other have other kind 13. the old alphabet of the baleares so describe by Cid Yahia 14. the suevian or old frisian 15. the old cantabrian of Charles the great 16. the bohni-seruian or slavonian of saint Cyrill that also diversify 17. the Burgundian or astrologian of Ishmael 18.19 run or ^ast hand with Cicero and cyprian note 21 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 22 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 23 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 24 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 25 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 26 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 27 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 28 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 20.21.22 be cabalistical alphabet attribute one to the angel Raphael the next to Enoch the three to Abraham of which sort and other have deliver with like credit to these 23. the old celtike of 24. the carnike or finnike of Vlphila 25. the old saxon of Otfridus monachus Lazius Munster Theseus Ambrose etc. have describe other 26. the punic 27. the cretan or phrygian of Hercules 28. the chaldean of Abraham that also vary by other 29 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 30 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 31 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 32 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 33 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 34 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 35 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 36 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 37 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 29. the old Corsica^ alphabet 30. the old cimbrian of 31. the old Danes 32. the old dacian 33. the old dalmatic of methodius 34. Lombard note of Cicero tiro 35. the east Frankes of Hanibald 36. the old gall of 37. gallograecian of Rotila 38. old german of Faramund 38 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 39 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 40 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 41 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 42 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 43 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 44 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 45 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 46 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 47 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 39 the georgian of saint james. 40. old gotike 41. getike or massagetike 42. old spanish-gotike of 43. old scythian-hunnike of attila 44. two old hetrurian 45. old heluetian-saxon of Charles the great 46. illyrian of saint Jerome 47. a african alphabet in the last page of which he thus name in their order the first a^ps a. the word signify a eare. the second each e. and both represent and signify a eye the three Ifr. a nose i. the four Ombr o. the tongue 5. a hand v. 6. lambd l. the earth 7. Mah the Sea m. the 8. Nisp the air n. 9 Rasch fire r. 10. bap. the sun it be a b. and with a dash p. 11. Cek. the moon c. and with a dash k. 12. the sword of Mars d. and t. 13. Goreq g. Mercury 14. Vaf Venus v. and with a dash f. 15. Siach Saturn s. and with a dash x. 16. theus jupiter it signify nothing but be add to the beginning and end of period they read as the hebrew from the right hand to the left and the line shall have be set the other way 48 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 49 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 50 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 51 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 52 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 53 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 54 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 55 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 56 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 57 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 58 (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 48. the aethiopike alphabet with the letter a. add throughout 49. Syriak 50. Arabic they have diverse other sort of letter as in Postellus Megiserus and other which have write of they be see the turk also use the same letter and point or note of vowel howsoever their language differ much be near the persian and tartarian 51. armenian 52. dalmatian 53. Russian 54. the jacobite 55. egyptian 56. Indian 57 Persian 58. the old syriake in these we have follow Gramaye but can have give more complete and exact alphabet if the cut have not be so exceed chargeable this for a taste may serve and we all know that in our own and other tongue and nation as have be say the letter and kind of writing be exceed diversify so that for any man to expect all the letter of all country must needs be impossible each vary so much in itself (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the China character be see in our map of China the japonian in the charter of that emperor to our merchant in captain Saris his journal as also the Indostan and Arabic tom. 2. l. 2. c. ^ tom. 1. l. 4. c. 1. tom. 2. l. 3. c. 23. the mexican hieroglyphike in a whole history therein write we have end with our own ancient saxon character but first will give you another sort of ulphilas gotike character set forth by bry. ulphilas gotike and the saxon alphabet see of these gotike letter tom. 2. l. 3 c. 23. the end of the first book a alphabetical table of the principal thing contain in the first book of the first part of purchas his pilgrim a a Atalla a papal eastern patriarch 151 abassine their habitation religion rite and opinion 137.138.147.148.149 Abdesu a eastern patriarch 151. Egypt Christianity there sometime exceed flourish 112. what christian there now 113.135 Aeneas his navigation 71 aethiopian church their rite and opinion 138. their faith declare at large by Tecla Maria a aethiopian 147.148 and seq. Africa have the rich mine in the world 28. her religion 112.113 and seq. african tongue 101. almost all africa mahometan or gentile 112.116.118 .. jew there 119. the torride part of Africa resemble to a libbards skin 113 alan and the old Aleman alphabet 182 alcantara order in Spain 170 Alexander the great 57.75.88 his life act peregrination and conquest 81.82 and seq. his sickness temperance persian expedition battle with Darius 83 his marriage and cruelty 84 his ambition frustrate danger escape view of the ocean 85. his marriage feast guard mourn rage death 86 alexander port 87 Alexandria build by Alexander 83 tree mention 2. chronicle 38 almug tree 38 alphabet diverse kind old and new 181.182.183.184 and seq. Alps why so term 140 Aluarez tax for his report of the nubians their dependence on the pope 137 amazonian tale 84 America thin and new inhabit 30. whither new-peopled and when the word the^e first preach 58. the multiply of people and cattle there 60. what christian among they and their poor christianity 115. four large region thereof as large as Europe possess by the spaniard 115. the whole country store with bear lion tiger wolf fox etc. 120 Ammon oracle 83 anabaptist deny their baptism 7 they wicked remove the landmark 16 Anacharsis the philosopher his travel 75 anachoreticall or hermetical monk 160 Andrew the apostle where he preach and die 53 Antiochia the place where the name of christian be first hear in the world 129. the patriarch thereof ibid. aunt cast up heap full of golden sand 32 aunt as great as a man span 89 Anzichi a idolatrous and man-eating nation 113 ape 39-436 apochrypha book false attribute to the apostle and other 56 Apollonius tyanaeus his pilgrimage 76 apostle their mission and pre-eminence 50. their preach through all the world 51. their tongue and miracle 53. their preach in the old know world 57 apostolical act and conquest 61 Aquitaine speech 106 arabian Gulf^ 40 arabic language which and where speak 110 Arabia the nest that breed and foster mahumetism 116 archbishop of the roman province 168 archbishop of Spain and their revenue 170 argyre store with gold and silver 33 argonaut their voyage 69. their art 70 Argus 70 Aristippus by flattery a trencher-worme to Dyonisius the tyrant 75 Aristotle his birth life travel etc. 75 A^menians their religion opinion and rite 139. their liturgy or public service 143. their patriarch number preacher or master 150 Armozia now Ormus a fertile region 88 Arsareth a suppose region 123 Arsaratha a city mention by the ancient 123 art but the supply of nature defect 10 asceticall monk 160 Asia the several religion therein many mahometans and pagan 113. in what part thereof Christianity have take root 114. near one half thereof corrupt by Mahumetans 116.117 another half by idolater 118. what jew find among they 119 augustinian have 555. monastery in Italy in Europe 4000 174 Auinion in France the pope country 171 author excuse for his european promise 94 author of the world man peregrination all thing 49 b babels confusion 29 Babylon the metropolis of the jew 51 baboon great than woman and little differ from their shape 79 Bacchus his several name his priest 23. his travel with diverse his famous exploit 68.69 bagisara a harbour in India 87 ballast 38 baptism every year use by the aethiopian and the reason thereof 148 baptism in the greek church 158 barbarian vanquish by Alexander 12 barna a town where be garden of myrrh flower culture of tree etc. 87 Bartholomew the apostle his preach life death etc. 55 bay call Hesperus his horn wherein a great island in the island a lake and in it another island full of wood when in the night be kindle fire and hear the noise of cymbal drum and infinite shout 78 beast feed with fish 87. a beast so big that he devour a whole elephant 89 beda translate some part of the scripture into the saxon or english tongue 145 Be^emoth and Leviathan a jewish tale of they 123 belgian bishopricke 172 Benedictine order beyond the jesuitical 174 Benomotapa a great kingdom in africa 113 Bessus his murder of Darius his torture 84 Bion the philosopher 75 bishop how differ from the apostle 52. religion reomfort by they 62 bishopric of the roman province 168. and bishopric in India 173. bishopricke in Spain France Low-countries Germany Swisser Hungaria Poland Prussia England Scotland Denmark Sweden 170.171.172.173 Bohemia 172 book of strange kind of paper 179 brachmans their manner of live they have no instrument to work no beast tillage use of iron they always worship God always pray look to heaven they eat what they find on the ground the man live of on side Ganges the woman on the other to who their husband have recourse certain month etc. 89 B^erewood his inquiry of language 95. of religion profess in the world 112 bread make of the meal of roast fish 87 bread for the greek eucharist call pure bread make by a pure woman or man 156 Britain in Caesar time 30 Bubarta a small island 87 Bucephalus Alexander fierce horse 82 Bucephalia a city build by Alexander where his horse Bucephalus die 84 byscaines among the spaniard boast that they be the right hidalgos or gentleman 107 c cabot voyage 28 Cadmus 70.177 Calabria revolt from the bishop of Rome and for a long time pertain to the patriarch of Constantinople 128 Calaminhan empire contain thirteen kingdom have great riches 34 calanus the philosopher his travel and burn of himself 76 his epistle to Alexander 89 the son of Cyrus his expedition 73 Canus the high part of the pirene hill whence so call 140 carbuncy 38 Cardandan a island plentiful for gold lie about the head of Ganges 33 cardinal in the roman empire 167 carneades 75 Carthage queen of the city of Africa 108 carthaginian call their city Lybiphoenician 79 Castille 170 cataea a isle sacred to Mercury and Venus whither dedicate goat and sheep be yearly send which there grow wild 88 celtae inhabit the middle part of France their language 106 cerne a island in Africa 78 Chaldee language and paraphrase 111 Chanaan 108 character magical and diabolical 179 Cheese-sunday 155 Chiama lake near be many rich mine 34 first founder of the tartarian empire 114 Christ the sun of righteousness 8. his kingdom not of this world 14. his peregrination 49.50 christian 8. their grace and glory 9 compare with philosopher 10. their hold 15. they be rich free and king 11.12 the diverse sort of christian 127. s. Thomas christians 55.132 christian much few since the tartar 58. almost all Europe Christian 112. christian possess near about a six part of the know inhabit earth 126. Christian liberty 7.8 christian religion enter the inner India in Constantine day 92 christian church under the turk dominion 112 christian in America 115 christian their liturgy or public service 143.144 and seq. Christian religion divide into four part in regard of her professor through the world 146 christopheros angelos his book 154 chuniake order 171 church decline and recomfort 62 chryse plentiful for gold and silver 33 chrysostom the translator of holy scripture into the armenian tongue 143 Cingianfigu a city in China many christian dwell there 114 circassians their abode rite and opinion 130. they celebrate their divine service in greek which their priest themselves understand not 146 circumcision among the tartar 121. among what other nation it have be use and from who receive 121 circumnavigation of Africa rar^ 47 circumnavigation of the indian and euxine sea 76 Cleo his speech 75 Clitomachus the philosopher 75 Clitus slay by Alexander 84 cleave tongue 80 coin as old as since Salomon day 177. Israel-Samaritan coin 181 colony in England 99 Columbus voyage 28 Comala 87 communion in the greek church 158 compass the ancient have it not 27 confession in the greek church 157 confirmation in what manner use 148 conqueror the conquest of religion 59 conquest apostolical 61 Constantinople the seat of the turkish empire have above twenty church of christian 112 constantinopolitan will be st^led universal bishop 166. he have three diocese acknowledge by the chalcedon council 167 conversion of the world pray for 64.65 conversion of indian and iberians 90 Cophti or christian of Egypt their religion opinion and rite 135.136 their liturgy 145. the difference between the Cophti and the aethiopian 149. their synod at cairo 151 a island where be sheep who flesh taste like sea-fowle they be feed with fish and have no grass there 87 council of chalcedon cause perplexity and trouble in eastern part 129 counterfeit father on the apostle 55 country be to relieve and enrich one another 5 country smell of spice 78 country full of flame in the midst whereof a exceed high fire reach unto the star 78 creation of man 49 creature very strange and fabulous 80 C^oesus 75 Crocala a isle 87 crocodile 78.79 cross how esteem in the greek church 162 cross fast 156 cross of a poison cup 159 ctesias the philosopher a traveller but he^ often travel from the truth 75 Curdi certain people in Asia their habitation 119 cyril preacher of the gospel to gentile nation and inventer of illyrian character 145 Cyrus his conquest 73 d dalmatians the vulgar translation of holy scripture use among they which some think to be the work of Jerome 144 Darius his expedition 73. his battle with Alexander 83. he be slay by reason of his own 84 David his talent 36. his husbandry 37. whither he send ship to Ophir 37 day at wardhouse and the north cape reckon two month and seven hour 92 deacon in the greek church 163 declivity of the channel of river 125 Daedalus flight 71 Dendrobo^a 87. Denmark 173 devil a traveller 66 dia a i will where bird shoot quill which kile man etc. 70 diamond where the most and best 37 Diogenes compare himself with Alexander 10 Dir^^otis a village of the babylonians a mart for the spice of Arabia 88 dodon a town in the i will Pylora which have nothing but fish and water 88 dog-tale of a dogfast 156 dolphin 88 a isle 87 Donha Simon a papal eastern patriarch 151 dragon seventy cubit long 89 drusi a people dwell in Syria about the skirt of Libanus 119 dutchmen their sea-greatnesse 20 e earth her difficulty 17. the earth divide among the son of n^an 5. the earth at the first form of it be in the superficies regular and spherical 124 the cause of the unevenness and irregularity thereof now ibid. the quantity and proportion of the part of the earth possess by christian mahometans and gentiles 126. the earth be equal poise on both side of her own centre 127. the centre of the earth and of the water be all one ibid. Easter how celebrate in the greek church 162 ecclesiastical polity ancient and modern 166 Egypt multiply by the israelite 60 Elana 22. Eloth ibid. elath 23 elephant can not come into Peru 27. their nature 39 Elias patriarch of Babylon his letter to the pope his belief 164.165 emerald 38 England the archishop and bishop thereof 173 englishman their sea greatness 20 english alphabet very old publish by sir Thomas Moor 182 epirotike speech and nation 107 epistle of calanus 89 esdras his allegation concern the tartar discuss 122 e^hiopians their rite and faith declare by Tecla Maria a ethiopian 147.148 ethnike hold in villeinage not in state of spiritual inheritance 15 their sum and computation 36 Etruria 169 evangelist 56 Euphrates 88 Europe compare with the other part of the world 90. the bound name and quality thereof 91 92. her art invention religion civility and language 93.94 almost every part thereof Christian 112 eutychian heresy 129.136 excommunication 158 eziongebe where it be 21.22 the signification thereof 23 f fable the cause thereof 68 fall of man 6.49 by his fall rob of supernatural wound in in his natural gift ibid. fast day observe by the greek 155. and difference of fast 155 fitch his pass through Ganges 32. his relation of Pegu 33 flatterer their baseness 75 fonts in the greek church 158 forgiveness 162 fountain of oil 84 Franc-Armenians 167 France 171. the diocese archbishop and religious and military order and jesuit there 171 franciscans 174 frankincense where get 140 141 free who so call 11. the wiseman most free freedom by Christ 7 french tongue 101. the beginning thereof 102. diversity thereof 106. composition thereof 107 frumentius 90 a hill near to Massapa in the kingdom of Monomotapa where be old ruinous wall with strange letter which ignorant people say be build by devil 28 g GAdira or Cadiz a city build by the phoenician 77 gadrosi a people of India 87 galatians have a peculiar language beside the greek tongue 95 gallicke tongue 101 Gallia belgica or the low country 172 Ganges the breadth and depth thereof 85 gem where the most and best 37.38 gentile their calling figure 37 Genua 169 Georgians their habitation rite and opinion 130. their order of divine service 146 german bishop 172 give of spiritual gift 157 gospel God rule over all and give all dominion and rule 15. the author of all thing 49 gold the excellence and superexcellence thereof above silver gem etc. 35 golden region 32.33 gold Antinous 32. gold bell 33. gold in some of the east part little pre-eminence above silver 33 golden fleece 69 Gorgones savage man their body all over hairy 78 goth their true native country 112 translation of the four evangelist remain in the abbey of Werdin 145 gotike alphabet 186 gotland and Thule discover by himilco within 24. degree of the pole where the day in june be 22. hour 77 Grandemont order 171 Greece the bound thereof 95 grecian obedient to the patriarch of Constantinople 127 grecian ship muster against Troy 70 greek tongue the extent thereof in ancient time 95. the extent thereof in vulgar use 96. the decay of the old greek where and whence and how corrupt 97 the difference of the old and modern greek 98 greek church the opinion and character thereof 128. their liturgy 146 greek their condition of life their rite of fast feast and other observation gather out of the book of Christopher angelos a greekish monk and priest 154.155 seq. Greek letter 177. Greek inscription in jonike letter 178 greek alphabet 100 grizon 172 gryphan 32.33 gulf call Notuceras ^or the southern 78 H HAbassia the bound and compass of that kingdom their religion not all christian but a great part gentile 113 habassine or midland aethiopian their religion opinion and rite 137. in what language they read the scripture and celebrate their liturgy 143.144 Halitivea a i will 87 Hanno and himilco their discovery of the south and north part 77 Hanno his voyage act and discovery on the african-atlantine coast 78 Havila 31 Hawkins how long in his voyage ere he arrive to the indies 42 hebrew tongue 29. diverse Jew ignorant thereof 51.111 not vulgar understand after the captivity 111 hebrew letter he inventer thereof 177 hebrew alphabet 180.181 heraclite a travel philosopher 76 Hercules his travel twelve labour pillar help Atlas with other wonder 69 heresy their spread 141. the succession of eastern heresy 142 hesperide 79 hieroglyphical obeliske 181 hill their height 124 hiram 62 Histaspis his travel into India where he learn magic and philosophy 76 historian their travel 76 house make of whale bone 87 Hungaria the university bishopricke and jesuit therein 173 hubandry a remarkable pillar of royal magnificence 37 Hydaspes a river which run into Indus 86 Hyrcania subdue 84 i iacobaean tree 14 jacobite whence so call their opinion and rite 134.135 their liturgy 145. their number bishop monastery and church 150 jacobus translate the scripture into the italian tongue 145 jambulus his navigation to Ara^ia and Aethop^a and thence to a strange island etc. 79.80.81 james the brother of John his death preach etc. 93 james call Alphaei and the brother of our lord etc. 53.54 saint james order in Spain 170 japonian character 185 iberians convert 90 ichthyophagi or fish-eater they make bread of the meal of roast fish 87 73 idolatrous nation in Europe Asia Africa and America 118.119 how great a part of the earth be possess by idolater 126 idumaea 22 jerusalem 54 jesuite their number and college in Italy 168 jesuit in Spain 171. in in the low country 172 in Cermany 172. in Hungaria Poland and Prussia 173. in India 173.174 jewel 37.38 jew divide into three sort 51.121 disperse in several part of the world 119. some ignorant of the Hebrew 51. and 111. some use the greek Syriake and Chaldee tongue 111. their travel and dispersion 67.119 their public service or liturgy 143. jewish church and Romish compare 64. hope of the jew conversion 67 jew destruction 67 jew for what cause often term in the act of the apostle (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) 111 jew when expel and banish out of England France Spain Portugal Naples and Sicily 119 jewish fable of enclose jew and of the Sea 123 jewish Chaldee be of two sort 145 land not yet inhabit 58.117 a goodly island find out by the phoenician 77 island of the people rite creature 80 island sacred to Neptune inaccessible 88 island where pearl be find 88 isle of Maledi^ia above seven thousand of they in all 117 isle lie disperse in the ocean on the east and southeast part of Asia be in number two or three and thirty thousand 119 image in^^^sed by the aethiopian 147 image of God 15 Imau^ a mountain more than half the length of Asia 117.118 India receive the name from the river (@) 28.46 it yield st^re of the thing bring from oph^r 39.40 indian voyage examine 42. do. dees calculation and other 43 indian embassy send to constantne 89 infidel what propriety they have in their land and good 14 inscription on the greek eucharist 156 jobson his travel up the river 28 jocktan posterity in India 31 John hi^ banishment preach etc 53 John archbishop of Seville his translation of the scripture into the Arabic tongue the vulgar speech of that part of Spain 145 jonathan Ben Vziel his translate the prophet and pentatuch into the Chaldee tongue as also his paraphrase upon the prophet 111 jonike letter 177.178 jonike alphabet 180 Ireland the bishopric therein 173 ishmaelite and Midianites the first spice-merchant 42 ismaelite and saracen the same nation 121 israelite their multiplication in Egypt 60 Israel peregrination in the desert 24.66 Italy the prince potent there 166 italian free state 169 italian language the beginning thereof 102. the diversity thereof 106 judaisme in what region profess 119 jupiter sacrifice to he by Alexander 88 just man their use of this world 14 k kine so multiply in America that one man have abo^^ sixteen thousand and another of one kow the increase of eight hundred they grow wild and be kill only for their hide 60 king their right 10. heroical king 12. how good a good and wise king 12. good king stir up in the decline age of the church 62. king JAMES his wisdom learning government etc. 13.14.48 king of Georgia his letter to the pope 152 king red who give name to the red sea 88 knighthood orde 174 kni^et his journal and friar-like report of saint Thomas preach in Brasill 60 l LAcides the philosopher 75 land not level where the high 125 language a discourse of the confusion thereof 29. the language of several nation 95.96 fourteen language or mother tongue in Europe beside latin which remain not only not abolish but little or nothing alter by the roman 100 latin tongue the antiquity dignity and extent thereof 98.99 latin abolish not the vulgar language in the foreign province of the roman empire 100 latin not vulgar speak in all place of the roman empire 102 latin degenerate into other language 103. threefold corruption thereof 104. objection concern the extent of the latin tongue with their solution 105 latin alphabet 180 learning receive by print 63 Lebanon a cragged and steep mountain cover continual with snow 140 legend burdensome to the church 55 lent observe among the greek 154. four lent every year 155. Leonard bishop of Sidon his relation of the jacobite 150 letter the diversity thereof use by the diverse nation in the world the antiquity manifold use and variety thereof with exemplary description of above three several alphabet with other strange writing 176. letter 28. use by the inhabitant of the island of jambulus but seven character 80 library at cairo very famous 1^1 louse leave man and die when they arrive at the indies 20 liturgy of christian in the several part of the world in what language celebrate 142 143. loadstone 26.38 whither Solomon know the use thereof 27 Lorraine 171 lord of all god 7. the poor sl^^e lord 7 Low-countries 172 m MAceta a rock whence cinnamon and spice be carry to the assyrian 88 magic alphabet 182 mahometan professor in the world 116. their multiply in Africa and Asia and the cause thereof 117. how great a part of the earth they possess 126. their liturgy or public service 143 malabar write 185 malana the utmost border of the 78 man threefold tenure microcosmicall cosmopoliticall spiritual 6. his creation fall recovery by invaluable price 49. his pilgrimage 50 Mantua 169 map map of the desert 24 map of saint Paul peregrination 57 map of the christian world 65.115 map of the navigation of Aeneas 71 map of the roman empire 74 map of Alexander expedition 85 maronites their religion patriarch opinion and rite 140 141. their liturgy 146. their error collect out of their own book by a jesuite 152 153 massilians speak three language 106 masterdom over our s^l^es the great possession 7 Matthew the apostle his preach etc. 55 Maurice prince of Orange admire of all Europe 172 megasthenes his testimony of old expedition 73 melchite whence so call 129. they be subject to the jurisdiction of the patriarch of A^tiochia ibid. they be for religion mere of the grecians opinion 129 Menelaus travel 71 mengrelians their rite and opinion 130 M^nippus the philosopher 75 m^n dwelling in cave and run fast than horse 78 merchant the first mention of they and the diverse mart for spice 42 merchandise prove by God law nature nation 5 Meroe a ^le inhabit by Mahumetans 113 Meropius a philosopher his sail to India 90 mesambria a Peninsula very fertile 88 Mesha 32 metal their excellence 35 methodius his translate of the scripture into the sla^^nike tongue 145 16 mexicans writing in form of a wheel read from the centre upward to the circumference 179 microcosmicall state of man 7 military order in Spain 171 military order in France 171 Milan the number of bishop there 169 miracle cease 62 Mi^hridates speak twenty two language without a interpreter 95 moenhemage a great kingdom in Africa 113 monk er^meticall and asceticall 160 monk of the exercise order 161 monk of saint Anthony order 137 monk fast 155. greekish monk 159. their life hand-labour habit diversity fast penacne night-prayer probation forgiveness easter conceit of the cross etc. 160 161 162.163 monothelite their heresy 141 morduite a people in Europe possess the middle confine betwixt the precopile tartars and the muscovite 119 Morontobaris 87 mountain their height 124. the high pass not in perpendicular erectnesse ten furlong ibid. mountain full of tree the wood whereof be odoriferous and of diverse colour 78 mountain call the chariot of the god 78 multiplication by divine providence 60 muscovite their religion rite and opinion 130. their liturgy 144 Musaeus bishop of Doleus his indian voyage 89 mutual necessity the mother of mutual commerce 5 muzal patriarchal see of the nestorian 132 N NAbuchodonosor 73 nation now (@) which former be very barbarous 59 nature inheritance great riches than the great king beneficence 10 navigation the lawfulness thereof prove from Solomon 4. the necessity commodity dignity thereof 17 18 19.62 63 Nearchus his voyage and fleet set forth by Alexander the great from the river Indus to the bottom of the persian gulf 86 87. seq. his voyage from Indus to Tigris honour by Alexander 88 negro country 78. Merry negro 79 nestorian scatter far and wide in the east their patriarch religion and heresy 131. their opinion and rite 132 133. they celebrate their liturgy in the Chaldee or Syriake tongue 145. difference betwixt they and the greek 165 ninive build by Ninus the stateliness of the build etc. 72 Ninus his march travel and conquest 72 no new thing under the sun how to be understand 26 norman seek to destroy the english tongue 100 north part discover 77 Nosa a isle sacred to the sun of which it be report that if any go on shore he shall never be see after but Nearchus find it false by experiment 88 another tale be that a nymph dwell there which lie with man and after turn they into fish 88 Nubia a large region in africa have from the apostle time profess the christian faith it have again above a^ 100 year since forsake it 112. want of minister the cause thereof the nubians their petition for supply 113. the nubians that be yet Christian their religion and obedience to the patriarch of Alexandria 137. o OAracta a island abound with vine palm and fruit 88 the pure gold 35 Olympia her dream 81 Ophir where situate 25. her derivative 31. the bound thereof 45 conjecture of the course take in the ophirian voyage 39.40 Orange 171 order term religious the several sort and original thereof 175 oritae 87 ottoman sultan their several seat 110 oil a fountain thereof find 84 p PAlestina the city thereby figure 4 Palladius his swiftness and travel 90 palmtree the ensign of Phoenicia 108 Panonian tongue 101 papall-religious order the number kind and beginning thereof 175 parrot 39 paruaim the name of the ophirian gold 25 patriarch travel 66 patriarch in the roman empire 166 patriarch of Constantinople his jurisdiction 167.127.162 the reason why his authority so great 128. his tribute family 163 patriarch of Antiochia his jurisdiction 129 167. patriarch titular obey Rome 151 patriarch of the nestorian 131 patriarch of mozall or seleucia 133 patriarch of jerusalem a jacobite 134 167 patriarch of Alexandria his jurisdicton 163 167 patriarch of the maronites 141 patriarch of Babylon 163. the beginning and alteration of the number and power of christian patriarch 166 patriarchship of the west 166. of the east 167 patriarch of seleucia 167 patriarch of Aethiopia 167 patriarch of aquileia 167 Paul the apostle his preach life death etc. 56. the map of his peregrination 57 peacock 39 Pegu infest with wild beast 33. famous for riches and jewel 33.34 pelasgi first bring letter into Italy 178 people the world people by degree 30. people speak at one time perfect with two man both answer and discourse and have clo^^^ tongue 80 peregrination of Christ 49.50 a world of peregrination have happen in the world 68 Peru why and whence so name 25 Peru be not Ophir 27 persian discomfit by alexand. 83 84. persian gulf 87 88 persian king palace 88 Peter his preach peregrination etc. 51. not bishop of Rome 52 Peter Stroza secretary to pope Paul the 5 his treatise of the opinion of the chaldaean touch the patriarch of Babylon and the nestorian in Asia 163 philosophy two kind 74. it former flourish in Asia but now suppress 117. philosopher hold themselves of themselves complete 7. their estate 8. compare to horse 8 philosopher and christian compare 10 philosopher travel 7^ 76 Philotas slay by the command of Alexander 84 Philip his preach etc. 54 Philip the father of Alexander his dream and aristander the divine his exposition thereof 81 certain isle in Asia call by that name the number whereof be eleven thousand 114 Phine^s blind by jupiter for reveal the god secret 70 phaenician voyage 77. a goodly island find out by they near the libyan shore 77 phaenician antiquity 48. phaenician alphabet 180. phaenicians the same with the canaanite 108 phoenix true in mystery not in history 23 pilgrimage or peregrination 49 50 pillar of stone inscribe I Alexander come hitherunto 89 pillar in the capital at Rome dedicate to the memory of with the latin inscription 106 Pinator lake near it much gold and a rock of diamond 34 Plato his travel 75. his disciple ib. poetical fiction 69.70.71 poison drink by a patriarch of Alexandria without hurt 159 Poland the province university bishopricke and jesuite therein 173 polander of the greek religion 131 Pomerland a dukedom the city and bishopricke therein 172 pope deny his baptismal name 7. his usurpation 12.166 no such power as he pretend 16. he be despise by the greek church 128. the title of pope be ancient give to other bishop 166 pope innocent the 3. charge that in city where be concourse of diverse nation that differ in language divine service shall be celebrate ac-according to that difference 144 popish rite in give order 149 pope Clement the 8. his messenger and gift to the maronites 152 port of sur the place of the city of Tyreso call 129 portugal their sea-greatnesse 20 Porus king of a great part of India 84 pray stand 157 preach of old to the american 59 presbyter John king of Tenduc his rule in the north-east part of Asia his religion scaliger error touch he 114 priest live in the greek church 163 prince no impeachment to they but true advancement of honour to use all frugal husbandry and mean of thrive at home 37 print the art of art 62. learn thereby revive 63 propriety the subject state 10 Prussia the bishopricke and government thereof 173 ptolomeis degr false or uncertain 79 punic tongue little differ from the Hebrew 109.29 the chananitish or old Hebrew language 108 purgatory 148 Pyrrho the philosopher his travel 76 Pythagoras the philosopher most famous both for travel and science 76 q QVeda plentiful for gold 33 queen Elizabeth her wisdom virtue government etc. 12.13.48 Quinsay the great city in the world in it but one christian church 114 choir in the greek temple 158 r RAbbi Benjamin a jew his travel 123 redemption of man 49 red-sea whence so name 22 reed bread make thereof 80 reed increase and decrease according to the moo^e 81 religion revive 62 religion profess in the world by christian mahometan jew and idolater 112.113 renovation week 157 riches their contempt 9 great riches in nature inheritance then in the great king beneficence 10 river of s. Mary and Rio grande 79 river-horse 78 79 river fiery 78.79 river slide from the high ground to the low till they come to the sea 125 Rome the seat of the romish religion 166. five patriarchal church in Rome 168 roman bishop 52 roman navigation to the indies 40 Romish and jewish church compare 6^ Rome city 98. the compass and number of inhabitant when it be first found 98 roman-emperour travel 73 roman empire bound 98 roman empire when and by who it fall 104 roman tongue the antiquity dignity and extent thereof 98 99 threefold corruption thereof 104 ruby where the most and best 38 Russia some part thereof idolatrous 113. they be convert to Christianity by the grecians and remain of their religion 130 133 s SAcalasis 87 salomons navy send from Ezion-Geber to Ophir 1. the history thereof borrow from scripture 2. the allegorical and anagogical sense or application thereof 3. Solomon signify Christ 3. his right to spoil the egyptian and ophirians 4. the combination of wisdom and royalty in his person 10. his excellenty fame and renown 18 19 the end of his navigation 18. his revenue audit 36. his servant who 42. our Solomon 12 13 14 Salonichi or thessalonica a city in the turkish empire have above thirty christian church 112 samaritan letter whether ancient than the present Hebrew 177 saphire where the most and best 38 saracen whence they have their name of all other nation most addict to 121 saracen of Arabia their scourge amend the posterity of the eastern church 142 saranga a region 87 savage people clothe in beast skin 78 Savoy the duke thereof chief of two military order 171. saxon alphabet 186 scorpion a cubit long 89 Scotland the bishopric therein 173 scripture in vulgar tongue 143.144 scripture-translator 145 scripture misapply by the greek 154 Scythia term it contend with Egypt for antiquity of habitation and prevail 123 sc^yth^^s chase by Alexander 84 s^as manifold serviceableness 17. it add true greatness to great king 19 it teach temperance ^0 it be a temple of theological virtue 20. it be deep than the high hit 124. the face thereof be in all part natural level or equal distant from the centre of the water whence call 126. sailor in equal distance from the land observe a equal deepness of the sea in both south and north latitude 127 selfe-knowledge 6 seleucia the metropolis of Assyria 132. diverse opinion of that city ibid. it be inhabit by the citizen of Babylon 133 Semiramis her exploit her building Babylon invade India etc. 72 seminary of Mar^nites 152 Senacherib invade judah 73 sense external the cinque-port-intelligencer internal reason handmaids 176 sensual liberty among the turk 117 Sephar 32 serica a region where be tree which bring forth very fine wool of which they make garment call serica 89 Sesostris his army and pillar 73 sheba 31.73 ship of Noah a figure of baptism 21. every christian man be a ship 3 shipwreck of faith ibid. Sicilia the bishop and number of jesuite there 169 Simon call Cananite and Zelotes his preach peregrination 54 Simon Sula^a a papal eastern patriarch among the chaldean 151 sin mortal 148 slavonian they exercise their public divine service in their own language 144 slavonish tongue 109 Socrates 75. Sofa^a be not Ophir 28 Soloente a Promo^tor^ of Africa 78 79 Solon 75. somatra^amous ^amous for gold 33 south continent 58 127 south part discover 77. Spain 107 spanish king title 94. spanish antiquity 48. Spain fit against Rome 64 spanish tongue 101. the beginning thereof 102. the composition thereof 107 spanish bishopricke and their revenue 170 spice whence fetch the several port 43 succession of port and staple for the spice-trade 44. spinel a precious stone 38 stand-mountaine 159 star which appear to we not see to some 81 Stuta a great river 86 subject true obedient to their king 12 sue a desert place where no herb grow the armada for India make there 23 sumatra store with gold 34 susians 88 swisser 172. Sueden 173 synod in Egypt 112. synod hold in Goa 133 syriake language 110. syriake testament 133 134 syrian or Melchites for number the great sect of christian in the orient 128. their order of divine service 146 t TAbernacle what 62 talon how much it contain 35. Solomon and David talent 36 taprobane a island judge by the ancient another world 40. govern by four prince one of which be chief to he be subject a thousand land 89 tartar subdue Asia and banish thence christianity 114. whence their name and signification thereof 120. they be not israelite 120.121.122 be Idoloters violater of the law sabbath-breaker etc. 122 Thais a strumpet she fire Xerxes palace 83 Thales his epistle to Pherecides a syrian 74 Tharsis or Tharshish 44.46 whither the same with Ophir 45 tartessus not Tharshish 47 Thebaeus his indian voyage 89 Theseus his Trancis and act 69 Thomas the apostle call Dydimus his preach life death etc. 55 a river 87. ship there a novelty the inhabitant have long and sharp nail wherewith they kill fish and cut wood their garment beast or fish skin 87 tearcon 73 Tecla Maria a abyssine his answer to question touch the religion of the abyssine and Cophti 147.148 seq. temple and mystery thereof unuail 4. a figure of heaven 21. parallel of tabernacle and temple 62 testament in the syriake tongue corrupt by the nestorian the imperfection thereof 133 Tholomon plentiful for gold 33 a city without Hercules pillar build by Hanno 78 Ticsivi^acocha 59 Tiglah Pileser k. of Assyria his expedition 73 timber much grow and bring to Asion-Geber 23. 158. Titha^^an 73 tithe of child 15^ topaz where find 3^ travel commend for antiquity God him-himselfe be a mystical traveller in the tabernacle etc. 66. Christian church always travel 68 travel Nationall 68 travel fabulous 68 69. seq. tree bring forth very fine wool 89 tree for salomons building 39 tree produce at the same time blossom and fruit 89 tribute which the christian in Europe pay the Turk 112. greek tribute diverse 154 truth occasion of fable 68 turk dominion in Europe 112 turkish language 110. their letter and point 185. tiger 33. Tyrus treasure 5 Tyrus a city ancient call sarra it give name to the syrian 129 five 171 Venice 169. in it two patriarch and four archbishop 169 the egyptian his conquest and be conquer 72 73 Vitriacus bishop of Acon and the pope legate in the east 113. Ulysses travel 71 universal possessor of the universe 8 voyage the first voyage of mankind 66 Vulphilas bishop of the goth inventer of the gothicke alphabet and translator of the scripture into the gothicke tongue 144 w welsh language of the celtae 107 water the nature thereof 124 126 whale 87 123. a whale fifty cubit long with oyster grow on his skin 88 other strange hyperbolical whale 124 wiseman most free 11 wolf how England be clear thereof 27 woman common 80. woman port 87 world how people 30. world centre 127 write the excellency and antiquity thereof 176. write strange kind 80 10 XEnophon both in art and arm and travel famous 75 Xerxes his invasion 73. his palace fire by Thais the strumpet 83 z ZEngitana a province wherein Carthage stand in it be 164. bishop under one metropolitan 112. zeno his travel 76 zerah the ethiopian with a m^^ion of man overthrow by king asa 73 a island of 60. mile in length and 27. in breadth 146. the religion of the inhabitant ibid. a description of all the circumnavigations of the globe the second book chap. i. of the improvement of navigation in late time and the mean whereby the world in her old age have be more than ever discover @. i. of magnetical and astronomical instrument first apply to navigation GOD the giver of every good gift have first make the world make man as it be a visible God of this visible world infuse in his superadmirable creation the knowledge of it of himself of god. this trinity of knowledge be deface by man voluntary rebellion which enforce against he the sentence of curse from the ever-blessed Trinity which yet in judgement remember mercy do not at once dissolve the world or man but alter his tenure suffer he as a customary tenant for term of life to be hold at the will of the lord to occupy and husband it for the necessity of his body leave also some spark of that heavenly fire in his soul maugre those dark flame of hell whereby he may by laborious art be rob of his white and pure robe wherewith nature have adorn he patch together leave or skin for a time to cover some part of his nakedness neither be * * in the sweat of thy brow thou shall eat etc. it any more or of more worth that here we labour for and get as servant than some light plume and break feather of that goodly fowl which whole without labour God have first give we as child thus in regard of this temporal state which yet he out of a curse produce blessing make the seedtime of a better harvest a rich possession raise out of this rubbish of our ruin by far then that which we have lose for time which we have forfeit give we eternity which can die for paradise heaven and GOD himself for the world a earnest whereof we have already his son give for we his spirit to we and the promise of himself in ineffable fruition yea meanwhile to solace this our weary pilgrimage he have give a erect * * subl i etc. countenance to the body still to be view the utter court of our promise palace the fair wall of our fair inheritance and to the soul the eye of art whereby not leave the great or her little earth it can in a moment mount and surmount heaven and compass all this spacious extension that I speak not of that spiritual eye of * * faith be the evidence of thing unseen Heb. 11.1 Deut. 34. faith which see thing unseen the privilege of his saint yea she have find out mean by the giver bounty to carry her belove body not from some high mountain to overlook the lowly plain or as Moses into mount nebo in vision to see that which to see with joyful enjoy be deny but real and actual to possess and use the remote sea and land she embolden the body to forsake her earthly nest and like young eaglet on the eagles wing carry she to take a natural and universal possession of the universe ps. 104. where the heaven alone * be spread about she as a curtain where the beam of her chamber be in proper sense lay in the water where the cloud be her chariot the wheel at least whereby she walk on the wing of the wind and those swell spirit be make her driver the angry element be tame by industrious art which use all their nature to her best purpose to compass this in former time be impossible and how many sea to our forefather impassable for want of the compass the star and coast be then the guide and without those stilt and stay navigation dare not adventure in that her impotency and infancy to go into the main and if any disastrous storm have make sudden surprise of ship and man the master find himself and his art at a loss in the midst of his ship and mariner and if the frown heaven long refuse with wont eye to look on he and the absent earth forget to extend her lap and arm lose he must be for ever no great discovery be otherwise by the art of the ancient perform nor dare any repeat that lesson by art which tempest have occasional teach he far from the coast against his will chance be a forgetful mistress unless be be the usher of her school teach and embolden to repetition of her casual lecture GOD almighty pity this frailty intend better thing to the last and worst age of the world as in this fullness of time he send his son and the spirit of his son to prepare man for heaven so since I hope to further the former have give the science of the loadstone and astronomical rule and instrument apply by art to navigation that he may give more ample possession of the sea and the earth to the son of men. two late help of navigation unknown to antiquity let other applaud admire adore the stone call precious this shall be to i pearl and ruby and saphire and diamant and more than all those multiply name of gem which all be also make we by help of the loadstone this magnetical virtue be hide to the golden and silver age her iron sympathy have long be know to the iron world but her constant polar ravishment and she no less constant inconstancy by variation be mystery reserve to late posterity the former of these quality yield the compass the needle by magnetical touch direct the way in wayless wilderness by land and through the vast watery plain this virtue of the loadstone to be the leadstone and way-directing Mercury through the world Plato Aristotle Theophrastus Dioscorides Galen Lucretius Pliny his Solinus and ptolomee scholar of the high form in nature school know not though the magnetical attraction of iron be mention in their work some have also add some physical virtue and some the fable of the adamant and garlic prevent that attraction which late author have receive by authority without due examination but if any list to see army of author muster and their write also of this subject examine Dr Gilbert in his learned work of the Magnete gilbertus de Magnete have do it in six whole book the cause also inquire both of that attraction and this whereof we now speak polar motion this invention some ascribe to Solomon which I will believe if he have write of stone as he do of plant or if the tyrian which be almost the engrosser of * navigation in that age and be the seaman which Solomon use in his ophyrian discovery which we have labour in fit place to discover have leave any tradition or monument thereof to posterity which can no more have be lose then sail itself which the greek carthaginian and other nation successive derive from they other therefore look further into the east whence the light of the sun and art have seem first to arise to our world and will have Marco polo the venetian above three hundred year since to have bring it out of Mangi which we now call China into Italy true it be that the most magnify art have there first be bear vid. @. 7. print gun and perhaps this also of the compass which the portugal at their first entry of the indian sea whereof you shall present hear find among the moor together with card and quadrant to observe both the heaven and the earth 1503. vert. c. 14. and Vertomannus about the same time travel with they over the arabian desert to Mecca and Medina direct their course by the compass and there also observe that tale of mahumet body hang in the roof of the temple by the attractive power of lodestone which Chinocrates be report to have intend to himself at Alexandria in the temple of Arsinoe make the roof of these stone so to attract his iron image prevent by death to be but a tale and fable but as neither print nor ordnance be bring from thence to we but casual act open a passage to industrious art be invent by european head and bring to ripe perfection then in the east which have know they before so I also conceive of these marine instrument nor will I envy to John Goia of a a a town in the kingdom of Naples of which be this ver^ Malsi that whatsoever glory of the first invention which Blondus and other some b b lo^ Gomara cap. 9 Bellon O^s ^ 2. c. 16. name he Flavius have ascribe to he Italy indeed have best deserve in discovery for her polo and Goia and vertoman now mention and for her Colombo and Cabota of which be question whether first find out the variation of the needle or whether discover more of the new world though another italian americus vesputius carry the c c America epist. ed. Wright gilb. op. mag. name away from they both this variation be when the magnetical needle point not out the true pole but be distract somewhat either with a easterly or westerly deflexion this variation of the compass be the best remedy yet find out against the mariner variation from their compass and deviation from their scope and intend course and although the variation can without star or sun be observe as the direction of the compass may which give light in the dark night point still towards the pole neither can hereby the true longitude of place be discover this light shine most out of darkness and from eclipse which I have therefore in this history take all occasion to observe be most illustrious and plain yet for ordinary and general use in discovery and navigation in unknown sea this yield best supply of that knowledge of longitude by reason of the constant inconstancy as I say of this variation for howsoever it vary from the true pole yet it never vary from itself but in the same place eternal hold the same variation if it be exact observe which sometime by want in the instrument or workman and almost always by sea through the unsteadinesse thereof fall out and therefore be better far be take in calm wether and best if opportunity serve on land now for the cause d d how vain ^ thing be man who can by reason manifest the number of the sphere of the element or that there be sphere their substance operation m^tion yea whether the earth or the heaven move or both be yet undecided how many opinion of the ancient be now prove false by experience and have not God give we his word for the ground of our faith which the devil envy have here also obtrude tradition what certainty have remain but knowledge of evil unto his posterity who for knowledge lose paradise either of direction or variation philosopher have rather busy their own then establish other conceit from variation by their direction and point out the cause hereof in nature some tell we of hyperboreall magnetical mountain some derive the cause from the pole of the heaven some from a star in the tail of the great bear some from the heaven near to the pole some go also beyond the pole and heaven to I know not what magnetical power place out of place some lead we into a magnetical island ly-land every man will say somewhat and so do they that fly to hide miracle in nature but that somewhat be nothing and we indeed be less than nothing and Vanity which while we call all our argument demonstration and all our art science neither know god nor the world or nature nor ourselves how ever vain puff up with the conceit and deceit of knowledge say e e Scalig. Exerc. 131. Scaliger of this subtlety who yet have a reason too though as reasonless perhaps as those of other so fortunate do our wit find itself unfortunate and know but one thing that it know nothing most laborious have be the pain most probable perhaps the reason of our countryman doctor Gilbert by many year experiment in this subject who have observe the whole earth to be as a great loadstone the loadstone and the iron which natural also with exact trial he have observe even without f f by help of the loadstone rich venne of iron and other metal be discover in military affair both in mine level of pe^ces in the dark al^o in building convey of waterwork and a thousand other devi^es be use of the loadstone touch to hold like direction and variation in respect of the pole to contain the principal quality of the earth that the direction and variation be both not from contraction or coition or other hide cause but from the dispose power of the earth and the convertible nature of the Magnete the earth itself be mother and original fountain of the magnetical virtue and operation he derive the direction from the polar conformity of the earth the variation from the inequality of the same in the superficies thereof partly by sea partly by mountain which have difform though not deform the globositie of this globe in pay to other place by excessive height whatsoever be take from the deep to make channel for the water hence the great continent of earth have great force and power and where the earth be most depress or weaken there have it lesser yet so as these magnetical motion be from the constant magnetical nature of the whole earth a small island can prejudice or prevent the claim of the great continent thus in the azore the needle have no apparent variation which on the coast of Guinnee incline eastward to the african g g have double the cape of good hope the variation double and look to the west from the pole as the land do continent and near the american bend westward in these land as indifferent betwixt two equal continent aim at the pole of the earth and therefore magnetical his many h h all compass be not fi^^or all navigation i^ appe^res by the difference of those in the straits and here etc. the variation least near the line in 60.70 or 80. very great etc. rule experiment and observation be worthy a learned and leisurely reader myself have haste to travel over the world and that with so many traveller can stand in this muse or maze rather of philosopher let we now consider not the natural cause which be hard but take easy view of the sensible effect thereof in the furtherance of navigation wherein the touch needle be the soul as it be of the compass by which every skilful mariner be embolden to compass the whole body of the universe let the italian have their praise for invention the praise of application thereof to these remote discovery be due to the portugal who first begin to open the window of the world to let it see itself these first also of all europeans apply by the direction of king John as follow in this story astronomical instrument to this magnetical and occasion those spanish discovery in the new world by colombo industry the loadstone be the leadstone the very seed and engender stone of discovery who soever jovial first conceive that Minerva but the juno Lucina that help nature in this happy conception and educate discovery to that strength that it dare ordinary adventure beyond the know world and make way to that maturity whereby it open soon after another world be prince Henry of Portugal Portugal praise thus do the great GOD raise up the least thing to greatness and this one of the last and least of european kingdom be dignify with the first search and science of discovery Spain and Portugal after a long servitude fatten their soil with the blood of the moor and thence have grow by divine blessing not only to free themselves of that yoke but with farre-spreading bough to overlook and over-awe the remote east and further west pay themselves with the drug and gem of Asia the gold and slave of Africa the silver and possession of America as wage for that european slavery under the mahometans many age continue which now shall follow to be declare @. 2 of henry three son to JOHN the first king of Portugal by a english woman the prince of late discovery and of the help both against the moor and in their discovery which the portugal have receive of our nation the saracen as we have relate a a p. pilg. l. 3. c. 2. @. 2. elsewhere about the year * * some say 714. 712. bring by julianus earl of to revenge the deflower of his daughter caba by the last of the gottish king into Spain under the conduct of muse conquer and subject the same to vlit the Chalipha Pelagius b b see spanish hist. Turquet li. 1. bar. Dcc. 1. li. 1. begin first to make head against these barbarian who successor have succeed in the same quarrel with prosperous success above three hundred year space when Alphonsus the six take Toledo from the moor he in recompense of good service in the war give unto Henry of Lorraine who some call earl of Limbourg his daughter teresa with the country of Portugal in dowry and whatsoever he can further conquer from the moor by title of a earl who son don Alphonso be the first king of that realm new erect on the blood and desolation of the moor in those part who by degree they chase quite out of that kingdom from that time till that of John the first he pursue that hereditary quarrel pass over sea into Africa and there take and break the ice to his posterity which make valiant and successful progress in those design of Africa till their navigation into Asia with great hope and happiness make they neglect that near and dear purchase this conquest of or seut be mention by Thomas c c t. Wals. hist. ang. an. 1415. Walsingham which then live in these word this year the king of Portugal rely on the help of the merchant of England most of all and of the almain overcome the Agarens in the land of the king of the betinarines many thousand of they be send to hell and take their city seat on the sea call very large compass with a wall as they say of twenty mile some reason the english have to this assistance for the wife of don John be Philip daughter of John of Gaunt duke of Lancaster and sister to Henry the four who son Henry the five than reign in England they do imitate also their english ancestor who long before in the time of Henry the second have join themselves with other northern d d A.D. 1188. vid. mat. Paris in fine hen. 2. pilgrim for the expedition to the Holy-land and sail together from Dartmouth about 37. ship well man touch at Lisbon where the Portugal king beseech their aid against the moor in the city Syluia or proffer to they the spoil in recompense which they attempt and on the three day of the siege break into the suburb and force Alchad the prince to yield the city wherein be of all sort above 60000. moor whereof 47000. be slay and the mahometan temple consecrate to the mother of God thus both at home and abroad be the portugal indebt to the english as also in the example of some englishman and namely one Macham which have be by tempest drive on shore in madera but in nothing more than that english lady before mention who three son don Henry be the true foundation of the greatness not of Portugal alone but of the whole christian world in marine affair and especial of these heroic endeavour of the english who flesh and blood he be which this ensue history shall present unto you this illustrious Henry have give proof of his valour against the infidel at devise e e see dam. a go de Aethiop mor. barrius dec. 1. l. 1. Osor. reb. Eman. l. 1. Maffaeus hist. ind. l. 1. with himself how he be governor of the military order of JESUS CHRIST former institute and endow to maintain war against the moor already expel out of Portugal may advance the honour of his name and order in conquest which other have not yet attempt and therefore in discovery of country yet unknown to this end he spend his life in single estate and in the study of the mathematics for which purpose he choose the clear air of cape s. Vincent that there he may better intend his mathematical theory the practic thereof in instrument and the use in send out ship at his own charge to discover remote part whereof he have both hear by enquiry of captive take at and conceive by his own study and reason for beside that of Macham ancient history give some light to the studious in the f f p. pilg. l. 7. c. 12. @. 2. report of Menelaus Hanno eudoxus and other that the atlantike and indian sea have concourse the one yield passage to the other or rather be one continue ocean he also from Maiorca cause one master james a man skilful in navigation and in card and sea instrument to be bring into Portugal there at his charge as it be to erect a school of marinership and to instruct his countryman in that mystery the first ship which he send discover no further than cape Bogiador 180. mile beyond cape g g of which their proverb be he which shall pass the cape of shall turn again or else be go non the before of the spanish navigation beyond which they dare not pass because of the lofty break of the surge cause by the cape extension far into the sea not dare such be then the infancy of navigation to avoid the same to put further off into the sea lest they may hap to lose themselves if they lose the sight of land that which art dare not tempest compel in the next bark send for discovery which with distress of wether drive into sea out of the mariner knowledge happy encounter that island which they hereupon name Porto h h Porto for that it be their haven and santo for that it be find on the day of all saint santo and without further coast the shore of Africa return home with the news and desire of licence to people it so well do they like of the air soil and gentle condition of the native the prince according send three ship two of which he commit to John consalvo Zarco and Tristan Vaz the former discoverer the three to Bartholomew Perestrello who with seed and plant carry thither a i i coney strange multiply coney great with young which light her burden by the way and together with they put forth so multiply in two year that they grow weary of all their labour destroy by those coney whereupon Perestrello return the other two consalvo and Vaz will needs discover whether it be land or no which appear unto they like cloud or vapour and find it indeed the island k k the island of madera or wood discover madera or wood so call of the abundance of wood which then over-shadowed it and with the moist vapour have seem to bury it in a cloud they return with this news to the prince receive by the king consent the same island divide betwixt they the one part call funciale to consalvo and his heir the other call * * Macham a Englishman Machico to Vaz this be so name of a Englishman call Macham which have before arrive l l ant. Galuano an. do. 1344. there by tempest and bury therein a woman who he love with a memorial thereof engrave on the stone of her tomb after which with a boat make of one tree he pass to the coast of Barbary without sail or oar and be present to the king for a wonder be by he send to the king of Castille in the year 1420. begin that m m ^ar dec. ^ l. 1. c. 3. plantation and the thick tree be by consalvo set on fire continue burn seven year which destruction of wood have cause since as great want the prince cause sugar cane to be carry from Sicilia thither and man skilful of that n n madera sugar art whereof the increase have be such that in some year the five part which the prince reserve to his military order have amount to above threescore thousand arrobe every arrobe be five and twenty pound grow only in one place little more than nine mile compass to Perestrello o o Sant^ people he give Porto santo on condition to people it which hardly he can do for the coney whereof in one little i^let at one time be kill three thousand twelve year have pass since the prince have begin this enterprise before cape Baiadore can be pass such be the p p difficulty pretend to stay the prince from discover further conceit of tempestuous sea strong current whirlpool which will swallow ship beyond that cape yea they add that the land be not fit for habitation but like the sandy desert of Libya much do they murmur that the nature of the land be exhaust in discovery which before wise and provident king will have undertake have there be likelihood of success who yet content themselves with the know world and seek not a torrid zone unfit for human dwell these cost may with less danger have be bestow in the barren part of the kingdom at home without sea-peril these murmur I recite as always attend and preoccupate great action and to show the poor prenticeship which navigation then serve that it may attain that freedom which the next age bring forth the patient prince endure these exception with quarrel at the victual money and man spend in a service so unserviceable and needless so dangerous so hurtful and so what every bark tongue can allege nor can the apparent profit of madera and Porto santo stop their mouth his man also which he send forth prey on the coast of Barbary and take slave which help bare charge but one of his servant name q q baiadore first pass Gilianes see the prince discontent that they go no further adventure that herculean labour as it then seem and pass that turne-againe or baiadore cape with some proof of the plant report of the sea passable and commendation of the air and soil in those part this happen an. 1433. the next year anton. consalvo pierce forty mile further and find the country inhabit nor can much more be effect till the year 1441. when Nugno Tristan discover r r cape blanco cape blanco and take some prisoner after which prince Henry obtain s s pope donation as security against foreiner and a incentive to the vulgar according to the conceit of those time of pope Martin the five a perpetual donation to the crown of Portugal of whatsoever shall be discover from cape Baiadore to the east indies inclusive and indulgence plenary for the soul of all such as shall perish in that conquest which the succeed pope Eugenius Nicholas and sixtus confirm at the instance of king Alphonsus and his son John at the next t t 1443. return they trade with the negro for exchange of their man for which they have gold and other slave whereupon they call the place the golden river and pass further to the isle of argin and Garze gold make a recantation of former murmur and now the prince be extol yea u u 1444. now the inhabitant of lagos capitulate with the prince to set forth carueile at their own charge which take many captive the year 1445. Denis fernandez pass the river 10 10 Sanaga and cape Verde Sanaga which divide the Azenegui from those of Guinea call gialof and discover also cape Verde other discovery successive follow in which some have make slave of friend the prince make the author apparel and send they back at their own charge to the canary whence they have steal they these y y canary ant. Galuano Macham first discoverer of madera and the canary canary by relation of Macham the Englishman aforesaid become know to the french and spaniard and betancor which hold three of they in possession compound for they with prince Henry but the Spaniard challenge they as conquer by that Frenchman through the aid of Cast^le under which crown they now be after many chop and change but the prince never give over his endeavour of discovery till he discover the celestial jerusalem which z z prince henry his death happen the thirteen of November 1463. three and forty year after madera have be descry in all which time his travel succeed no further then from Baiadore to Sierra Liona one thousand one hundred and ten mile space in near fifty year continue care and cost so hard a thing be it to discover a argument of patience to our modern discoverer which be ready to murmur and almost to mutiny if new world drop not into their mouth at the first voyage a little before his death the land of * * land of cape Verde d^scou^red d. Iso^^ cape Verde be discover by Antonio Nolle a genuois license by the prince on may even be maio find and on the next day two other call also of the time one Philip and the other jacob or jago which be first people in his time * * Terceras discover or a^ores or flemish land also be discover the Terceras by certain Fleming sail to Lisbon which first begin to be people an. 1449. king Alphonsus have little leisure for further discovery farm the same to Fernand gomez a citizen of Lisbon for five year space with condition every year to discover three hundred mile to begin from Sierra Liona and so to proceed along the coast. he discover * * mina mina by Santaren and scovare his captain and after that to cape s. Catarine on the south side of the line in that time be also discover the island of Fernand Po the land also of s. Thomas s. Matthew Annobon and the name of the discoverer be unknown @. 3 of king JOHN the second his discovery and advancement of the art of navigation king John the second have some experiment of the profit of Guinea which king Alphonso have bestow on he for his princely maintenance can not now by the objection of the length of the way unholesomenesse of the country expense of and the like be detain by his counsellor but in the year 1481. he send a fleet of ten * * one of the captain be a Englishman call Diego or james Ruiz caravel under the command of Diego Dazambuia to build the castle of s. George mina which in the year 1486. he dignify with the privilege of a city in the church thereof be ordain a perpetual soule-priest for prince Henry aforesaid and three year after that castle be build he add to his regal title lord of Guinea Caramansa the lord of the country will have hinder that building and the people which worship the stone and rock mutine but the pope gift with their strength gift cunning and some revenge prevail the king command that stone cross or pillar with the Portugal arm stone cross or pillar erect in place discover shall be set up in convenient place express the time and author of such discovery so do Diego can 1484. on the bank of the river Zaire in the first discovery of the kingdom of a a Zaire and congo congo the king whereof as also the king of benin desire priest and baptism and in his next return two other have discover six hundred mile and in both his voyage 1125. mile from cape Catarine further on the coast. by the ambassador of the king of benin which be not far from mina the king of Portugal understand of the b b news from benin of presbyter John abassine common call Prester John by they Ogane who vassal the king of benin then be none be c c king of benin tributary to he acknowledge lawful prince till he have send his ambassador to the say Ogane and have receive from he a cross to wear about his neck in token of his admission hereupon king John send both d d Enquirie for he by sea and land by sea and land to inquire both of the indies and of this great negus or Ogane by sea two pinnace of fifty ton apiece under the conduct of Bartholomew diaz with a little victual bark in August 1486. he set certain negro on shore in diverse place which have be before carry into Portugal and well use that among those savage they may relate the Portugal civility and greatness carry also with they some show thereof in apparel and other thing give they and to make know if it be possible his desire to find by his discovery mean of acquaintance with Prester John he give name to place discover and erect pillar or cross of stone as be say the last in the i will call hereof the cross where his people with much disquiet urge his return allege their victual spend and the loss of their victual bark yet after consultation he proceed so far that he first discover the famous cape which for his manifold trouble he term cabo Tormentoso or the tempestuous cape but king John hope thence to discover the indies name it at his return the e e cabo Tormentoso or of good hope first discover cape of good hope where he place another pillar of stone call s. Philip as the other be term s. George in the river of Zaire s. Augustine in the cape thereof so term and likewise the rest he return in December 1487. sixteen month and seventeen day after his set out have discover a thousand and fifty mile of coast. he find by the way his victualler wherein he have leave nine man of which three only be leave alive f f death cause by sudden joy the like happen to a Englishman leave 14. month in s. Helena one of which Fernand Colazzo die with sudden joy of this fight nine month after the loss of each other by land the king have send some by the way of jerusalem to pass with the abassine pilgrim which yet for want of the arabic tongue return whereupon he send Peter g g Peter covilian first discoverer of Prester John and of the indies and Sofala covilian well skill therein and with he Alphonso in May 1487. which go to Alexandria thence to cairo and thence with certain moor to aden from whence go to seek a passage to Prester John but die at cairo covilian from aden near the strait of the red sea unbark himself for cananor and thence to Calicut and Goa in the east indies from whence he return unto Africa near the mine of Sofala and after that to cairo with purpose of return into Portugal but the king have send by two spanish jew rabbi Abraham and r. joseph the late of which have be at bagdad and have acquaint the king with the trade at Ormus and from thence have pass to Aleppo and Damascus and be now send back to covilian that by the one a answer may be bring what he have do with charge not to desist till he have be with the abassine to who he employ he in embassage the other to go to Ormus and inform himself of the affa^res of those part by joseph covilian write to the king and to encourage his navigation send he a map of his discovery in India and on the african coast. he pierce after this to the court of Alexander the abassine who kind entertain he but soon after die neither will his successor permit that Ulysses to return a man of many language Francis Aluares and much useful for his experience in the world but to Francis Aluares which accompany Roderike de lima in a embassage thither almost thirty year after he relate the sum of his travel many other worthy act be perform by king John in seek to reduce some of these wild people both in Guinea and congo to holy baptism and christian religion not so pertinent to this our purpose but this be the further of his discovery he have omit a opportunity offer by Columbus who in his first return from the indies with his new indian he see in march 1493. but occasion head in the hinder part be bald the Spaniard have before fasten on her fore-locke yet do navigation owe as much to this prince as to any rule of astronomy first apply to navigation who have employ Roderigo and joseph his jewish physician cunning mathematician of that time with Martin Bohemus the scholar of John Regius to devise what help they can for the mariner in their sail through unknown sea where neither star as unknown nor land be out of ken can guide they these first after long study apply the astrolabe before use only by astronomer to marine use and devise the table of declination astrolabe and table of declination to find out the latitude of place and how to direct their course which be afterward by the knowledge of the variation exceed further whereby the mariner art first begin to free itself from the rudeness of former time and in these navigation of Canus and Dias as those also of Columbus to prepare a way to open our eye in these part to see a new world and there in those to see a new heaven by evangelicall light whereof a little mislead glimpse they have already a earnest as we hope of more and more perfect by God grace in due time to be reveal @. 4 of the conjecture touch a new world by CHRISTOPHER Colon or Columbus and his manifold difficulty therein and unto Portugal be Spain behold for Columbus and Columbus also for his skill whereby the columbian so fitly name than american world be discover this Columbus or Colombo by the spaniard for easy pronunciation term Colon be bear some say at Sarona some at other in Cicurco in the territory of Genua Herera dec. 1. l. 1. c. 7. Gomara hist. gen. c. 14. see Ede^s preface to pet. mart. dec. of a ancient house of great reputation in the empire of Otho the second who charter to the family of the be yet extant but now almost antiquate rot and ruin with antiquity he begin to embrace the sea and use navigation in his childhood and trade many year into Syria and other part of the east and become also a maker of card for the Sea the fame of the Portugal navigation bring he thither to learn the coast of Africa and with their skill to amend his card and withal his fortune there he marry a wife Philippe de Perestrello by who he have his son james and trade the coast of Guinea some skill it be manifest he have in the latin tongue and be very studious of the mathematics be also in his religion according to that knowledge he have very devout Botero rel. vn. 4. l. 2. frequent in prayer observant of fast temperate in diet modest in attire grave courteous in behaviour abstinent of oath and abhominate blasphemy such a one do God make he before he will make he a discoverer and as the psalmist sing of heavenly ps. 25. it be true also in earthly mystery the secret of the lord be with they that fear he and the meek he will guide in judgement which easy show the cause why no better success have follow some man endeavour who go forth with high swell sail fill with puff of pride and blast of arrogance addict themselves to swear curse and other resolute dissoluteness as if they seek discovery in the infernal region and acquaintance with those legion of hell rather than to discover land and recover infidel to internal peace by the eternal gospel either perish at sea or return with the gain of loss and shame in stead of glory our Christopher Columbus be such in deed as in name carry Christ in his heart and dovelike lovely carriage in conversation he be report by Gomara Mariana and other to have be first move to this discovery by a pilot which have be before by distress of wether drive upon the land of America Herera dec. 1. l. 1. Ouiedo l. 2. which the most judicious spaniard either omit or deny Benzo and Ramusio think it a trick of spanish envy derogate from the worth of a italian but the reason more probable be his pierce wit judicious observation of occurrent learn in the mathematics and the special instinct of divine providence without which no human patience can have sustain such magnanimous endeavour so long contemn so much so various condemn experience of the portugal among who he dwell Columbo ground for discovery of the new world have teach he the vanity of antiquity touch the antipode the torrid zone not habitable and that the sea be every way navigable be instruct he of the roundness of this inferior globe which in the moon eclipse be visible and the proportionableness of the earth to the water that as much dry land may be as well on that as on this side the line neither be it likely that so huge a quantity of the globe shall be cover with water which be make principal for the use and habitation of man or that this globe be not equal poise on both side that centre which be one to it and the water or that there shall be such huge land if they be land in this old age of the world no^ inhabit by man gen. 1.28 and 9 ^ who blessing from the creator be to fill or replenish the earth renew again after the flood or that the indies in the east may not in the earth globositie be as ready find out by the west follow the sun in his daily journey which with all his night-watch of star be as unlike to be there appoint a continual course and circular race for the sea or desert land experiment have also teach he both by relation of the portugal in their long voyage and in his own on the west of Spain that the western wind hold a constant course yearly and that also far off at sea can not but arise from some land further westward than any yet know and Martin Vincent a mariner which use the Azores or have tell he that he be once carry four hundred and fifty league to the west of cape s. Vincent and there take up a piece of wood or timber wrought by man hand and that Her dec. 1. l. 1. c. 2. as far as he can judge without iron which he imagine have come from some western island Pedro correa which have marry his wife sister have likewise signify to he that at puerto santo he have see the like piece drive thither by the western wind wrought in the same fashion and beside he have see great cane which in each knot may contain above two gallon of water which he also send to he to see which be unlikely to grow in the know part of the west and have read of such grow in India he suppose that some long and violent western wind have bring they thither from thence the inhabitant also of the Azores have tell he that strong west and northwest wind have bring by sea upon and fayal certain pine tree two dead man also on the coast of flores with large face than be usual in these part and of other favour and two canoas another time drive also by the wind. Antonio leme of madera have relate that be carry in his Caruile far westward he have seem to see three land and another of that island have sue to the king of Portugal in the year 1484. for licence to discover certain land which he swear he have see every year over-against the Azores Diego Velazques have forty year before be carry far into the west and there observe the sea and wind such as if the land be not far off as he affirm to Columbus and another mariner tell he of land he have see far west from Ireland which be suppose to be newfoundland Petro de Velasco have signify the like in his go for Ireland and Vincent diaz a Portugal pilot have seem to himself in his return from Guinea to see a island in the height of madera for which also search be after make but no discovery these thing argue his laborious industry and diligent enquiry his read of Marco polo and other journal that I mention not the ancient do not a little animate he as may appear in his enquiry for Zipango mention by polo suppose now to be Japan and name hispaniola Ophir think or seem to think that he have find out the east indies why America call India and for that cause be this new world call the indies also with distinction of west and this be his main argument to such prince as he seek to patronize this his discovery the riches of the east indies promise by a western navigation and herein his resolution be admirable that howsoever some deride as folly other reject as impossible his suit yet he never desist he first propound it to his countryman the genuois and find that a prophet find no profit at home he second it in Portugal where he dwell and be marry at Lisbon and have learn most of his art and intelligence i. di Barros in his dec. 1. lib. 3. cap. 11. say that he be not believe at all and license by the king to go for Cast^le but we have follow Herera in the most part of this relation confirm therein also by Martin Bohemus the mathematician but John the second do not second his desire as adjudge vain by Roderigo and joseph the jew before mention with other committee which yet move with his reason counsel the king secret to send a carvel under colour of a voyage to cape Verde to make this discovery wherein cross with foul wether they effect nothing this make he out of love with Portugal and to send his brother Bartholomew to king Henry the seven of England with the same suit who fall into the hand of pirate be force to sustain himself with make sea-card and so long defer for want of suitable suit to make his suit and petition to the king that when it be grant and his brother send for he have speed before in Spain thither have he himself repair in the year 1484. secret and by sea for fear of the portugal which have before delude he Ferdinand and Isabel the catholic prince be then busy in war against the moor of Granada but have spend five year in pursue his suit his answer from the court be that the king treasure be so exhaust in the conquest of Granada that they can not entertain new expense but those be end they will better examine his intent and give he dispatch much be Columbus aggrieve at this answer yet fail not his constancy he cause his desire to be make know to the duke of Medina and of Medina sidonia but with effect like the former twice he purpose as his son Fernand Columbus write to leave Spain and go himself into France or England whence he have not hear of his brother Bartholomew but divine providence otherwise dispose and he which hitherto have not find credit to advance nay scarce mean but in great part by the bounty of Alphonso the king chief auditor to sustain he obtain the letter of Friar ivan Perez de marchena to Friar Fern^ndo the queen confessor and at last by the mediation of the cardinal Mendoza archbishop of Toledo procure audience and grant of the catholic king queen Isabel take order with Lewis of s. Angelo to empawne some of her jewel to the value of two thousand ducat for his expedition which yet he lend out of his purse so low be the treasure of Spain when God offer they the western treasury magnanimous Columbus not break with poverty at home with affront and discountenance abroad with imputation of impotent almost impudent at least as imprudent as importunate fancy of impossible impassable navigation by unknown sea to unknown land not amate so far as to abate his condition of no small nature to he and his heir as if he have already effect his design not desire any reward except he find somewhat answerable to his promise nor less then than the office and title of admiral by sea and viceroy on land with the ten of the profit through all the sea land or firm land to himself during his life and after to his heir and successor whatsoever he shall discover which say Ouiedo he enjoy while he live ouy hist. deal ind. l. 2. c. 5. Herera dec. 1. l. 1. c. 10. his son admiral james or don Diego Colombo after he and his nephew don Lewis Colombo the admiral at this day this composition be make betwixt he and the catholic king in the field before Granada then besiege in the midst of the army the seventeen of April 1492. as if God will reward their endeavour and expense in root out the moor which have possess those part of Spain above seven hundred year with this new discovery so profitable to the spanish crown @. v. columbus his first voyage and improvement therein of the mariner Art on Friday the three of August the same year he set forth with his three caravel from palos himself in the admiral call * * Ouiedo have Gallega Santa Maria the second pinta in which be captain Martin Alonso Pincon and his brother Francisco martinez Pincon master the three ninna who captain and master be Vincent Pincon which find half that eight part of the expense which Colombo have covenant to contribute mart. dec. and Ouiedo there be in all some say a hundred and twenty man Herera have but ninety on the four of August the rudder of the pinta prove loose which they fasten as well as they can with cord but soon after with force of wind break and they be all compel to strike sail which in such a voyage as this they know not whither can not but be troublesome and seem also ominous on the eleven of August they have sight of the canary where have refresh themselves in the i will Gomera they haste thence the six of September for fear of the portugal who have set forth three carvel to take they the seven they lose sight of land with sigh and tear many of they fear never to see it again who don Christopher comfort as well as he can with promise of rich discovery and sail that day * * when he have run above 700. he reckon less than 600. nor their pilot much more deceive by the wind always large eighteen league he reckon no more than fifteen diminish his account to make they seem near home on the fourteen of September he first observe the variation of the compass which no man till then have consider which every day appear more evident on Sunday the sixteenth they see piece of * * this grass they call Salgazzi or Saragasso float in diverse place this and ^hat way which at first terrify they as if they have encounter sink land grass or herb on the water of a pale green colour and on one of they a grasshopper alive and some sign of land approach make some believe they have see it on the nineteen they see a alcatraz a kind of sea-fowle and the next day two which with other grass every day increase increase their hope of land save that the grass sometime hinder their sail all this while he have the wind in poop which on the two and twenty of Septembe^ come cross at south-west and the spaniard murmur that the former wind which have be large to bring they hither will never permit their return to Spain and now begin to blame the king and queen which have listen to that bold italian resolve to pursue the voyage (@) further the admiral use all his wit to the contrary in vain mix with (...) prayer threat and menace allege that he think to make himself a great lord with the price of their life and that they have already do their duty sail further from land then ever any have nor ought they to be guilty of their own death proceed they know not whither till victual fail they which already will scarce hold out their return nor yet the carvel be already spend and faulty with other like quarrel threaten to throw he into the sea if he will not return and if he be so desperate to perish they will save themselves Colombo sweet calm those tempest with gentle word and rich promise (@) as be think before agree upon talk with Vin^ent Pincon sudden cry land land on the five and twenty of September which fill they with cheer and hope which yet prove but cloud and therefore howsoever the mutinous tempest be for a time still yet on the second of October that storm revive with such force that he have prolong as far as he may with likely sign daily of land at last he indent with they for three day this they promise to try but not one hour long say all be lie which he have promise the first of these day he perceive by the sunset that land be near and command that they shall abate their sail in the night in which night he spy Light two hour after midnight rodrigo de triana descry land on the eleven of October rod. de triana first see land 1492. which when it be day they see to be a island of fifteen league compass plain and woody with a great pool of fresh water the naked people wonder on the shore think their ship be live creature they go on land and term it San Saluador or San Saluador by the inhabitant call Guanahani one of the isle Lucayos nine hundred and fifty league from the canary and have say a on his knee with tear in his eye Colombo take possession in name of the catholic king Ferdinand and Isabel in presence of rodrigo notary the spaniard also acknowledge he for viceroy the people wonder at the beard whiteness clothe of the spaniard who give they colour cap glassebead and other toy and when they depart the naked native follow some in canoas a Conoa be a boat make of one tree which they wrought into that form with sharp stone and help of fire some carry but one and some above 40. or 50. man in they s. Maria conception fernandina Isabel other swim after they they be all naked their hair find up their stature mean body well form colour like those of the canary olive paint some black other of other colour in part or all over the body as each best fancy they know not the use of iron or weapon but lay their hand on the edge of the Sword they see no live creature but parrot among they they truck for Cotton yarn and have ring of gold in their nostril which they say that it come from the south where they have a king rich therein they take the spaniard to be man come from heaven on the fifteen of October he go seven league thence to another island which he call Santa Maria la concetion the seventeen to fernandina where the woman with cotton short coat from the navel to the mid thigh cover their nakedness the four island he call Isabel and thereof as of all the former take solemn possession he will not suffer any of his company to take aught from the native in any place thence he pass to Cuba and go on land think it to be Zipango and some indian which he carry with he signify that there be gold and pearl Cuba he send two spaniard with two indian to search the country which find a town of fifty house of about a thousand person for a whole kindred or lineage dwell together in one house where the people kiss their hand and foot think they heavenly wight give they bread of a root and perfume they with certain herb burn they see store of Cotton grow of itself and strange kind of bird and tree the spaniard have most mind to the gold which they see in their nose of which they question these indian who answer cubanacan that be in the midst of Cuba which the spaniard understand of the can of cathay mention by Marco polo in hope of singular success Martin Alonso Pincon leave the admiral who also leave Cuba which he call juana in honour of the prince of Castille to seek that island which he name hispaniola before Hayti for have demand of Zipango in Cuba the indian think he have mean Cibao which be one of the rich mine of hispaniola direct he thither here give a woman which they take meat drink and clothes he send with she some of his indian which report much good of the spaniard whence grow much acquaintance betwixt they and after with their king Guacanagari which entreat Colombo to come aland here he lose his principal ship and erect a fort call the nativity a fort. and understand of the golden province of this island and have good remonstrance of his golden hope and hap also in exchange for trifle with some indian take with he leave eight and thirty spaniard in his new fort after reconciliation with Pincon the indian which carry the admiral letter to he attribute their mutual understanding to some deity therein he prepare for his return before this he charge they to behave themselves with all due respect to Guacanagari and to his indian without wrong to any and on Friday the four of january in the year 1493. after their account sail from the port of nativity he see three mermaid leap a good height out of the sea creature as he affirm not so fair as they be paint three mermaid somewhat resemble man in the face of which at other time he say he have see on the coast of Guinea in his return he discover a great part of the coast of hispaniola and give name to cape and harbour in this voyage Colombo be say first to have teach the spaniard in their sail to observe the sun and pole in their navigation which they before know not observe by his skill in astronomy that the moon be in conjunction with Mercury and opposition with jupiter and the sun also in like opposition to produce great wind he make some stay and have new commerce with other indian where accidental happen the first quarrel and skirmish betwixt the spaniard and native but soon after their king send they his crown of gold and much victual and give they further intelligence from this gulf Flechas or of arrow on Wednesday the seventeen of januarie he depart and make homeward in which it be observe that as in their way to the indies have the wind large they reckon far few league than they sail so in their return they account more the admiral reckon be a hundred and fifty less than they pilgrimage vow a tedious tempest befall they in February wherein other remedy seem to fail they vow pilgrimage to our lady by lot the first fall on the admiral himself to guadalupe the second to Loretto on Pedro de Villa and a three vow be common to all that they shall at the first church of our lady they come to make procession in their shirt with other like devote devotion how unlike be this to that of the psalmist in like storm happen to they that see the wonder of the lord in the deep ps. 107.24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31. for the lord command and raise the stormy wind which lift up the wave thereof they mount up to the heaven they go down again to the depth their soul be melt because of trouble they reel too and fro and stagger like a drunken man and be at their wit end then they cry unto the lord in their trouble and he bring they out of their distress he make the storm a calm so that the wave thereof be still then be they glad because they be quiet so he bring they unto their desire haven o that man will praise the lord not go on pilgrimage to our lady for his goodness and for his wonderful work to the child of man etc. the psalmist in like case be to distress mariner a better admiral than Colombo who devotion herein fail in the object providence lest the voyage shall miscarry yet his diligence and wisdom in this be to be commend that fear shipwreck lest this famous discovery may also be lose he write the whole discourse in parchment and fold it in a cerecloth he put it in a barrel or hogshead which he throw into the Sea but on the fifteen of February they see land be s. Mary island one of the Azores where go on shore to fulfil their vow pilgrimage the governor come upon they and after many word tell they that he have order from the king of Portugal to take they but make a escape another storm take they and cause another pilgrimage to be vow to our lady of Cinta the lot fall on the admiral and thus be he force to Lisbon bar. dec. 1. l. 3. c. 11. where after much contest with the portugal the king send for he be now much grieve for omit such a opportunity yet use he kind although there be that offer to kill Colombo before he shall carry news of this discovery to Spain the rather for his boldness object to the king his neglect but the gentle king reprove these cruel gentleman and after kind usage license he to depart true it be that the Portugal nation have in their book and write seek to obscure this exploit of Columbus attribute it rather to a dream of Zipango out of Marco polo and his confident glorious nature second by success unlooked for for which as idle imagination their king have refuse his offer than any such excellency as the castilian writer ascribe to he enuy. but envy be the dark shadow that always follow he at the heel which walk in the bright sunne-light of virtue and high attempt even the spaniard themselves not only by the tale of the pilot before mention but by light esteem of his worth have show a contemptible contempt of he some of who object to himself the easiness of this discovery as he sit at table he pray to make a egg which then he give they to stand on end which when they can not he bruise the shell and make the end flat make it to stand thereon thereby insinuate how easy it be for they to do that which they have see and learn of he yea the pincon his chief associate by like spirit of proud envy malign he one of which have after the island discover forsake he as you have hear which he be force to dissemble and be reconcile the most of his company be of kin to the pincon or at least inhabitant of palos with they they also enter suit with Colombo and arrogate to their own valour this discovery which Columbus will after so many day not find land have forsake but be proceed in by their resolution and in his three voyage 1949. Ximenius raise a rebellion in those part and effect that Bovadilla be send governor into hispaniola who send the admiral with his brother prisoners all the way of his long discovery into Spain for which he have so adventure these iron chain can cold envy for so much gold for such a world render unto that worthy of men. but the catholic king of high spirit for envy the first sin we read of in the devil and which make he a devil as Tertullian and cyprian in their tractate of patience have observe the first also in the firstborn man which make he a incarnate devil and murderer be but the sink^ and settle dregs of baseness which want proper worth malign it to other these much honour Columbus as well they may and confirm his privilege anew beside many special grace do he as do also the cardinal of Spain and still be do by their ingenuous writer Ouiedo Herera and other this story at large I have set down that discoverer may by this example learn to digest great storm at home than the boisterous element in their tempestuous conspiracy yield they and to know that pusillanimity and impatience be the unfit attempter in the World the spaniard other discovery in the american part for so be they call of americus vesputius a florentine who accompany Colombo in his first voyage and after discover a great part of the continent than the admiral have as Cabota in that do more than they both I listen not to pursue easy it be to know that gold barter for glass bead needle and other toy will be strong active and strange attractive to new discovery his conquest of Mexico and pizarro his Peru be not comparable to their master masterpiece who find the new world to find they work before Colombo go his second voyage he leave a card contain the description of the whole navigation and discovery in Spain with the king and his son page to the prince @. 5 of the pope bull make to Castille touch the new World the catholic king present after that first discovery give account thereof to the pope which then be Alexander the six before name Borgia a Spaniard of Valentia by his ambassador and desire his favour for the crown of Castille and lion in the grant of these new discovery make or to be make for long since have the pope challenge Christ right over the christian World Adrian the four in his letter of Ireland to king Henry the second affirm that all land under the sun of righteousness belong to papal disposition this second Alexander in God right claim all the world for the conversion forsooth to the faith the temporal estate of the whole world be by his parasite usual put under that triple diadem so they think or so will seem to think in regard of papal grant before to the crown of Portugal whence be like to arise some grievance and impediment to their affair as pretend a monopoly by former dispensation in indian discovery and therefore seek this favour of that monster of man then sit in that chair this bull because it be not common I have here transcribe the same english alexander bishop the servant of the servant of GOD this be english and publish by r. Eden 1577 to our most dear belove son in CHRIST king Ferdinando and to our dear belove daughter in CHRIST Elizabeth queen of Castille legion Arragon Sicily and Granata most noble prince greeting and apostolical benediction among other work acceptable to the divine majesty and according to our heart desire this certain be the chief that the catholic faith and christian religion special in this our time may in all place be exalt amplify and enlarge whereby the health of soul may be procure and the barbarous nation subdue and bring to the Faith and therefore whereas by the favour of God clemency although not without equal desert we be call to this holy seat of PETER and understand you to be true catholic prince as we have ever know you and as your noble and worthy fact have declare in manner to the whole world in that with all your study diligence and industry you have spare no travail charge or peril adventure even the shed of your own blood with apply your whole mind and endeavour hereunto as your noble expedition achieve in recover the kingdom of Granata from the tyranny of the sarracen in these our day do plain declare your fact with so great glory of the divine name for the which as we think you worthy so ought we of our own free will favourable to grant you all thing whereby you may daily with more fervent mind to the honour of God and enlarge the christian empire prosecute your devout and laudable purpose most acceptable to the immortal God we be credible inform that whereas of late you be determine to seek and find certain land and firm land far remote and unknown and not heretofore find by any other to the intent to bring the inhabitant of the same to honour our redeemer and to profess the catholic faith you have hitherto be much occupy in the expugnation and recovery of the kingdom of Granata by reason whereof you can not bring your say laudable purpose to the end desire nevertheless as it have please almighty God the foresay kingdom be recover willing to accomplish your say desire you have not without great labour peril and charge appoint our well-beloved son Christopher colonus a man certes well commend as most worthy and apt for so great a matter well furnish with man and ship and other necessary to seek by the sea where hitherto no man have sail such firm land and land far remote and hitherto unknown who by God help make diligent search in the ocean sea have find certain remote land and firm land which be not heretofore find by any other in the which as be say many nation inhabit live peaceable and go naked not accustom to eat flesh and as far as your messenger can conjecture the nation inhabit the foresay land and land believe that there be one God creator in heaven and seem apt to be bring to the embrace of the catholic faith and to be endue with good manner by reason whereof we may hope that if they be well instruct they may easy be induce to receive the name of our saviour JESUS CHRIST we be further advertise that the forenamed Christopher have now build and erect a fortress with good munition in one of the foresay principal land in the which he have place a garrison of certain of the christian man that go thither with he as well to the intent to defend the same as also to search other land and firm land far remote and yet unknown we also understand that in these land and land late find be great plenty of gold and spice with diverse and many other precious thing of sundry kind and quality therefore all thing diligent consider especial the amplify and enlarge of the catholic faith as it behove catholic prince follow the example of your noble progenitor of famous memory you have determine by the favour of almighty God to subject unto you the firm land and land aforesaid and the dweller and inhabitant thereof and to bring they to the catholic Faith we great commend this your godly and laudable purpose in our lord and desirous to have the same bring to a due end and the name of our saviour to be know in those part do exhort you in our lord and by the receive of your holy baptism whereby you be find to apostolical obedience and earnest require you by the bowel of mercy of our lord JESUS CHRIST that when you intend for the zeal of the catholic faith to prosecute the say expedition to reduce the people of the foresay land and land to the christian religion you shall spare no labour at any time or be deter with any peril conceive firm hope and confidence that the omnipotent God will give good success to your godly attempt and that be authorise by the privilege of the apostolical grace you may the more free and bold take upon you the enterprise of so great a matter we of our own motion and not either at your request or at the instant petition of any other person but of our own mere liberality and certain science and by the fullness of apostolical power do give grant and assign to you your heir and successor all the firm land and land find or to be find discover or to be discover towards the west and south draw a line from the pole arctic to the pole antarctic that be from the north to the south contain in this donation whatsoever firm land or land be find or to be find towards India or towards any other part whatsoever it be be distant from or without the foresay line draw a hundred league towards the west and south from any of the land which be common call and Capo Verde all the land therefore and firm land find and to be find discover and to be discover from the say line towards the west and south such as have not actual be heretofore possess by any other christian king or prince until the day of the nativity of our lord JESV CHRIST last pass from the which begin this present year be the year of our lord a thousand four hundred ninety three when soever any such shall be find by your messenger and captain we by the authority of almighty GOD grant unto we in saint PETER and by the vicarship of JESUS CHRIST which we bear on the earth do for ever by the tenor of these present give grant assign unto you your heir and successor the king of Castille and legion all those land and land with their dominion territory city castle tower place and village with all the right and jurisdiction thereunto pertain constitute assign and depute you your heir and successor the lord thereof with full and free power authority and jurisdiction decree nevertheless by this our donation grant and assignation that from no christian prince which actual have possess the foresay land and firm land unto the day of the nativity of our lord beforesaid their right obtain to be understand hereby to be take away or that it ought to be take away furthermore we command you in the virtue of holy obedience as you have promise and as we doubt not you will do upon mere devotion and princely magnimitie to send to the say firm land and land honest virtuous and learned man such as fear God and be able to instruct the inhabitant in the catholic faith and good manner apply all their possible diligence in the premise we furthermore strait inhibit all manner of person of what state degree order or condition soever they be although of imperial and regal dignity under the pain of the sentence of excommunication which they shall incur if they do to the contrary that they in no case presume without special licence of you your heir and successor to travail for merchandise or for any other cause to the say land or land find or to be find discover or to be discover towards the west and south draw a line from the pole arctic to the pole antarctic whether the firm land and land find and to be find be situate towards India or towards any other part be distant from the line draw a hundred league towards the west from any of the land common call and Capo Verde notwithstanding constitution decree and apostolical ordinance whatsoever they be to the contrary in he from who empire dominion and all good thing do proceed trust that almighty GOD direct your enterprise if you follow your godly and laudable attempt your labour and travail herein shall in short time obtain a happy end with felicity and glory of all christian people but forasmuch as it shall be a thing of great difficulty these letter to be carry to all such place as shall be expedient we will and of like motion and knowledge do decree that whither soever the same shall be send or wheresoever they shall be receive with the subscription of a common notary thereunto require with the seal of any person constitute in ecclesiastical dignity or such as be authorize by the ecclesiastical court the same faith and credit to be give thereunto in judgement or elsewhere as shall be exhibit to these present let no man therefore whatsoever infringe or dare rash to contrary this letter of our commendation exhortation request donation grant assignation constitution deputation decree commandment inhibition and determination and if any shall presume to attempt the same let he know that he shall thereby incur the indignation of almighty GOD and his holy apostle Peter and Paul give at Rome at saint Peter in the year of the incarnation of our lord 1493. the four day of the Nones of May the first year of our popedom animadversion on the say bull of pope ALEXANDER although some deny liberty of examination and censure to historian but will have they leave all to the judgement of the reader to conclude what their own judgement shall gather out of historical premise yet because we write a a Seneca and history be not b b Cice^o only but be the school of divine providence wherein by example be always read that rule let i have like leave as almost all historian divine ecclesiastical and humane have with thanks also obtain and let the severe critic call it a digression or parenthesis or what he please so it may profit the feeble foot of such as may stumble hereat and confirm the firm and more resolve it be almost necessary in this treatise of navigation most of which be or seem thereby inhibit not to suffer this bull as butcherly in sequel as those the statute include to pass unbaited it be now the time that the antichristian kingdom be grow to the height and begin to sink under the weight of itself and the prophecy of the church restauration and reformation begin to ripen and hasten to the birth when this c c he be before c^lled Roder^cus Borgia a Spaniard of Val^n^ia Borgia ascend the papal throne still himself Alexander a name ominous to the world to the church and to themselves in some to some of they in this the total sum of mischief to all this appear in that great macedonian who be call d d Lucan and to who a e pirate charge with sea-rovings object his great world-rovings and rob this only differ that the one do little with his little ship and therefore be call a thief the other do great harm with his great army be surname great who after his great ^ and great ambition of deity with a little poison be confine to his little earth a few foot a few handful of dust leave the ptolemey and seleucidae which succeed in part of his state to exceed in cruelty to the church to the christian church such have be the pope that have name themselves alexanders thus Alexander the second the first that assume that name reject which in his baptism he have receive bring forth a schism with his papacy proceed like a Alexander in war and die in prison as some think of poison to give place to f f b^n card. bal. etc. vid. script vit Pontif. seq. PP hildebrand the true Scanderbag of the papacy the next Alexander be procreate in g g this history have many testimony of their own author see it maintain against baron by morn myst. iniq. pag 323. in fol. V^d schard schism betray Fredrick the emperor to the sultan send he his picture to that end and after degenerate from the macedonian Alexander humanity tread on his neck in the temple of s. mark at Venice and profane scripture to that diabolical design first make the law of canonization and then with devout Bernard canonize t. Becket h h he maintain the pope po^e^ against (@) k^ng and the clergy immunity which have commit above a hundred murder as Neubrig l. 2. then live testify from the king and just therefore by divine providence though with human injustice be murder himself a angel of light and of darkness yoke together this be murder or martyr in the devil quarrel have at once beyond all Alexander pomp the king of England i i king henry the second hold the bridle to the pope legate twice and suffer many stripe on his naked flesh with rod and France attend on foot and hold his bridle the next Alexander begin with excommunication persecution war against manfred king of Sicilia which to maintain he use extortion and exaction such as have never be hear of k the cry whereof ascend to God the lord of revenge that the bishop of London protest he will rather loose his head the bishop of York write to he to feed not to shear to flay to eviscerate to devour the sheep like a hungry wolf as Matthew Paris who then live record the ten which be grant for the holy land and the prize of absolution for homicide treason sodomy witchcraft perjury and all crime he thus employ and after that public pestilence of the publish he die of thought event not second his alexander-like design the five Alexander l l see theod. Ni^m whi^h live with he his three last chapter of the three book be produce in the great schism that ever befall the papacy he depose Ladislaus king of Naples and give that sceptre to Lewis the duke of Anjou as also the kingdom of the roman from rupertus to Wenceslaus guide in all thing by Balthasar full of fierceness and secularity he die of poison give he by his physician at the procurement of Balthasar his successor leave a year of pestilence and famine to infest the World but this six Alexander be heir of all their vice who have procreate many bastard procure the papacy m m whence those verse by simony some add diabolical * * bal. h. mar. Euseb. cap. contract to advance they and himself with unjust justice miserable plague those simoniacal n n see Onuph in vit. al. 6. cardinal which for price and promise have exalt this plaguesore into that chair of pestilence where he act the monster of man or be indeed rather a incarrate devil Bellarmine o o bel. r. pont. in praefat. himself a man not of the tender forehead blush at his name though ashamed of that shame he return with great impudence and from the immanity of this and some other pope will have we more admire the steadfastness of that romish rock which have sustain such portentous beast as a argument of divine providence that the gate of hell shall never prevail and what else but vice be the gate of hell against it in vain do we heretic labour to set forth the vice of some pope which themselves confess but so that the glory of that see be thereby exceed amplify a exceed amplification of Bellarmine his wit p p Onuph in vit. al. 6. and so Guic. l. 1. and figlivol vid. jou. etc. Onuphrius Guicciardine Volaterrane and other of their own seem amaze at this man monstrosity though vice be no rarity in pope and of the ordinary one one q q Guic. l. 16. say that he be account a good pope not who virtue equal his vice and hold some counterpoise as Comminaeus of a prince but who wickedness do not exceed that of other man to omit the deluge of water of famine plague war which overflow the city and all Italy in his time Rome be by the impunity of assassinate make a very * butchery within it no go by night nor without by day and for his personal virtue theological and cardinal his love be unnatural lust to his daughter and for his son his faith perfidy to all which trust he Gemes the turkish emperor brother for turkish r r 200000 ducat and Christ seamelesse coat jon. hist. l. 2 gold he betray and with a white sweet linger poison mix with his wine murder his reconcile enemy he fraudulent betray to massacre to his guest invite to his table he give poison potion in exchange of their great riches in one of which banquet himself at unaware by a mistake cup be pay in his own coin the son also pledge the father but to the world great scourge by the benefit of youth and physic recover his hope be to make his son Caesar Borgia which have slay his brother and be say to communicate with his father in his * * Pontanus of Lucretia the pope daughter sister bed the Caesar of the church state or patrimony his fortitude be dare to any mischief in prudence he be not wise as a serpent to prevent but a wise serpent to invent evil with his temperance I will not further distemper your patience but consider his justice in this donation of he know not who to he know not what misery and if it seem impertinent to have say so much of the person let such know that I have do it to show that here be suitable to the lettuce and among all the pope of late time the devil which be a murderer from the beginning can not have find a fit vicar whether we regard the bloody execution and depopulation that ensue wherein both Alexander the Macedon and Alexander pope and if there be any Alexander devil be by the event of this bull surmount all or whether that the devil foresee by the prophecy of Babylon fall confirm also with the s s Volater and bal. fall of the angel in this pope time from the top of s. Angelo that his kingdom will soon decline raise up this Alexander to be another Alexander a conqueror of another world by his spiritual weapon under a seem conversion to christianity to make a t conversion of another ciceronian etymology a sweep of a world of man out of the world together and wipe u u 2. reg. 21.13 they as a man wipe a dish wipe it and turn it upside down this first and in the remainder a conversion to such a christianity as shall make they 10 10 mat. 23. twofold more the child of hell which be by themselves y y see the last chapter of my pilgrimage lib. 9 testify of the indian or whether the pope his vicar as honest as that z z lu. 16. steward in the gospel fear to be cast out of this european stewardship bethink he by give so great a part of the world whereof his master be call a a 2. cor. 4.4 the god to procure entertainment somewhere else and thereupon be so liberal of the devil peculiar this ethnic world or that in the decay of the spiritual power that genius of the papacy seek to supply it with temporal whereof the christian king be more jealous and therefore have new forge the key into sword that what his key can not unlock nay have nothing to do with as be no part of the house like the first Alexander in the gordian knot his sword may chop in asunder and give the one half to one and the other half to another once the sword have make way to the key in those part and make the farm of the pope pardon a good revenue I question not the right of the spanish crown in those part it be the fault I find in this great Ardelio the castilian industry I honour as appear in the former relation their right may for that which be actual in their possession without this bull plead discovery even before this be write the sword preseription subjection of the inhabitant long and quiet possession which howsoever the b b bar. Ius l. ^ c. 3. case be at first wherewith I meddle not must now after so long succession be acknowledge iust. I quarrel the pope only and the claim of that see herein true catholic or universal challenge even in the devil c c (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) lu. 4.5 and (@) Papa style and he as the devil vicar who by tradition challenge a right to they and by tradition that be treason disturb right and rite in they do betray the right of they by sentence censure and I know not what bull true it be that the catholic king have other reason to ask this furtherance from the pope in regard of the Portugal which have obtain former bull as be before relate as d d Neptune with the ethnike so navigation with these be propitiate with bull and challenge a monopoly of discovery in regard of other prince to who the pope censure as thunder in a dark night be in those time terrible especial in a case otherwise just where they have make discovery and take and continue possession before all other and in regard of the people and those blind leader of the blind the friar and priest who can with this bull as a bag full of wind make music to the vulgar and cause they dance over the sea in this attempt as no less holy approve by that holy father than e e 2. sam. 6. David dance before the ark the bull bellow PETRO JESV where gold and glory be real propose with conceit of heaven and merit annex can not but to mind credulous covetous and therefore willing add wind in poop and become another general wind to carry they to this new World beside in mind scrupulous touch the lawfulness of that design but acknowledge that fullness of apostolical power without examination or scruple it be almost necessary to obtain that which have it be necessary to themselves and in their own conscience have begin the lawfulness of that action they will not first have discover and possess as the bull itself intimate and afterward have demand the pope grant they will not have devour that be sanctify and set apart from their use and after the vow have inquire reason of state be evident religion of episcopal power to be reason of give just title of inheritance and that to a world to a ethnic world f f ter. beaut be not only as the mystery of religion be beyond and above but utter against and contrary to reason but from these reason of state have the romist who religion at Rome be little else but reason of state as appear in their late erect pillar and ground of truth which pill and cast the truth to the ground their g g Se^ the hist. of that council publish in english translate out of italian by m. brent which discover the particular work of that mystery council of Trent gather a sovereignty over king and kingdom and therefore whatsoever be do in this kind while their hour and the power of darkness last be set upon the last and stretch to make it a fit slipper for the pope pride-swollen foot to tread upon the neck of king and emperor as with thus Alexander serve Fredrick and thus of the second Fredrick say h h mat. Paris in hen. 3. an. 1245. innocentius then angry with the king of England and France * * yet Michael the archangel when he strive against the devil dare not blame he with curse speak jude 9 these thing he speak yea now Bellarmine be much i i 26. vid. resp E^ E^ pag. 78. amuse and amaze that his majesty shall presume to compare himself with the pope be a king of two land in a corner of the north forget that great Constantine the sun of the empire arise from this northern corner which first fill the horn of the pope mitre with secular light and by remove the imperial seat make way for that star to become a full moon which though a long time as the moon while the sun shine make no great show the imperial greatness continue yet in the eclipse of the empire or that irrecoverable night rather by barbarian deluge these also God raise out of the contemn north to tread under foot the roman pride seem to become in that night of darkness lady of the light indeed a light lady which dazzle with selfe-reflecting her borrow beam challenge to be the sun and glory to have procreate this late moon in translate and erect the western empire which and all other christian kingdom must no long shine than they admit the light of the papal sun otherwise their opposition must be a conjunction and thence thunder-striken like young Phaeton they must loose their light and life and empire together become as opacous earth so some conceit the moon yea as dark hell of heresy for not acknowledge the pope an. 1245. let this contemner of the north remember that this northern corner be once k their paradise and garden of pleasure where the pope himself l l a. 1245. will have personal for a time reside and be reject even in his son day who Bellarmine say untrue m m vid. ^esp apol. R.P. epist. el. pag. 82. vid. and t^rt t. pag. 217. resign his crown to the pope and let he remember that of the ten horn which shall hate the whore and make her desolate and naked and eat her flesh and burn she with fire some may come out of some corner of the north. the ancient alm of n n ^ fuiss^ hib. hen 2. an. 1126. pag. 29. peter-pence he call tribute and allege Ireland to be the pope gift sure we be that the pope have do their best and worst against the english right in Ireland Paul o o hist. con. Trent the four stomach the title of king without papal licence Pius the five impious depose queen Elizabeth by his bull and Gregory the thirteen intend it also to his son send force with Stukley to that purpose which the pope blessing notwithstanding perish before they come there neither need we here or there fear Balac or * * balaams counsel for peor his idolatrous priest be more to be fear then his bull Balaam their curse be blessing though sanders also play the Shemei but for that of Ireland one of his own religion have answer the cardinal who he applaud in divinity but in esteem that if the pope or his predecessor ever have right yet by his bull possession take by the english and prescription they be utter exclude he allege also beside the succession of diverse age that the roman court know well enough that q q 4. Archiep. 28. Epis^ etc. Ius belli and that voluntary submission yea supplication of the irish to king Henry for that purpose which he accept and perform their letter as he say still remain in the Vatican r r to 12. an. 1171. Baronius have testify and mention the transcript of those letter to pope Alexander adrian indeed write to king Henry who have before consult with he be a Englishman about those irish affair ask his advice and assistance be adrian's word and the whole epistle be of advice but by that epistle nothing be attempt fifteen year after king Henry offer aid to king Dermitius at his humble solicitation and by his sword not the pope key as the s s vid. ep. el. card. bel. Apa^ resp pag. 86. most learned bishop have answer the cardinal together with the submission of the irish obtain that sovereignty p p g. ^arret I.C. li. 3. c. 3. ^d lud. 13. gal. k. the same challenge may they make to France for consultation with pope Zacharie when Hilderike or Childerike be depose by the French yea what kingdom do they not find some window or postern to creep into and though these unjust steward can t t lu. 16. dig and to beg be ashamed yet herein where they have beg for u u Matth Paris an. ^155 peter-pence as Adrian in that letter of king Henry even of such beg will make a instrument to dig through and steal as some rogue which by beg obtain a alm have seize on the whole purse and rob their benefactor thus he which at first be a holy bishop after by beneficence of prince become a princely prelate in the church next by a murderer and traitor be make head and prince of the church in church-affaire 10 10 Onuph in Bonifac. 3 ecumenical pope after which by prince bounty make a prince but tributary by treason against his prince make himself his prince peer and exalt himself above all that be call God from the time of Gregory the seven have bestir he to make himself the prince of all prince * * say the pope anger with a letter o^ rob. gro^^ed a. 1253. ap. mat. par. and s^^e^bo etc. Christian and now in this Alexander a god of the world the style as be say of the devil for whereas Adrian have challenge y y mat. Paris a^ 1155. he do it but of christian and for his * * the very word (@) be (...) and ^ peter-pence as a argument to receive alm not to give sceptre but this bull have a loud bellow and open his mouth wide and that with a imagine line from the arctic to the antarctic pole by the imaginary authority of almighty God with all their city castle dominion right jurisdiction inhibit all other under pain of excommunition to presume thither for merchandise or any other cause etc. do they not challenge the kingdom of Hungary of Arragon of Spain itself of Denmark of Dalmatia and Croatia of Portugal of Naples Sicilia jerusalem Sardinia Bohemia Swethen N^rway Poland Scotland and all the kingdom of Europe as (@) mag. R.E. l. 2 c. ^ (@) tit r. e. in (@) and have name very many he con^^u^e^ E^t (...) s. ^ot ^^as in su^t (@) (...) etc. Stapleton (...) ap. stench l. 2. cont. dan. const. Bodin Re^ub l. 1. c. 9 vid. and Tort. Tort. p. 21^ Steuchus marta and other have write we r^ad of a mad man at Athens which esteem every ship that come into the haven his own and therefore to^ke inuentory of the good such be the sobriety of Rome as if the world have be create for the papacy whatsoever promise be make to the church in scripture be their inheritance the pope be the church and Peter and bishop and apostle and prince yea Christ and God and Caesar and all and more than all his centre at Rome his circumference every where and nowhere according he give as if he have all thing he take scrape rake as if he have nothing witty do a a Sanctius brother of the king of Arragon show himself grateful to his holiness for like bounty who when the pope by (@) of trumpet have proclaim king of Egypt he requite he with like bounty by his trumpeter proclaim the pope Chaliph of Baldach that be Mahomet vicar so Chaliph signify and supreme head of the saracen no less wise do earl Richard brother to king henry the three acknowledge b b mat. Paris an. 1254. the pope bountiful gift of the kingdom of Naples and Sicil take from king conradus demand hostage money and some fort in the pope hand to be deliver he otherwise say he it be all one as if he shall give i the moon and bid i climb up and fetch it and well have it be if king Henry himself have so answer he yea the catholic king c c Phi^ r. Hisp. Cath. cont. c. bar. ^ion sic. himself in this inheritance of Sicill be sensible of the pope claim and prohibit that part of Baronius which maintain it but whence this power so boundless be he the vicar of Christ this be he that be heir d d Heb. 1 of all thing e e col. 1. by who and for who all thing be create yea f f ab 3. the beginning of the new creation of God do g g ph. 2. take on he the form of a servant that be not the show but the substance as be his form of God and h h Lu^ 2d come not to be serve but to serve he in his birth will be i i luc. 2. tax or enrol a servant to a foreign prince in his life pay tribute money yea for Peter as well as himself do it k k Mat^ 22. and teach so to do in his death pay that he never take vile and servile open witness a good confession to Pilate that his l l io. 18. kingdom be not of this world yea that this power over he be give from above to Pilate and when they will have m m 6.15 make he a king he refuse nor will n n luc. 12. divide the heritage betwixt the brethren reject it with whereas his pretend o o ^on 8. vicar have make a constitution of purpose to arrogate both sword and this Alexander have exclude all other and divide almost all the world to two brethren but the pope be successor of Peter and Paul the apostle yea the heir of all apostleship and why not then of that p p mat. ^0 luc. 22. and why do he not listen to Peter q q 1. pet. 5. these place be produce by Victoria in his Relect. De Indis n. 27. and pet. much less in and why do he not with Peter put up his sword into his sheath not draw in such a exigent for his master life such a weapon with approbation Malchus his right ear the king servant faithful ear by this high priest be cut off and they make recusant to God service and the king allegiance by his sword and Bellarmine his armour-bearer yet if he love so well armour why do he not follow Paul in his r r 2. cor. 10. and if he will needs be a soldier why break he Paul rule s s 2. tim. 2. vid. amb. lo^ if yet he will change Peter key into Paul sword let he know Mucro Sauli that sword make he the successor of Saul a persecutor not Paul a apostle king richard the first t t mat. par. an. 1196. be request by the pope to free his son the bishop Beluacensis take in the field send the pope his armour wherein he be take with this message which cause the pope modest to disclaim he the reason be strong against the pope challenge temporal power and kingdom for which the u u io. 18.36 servant must fight in the judgement of truth itself with weapon correspondent say 10 10 bern. ^e l. 2. the y y can. ap. 80. and 82. canon be strict herein but the pope be like the late prophetical king of z z see my pilg. l. 6. c. 11. @. 3. Barbary which can cause as they report the bullet to remain in the discharge piece and therefore adventure himself and he on the ordinance without harm but what shall I multiply word in this argument wherein not only our a a D.D. Epis^ el. t^rt t. and Resp. and d. Morten and Abbat and B^ck and down and arch. Spalat. l. ^ c. 10. d. Sutl pont. r. l. 4. c. 14. d. Whitak and rain and col. etc. man have take this weighty crown from the head of this man who worse than that ammonite serve not ambassador but king themselves in that homely fashion cut off their garment by the buttock not leave to cover their nakedness or his own shame and set it on David head but even b b Barclayus p. and f. g. Barret joan. Paris jac. Alma^n Serbona ^n Tanquerelli pali^od Relect. victoriae etc. their own also both schoolman and lawyer and university and state have write decree by pen and pike seek to maintain as at Venice late the right of the crown free from the triple diadem and Melchior Goldastus have publish a large library of this kind but this argument have find a kingly writer a king a writer a king of writer as pattern and patron of other learning so herein also a defender of the Faith and foolish do I further pour water into this sea into which pope Alexander bull have bring i but their romish shop and mint of doctrine provoke i which have c c bulla profess ^d late hammer a new creed annex to their tridentine Anathema's and make a bull to proclaim they like d d see my pilg. l. 3. c. 3. Mahomet bull which in the turk legend bring the Koran in his horn seek haply to add this as a thirteen of the pope monarchy over monarch so strange rather then strong defend by jesuitical e e see twenty such article against the state of king draw out of Bellarmine by the b. of w. in his learned answer to the apology pag. 62. spirit no less jebusiticall in deny David right then jezabellicall in paint the face of their idolatrous mother who witchcraft and whoredom remain in too many will not suffer even child to hold their peace and indeed to recite be to refute the argument of their pope and cardinal as those of Boniface f f bon. Exti^^ the eight and other of like light moment so that of cardinal and of and before they of our countryman cardinal g g reg. Pol^ sum p. c. 47. Poole for the pope temporal power mat. 6. es. 60. for prince submit their sceptre to the pope and the divine providence in give some temporal peculiar for s. Pe^ers patrimony and yet how many of they live in France and never see s. Peter patrimony and well have it be if this Alexander have live in this new world or quite out of the world yea in the rest their own historian show no man more transport either by faction or affection to their kindred who they seek with public loss to advance such example they have be at home and what good example they have be abroad appear in that h h mat. par. in h. 3. an. 1252. king which deny his own and his progenitor grant pretend the example of the pope his play fast and loose with his and the pope practice of dispense with oath both of prince and subject can testify y^a most corruption which history observe in secular government thence may derive easy original hence do that justice complaint arise the same historian tell of oath that which be now devolve to the people both prohibit and absolve from oath by the pope now that king begin to discover and to hate the whore and be not as he than say and much less needs it that the pope shall give that which be out of the church and none of Christ flock for what power have the key of the i i a. 1251. 1254. and 1256. etc. kingdom of heaven to shut the door of earthly of mere earthly kingdom or to shut out such as be never let into the church yea when Christ say k k mat. 18. let he be as a ethnic unto thou express the utmost extent of the key how can ethnike be include who be not but already s. Paul say l l 1. cor. 5.12 13. this be cite by m m fr. vict. Relec. pot. Eccl. s. Victoria a spanish divine to prove that the pope add that infidel be see the apostle command n n rom. 13. tribute to be pay they and that the contrary be large prove these proposition that the pope be not lord of the world that the temporal power depend not of he that it be not subject to his temporal power and that he have nothing to do ordinary to judge of prince case title jurisdiction nor have any power mere temporal that the temporal power do not at all depend of the spiritual and in his r^lections of the o o Relect. ind. n. 38. indian he say that it do not appear to he that the christian faith have so be preach to they that they be find to believe it have have no probable persuasion as miracle and example of religious life but the contrary yea have the faith be never so probable propound and they reject it yet may they not therefore be spoil of their good or pursue by war and what right then have the pope to propound that method in his bull be any thing more free then to believe else if p p 22. q. 66. ar. 8. i fid. (...) (...) and (@) etc. ethnic have be to be compel to enter into the church for it be otherwise with the child of the kingdom he will have send captain conqueror alexanders as the saracen do and this Alexander imitate not fisherman tent-maker publican as sheep among wolf not wolf among sheep on who do David or m^ses or any of the ancient king make war only for infidelity say cardinal q q s^p say he shall be send by their preach and live to convert they to God and not such as shall oppress spoil scandalize subject and make they twice more the child of hell like the pharise and this may be the cause of all those misorder which happen in the indies the most by a blind zeal think they do God service in punish the idolatry man-eating and sodomy and other vice of the ethnike with invasion and war especial where terr^r may bring they or they be slay other by their example to admit the gospel that have not the piety and pity of some eye-witness excite the royal provision of the catholic king in this case which over so wide sea and spacious land they can not discern even hell itself have be loose on earth under the pretext of heaven and the prince of darkness have effect his black and cruel design in habit of a angel of light tantum may we say of this religious irreligious bull. thus Nunho r r gusman a spanish commander relate in a epistle to the emperor his manner of invade first after his martial prologue preach to the indian GOD the pope and the king of Spain minister of GOD on earth who all man in the world ought to obey the s^lly indian for fear acknowledge themselves ready to worship the king till his better instruction he also persuade the emperor not to give liberty to the christian indian and to allow nothing but necessary that by much subjection they may be make good christian he quarrel those quarreller that hold this war unjust and seek to disturb it be the most holy and meritorious work that can be do in the service of God for which himself hope the diminution of his sin and if I shall show out of f f bart. cas. of the spanish cruelty casas a spanish bishop in those part the execution of this bull you will say that the brazen bull of Phalaris the monster-bull of Minos the fire-breathing bull subdue by Hercules the jew * * see p. pilg. lib. 2. cap. 20. of Egypt their Mnevis Apis Ba^is onuphis etc. l. 6 c. 4. Behemoth and those of Egypt be but calf to this of pope they have be heretic if they have not obey the pope all that we have talk of king all this while see effect in t t cort. imp ^ar Mutezuma no mean though a ethnic prince out of Cortes his own relation to the emperor and in Attabaliba or atahualpa the mighty Inga relate by u u Benzo l. 3. c. 3. see the whole oration ground on th^s bull the pope thereby give lop. Vaz l. Gomera G^rc de la Vega etc. Benzo the dominican preach the pope gift to which if he do not willing yield he shall be force which that heathen disclaim as unjust say that the pope be foolish and impudent to give so liberal another man good whereupon the friar cruel cry to the spaniard to execute that which be in that manner easy to effect say Christiani trucidate cane etc. what shall I speak of million perish without the faith by this new article of faith of shambles of man flesh and other cruelty I delight not in such tragaedy I only show the choragus the western Alexander his bull or Bucephalus the very Cerberus which produce those dog which hunt and devour the indian and yet as casas have be more mild than their master master indeed of 10 10 1. c. 13 14. l 2. c. 2 3 4 5 6 7 13 14 15. l. 3. c. 3 4 5. l. 4. c. 4 5 etc. he also show how natural merchandise be and how unjust it be to prohibit it produce he example of the Chinois he may of this bull. immanity and inhumanity but proceed in this school and write comment and a world of gloss on this bull-text with the blood of a world of man in that new World how do acosta and other deplore these bloody and therefore slippery foundation of the faith that from these force beginning that they have receive but a show of christianity close embrace their old superstition as a plant say he grow crooked at first must either be break or still suffer so to grow so among these indian as the fear of war not true preach make way to christianity so do they still retain fear and a servile condition not free translate to be the child of God by regeneration for nothing be so contrary to faith as be all force and violence but of their christianity I have speak * * in the last chapter of my pilgrimage elsewhere out of their own author I here show the root of it this apostolic bull. the poet tell of Europa deflower by jupiter have convey she through the sea in form of a bull. the roman jupiter of the Vatican Capitol or s. Angelo veiovis have convey over this great part of the world this new world America to be both deflower and devour by catholic soldier by his catholic bull in fair show of reduce to faith but first mention fort and subjection that bull by the poet be exalt to a constellation in heaven this bull have make such havoc on earth rather deserve hell except some poet which can make their god as the pope in canonization the priest in consecration can devise also to make new antarctic heaven to place this bull in our arctic be now too full of constellation to admit any such monster lest he shall make terrible tragedy there also be since grow so huge that he encompass the two hemisphere with his horny hemi-circle and for his prohibition of all christian else to attempt those part for merchandise or other cause what be it but with his two horn to push at and out both nature and grace that in so large a Tract of the world it may neither be lawful to carry spiritual nor recarry temporal commodity without leave obtain under pain of excommunication and be it not bulla a bubble and froth the babble or babel of Babel that a bishop shall countermand merchandise and the servant of God servant shall make himself a lord of heathen lord to give the crown of king by apostolical what more apostatical or apotacticall what can alexanders malediction have do more or worse be subijcere the way to bring to the catholic faith and yet one clause of baptism be more bullish or hellish than the rest that christian that king be oblige by their very baptism oblige to the apostolical that be in their sense the pope commandment a a 1. co. 1.13 Paulus say that glorious apostle of the gentile but this gentle glory apostle will needs in a new catholic faith be either crucify for we with Christ or make a four person in the trinity unto who mandate alone we be baptize but Boniface have answer this b b bon. 8. Extr. (@) and this also favour Alexander which will needs be a God the son of jupiter and be so by his parasite acknowledge and right so the pope by his flatterer who affirm c c b^llar in his Ma^ Tort. vid. t. pag. 32. and consequent to his vicar the pope we poor man have think that in the sacrament God have vouchsafe we a great dignity that we be therein equal with king that in d d 1. cor. 12.13 one spirit we have be all baptize into one body whether jew or gentile whether bond or free that e e gal. 3.27 28. whosoever be baptize in Christ have put on Christ and that there be neither jew nor greek neither bond nor free neither male nor female jesu. but see how this h^rned beast with his scepter-pushing bull bless and make we more happy then baptize king for we may enjoy our possession our profession as more free at least not impair by baptism but king be admit into the church with subjection of their person and crown to the pope their subject also may disclaim not swear forswear allegiance yea it shall be tolerable nay lawful nay commendable yea and meritorious for heaven to kill the king of the earth which shall be immorigerous to his holiness protestant be general behold to his catholic key which open Rome the catholic mother city to strumpet to jew but lock out our generation to the consume f^ames but Protestant yea catholic king be less in favour then other catholic and in condition like the jew for as they must in convert to Christianity renounce their former wealth as f f vict. carb l. 1. c. 4 5. victor de Carben a christen jew complain together with the world and the devil embrace beggary with their christianity which make so few convert so king which even among heathen know no superior but God must in their baptism make a tacit renuntiation of their kingdom when their holy lord the pope shall so adjudge and if he obey not he lose his baptism become now a heretic and his subject by virtue of that his baptism also which oblige he to the pope be at the pope bull first low to depose he king and jew may say it be better in secular respect not to profess Christ not to be baptize the reason out of his new Kabala as that learned g g Tort. pag. 201. bishop call it in our natural birth we be bear subject to our prince in our supernatural by baptismal regeneration we be therein swear forsooth to the pope it be no marvel that this bull have beget such brutish christian in America as the h h accost sae irin l^b use shall jesuite complain I hope in the east they teach otherwise that the pope renounce his baptismal name I never know the reason before nor do I now marvel for than our Roderigo Borgia be swear in baptism to Christ and tacit to the pope but now he be make pope himself a name in opposition to all obedience free from both i i 2. th. 2. vid. down Antich l 5. c. 6. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) no more Roderigo the Christian subject it be a term of all other most odious to pope to Christ and the pope but Alexander the great the very pope emulous to Christ his vicar which do and receive all thing as one and the same head with Christ give a world receive king in baptism as here and therefore very Antichrist both as (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) oppose and as (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in the name of Christ vicar with his two horn like the lamb extol himself k k 2. th. 2. vid. down l. 4. c. 1. above all that be call God or that be worship and so I leave he and his Apis his egyptian babylonical bull in bait whereof if I have play the fierce english mastiff no man that have read the story of the spanish dog in the west indies which come out of this kennel can be just offend and beside that the place where I write this ch. col. have be a place of argument to move i to enter these list the argument of this great work navigation english indian navigation exact some apology to shroud themselves from this bull push and loud bellow thunder Petri and the curse that be causeless shall not come GOD will do good to David for Shimeis curse the catholic prince of those day do not believe he nor have they since the portugal as you shall present hear regard it not and not the bull but other compromise stay they from open hostility the peaceable and wise king of England henry the seven send present after Cabota to discover the french in their France antarctike and new France and other east and west navigation have contradict these believe not that the sun shine only in one kingdom whatsoever combustion this portentous comet diffuse and long long may his majesty of great Britain spread his long and just arm to the further east and remote west in the gainful traffic in the painful discovery in the glorious and christian plantation of his subject maugre such bugbear bullbeare bellow Solomon and hiram israelite and tyrian all art and religion concur into one art of art the truth of religion and advance of the faith together with the glory of his name the splendour of his state the love of his people the hope of his royal posterity to the last of age amen amen @. 7 of the portugal discontent and compromise with the Spaniard and their first discovery of the east indies the king of Portugal be much discontent and send his ambassador to the king and queen who also send unto he in embassage garcia de Herera and after that see that the Portugal intend by force to defend his suppose right to the ocean and by a strong fleet to dispossess the castilian of their late discovery send don Pedro de ayala and Lopez de caruaial the substance of who embassage be to congratulate with king John his desire of peace to be conserve betwixt they which be also the care of their catholic majesty and as for that difference touch discovery which the king by apostolical grant and by possession and prescription challenge they will yield unto any honest course which may maintain brotherly love and amity themselves be persuade that their late discovery no way concern he nor disturb their mutual league as not near Guinea or any of the Portugal discovery that they be content to name fit person by way of justice to determine the controversy or to put it to his holiness to be hear in the court at Rome sup M^ff hist. ^nd l. 1. H^rera dec. 1. l. 2. c. 8 9 10. but secret they give order that the business shall at least be protract and continue on foot till they may hear how their second fleet succeed which the ambassador perform cunning but not unperceived of king John who say that embassage of the castilian have neither head nor foot smart insinuate the lame leg of the one and the light and vainglorious brain of the other ambassador the Portugal ambassador have make overture of all the north discovery through the world to belong to Castille from the canary and thence southward to the Portugal but this be not accept afterward three counsellor of state on the behalf of each kingdom be employ in this discovery of the right and just title and bound of the discoverer which on the seven of june the pope authority infringe by a latter accord 1493. agree that the line of partition contain in the bull of the pope shall be extend 270. league further to the west all from thence westward to remain to the castilian and eastward to the Portugal navigation and conquest that there shall be free sail on both part but neither shall send to trade without these limit this be put in write and confirm on the second of july by the castilian on the seven and twenty of February by the Portugal king and cosmographer also employ which shall design the say limitation and now each party intend to prosecute new discovery king John prepare a fleet for search beyond the cape of good hope on the coast of Africa whereof covilian have give he intelligence but amid these preparation God call he to the fatal and final peregrination of all flesh. Emanuel king of Portugal don Emanuel succeed he in that crown the twenty of October 1495. and the year 1497. employ vasco gama with three * * bar. dec. 1. l. 4. c. 1. ship one victualler with 160. man this voyage have be the rather thus long defer because the portugal in the former discovery have meet with such storm and tempest near the cape which therefore they call Tormentoso a new conceit possess most of the mariner as have do before touch cape Bogiadore that there be no sail any further but gama fear no such fantasy and receive covilians map and instruction with letter to the indian king hoist sail on the nine of july a season unfitting Osor. Eman. l. 1. bay of saint Helena as experience after show and pass by the i will of saint james direct his course eastward the first land he see be that which he term the bay of s. Helena for this be their custom to name land at their first discovery of that saint on who day they discover the same where after three month ill weather they go on land they take some negro of curl hair who language none of they can understand which receive glassebead and bell with other trifle kindness procure their countreymens familiarity and traffic by sign for such victual as they have but one Portugal desire to go with they to their house not like their diet and return with much company when he come in sight of his own more for fear then any just cause cry out for their help this cause the portugal to come in to succour and the negro to fly which with their pole sharpen at the end with horn the folly of a cowardly follow as with sharp dart wound the christian and among many other gama himself by this fool occasion they hasten thence towards the cape of good hope and encounter such winterly storm in the way the time of the year be then unseasonable that they be force to strike sail and commit themselves to the wind boisterous tuition and the company importune gama not to permit they to so terrible a death mutiny the forerunner of great exploit but to haste his return which when he constant refuse they conspire his death but by his brother Paul relation forewarn he fore-armed himself with vigilant circumspection and lay the master in the bolt become master himself on the twenty of November he double the cape and sail continual near the land which they see full of cattle and people like those at s. Helena naked enclose their privity in a receptacle of wood utter their speech out of the throat as it be sob have refresh themselves not far from the cape they proceed and the eight of December a storm drive they out of sight of land whereto with fair wether they present return and have pass two hundred and thirty mile from their last water place see a pleasant country and the sea deep hard by the shore and much people on the ten of januarie he send one on shore with a present who be kind use and with their country present return benefit of condemn person here gama set two condemn person on shore ten of which he have with he have pardon of their life with condition to be set on shore where the governor see meet there to observe the country and people and proceed he come to a goodly country where the people colour as the former be more bold and familiar and one with ill Arabic signify that in a country not far thence ship like they use to come whence he term that the river of good sign hope thence to find out India quick erect also a stone-crosse and name the country s Raphael leave there likewise two other condemn person after refresh his sick company he depart and on the first of march they espy seven small sail which make towards the admiral and come near with a loud cry salute they in Arabic and make they much music the man have garment of silk with linen turban wrought with gold and falchion gird to their side they come aboard be well entertain and tell that the name of the island be mozambique the people ethnic mozambique discovered but a great part inhabit by Moor or Mahumetans for some knowledge of divine scripture have in usual appellation cause a distinction of these from other which have no knowledge of God but mere natural who therefore author usual call idolater or gentile and ethnike it be subject to the king of quiloa and thence be ordinary trade into Arabia India and other part of the World they learn that they have pass Zophala where be much Gold it be remarkable that these moor use both * * the compass and sea-card and quadrant in use with mor^s in the indian sea before the portugal discover they compass and sea-card or plait quadrant also wherewith they observe the height of place the sun declination and distance from the line and be furnish with diverse maritime mystery not much short of the portugal they mistake the christian for mahometans of Barbary and therefore use they so kind the governor of the place to who they have send present visit they in great pomp and be feast on shipboard the sick be remove out of sight and the rest well arm for fear of treachery neither do their superstition forbid they to drink wine if it be not ignorance rather of that liquor he inquire of they not doubt of their mahumetism whether they be * * moor who be usual call I think that they be first so call because out of Mauritania they pass first into Spain and therefore ^ll of that religion which the spanish na^ion find in their discovery of Africa and India they call Moor but the other nation mahometan of which the knowledge have come to we over land and not by the castilian or Portugal retain their own title as turk etc. his question be whether they come out of Barbary which before call Mauritania give they this name of moor or out o^ Turkey Moor or turk usual all mahometans of Africa Arabia and the indian coast be call moor from which name the greatness of the Turk tartars persian and mogul with I know not what difference of sect have in ordinary appellation exempt they he ask also of their weapon and mahometan book gama answer that they come out of the remote west that they use such armour as he see with such ordinance able to ruin castle and for his book he will show they when he have finish his journey for he be now in his way to India and desire his help for pilot to Calicut this promise and the next day bring he two with who he agree how much gold he shall give to conduct he thither but in the midst of all this kindness it be perceive that they be christian they devise all mischief against they which be by one of those pilot reveal to gama they set upon the christian also as they be fill water hereupon gama with his three ship for the four be set on fire before go to a a Quiloa quiloa but either by necessity or their pilot treachery be hinder from shore this pilot persuade they to go to b b Mombaza Mombaza dissemble that a great part of that city be christian and that it be a fit place to refresh his sick man many of his company be dead and the rest feeble the land be there fertile the air wholesome the people he find treacherous for the king send a ship with a hundred man arm c c moorish treachery turk-fashion which will all have enter but gama only suffer four of the principal who relate their king desire of his acquaintance and proffer all kindness if he will bring his ship near the city the king also by two condemn person who he put on shore send he spice and so wrought that gama intend to fulfil his mind but in the way fear a shelf sudden command to cast anchor whereupon his more-pilot by self-guiltiness accuse leap into the sea suspect that their treachery be reveal have before covenant with the king of Mombaza to set the ship either on ground or in easy possibility of take the treacherous pilot escape in boat and in the night the king send other close to cut their cable which by vigilant care they avoid they depart thence for d d melinde melinde and there arrive on easter day the house he find of hew stone stately and useful build the country fruitful the people idolater black with curl hair from the navel upward naked thence clothe with silk to the middle leg here he find e e christian of India christian of India which much rejoice at the sight of the portugal and admonish they of many thing fit to their voyage he be kind use of the prince the king himself be decrepit who give he a master a indian for his navigation hence they depart the two and twenty of April and have pass the line with joy recover sight of the star which so long they have not see @. 8 of GAMAS act at Calicut and his return the nineteen of may they have sight of land be the high mountain near to Calicut and come within two mile of the city the same day he give thanks to God and set one of his condemn person on shore who be almost oppress with multitude press to see a man of so uncouth habit till at last two merchant of Tunis easy know he to be a Spaniard and monzaida one of they ask he in spanish of what part of Spain he be and be answer of Portugal invite he home and have make he eat and drink go on board with he to gama and proffer he all kindness tell he that the king of Calcutta who custom be his chief revenue will be glad of their come to he gama send two of his company with Monzaida which declare to he that their king move by his worthy fame have send one of his captain thither to establish mutual love and amity the king glad hear they and will they to bring their fleet to Pandarane where he than be because the road of Calcutta be dangerous in that season of the year and send a pilot to effect it soon after the king send a officer or magistrate call catual honourable to conduct gama unto he who appoint Paul gama his brother over the fleet bid he if ought amiss happen to he that he shall return home without further care of he for neither can he effect his king design otherwise nor they resist that king power to relieve he be the guard and soldier they be no soon land than a litter receive each of they many Nairos attend on foot and after that another and be bring into a sumptuous temple esteem of great sanctity which gama suppose by the structure and other * * image at the first sight etc. sign and because he have hear of many christian in those part to be christian. at the temple door four man meet they naked to the navel thence clothe with silk to the knee have three thread from the right shoulder cross to the left side the habit of Bramenes which sprinkle holy water on they and give they sweet powder the wall of the temple have many image paint on they in the midst be a round high chapel with a brazen narrow door have many step to it and within a image which the darkness will not suffer they to discern neither may any enter but the priest who approach to the image with their finger point to it twice call * * how near a consanguinity be in all kind o^ idolatry how e^sie a passage from you worship you know not what to the worship of the devil himself of these devotion see my pilgrimage l. 5. the like happen to the japon christians which see the picture o^ Venus and Adonis in captain S^ris his ship worship the same m^st king it for the picture of the virgin etc. Maria whereat the catual and his company fall flat on the earth present arise and say their prayer the portugal think it to be some service of the bless virgin worship she after their wont manner thence they pass to another temple of like magnificence and after that to the king palace trumpet and pipe sound all the while and the people so throng that have not the Nairos make way with their sword they can not have pass at the gate they be meet by certain noble call Caimaes and approach to the room where the king be a age man clothe in silk from the shoulder to the ankle come forth embrace gama this be the chief of the Bramenes the other be f^rst permit entrance he last of all hold gama by the hand follow it be a large hall with many bench artificial wrought one above another in form of a theatre the floor be cover with silk the wall hang with curtain of silk embroider with Gold the king lie in a rich bed with a tire on his head set with stone and wrought with gold clothe with silk have many golden clasp on the breast on his ear hang jewel of great value his toe and finger with ring and gem make a glorious splendour his personage be comely tall majestical gama salute he as the use here be to the king and be then place in a seat next he the other portugal also sit down water be bring to wash and cool their hand and diverse fruit to refresh they after this he question gama of his embassage who answer that it be not the Portugal custom to declare embassage in promiscuous and public assembly but to communicate the same only with the king and his council or committee hereupon the king remove into a fair room and there hear gama relate the worth of his master king Emanuel who in a magnanimous spirit have hear of the renown greatness of the king of Calicut and of the rarity of India have in desire of league and friendship send he thither to begin it in his name whence may both honour also and profit arise to both part and signify that he have letter of credence unto he the king courteous receive his word and promise to acknowledge the king of Portugal as his brother give order to the catual to conduct he to the house appoint for his lodging the city be large the house not be continue but with orchard and garden distinguish mean build the law so provide only the king house of stone l. 2. this king at that time be chief of all the prince adjoin both in wealth and power after three day gama conduct by the catual deliver the king his letter and withal a present which the king seem to contemn but be excuse by the uncertainty of the navigation neither be any present so good as the friendship of such a prince from who also if he expect profit it shall be effect by ship of merchandise yearly trade thither he desire that his king letter may not be interpret by saracen forasmuch as he perceive by Monzaida that they seek he a mischief monzaida interpret the letter and the king admonish he to be vigilant against saracenicall fraud for which he thank he and depart these moor consult their ruin malice of moor and bribe the courtier to that end traduce gama also for a pirate and a spy in show of a merchant a spark if not timely quench likely soon to bring that whole state in combustion this they do partly in hatred of the christian name and partly in fear of decay their trade communicate thus to portugal the king weary with their importunity fear to lose their custom and fear by the example of the moor and Negro in Africa with some exploit in the way who beggary also he see in their king contemptible present and their poor merchandise as if he have send to some wild negro prince threaten with their departure to some other prince and to remove their staple thither with his manifest loss perhaps their own gain yield to they and send the catual to persuade gama with promise of all kindness if he will bring his ship near and for security deliver up his sail but he write to his brother that if he see he long detain to set sail homeward and after much contention agree to send on shore his merchandise with man to sell they whereupon he be dismiss to his ship he complain to the king of the catual who give he fair promise but cause his merchandise to be carry to Calicut where he say be better sale gama be content and every day send two or three together to observe the city which yet receive no offence he desire of the king to leave a factor there whereto the king make angry answer make no reply which cause further anger and two of his man on shore to be commit to custody with their ware which when he can not reobtain by entreaty he set upon the next ship which come thither and take thence six principal man and then put off further into the Sea the king send to he say he wonder much he will apprehend his servant see he detain the two portugal only till he have write to king Emanuel who also the next day he send with letter but withhold the ware for their factor if he will send any to dispose thereof but gama say he will now leave none and will keep the man till he have his good the day after Monzaida come to they and tell they that he have be in danger of his life for their sake which have very hardly escape he pray to carry he with they to Portugal which they do and there he become christian. the king send his ware in seven boat but gama refuse and say he will carry those malabar into Portugal to testify how injurious the king of Calicut have use he and present discharge his ordnance chase they away the king be enrage but his navy be at that season unrig and in harbour yet he send out threescore merchant against they which be by sudden tempest disperse gama from the next port where he can arrive send a letter with good word to the king by one of his captive servant there he be assault by Timoia a pirate Timoia a pirate Anchediva Goa and their treachery with eight ship whereof he take one well furnish the rest flee he go to Anchediva to amend his ship and there be salute by a servant of Zabaius lord of Goa a italian who in the name of his master offer he all kindness if he will go thither this man profess himself a italian captive by pirate and so bring to serve a mahometan in these part gama perceive he witty but curious and busy suspect and apprehend he who be torture confess himself a tartarian jew send by Zabaius for a spy who he carry with he into Portugal where he be baptize and prove serviceable in many thing to the King thence he now haste his departure and the time be unseasonable come slow to on the african shore and because they be Mahumetans sink and spoil their ship and ruin a great part of their wall at melinde he be kind entertain melinde and his man well refresh and within five day for fear of winter at the cape set sail with a ambassador from melinde to Portugal he burn as unfit for the voyage the ship of Paul gama have need of the mariner to supply the other two on the seven and twenty of February he come to a island call zanzibar zanzibar four and twenty mile from the continent where he be well entertain and refresh of the prince though a more he refresh himself again at saint blaze water water of s. blaze and on the five and twenty of April double the cape thence to saint jago where by tempest they be part coelius the other captain next way to Lisbon gama to the Tercera where his brother Paul die and soon after to Lisbon in the year 1499. where coelius have relate all to the king before of a hundred forty eight or as other report a hundred and threescore there return only five and fifty and those very feeble @. 9 the second fleet send to the east indies their discovery of Brasill and other Acts. king Emanuel set forth a second fleet of thirteen ship well furnish with fifteen hundred soldier and munition under Peter Aluarez Capralis who he command to hold peace and confirm amity if it may be with the king of Calcutta and if it be possible to get leave of he to build a fort near the city where they may be secure from saracenicall hostility he send also five franciscans for holy office both to the portugal and if mean be offer for conversion of the infidel he depart from Lisbon the eight of march 1500. in the secular year and hold his course to s. jago there meet with a storm which scatter the fleet and force one ship to return home the rest of the fleet have two day after the tempest stay in vain for it set sail westward land of brasil first discover and on the three and twenty of April have sight of land with no less marvel than joy Capralis command the master to go near and take view of the shore which return news of a fertile and well water soil the native naked with long hair and bow and arrow but that night a storm take they which much torment they till at last he light into a safe harbour puerto which thereupon he call puerto they take two fisherman which by no sign can or will understand they who with bell bracelet and glass they restore on shore which bring the rest with store of meal and fruit for like traffic he name this land of the holy cross since of store of that wood call Brasill and have erect a stone pillar send one of his ship back to Portugal with that news he have mass and a sermon on shore to the great astonishment of the savage difficulty in all great attempt on the five of may he depart and on the three and twenty a sudden violent storm sink four of their ship not one man escape and soon after the remain seven with another tempest be sever and on the five and twenty of july six of they hold their course together one be separate which pierce into the arabian gulf or red sea and thence return home with only six man the rest perish by famine and disease the other six have double the cape of good hope find land pleasant and fertile but the people will not trade with they then destitute of provision at last they espy two ship at anchor which have sight of the portugal flee but be pursue and take but learn that they belong to Foteima a prince in amity with the king of melinde he let they pass with great store of gold which they have bring from Zofala Zofala with other rich commodity at mozambique he water without impediment and buy victual and hire a pilot to quiloa Quiloa the king of quiloa dominion extend nine hundred mile in length his subject be some black some colour speak Arabic beside other language merchant of diverse country trade among they it be separate from land with a narrow sea four hundred mile from mozambique full of spring tree cattle wild and tame rich in soil and fish the city great and populous with magnificent house with store of furniture their ship for want of pitch trim with a bastard frankincense Capralis send to Abrahem the king who kind entertain the messenger and promise next day to come aboard which he do in barge gallant deck his company attire in gold purple or silk with sword and dagger have in the hilt gem of great splendour the air fill with trumpet and pipe confuse with the trumpet and ordinance of the portugal who in their best attire go into their boat to meet he the king hear his letter and embassage with joy and promise to hold his master for his brother and the next day be design for confirmation of the league Moor treachery the moor with wily art this amity upbraid to the king his simplicity that will give such credit to pirate hear this hold on his way to melinde where with incredible gladness he be welcome melinde and the ambassador now return to his master with the king of Portugal present namely a fair horse sumptuous trap with other gift here Capralis will not stay but leave two exile or condemn person there to inquire if any way be open to Prester John and to learn the custom of the country on the two and twenty of August he come to Anchediva Anchediva and there a while refresh his company which have do he sail to Calicut Calicut the king send two with a guzarate merchant to salute Capralis who send with they back his christen jew and four of those or courtier which gama have take the year before then he detain as pledge with John Sala a Portugal all in Portugal habit whereat the king rejoice in a palace near the shore the king entertain Capralis who have leave Sancius Thoare with command of the fleet and after much compliment promise he more than he ask give they free liberty of trade and house fit thereto the patent or charter be a table of gold with letter engrave for perpetual memory he give they leave to erect the banner of king Emanuel on their house top as a monument of his love to their master hear of a strong and well man ship come from cochin to Cambaia with a mighty and warly elephant therein he send to entreat Capralis to take it whereto he employ one of his small vessel whereat the king marvel have before set certain saracen or moor of purpose to observe their behaviour in that enterprise especial see the great ship chase to Cananor Cananor about forty mile north from Calicut into which they compel she the next day as captive to return this do but kindle the envy of the moor who to their wont art add the forestall the market and give great price so that whereas they have be promise lade in twenty day they have expect three month when mean time the saracenicall ship be lade and go contrary to their late league which conclude they the first to be serve he send notice to the king who seem to be offend with the moor give they leave to lade themselves out of their ship pay they their money lay out fear to execute this by correa the cape merchant be importune and one ship now set sail war begin betwixt Moor and portugal be bring back by they into the haven whereupon grow great broil the king seem content they shall try it out betwixt they they therefore with a company of Nairos on the seventeen of December rush into the Portugal house which correa by a sign erect signify to the Fleet. he have with he seventy man against four thousand so that he with fifty other be slay the rest be by the assistance of their fellow in boats convey aboard Capralis then sick of a quartane and more of this disaster perceive the king conscious a fautor if not author of this design assail the next day ten great ship of the moor and slay six hundred of they distribute the rest as slave in their ship and lade themselves with the good be force for want of provision to kill three elephant and salt they for food which do he set the ship on fire and that in the night for great terror the morrow next he assault the town with ordnance from his ship and slay many one of which a courtier at the king foot after this Capralis go to cochin a hundred and seventy mile southward cochin be a sure haven the king be then poor and tributary to Calcutta to he he send a indian jogue a beg friar of that Bramene religion which by the Portugal friar have be convert and baptize by the name of Michael the king promise all that they request and entertain they in a house fit for trade the king of Cananor and Coulam send thither to they offer of league and traffic but Capralis fix here his staple staple erect at cochin where two christian of Cranganor twenty mile distant desire and obtain of he to carry they into Portugal that they may have a sight of Rome and jerusalem not long after he have news of the king of calicuts fleet of twenty great ship and many small with fifteen hundred man therein send to be revenge of the portugal which he go forth to assail but be scant of wind which they have and willing want for fear of the ordnance so leave two factor at cochin and have take in the rest of his freight at Cananor he depart the sixteenth of january and near to melinde take a ship which perceive it belong to a more of Cambaia he dismiss profess no quarrel in India but to Calcutta alone and the moor of Mecca one of their ship be here wrack the remainder whereof he burn to prevent the enemy spoil he employ one of his ship in the search of Zophala and return with the rest to Lisbon where he arrive the last of july and be welcome of the king who have before send three other ship on the same voyage the three and four and fi^t voyage to India and in the year follow 1502. he send Vascus gama again with ten ship and with another fleet give he commission to make himself * * commission to mak^ themselves ll. of the Sea lord of the sea and to do his utmost against the moor this consist of fifteen ship five other he send under Stephen gama and so proceed in his fortune that in a few year he make himself lord of the indian trade and navigation and subdue the kingdom of Ormus Goa and malacca with other part of the east to the Portugal sceptre to the great enrich of that state and the indian partaker whereof cochin have from a poor estate arise to greatness and Calicut be eclipse but as those spanish western discovery and act so these eastern of the portugal I leave to their own author such as for the former be p. martyr Cicca Viega Ouiedo Herera Gomara Benzo and the rest and for the late barrius Osorius Maffaeus Castaneda and other I intend in this place only to show the beginning of trade and navigation in both part and the occasion hence arise of the first sail round about the globe @. x. albuqverqve exploit and the first knowledge of the molucca you have hear of the quarrel betwixt Seville and Lisbon or the castilian and Portugal compound each share a moiety of the World some question grow of the molucca molucca after the discovery of they by the portugal whether they appertain to the castilian or lusitanian share it be to be consider that ten year after gamu discovery and ill usage at Calcutta the portugal seek all this time revenge and in great part effect it notwithstanding the indian potentate the egyptian sultan assistance as long after the turk succeed in that state and quarrel maintain their trade and propagate their sea and land-soveraigntie in those part although with some vicissitude of fortune and with loss even this summer of some of their principal commander Almeida the late viceroy base perish near the cape of good hope by the hand of wild negro while he envy any partner in the glory of take the king palace at Calcutta while albuquerque set the city on fire and permit his soldier to overhasty pillage lose his lategotten purchase and himself and albuquerque himself carry away near dead with diverse wound maff. l. 4. malacca cape Cory g. of Bengala while these thing be do at Calcutta be send out of Portugal to begin amity with malacca who be the first that have pass the promontory Cory and sail through the Bengalan or gangetike bay touch on sumatra divide by a narrow and dangerous straight from the continent of malacca either be or suppose to be in old time a Chersonessus or pen-insula every where encompass with wave but by one neck of land fasten to the main and call as some will have though other ascribe it to malacca and the siam kingdom aurea chryse or aurea Chersonessus or the golden be indeed rich in gold and other metal as this ensue history will show Sequeria have here make league with the king of Pedir and Achen and erect such stone pillar as before be mention in both place as monument thereof pass to malacca where he receive great kindness of Mamudius a mahometan which have usurp that state by force from the siamite who yet as the Samorin or king of Calcutta by the moor be alter and seek by treason to murder the portugal and seize on their ship for pretend after league confirm to entertain he in a feast Sequeria have intelligence excuse himself by sickness whereupon he offer extraordinary favour to lade his ship contrary to the custom of that port before all those which have be there before they Moor treachery at malacca which must be carry close for fear of disgust and mutiny of other merchant which Sequeria accept thankful and send his man to diverse place assign the son of Vtimutis the next man in malacca after the king be send aboard to compliment with he till a sign give by smoke from a certain place shall at once arm the rest in other place and he on shipboard to sudden and unexpected slaughter it happen that Sequeria at his come chess-play in India be at chess which he dissemble will he to continue that he may observe our difference from they in that Play but while he wait the smoke other of malacca have not that patience but misorder begin their fury which be espy from the ship top by a mariner who cry treason whereupon they run to their arm the malaccans leap over board and they send some to help their fellow while the rest cut their cable to have sea-room for their ship-fights and by terror of their ordnance easy chase the navy set purposely to assail they but of those on shore forty be slay and more captive which minister just cause of quarrel to their countryman who Sequeria have send notice hereof himself pass direct to the cape and so to Lisbon albuquerque have now recover of his wound and mind to recover ormuz the king whereof have before acknowledge vassalage to king Emanuel ormuz tributary to Portugal with fifteen thousand serafine of gold yearly tribute and leave to the portugal to erect there a fort which the slackness first and after that open mutiny of his own man have frustrate Zeifadin the king have intelligence thereof bar. dec. 2. l. 10. maff. l. 4. in fine see bar. dec. 2. l. 5 6 and 7. Osor. (@) 7 8 9 10. and thereby take occasion to shake off the Portugal yoke he pretend fear of Ishmael the persian Xa or sophi who tributary he be but be regain afterward it be the last act of albuquerques life and the persian also not discontent yea send a ambassador to treat of peace as have their action in admiration but at this time have collect a fleet of one and twenty sail in his way thither be intercept by the opportunity of Goa who prince Zabaius in the midst of his preparation against the portugal be late dead leave his young son Idalcan as full of trouble as empty of experience Timoia a famous pirate and lord of a island not far off give this intelligence Goa win and lose and recover again with proffer of his best assistance therein whereupon a sudden siege and surprise thereof be make upon condition the portugal wonder to see themselves so easy lord of such wealth but Idalcan with force and famine soon expel they which yet not long after they recover to the great honour of that nation in those part intend next to enter the red sea red Sea the northwest wind repel this victorious general or viceroy from that attempt but offer fair opportunity for malacca which he ready apprehend and first demand his prisoner of Mamudius which he say be flee but see his town on fire be force to present unto he and when his condition demand seem great namely the charge of both fleet and restitution of thing lose Mamudius be animate by some rather to defend himself by war the effect whereof be the loss of that petty kingdom and of himself with grief malacca win in the way thither albuquerque have meet with some ship late come from thence which he assault and take in which prelude of a great war this happen remarkable that Naodabeguea one of those which have before conspire against Sequeria receive diverse wound by which at last he fall but neither blood nor soul issue which both as from a break vessel sudden flee after a gold chain be take from his arm the cause they learn to be a bone of a beast call Cabis in the country of siam a chain of strange virtue Cabis a strange beast which be include in that chain include the blood also those open passage notwithstanding this jewel be send into Portugal for a rarity but perish by shipwreck in the way the victory at malacca spread the Portugal fame cause league and legate of diverse nation and occasion their search and discovery of the land of Amboino Banda and the molucca yea the Samorin of Calcutta and Idalcan himself seek their amity Amboino molucca and the negus of Abassia or Prester John send a ambassador into Portugal the king of Maldiva become vassal to king Emanuel Antonius Abreus be employ for the molucca Maldiva which first come to java then to Amboino set his stone pillar in both place next to Banda the name of diverse land where nutmeg and mace only for aught then know in all the world do grow the fame of malacca have pierce hither and prepare ea^e condition to a league as also to the molucca where the two emulous king of ternate and Tidore be ambitious which shall first win they to their side their mutual quarrel open a ready advantage to the portugal by take part with one to make his best of both these quarrel they have transmit to their posterity and even at this day the Hollander take part with the one and the Spaniard who have here succeed the Portugal with the other out of their evil gather benefit to themselves so foolish and not impious alone be strife that beside mutual mischief to and by each other they expose themselves to foreign both scorn and gain chap. 2 of FERNANDUS MAGALIANES the occasion of his voyage and the particular of the same with the compass of the world by the ship call San Victoria gather out of * * Pigaf^tta's book be extant in Ramusio be first tome and a great part thereof english by r. Ede^ to which here be add other necessary p^rts thereof out of ram. his copy ANTONIO PIGAFETTA a italian of Vicenza who be one in the say circum-navigation as also from diverse other author one which serve under albuquerque in these victorious war be Fernandus Magalianes a Portugal a gentleman of great spirit who have make good and manifold proof of his valour and value both in Africa and India and be reject in a suit to the king for augment his stipend half a ducat a month conceive deep indignation hereat he renounce his allegiance to his master king Emanuel os^r l. 11. maff. l. 8. Magal voyage translate out of Portug ma. Transiluano epist. Herera dec. 2. l. ^ c. 10. lop. Vaz etc. and betake himself to the court of Castille with Ruy Falero a profess ginger the portugal say a conjurer and acquaint the emperor that the land of Banda and of the molucca the one the only storehouse of nature for nutmeg and mace the other for clove appertain to he by that division which king John the second and king Ferdinand and Isabel of Castille have agree on that be to the western moiety of the world from the prescribe limit before mention and with a bold and admirable attempt offer also by the west to discover these rich land of spicery the Portugal author speak here nothing but treason and cry out upon he as a traitor for sow seed likely to produce war betwixt Castille and Portugal nor do I in those thing undertake to justify he but out of he whatsoever evil God produce this good to the world that it be first by his mean sail round nor be his neglect of his country neglect or revengeful mind unrevenged as the sequel manifest by his untimely and violent death five ship be furnish at the emperor command the trinity admiral Stephen Gome^ a Portugal pilot of San Victoria be Lewis de Mendoza captain John de cartagena of the ship s Antonio John Serran of the ship s jago and Gaspar de Quexada of the ship conception Magalianes himself be make general the whole company be two hundred thirty seven or as some say two hundred and fifty of which thirty be portugal on the ten of August 1519. they depart from Seville the six and twenty of September they arrive at tenarife the three of October they sail betwixt the land and cape Verde they sail many day in the sight of the coast of Guinea and have a great calm seventy day which they spend in attain the line they lose the sight of the north star the island of Brasile the south Pole sugar when they have sail past the equinoctial line they lose the sight of the north star and sail by the south-west until they come to a land name Brasilia be two and twenty degree and a half towards the south Pole or Pole antarctic this land be continuate and one firm land with the cape of saint Augustine which be eight degree from the equinoctial in this land they be refresh with many good fruit of innumerable kind and find here also very good sugar cane and diverse kind of beast and other thing which I omit for brevity they depart from this land and sail to the four and twenty degree and a half towards the pole antarctic where they find a great river of fresh water and certain cannibal cannibal giant of these they see one out of their ship of stature as big as a giant have a voice like a bull. our man pursue they but they be so swift of foot that they can not overtake they about the mouth of this river be seven land in the big whereof they find certain precious stone insule cap. s. Maric and call it the cape of saint Mary the spaniard think that by this river they may have pass into the south sea but they be deceive in their opinion for there be none other passage then by the river which be seventeen league large in the mouth the pole antarctic pengwin and seal thus follow this coast by the tract of the land towards the pole antarctic they come to a place where be two land replenish with pengwin and seal these be in such number that in a hour all the five ship may have be lade with pengwin be all of black colour and such as can fly they live of fish and be so fat that they can scarce slay they they have no feather but a certain down and their bylls like raven bylls here be they in great danger by tempest but as soon as the three fire call saint Helen saint Nicholas and saint Clare appear upon the cable of the ship sudden the tempest and fury of the wind cease the 49. degree of the south Pole depart from hence they sail to the nine and forty degree and a half under the pole antarctic where be winter they be enforce to remain there for the space of two month all which time they see no man except that one day by chance they espy a man of the stature of a giant giant who come to the haven dance and sing and short after seem to cast dust over his head the captain send one of his man to the shore with the ship boat who make the like sign of peace the which thing the giant see be out of fear and come with the captain servant to his presence into a little island when he see the captain with certain of his company about he he be great amaze and make sign hold up his hand to heaven signify thereby that our man come from thence this giant be so big the bigness of the giant that the head of one of our man of a mean stature come but to his waste he be of good corporature and well make in all part of his body with a large visage paint with diverse colour but for the most part yellow upon his cheek be paint two heart and red circle about his eye the hair of his head be colour white and his apparel be the skin of a beast sow together this beast as seem unto we have a large head and great ear like unto a mule with the body of a camel and tail of a horse the foot of the giant be fold in the say skin after the manner of shoe he have in his hand a big and short bow the string whereof be make of a sinew of that beast he have also a bundle of long arrow make of reed feather after the manner of we typt with sharp stone in the stead of iron head the captain cause he to eat and drink and give he many thing and among other a great lookingglass in the which as soon as he see his own likeness he be sudden afraid and start back with such violence that he overthrow two that stand near about he when the captain have thus give he certain hawk bell and other great bell with a lookingglass a comb and a pair of bead of glass he send he to land with four of his own man well arm short after they see another giant of somewhat great stature with his bow and arrow in his hand another giant as he draw near unto our man he lay his hand on his head and point up towards heaven and our man do the like the captain send his ship boat to bring he to a little island be in the haven this giant be very tractable and pleasant he sing and dance and in his dance leave the print of his foot on the ground he remain long with our man who name he John he can well speak and plain pronounce these word jesus johannes even as we do but with a big voice the captain give he a shirt of linen cloth and a coat of white woollen cloth also a cap a comb a lookingglass with diverse such other thing and so send he to his company the day follow he resort again to the ship and bring with he one of those great beast which he give the captain but after that day they never see he more suppose he to be slay of his own company for the conversation he have with our man after other fifteen day be pass there come four other giant without any weapon four other giant but have hide their bow and arrow in certain bush the captain retain two of these which be young and best make he take they by a deceit give they kayve shears looking-glass bell bead of crystal and such other trifle two giant be take by a policy he so fill their hand that they can hold no more then cause two pair of shackle of iron to be put on their leg make sign that he will also give they those chain which they like very well because they be make of bright and shine metal and whereas they can not carry they because their hand be full the other giant will have carry they but the captain will not suffer they when they feel the shackle fast about their leg they begin to doubt but the captain do put they in comfort and have they stand still in fine when they see how they be deceive they roar like bull and cry upon their great devil Setebos to help they be thus take the devil Setebos they be immediate separate and put in sundry ship they can never bind the hand of the other two yet be one of they with much difficulty overthrow by nine of our man and his hand find but he sudden loose himself and flee as do also the other that come with they in their fly they shoot off their arrow and slay one of our man they say that when any of they die devil appear to the giant when they die there appear ten or twelve devil leap and dance about the body of the dead and seem to have their body paint with diverse colour and that among other there be one see big than the residue who make great mirth and rejoice this great devil they call Setebos and call the less one of these giant which they take declare by sign that he have see devil with two horn above their head with long hair down to their foot and that they cast forth fire at their throat both before and behind the captain name these people Patagoni the most part of they wear the skin of such beast whereof I have speak before Patagoni and have no house of continuance but make certain cottage which they cover with the say skin and carry they from place to place they live of raw flesh and a certain sweet root which they call Capar they be very jealous of their woman when they be sick at the stomach they put a arrow half a yard or more down the throat which make they vomit green choler and blood for headache they make a cut over the forehead and let themselves blood the like they do on the arm or leg in any ache they cut their hair like friar but a little long and bind it with a cotton hayre-lace by reason of cold in those part they truss up themselves so as the genital member be hide within the body the giant feed one of these which they have in their ship do eat at one meal a basket of biscuit and drink a bowl of water at a draught they remain five month in this port of saint julian where certain of the under captain conspire the death of their general be hang and quarter among who they conspire against their captain the treasurer Luigo of Mendozza be one certain of the other conspirator he leave in the say land of Patagoni namely John de cartagena and a Priest they erect there a cross in token of possession depart from hence to the two and fifty degree towards the pole antarctic lack a three part they find a river of fresh water and good Fish their ship be here in great danger they remain two month in this port where they make new provision of fresh water fuel and Fish here the captain cause all his man to be confess confession approach to the two and fifty degree they find the straight now call the straight of be in some place a hundred and ten league in length and in breadth somewhere very large the straight of and in other place little more than half a league in breadth on both the side of this straight be great and high mountain cover with snow beyond the which the south Sea the giant die for heat be the entrance into the sea of sur. this entrance the captain name here one of the ship saint Antonio steal away privy and return into Spain in this be one of the giant who die as soon as he feel the heat that be about the equinoctial line when the captain Magalianes be past the straight and see the way open to the other main sea he be so glad thereof that for joy the tear fall from his eye and name the point of the land from whence he first see that sea Capo suppose that the ship which steal away have be lose they erect a cross upon the top of a high hill Capo to direct their course in the straight if it be their chance to come that way they find that in this straight in the month of October short night in the month of October the night be not pass four hour long they find in this straight at every three mile a safe haven and excellent water to drink wood also and fish and great plenty of good hero they think that there be not a fair straight in the World here also they see certain fly fish the other giant which remain with they in the ship name bread Capar water oli red cloth Ch^ecai red colour cheic^e ^lacke colour Amel and speak all his word in the t^r^^t on a time as one make a cross before he and kiss it show it unto he he (@) cry^d Setebos and declare by sign that if they make any more cross Setebos (...) into his body and make he burst but when in fine he see no hurt come thereof (@) to^ke the cross and embrace and kiss it oftentimes desire that he may be a (@) ^efore his death th^ giant be (@) he be therefore baptize and name Paul depart out of this straight into the sea call the eight and twenty day of November in the year 1520. they sail three month and twenty day before they (@) land three month styl without the sight of land and have in this time consume all their biscuit and other victual they fall into such necessity that they be enforce to eat the powder that remain thereof be n^w f^ll of worm and stink like pass by reason of the salt water their fresh water be also p^trif^ed and become yellow they do eat skin and piece of leather which be fielded about certain great rope of the ship but these skin be make very h^rd by reason of the sun rain and wind they hang they by a cord in the sea for the spac^ of four or five day to mollify they and sod they and eat they by reason of this famine disease of famine and unclean feed some of their gum grow so over their tooth that they die miserable for hunger and by this occasion die nineteen man and also the giant with a indian of the land of brasyle otherwise call Terra papagalli that be the land of Poping^y^s beside these that die five and twenty or thirty be so sick that they be not able to d^e any service with their hand or arm for feebleness so that there be in manner none without some disease in th^se three month and twenty day they sail four thousand league in one gulf by the say sea call that be peaceable which may well be so call forasmuch as in all this time have no sight of any land they have no misfortune of wind or any other tempest during this time also they discover only two little land habit where they see nothing but bird and tree unfortunate land and therefore name they infortunate land be one from the other about two hundred league distant the first of these land be from the equinoctial towards the pole antarctic fifteen degree and the other five their sail be in such sort what they sail daily that they sail daily between fifty threescore to seventy league so that in fine if God of his mercy have not give they good wether it be necessary that in this so great a sea they shall all have die for hunger they consider in this navigation that the pole antarctic have no notable star after the sort of the pole arctic but they see many star gather together which be like two cloud the star above the sou^h Pole one separate a little from another and somewhat dark in the midst between these be two (@) not very big nor much shine which move a little and these two be the pole antarctic the needle of the comp^s the needle of their compass vary somewhat and turn ever towards the pole arctic nevertheless have no such force as when it be in these part of the pole arctic insomuch that it be necessary to help the needle with the leadstone the leadstone before they can sail therewith because it move not as it do when it be in these our part when they be in the mi^dest of the gulf they see a cross of five clear star direct towards the west and of equal distance the one from the other in these day they sail between the west and south so far that they approach to the equinoctial line the equinoctial line and be in longitude from the place from whence they first depart a hundred and twenty degree in this course they sail by two land of exceed height whereof the one name Cipanghu the land of Cipan^hu and sumbdit be twenty degree from the pole antarctic and the other name sumbdit fifteen degree when they be past the equinoctial line they sail between the west and Southwest at the quarter of the west towards the south-west more than a hundred league change their sail to the quarter of the south-west until they come to the thirteen degree above the equinoctial towards the pole arctic intend as much as w^re p^ssible to approach to the cape call of the old writer cattigara the which be not find as the old cosmographer have describe it but it be towards the north about twelve degree as they afterward understand when they have thus sail seventy league of this voyage in the twelve degree above the equinoctial ^nd a hundred forty six degree of longitude as I have say the six day of march th^y dis^^uered a little island towards the northwest and two other towards the south-west but the one be high and big than the other in the big of these the general will have rest himself a while but he can not by reason the people of these land resort continual to the ship with their canoas and steal now one thing and now anoher in such sort that our man can take no rest and therefore demand of the captain that they may strike their sail to bring the ship to land but the general be provoke to anger go aland with forty arm man and burn about fifty of their house with many of their canoas and slay also about seven man and recover a shippe-boat which the barbarian have steal and so depart follow his voyage he name these land that be the land of thief when our man have so wound some of they with arrow that they be strike through both side they pull forth the arrow not cease to marvel at they till they fall down dead and yet can not the other so depart but still follow the ship with more than two hundred of their boat approach as near to the ship as they can and proffer our man certain fish as the ship pass with full sail in the midst of their boat they see in some of they certain woman lament and tear their hair which our man think they do for the death of their husband as far as they can perceive these people live at their own liberty without any ruler or governor they go naked and some of they have black beard people with long ^ayre and black hair on their head which they wear long down to their waste they be of the same stature that we be and well make of colour like unto a olive their woman be well-favoured with black and thick hair on their head reach to the ground they wear also for a cover before their privity the inner bark of the palmtree be white than the man and seldom go out of door but at home make mat and net of the palmtree and other household necessary some of the man wear bonnet on their head of palmtree they colour their tooth red and black which they esteem a comely thing their food be and bird fig a handful long sugarcane fly fish and other thing they anoint their body and head with the oil of Cocus their boat be some all black some white and some red and have sail make of the broad leave of date-tree sow together in the stead of a rudder they use a certain broad board with a staff in the top and may when they will make the stern the forecastle or the forecastle the stern they sail so swift that they seem a far off like dolphin swim above the water their house be make of timber cover with board and leave of figtree a yard long they have a hall window and chamber they have palme-mat for bed-furniture and sleep on palm leave which be soft their weapon be club or pole with a horn head the ten day of march in the year 1521. they go aland upon a little island the island of Zamal name Zamal thirty league distant from the island of thief the next day he go on shore on another island not inhabit they rest here a while where the captain cause a pavilion to be pitch for the sick and craze man and a hog to be kill the island be call humunu and have two clear spring and gold and white coral and many fruit-tree they give it the name of good sign the eighteen day of march they see a boat with nine man come towards they show themselves joyful and rejoice of their come they bring many present with they and seem to be people of much humanity they give the captain a great fish and a great vessel of the wine of those date-tree which bear the fruit Cocus they make also sign that within the space of four day they will bring rice wine of date-tree and diverse fowl and beast as they do indeed this cocus be a fruit of certain date-tree whereof they make bread wine oil and vinegar they make wine in this manner they cut a big branch of the tree the marvellous fruit Cocus and hang thereat a reed as big as a man leg into the which drop a sweet liquor from the tree like unto white wine somewhat tart and let the reed continue there from morning till evening and from evening to morning the fruit of this tree call Cocus be as big as the head of a man or more the first rind of this be green and of the thickness of two finger have in it certain thread whereof they make cord with the which they tie their Bo under this rind there be a thick shell which they burn and make powder thereof and use it as a remedy for certain disease under this shell be a white substance like the kernel of a nut be a finger in thickness which they eat with flesh and fish as we do Bread it have the taste of a almond and be use in the stead of bread when it be dry in the midst of this kernel be a clear and sweet water be very wholesome and cordial this water sometime congeal and lie within the shell like a egg when they intend to make oil hereof they lay it to putrify in water and boil it until it be like oil or liquid butter when they intend to make vinegar they suffer only the water to putrify and then set it to the sun where it become vinegar like unto that which be make of white wine and when they mingle the kernel with the water which be in the midst of the fruit and strain it through a cloth they make a milk thereof like unto goat milk these date-tree be like unto they that bear date but be not so full of knot with the juice of two of these date-tree a whole family of ten person may be maintain with wine use one eight day and the other other eight day for they shall else be dry and wither these tree continue for the space of a hundred year this island where they find this human and gentle people be call zuluan the island of Zuluan and be not very big they invite the general to their boat in which be their merchandise viz. clove cinnamon ginger pepper nutmeg mace gold make in diverse thing which they carry to and fro with their bark he have they also aboard the ship and cause a piece of ordnance to be shoot off which terrify they so that they be ready to leap overboard but he appease they and give they gift the two and twenty of march they bring orange and a cock and with palme-wine in two bark the man be naked have two gold ring at their ear and many jewel fasten with gold to their arm with these they refresh their sick man they tell of people in near land with ear down to their arm they have dagger knife and lance garnish with Gold the sea call Archipelago San Lazaro this name Archipelago be give to sea full of land about this island they find many other land and therefore name this sea Archipelago San Lazaro that be the great sea of saint Lazarus be ten degree above the equinoctial towards our pole and a hundred threescore and one from the place from whence they depart the people of this island be gentile they go naked save that they cover their privy part with a cloth make of the rind of a certain tree the chief man have about their head a silken cloth of needlework they be gross and broad set and of the colour of a olive they anoint their body with the oil of Cocus to defend they against the heat of the sun gentile and dryness of the wind the five and twenty day of march they depart from hence and direct their course between the west and Southwest and sail between four land name Cenalo Huinanghan Hibusson and Abarien four land etc. the island of Buthuan the eight and twenty day of march they come to the island of Buthuan where they be honourable entertain of the king and the prince his son who give they much gold and spice the captain give the king a vesture of red cloth and another of yellow make after the turkish fashion and also a red cap and give likewise to other that come with he certain knyve glass and bead of crystal after that the captain have show the king the secret of his ship and such merchandise as he have therein he cause a piece of ordnance sudden to be shoot off whereat the king be great amaze until the captain comfort he then the captain command one of his man to be arm from the head to the foot and cause three other to strike he with their sword whereat the king marvel great and say to the interpreter who be a slave bear in malacca that one of those arm man be able to encounter with a hundred of his man but he marvel much more when the captain tell he by the interpreter how he find the straight by the compass and loadstone and how many day they be without sight of any land then ask licence to depart the captain send two of his man with he of the which Antony Pigafetta be one when they come on land the king lift his hand to the sky and after that towards the two christian these do the like and all the company after they the like ceremony they use in drink one to another the king palace be like a hay-house cover with palm and figleaf build on high Timbers aloft that they mount thereunto on ladder they sit at meat crosslegged like tailor they make light in the night with a gum of a tree wrap in leaf of palmtree when the king see Antony Pigafetta write the name of many thing and afterward rehearse they again he marvel yet more make sign that such man descend from heaven the king bring they first to his palace where he entertain they honourable and give they many gift as do also the prince in his palace the island of Caleghan be in another island name Caleghan as they sift a certain i of earth in the king island they find piece of gold some as big as nut and other as big as egg all the king vessel be of gold and his house well furnish plenty of Gold in all the whole nation there be no man of comely personage than the king he have his hair long down to his shoulder and very black with a veil of silk roll about his head the king of Buthuan and two great ring of gold hang at his ear he have about his middle a cloth wrought of Cotton and silk empale with gold and reach down to his knee on his one side he have a long dagger with a haft of gold and the sheathe of a fair kind of carve wood. he have on every finger three ring of gold and have his body anoint with oil of storax and Benjamin the natural colour of his face be like unto the colour of a olive and all his body beside paint with diverse colour the king name be Raia Colambu and the prince be call Raia Siagu they easy understand each other by mean of a slave which they carry with they take before at sumatra one man offer for six thread of crystal bead a crown of massy gold with a collar but the general will not permit such barter that they shall not perceive more account to be make of their gold by the one then by the other of the spanish ware the people be nimble naked paint the woman go clothe from the waste downward with their long black hair hang to the ground they wear earring of gold in diverse form they always be chew Arecca a certain fruit like a pear cut in quarter and roll up in leaf of a tree call good or vetele like bay leaf which have chew they spit forth it make the mouth red they say they do it to comfort the heart nor can live without it the captain or general cause a cross to be bring forth with nail and a crown of thorn give commandment to all his man to give reverence thereunto and signify to the king by the interpreter that that banner be give he by the emperor his lord and master with commandment to leave the same in all place where he come to the great commodity and profit of all such as will reverendly receive it as a assure token of friendship and that he will therefore leave it there as well to accomplish his lord commandment as also that if at any time any ship of christian shall chance to come that way they may by see that cross perceive that our man have be well entertain there and will therefore not only abstain from do they any hurt or displeasure but also help to aid they against their enemy and that therefore it shall be requisite to erect that cross upon the top of the high mountain that may be see from the sea on every side also to pray unto it reverent and that in so do they shall not be hurt with thunder lightning and tempest when the king hear these word they give the captain great thanks promise glad to observe and fulfil all such thing as he require then the captain demand whether they be Moor or gentile they answer mores and gentile that they have none other kind of religion but that lift up their hand join together and their face towards heaven they call upon their god abba which answer like the captain very well because the gentile be soon persuade to our faith then the moor depart from hence they come to the land of Zeilon Zubut messana and Calaghan by the conduct of certain pilot of the say king of these Zubut be the best many land and have the trade of best traffic in the island of messana they find dog cat hog hen goat rise ginger Cocus mill panic barley fig orange wax and gold the island of messana in great quantity this island be above the equinoctial towards our pole nine degree and two three part and a hundred threescore and two degree from the place from whence they depart they remain in this island for the space of eight day and then direct their voyage towards the northwest and pass between these five land Zeilon Bohol Canghu Barba^ and Catighan in this island of Catighan be certain great bat as big as eagle of the which they take one they be good to be eat and of taste much like a hen bat as big as eagle there be also stock-dove turtle-dove popinjay and certain fowl as big as hen these fowl have little horn and lay great egg which they cover a cubit depth in the sand by the heat whereof and virtue of the sun they be hatch fowl with horn egg hatch in sand. and the young bird creep out of the sand by themselves from the island of messana to Catighan be twenty league sail towards the west and because the king of messana can not follow the ship they tarry for he about the land of polo Ticobon and Fozon where the captain take he into his ship with certain of his principal man and so follow their voyage towards the island of zubut which be about fifty league distant from Catighan the seven day of April about noon they enter into the port of Zubut the island of Zubut and pass by many village and habitation in tree they come to the city where the captain give commandment to the mariner to strike their sail and to set themselves in order in manner of battell-ray cause all the ordnance to be shoot off wherewith all the people be put in great fear after this the captain send a ambassador with the interpreter to the king of Zubut when they approach near to the city they find the king with a great company of man sore astony at the noise of the gun but the interpreter advertise they that it be the custom of our man in all such place where they come to discharge their ordnance in token of friendship and to honour the lord of the city with which word the king and his company be well quiet after this the interpreter declare that his master be the captain of the ship of the great prince in the world and that they go to discover the land of Molucca and further that hear of his good name and fame by the report of the king of messana they determine to visit he and to have victual for exchange of their merchandise the king answer that he be well content therewith and that they be hearty welcome nevertheless that it be a custom in that place that all such ship as enter into that haven shall pay tribute and that there be not many day past since a ship lade with gold and slave do so pay in token whereof he cause to come before he certain merchant of that company which yet remain with he a ship lade with gold and slave to this the interpreter answer that for as much as his lord be the captain of so mighty a prince he never pay tribute to any king in the world and will not now begin will he to take this for a resolute answer that if he will accept the peace that be proffer he he shall enjoy it and if he rather desire wa^re he shall have his hand full when the interpreter have say these word one of the say merchant who be a more speak to the king in this manner Catacaia Chita that be take heed sir for these man be they that have conquer Calcutta Malacha and all the great India and be of such power that if you entreat they otherwise then well you may too late know what they be able to do Calcutta Malacha more than they have do at Calcutta and malacca when the interpreter hear these word he say that the king his lord be of much great puissance and more dominion and lord of more ship than be the king of Portugal declare further that he be king of Spain and emperor of all Christendom add hereunto that if he will not be his friend he will hereafter send thither such a power of arm man as shall destroy his country the more confer all these word with the king who say that he will further deliberate with his council and give they a full answer the day follow in the mean time he send they certain victual and wine when all these thing be declare to the king of messana who be the chief thereabouts next unto he and lord of many land he go a land and repair to the king of Zubut and declare unto he the great humanity and courtesy of the general captain short after the captain send certain of his man with the interpreter to the king of Zubut to know his pleasure and what answer he will make they as they go towards the court they meet the king come in the street accompany with many of his chief man he cause our man to sit down by he and demand of they if there be any more than one captain in their company and whether it be their request that he shall pay tribute to the emperor they answer that they desire none other thing but that they may exercise merchandise with they and to barter Ware for Ware the king make answer shed of blood be a token of friendship that he be well content therewith will the captain in token of friendship to send he a little blood of his right arm affirm that he will do the like after this the king of messana with the king of Zubut his nephew who be the prince and certain other of his gentleman come to the ship and bring the captain many goodly present they enter into great amity and have large communication of many thing the captain persuade they to the christian faith which they glad embrace and take such pleasure in hear the article of our belief that the tear fall from their eye for joy they be baptize the king of Zubut be baptize and short after all the people of the island they esteem nothing more precious then drink glass of Venice work when they come to the city they find the king in his palace sit upon a floor or story make of the leave of date tree wrought after a curious device like a certain kind of mat the king of Zubut his apparel he have upon his body none other apparel but only a cloth of bombasine cotton hang before his privy part on his head he have a veil of needlework and about his neck a chain of great price at his ear hang two ring of gold wherein be enclose many precious stone he be but of small stature but somewhat gross and have the residue of his body paint with diverse colour whereof some be like unto flame fire before he he have two vessel make of the fine earth call Porcellana with sodden egg also four vessel of Porcellana full of wine make of date tree and cover with many odoriferous herb well favour woman the prince bring they to his house where he have four daughter very well favour and white like we he cause they to dance all naked and therewith to sing and play on certain timbrel make of metal at this time it so chance that one of the spaniard die in one of the ship and when certain of their company desire the king to give they leave to bury he on the land he answer that for as much as he and all his be at the commandment of their king and master how much more ought the ground so to be they great marvel at the ceremony pertain to the manner of our funeral and honour the cross which be set at both the end of the grave they live with justice and use weight and measure their house be make of timber and saw board and be so build above the ground upon prop and pile that they ascend to the same by certain stair under their house they keep their hog and goat and hen they tell of certain goodly waterfowl as big as crow call Laghan which the whale of those part sometime swallow down but so be themselves devour the fowl gnaw the heart of the whale and kill he by the people find in the dead body float to land still live in the same the flesh of this fowl be delicate but the skin be black barter when they come to barter they give gold Ryce hog hen and diverse other thing for some of our trifle of small value they give ten Pesos of gold for fourteen pound weight of iron Pesus what it be one Pesus be in value a ducat and a half the Sunday follow the king be baptize with great solemnity at which time the captain admonish he before not to be afraid at the shoot off of the ordnance because it be their custom so to do at such solemn feast after this the captain cause they to break all their idol they break their idol and erect the crosse. and to set up the cross in diverse place pray to the same both morning and evening kneel on their knee and hold up their hand join together the king in his baptism be name Charles after the emperor name and the prince Ferdinando after the name of his majesty brother the king of messana be name John and the more Christopher to all other they give such name as be common use in Christendom five hundred man baptize and thus before mass be begin be five hundred man baptize when mass be finish the captain invite the king to dine with he in his ship and at his come cause the ordnance to be discharge the queen be also baptize with forty of her gentlewoman and her daughter the prince wife the queen of Zubut the queen be very young and fair have her body cover with a white Cloth her lip be red and she have on her head a hat on the top whereof be a triple crown much like the pope this crown and the hat be make of the leave of date tree within the space of eight day the inhabitant of the island be baptize except one village of idolater who will not herein obey the king commandment whereupon the captain send certain of his man thither who burn the town and erect a cross in that place because the people of the village be gentile that be idolater but if they have be Moor that be machumetist they will have erect a pillar of stone because the moor be more stubborn and hard to be convert then be the gentile when the queen come to the place where she shall hear mass she come forth with great pomp and solemnity have go before her three young damosel the queen apparel and three man with their cap in their hand who she follow apparel in white and black with a great veil of silk upon her head fringe about with gold which cover her hat and hang down to her shoulder she have also a great train of woman follow she be all barefooted and naked except that upon their head and privy part they wear certain veil of silk and have their hair spread before the king of Zubut be baptize he be name Raia Humabuon when the captain demand of he why all the idol in the island be not burn according to his promise he answer that they esteem they no more as god but only make sacrifice to they for the prince brother who be very sick and as noble and witty a man as be in the island the captain answer that if he will burn all his idol and believe faithful in Christ and be baptize he shall be immediate restore to health and that he will else give they leave to strike off his head by these word and persuasion of the captain he conceive such hope of health that after he be baptize he feel no more grief of his disease and this be a manifest miracle wrought in our time whereby diverse infidel be convert to our faith and their idol destroy and also their altar overthrow on the which they be accustom to eat the sacrifice flesh the people of the island pay the king a portion of victual for their tribute by all their city and village not far from this island of zubut be the island of Mathan the island of Mathan who inhabitant use marvellous ceremony in their sacrifice to the sun and in bury the dead before their swine-sacrifice they ring certain bell then bring three platter in two of which be viand of rice and honey boil roll up in leave and roast fish in the other be a linen cloth with two fillet or string which be spread on the earth then come two old woman each with a reed-trumpet in hand these mount upon the cloth and have worship the sun cover themselves with the Cloth one of they apply one of the string or fillet with two horn to her forehead hold the other in her hand and thus sound and dance call on the sun the other follow both pray sound and dance round about the hog tie in the midst the horn beldame mumble to the sun the other answer then a cup of wine be bring and make semblance to drink after diverse mutual mumble she pour it on the hog after which this horn mother have a lance bring she with which after a deal of mask and mum ceremony she kill he all this while a light be burn and now be put into the mouth of the swine the other beldame wash the head of the trump in the blood and with her finger imbrue with blood first sign her husband forehead and after other man which do they both disrobe themselves and eat the viand in the other dish only woman communicate with they they singe the hog the flesh they may not eat till it be thus consecrate by those witch they go naked except a little cloth before their privity the Males great and small make a hole through the skin near the head of the yard and therein a gold ring be put as big as a goose-quill they take as many wife as they will but one be principal when a man of s^rt die the principal woman go to his house and set bough in cord fasten about the corpse in every bough a piece of Cotton so that the place be like a tent. herein they sit array in white cotton each have a girdle with a fan of palm tree to cause wind one come after with a knife which cut off by little and little the hair of the decease after which his principal wife lie upon he apply her lip to he her hand to his hand and her foot to he when the one cut this other lament when she cease to cut this sing about the chamber be porcelain dish with fire on which they burn myrrh storax and other sweet this ceremony last five day all which time at midnight they say there come as it be a raven which light on the house and cry the dog with howl hold with the raven cry all lack sanctus for five hour each night after all this they enclose the corpse in a house close round with wood. the island be govern by two prince whereof the one be name Zula and the other Cilapulapu and whereas this Cilapulapu refuse to pay tribute to the king of Spain the captain go against he in his own person with threescore of his man arm with coat of mail and helmet Cilapulapu divide his army into three battle have in every battle two thousand and fifty man with arm bow arrow dart and javelin harden at the point with fire this continue long and sharp but the captain be a valiant man and press himself in the brunt of the battle be sore wound with a venom arrow and after with a lance of cane thrust in his face slay for as much as the most of the barbarian direct all their force against he the captain be slay beside the captain be slay of our man about eight or nine of the barbarian be fifteen slay and many sore wound after the death of the captain they choose two other in his place of the which one be odoardo Barbosa a Portugal and the other John serrano who be short after betray by the interpreter and take prisoner with diverse other the enemy will not permit magalianes body to be ransom at any price certain day before the captain death they have knowledge of the land of Molucca which they chief seek depart therefore from the island of Mathan they sail far and come to the cape of another island the island of Bohol they burn one of their ship black man name Bohol in the midst of this main sea which they name Archipelagus they consult to burn the ship name conception because they be now few in number and to furnish the other two ship with the artillery thereof thus direct their course towards south-west they come to another island name Paviloghon where they find black man short after they arrive at another great island who king name Raia Calavar entreat they very friendly in all thing as do the king of messana this island be rich in gold and have plenty of rice ginger hog goat hen and diverse other thing it be name chippit the island of chippit and be eight degree above the equinoctial line towards our pole and in longitude from the place from whence they first depart a hundred and seventy degree and about fifty league from Zubut the king in token of peace draw blood of his left hand and therewith anoint his body face and the top of his tongue the like be do by the spaniard Pigafetta be entertain by the king and his two wife with deep carouse which he refuse to pledge excuse that he have sup here he see much gold but small provision of victual the island of caghaian depart from hence they come to another island name caghaian be forty league from chippit as they sail between the west and Southwest this island be very great and in manner habit the people be Moor and be banish out of the island of Burnei which some call they use poison arrow and have store of Gold from this island about five and twenty league between the west and northwest they find a marvelous fruitful island the island of Pulaoan name Pulaoan be towards our pole above the equinoctial nine degree and a three part and a hundred seventy and nine degree and a three part in longitude from the place of their depart in it be store of rice ginger hog and goat hen fig half a yard long as big as a man arm very good and other of lesser kind battato sugar cane and a kind of pleasant root the king in token of friendship wound his breast with a knife touch with the blood his tongue and forehead and the spaniard do likewise the people go naked use poison arrow have great cock which they use in cock-fighting but not for food by reason of a reasonless superstition they have wine of Rice better than that of the palmtree easy cause drunkenness the island of Burnei or from this island ten league towards the south-west they see another island which seem to they sometime to mount as they sail by the coast thereof as they be enter into the port there arise a boisterous and dark tempest which cease as soon as the fire of the three saint whereof we have speak before appear upon the cable from the beginning of this island to the port be five league this island be great and rich and the chief city thereof contain five and twenty thousand house the king entertain our man very friendly a great city and send they beside many other present two elephant trap with silk to bring they to his palace elephant that bring the present which the captain send he he have a magnificent court and a great guard also a multitude of concubine he be a more and be name Raia he be a king of great power and have under he many other king land and city this island of Burnei be above the equinoctial towards our pole five degree and a quarter and in longitude from the place of their depart a hundred seventy six degree and two three part they use here betele and Arec^a and rice-wine call Arach their reverence to the king be three time to hold the (@) close over the head then to lift up the foot one after the other and last to kiss their hand the king have ten scribe or secretary which write his affair in bark of tree his household be all order by woman and the chief man daughter on the nine and twenty of july they be assault by a hundred prawe and junke of which they take four in one of which be the son of the king of Lozon captain general to the king of borneo who now be return from the sack of Lao a great city in the island towards java for the ethnic or native and the moor of this island be in fierce war against each other and have not the pilot for a bribe let this man escape close he have be worth much to they in ransom this king of borneo have two pearl as it be hen egg and so round that on a plain table they will not stand firm in this island grow Camphir which be the gum of the tree Capar and cinnamon ginger Mirabolans orange lemon sugar cucumber melon swine goat hen dear elephant horse etc. depart from Burnei they come to a island call Cimbubon the island of Cimbubon be eight degree seven minute above the equinoctial line here they remain forty day to calk their ship and furnish they with fresh water and fuel which be to they great pain and travel because they be in manner all barefooted their shoe and in manner their other apparel be wear by reason of the long voyage in the wood of this island they find a tree who leave as soon as they fall on the ground do stir and remove from place to place leave of tree which seem to live as though they be alive they be much like the leave of a mulberry tree and have on every side as it be two short and blunt foot when they be cut or break there be no blood see come forth of they yet when any of they be touch they sudden move and start away Antony Pigafetta keep one of they in a platter for the space of eight day and ever when he touch it it run round about the platter he suppose that they live only by air here be crocodile and wild hog and ostrich they take also a fish head like a swine with two horn the rest of the body all of one bone and as it be a saddle on the back depart from hence they direct their course by the west quarter towards the southeast to find the land of Molucca and sail not far from certain mountain where they find the sea full of great weed and herb a sea full of weed from hence they come to the land of Zolo and in the which be find pearl of exceed bigness the king of borneo have his two pearl from hence pearl captive the king his father in law and make he pay they for ransom follow their course towards the north-east they come to a great city name Mangdando lie above the land of Buthuan and Calaghan where they take a Canoa of certain of the inhabitant by who be inform of the land of Molucca they leave their course towards the north-east and follow the southeast near unto a cape of the island of Buthuan they be advertise for certainty that on the bank of a certain river there dwell man call Benaian overgrow with hair which kill man man overgrow with hair and do eat their heart raw with the juice of orange and lemon they be tall and strong use Bowes and sword of wood. in these land grow the best cinnamon whereof they have seven and twenty pound in exchange for two knife here be the great city Mangdando be in six degree seven minute they make their way southeast and encounter four land Ciboco Biramboia Sarangani a great tempest here assail they the four and twenty of October but after their prayer the three light appear on their shrowd whereupon the darkness cease if a worse do not remain for they hereupon vow to set free a slave in honour of the three saint s. Helena s. Nicholas and s. Clare how much more tolerable be that ethnic adoration of the sun and star than this of inferior meteor if it may any way be tolerable to give the glory of God to a creature after the tempest they come to harbour in the i will Sarangani where they hear be gold and pearl here they take by force two pilot for the molucca they pass eight land some inhabit some not their name be Ceana Canida Cabiaio Camuca Cabalu Chiai Lipan Nuzza and then come to a fair island call Sanghir in three degree and a half where be four gentile king they pass five other land and then espy four other which their pilot say be the molucca this be the six day of November and the seven and twenty month after their departure out of Spain be therefore joyful and give thanks unto God they discharge all their ordnance in the coast of all these land even unto the land of Molucca sound with their plummet the land of Molucca they find the depth of the sea to be no less than a hundred and two yard which be contrary to the say of the portugal who affirm that no ship can pass that way without great danger the portugal be reprove by reason of the shallowness and rock or shelf and for the darkness which the cloud cause in the heaven all which thing they feign to the intent that none other shall have knowledge of their voyage the eight day of November in the year 1521. before the rise of the sun they enter into the port of the island of Tidore be one of the chief land of Molucca Tidore one of the land of Molucca where they be honourable entertain of the king who declare that he have long before dream that certain ship shall come from a far country to the land of Molucca and that whereas for the better certificate thereof he consider the station of the moon a vision in the planet he see therein the come of our ship and that we be the man who he seem to see in the same whereupon he proffer himself to enter into league of friendship with the king of Spain and to accept our man as his brethren and child will they to come aland as into their own house also that for their come that island shall no more be call Tidore but Castille for the great love which he bear to their king who he repute as his lord and master this king be a more and be name Raia sultan Mauzor he swear upon the Alcoran lay it three or four time on his head and say certain word to be friend to the king of Spain the five land of Molucca tarenate the land of Molucca be five in number and be thus name tarenate Tidore mutir Macchian and Bacchian of these tarenate be the chief and the king thereof be sometime lord of they all mutir and Macchian be now govern of the people Bacchian have a King the clove-tree be as big as a man about tall the bough large in the midst and point at the top the leave as of bay-tree the bark of olive colour the clove grow ten and twenty together in the top of the bough first white red at ripeness black by the dry they gather they twice a year in june and December the leaf bark and wood be green be as strong as the Clove if they take they not in their time they grow great and hard every man have his own tree and bestow little husbandry on they the woman be brutish and go naked save that before their privity they have a cover make of a tree which be steep in water be beat into as large a form as they will even to the thinness of silk the island of Gilolo Moor and gentile direct against the island of Tidore there be another great island name Gilolo inhabit of Moor and gentile the moor have two king of the which one have six hundred child and the other six hundred and fifty the gentile keep not so many woman as do the moor nor yet live in such superstition they pray to the first thing that they meet in the morning when they go forth of their house and honour that as their god for that day Gold water in reed the king of the gentile be very rich in Gold in the say island of Gilolo be reed as big as a man leg and full of clear water wholesome to be drink the twelve day of November the king of Tidore appoint our man a Warehouse in the city their manner of barter where they may sell their merchandise their manner of exchange be in this sort for ten yard of good red cloth they have one Bahar of clove which amount to four and six pound weight and one Cantar be a hundred pound weight for fifteen yard of cloth somewhat worse than the other they receive in Cambie one Bahar for five and thirty drink cup of glass they have one Bahar for seventeen cathyl of quicksilver one Bahar they come daily to the ship with many of their bark full of goat hen fig of a span long also the fruit call Cocus with diverse other kind of victual in such quantity that it be a marvelous thing to behold they furnish also their ship with fresh water water of a strange quality which be hot as it issue out of the spring but be very cold when it have stand a while in another place it spring from the mountain on the which the clove-tree grow they see a cloud rise in manner daily which compass about the say mountain of clove-tree there be some nutmeg-tree also bird of a strange form the king of the island of bacchian send the king of Spain two dead bird of strange form they be of the bigness of turtle-dove with little head and long bylls also long and small leg and no wing but in the stead thereof certain long feather of diverse colour and tail like turtle-dove all the other feather be of one colour much like unto tawny except those of the wing they fly not but when the wind blow these moor be of opinion that these bird come from the heavenly paradise and therefore call they Manuccodiata that be the bird of God when they be determine to depart from the land of Molucca certain king of the land accompany they with their canoas and conduct they to a island call mare where they refresh their ship with fresh water and fuel the king send the emperor majesty many present and embrace our man depart with the tear in their eye and our man for their last farewell shoot off all their ordnance they leave one of their ship behind they in the island of mare they perceive that one of their ship leak and take water very sore whereby they be enforce to tarry there three day but see that they can find no remedy for the same but in long time they determine to leave it give order that if afterward it can be repair they shall return into Spain as well as they can the land of Molucca in all the land of Molucca be find clove ginger bread of the branch or inner part of Sagu Rice goat sheep hen fig almond sweet pomegranate and sour orange lemon honey of fly and honey which be make of certain fly less than aunt also cane of sugar oil of Cocus melon gourd and a marvelous cold fruit which they name Camulicai and diverse other fruit popinjay furthermore white and red popinjay and other of variable colour it be not past fifty year since the moor first inhabit any of these land which be before inhabit only with gentile the island of Tidore be above the equinoctial line towards our pole the island of T^dore about seven and twenty minute and in longitude from the place from whence they depart a hundred seventy one degree and from the archipelagus in the which be the island of Zamal which our man name the island of thief nine degree and a half and run to the quarter of south south-west and north north-east terenate be under the equinoctial line four minute terenate mutir Macchian Bacchian under the pole antarctic mutir be direct under the equinoctial line Macchian be fifteen minute towards the pole antarctic and Bacchian one degree these land be like four sharp mountain except Macchian which be not sharp the big of all these be Bacchian depart from the island of mare and direct their course towards the south-west with only six and forty man in their ship and thirteen indian many land they pass by the land of Chacovan Lagoma Sico Gioghi Caphi Buru Ambon Budia Celaruri Benaia Ambalao bandon Zorobua Zolot Nocevamor Galian and Mallua the island of Mallua with diverse other land both great and small of moor gentile and cannibal our man remain fifteen day in the island of Mallua to repair their ship in certain place where it take water all the field of this island be full of long and round pepper pepper and be situate towards the pole antarctic under the equinoctial line eight degree and a half and be in the longitude of a hundred sixty nine degree and forty minute the people be men-eater the woman use bow and arrow the man wear their hair and beard in cane there grow much pepper both long and round with leave like mulberry and climb like to ivy the pilot which our man bring out of the land of Molucca tell they little man with long ear a ^abulous report such have be the ground of fabulous monster in Pliny etc. the island of white Saunders and ginger the devil appear saint job his disease that not far from thence be a island name Arucetto in the which be man and woman not past a cubit in height have ear of such bigness that they lie upon one and cover they with the other but our man will not sail thither both because the wind and course of the sea be against they and also for that they give no credit to his report the five and twenty day of january in the year 1522. they depart from Mallua and the day follow arrive at a great island name be five league distant from Mallua between the south and south-west in this island be find the wood of white Saunders and ginger and diverse kind of fruit also sundry kind of beast and plenty of victual and Gold they of the land of Giava Molucca and Lozon resort to this island for Saunders the inhabitant be gentile they say that when they go to cut the wood of Saunders the devil appear to they in diverse form and ask they what they have need of and that after this vision many of they be long sick in all the land of this archipelagus reign the disease of saint job which we call the french pox more than in any other place in the World this island stand in ten degree antarctic and a hundred seventy four in longitude far from this island between the west and northwest they come to a island name eude in the which grow great plenty of cinnamome in this Tract be find many land lie in order as it be one direct behind another cinnamome even unto the island of the great Giava name and unto the cape of Malacha be in east India the land of Giava Malacha the less be as big as the island of madera and be but half a league distant from Giava the eleven day of February in the year 1522. they depart from the island of and be engulf by chance in the great sea call Lantchidol the sea of Lantchidol and take their course between the west and south-west leave the north coast on their right hand fear lest if they shall sail towards the firm land they may be see of the portugal who be of great power in Malacha and therefore direct their course without the island of sumatra Malacha the island of sumatra cap. de buona Speranza call in old time Taprobana and more safe to pass the cape of buona Speranza be above Africa they sail about two and forty degree towards the pole antarctic and remain seven week about that cape with many fetch compass the wind with their sail continual aloft because they have a west and northwest wind in the prow of their ship which will not suffer they to pass the cape of buona Speranza be towards the pole antarctic beneath the equinoctial line four and thirty degree and a half and a thousand six hundred league from the cape of Malacha and be the great and most dangerous cape that be find at this day in all the World when they have by these peril over-passed this cape certain of they as well for lack of victual as also by reason of sickness be mind to sail to a haven of the portugal name mozambique above Africa but the other answer that they will rather die the port of mozambique then go to any other place then direct to Spain they follow their course therefore sail towards the south-west two month continual without touch at any port in which time there die about one and twenty of their company who they cast into the Sea and sure if God of his infinite mercy have not preserve the residue in time they have all die of famine in fine be enforce of necessity and half of their company dead they sail to one of the land of Capo Verde call that be saint james island pertain to the king of Portugal where as soon as they arrive they send certain aland in the shipboat for victual declare to the portugal with all love and favour what necessity they be drive to and what misery and travail they have sustain inform they furthermore of their marvelous voyage and such thing as they have see in both the east and west India with such other gentle word whereby they obtain certain measure of Rice but when afterward thirteen of they return for more rice they be detain whereupon the rest which remain in the ship fear the like chance depart with full sail and the seven day of September the port of s. Lucar near unto Sivile with the help of God enter into the haven of San Lucar near unto sivile where discharge all their ordnance for joy they go immediate to the great church in their shirt and barefooted with a torch before they to give thanks to almighty God who have bring they safe to their own country and restore they to their wife and child of this ship San Victoria which return and have first discover the straits they be call the straits of Victoria which name pass after to Magalianes himself what become of the other ship Dariena the other ship which they leave behind they to be repair return afterward by the archipelagus aforesaid and by the great sea to the coast of the firm of the west India and arrive at a region of the same be against Dariena where the south sea of sur be separate but by a little space of land from the west ocean in the which be the land of hispaniola and Cuba and other land of the spaniard the portugal take the trinity and the castilian in Tidore and overthrow their factory they build also by leave a port in ternate and establish a factory for themselves indent that they alone shall have the clove sell to they John Sebastian canon which bring home the ship Victoria into Spain be well reward by the emperor but much strife hereby grow betwixt Spain and Portugal each challenge the molucca to his own division cosmographer be in fine appoint to define the controversy with pilot and judge on both side depute and after much menace and brabble and delay the portugal trade be great and loath to lose such a morsel take the advantage of the emperor marriage to the lady Isabel sister to king John of Portugal which have use of money empaw the land and trade of spicery go then into Italy to be crown 1529. to the say king for three hundred and fifty thousand ducat without term limit in the year 1548. Cortes offer to repay that money for six year profit of that trade and to leave the same after that to the crown but the emperor will not admit it and so it continue till the crown of Portugal itself be annex to the castilian before also some have attempt this discovery our of new Spain by the south sea but unlucky as by the relation of ivan gaetan a castilian pilot * * this voyage be in Romusio his first tome appear who set sail from the port of nativity in twenty degree 1542. and come to the molucca where the king of Tidore give they kind entertainment but their weak ship force they to agree with the spaniard this sea be yearly navigate by the spaniard to the philippina which now also concur with the molucca chap. 3 the second circum-navigation of the earth or the renown voyage of sir FRANCIS Drake the first general which ever sail about the whole globe begin in the year of our lord 1577. heretofore publish by m. r. HACKLVYT and now review and correct the fifteen day of November in the year of our lord 1577. m. Francis drake with a fleet of five ship and bark and to the number of a hundred sixty four man gentleman and sailor depart from Plymouth give out his pretend voyage for Alexandria but the wind fall contrary he be force the next morning to put into Falmouth haven in Cornwall where such and so terrible a tempest take we as few man have see the like and be indeed so vehement that all our ship be like to have go to wrack but it please God to preserve we from that extremity and to afflict we only for that present with these two particular the mast of our admiral which be the pelican be cut overboard for the safeguard of the ship and the marigold be drive ashore and somewhat bruise for the repair of which damage we return again to Plymouth and have recover those harm and bring the ship again to good state we set forth the second time from Plymouth and set sail the thirteen day of December follow the five and twenty day of the same month we fall with the cape cantin upon the coast of Barbary and coast along the seven and twenty day we find a island call mogador lie one mile distant from the main between which island and the main the isle of mogador on the coast of Barbary we find a very good and safe harbour for our ship to ride in as also very good entrance and void of any danger on this island our general erect a pinnace whereof he bring out of England with he four ready frame while these thing be in do there come to the water side some of the inhabitant of the country show forth their flag of truce which be see of our general he send his shippe-boat to the shore to know what they will they be willing to come aboard our man leave there one man of our company for a pledge and bring two of they aboard our ship which by sign show our general that the next day they will bring some provision as sheep capon and hen and such like whereupon our general bestow among they some linen cloth and shoe and a javelin which they very joyful receive and depart for that time the next morning they fail not to come again to the water side and our general again set out our boat one of our man leap over-rash ashore and offer friendly to embrace they they lay violent hand on he offer a dagger to his throat if he have make any resistance and so lay he on a horse carry he away so that a man can be too circumspect and wary of himself among such miscreant our pinnace be finish januarie we depart from this place the thirty and last day of December and coast along the shore we do descry not contrary to our expectation certain canter which be spanish fisherman to who we give chase and take three of they and proceed further we meet with three caravel and take they also the seventeen day of january we arrive at cape blanco where we find a ship ride at anchor within the cape and but two simple mariner in she which ship we take and carry she further into the harbour where we remain four day and in that space our general muster and train his man on land in warlike manner to make they fit for all occasion in this place we take of the fisherman such necessary as we want and they can yield we and leave here one of our little bark call the Benedict we take with we one of they which they call canter be of the burden of forty ton or thereabouts all these thing be finish we depart this harbour the two and twenty of january carry along with we one of the Portugal caravel which be find to the land of cape Verde for salt whereof good store be make in one of those land the master or pilot of that caravell do advertise our general that upon one of those land call mayo there be great store of dry cabrito which a few inhabitant the isle of mayo there dwell do yearly make ready for such of the king ship as do there touch be find for his country of Brasile or elsewhere we fall with this island the seven and twenty of january but the inhabitant will in no case traffic with we be thereof forbid by the king edict yet the next day our general send to view the island and the likely hood that may be there of provision of victual about threescore and two man under the conduct and government of master winter and master Doughtie and march towards the chief place of habitation in this island as by the Portugal we be inform have travel to the mountain the space of three mile and arrive there somewhat before the day break we rest ourselves to see day before we which appear we find the inhabitant to be flee but the place by reason that it be manure we find to be more fruitful than the other part especial the valley among the hill here we give ourselves a little refresh as by very ripe and sweet grape which the fruitfulness of the earth at that season of the year yield we ripe grape in winter and that season be with we the depth of winter it may seem strange that those fruit be then there grow but the reason thereof be this because they be between the tropic and the equinoctial the sun pass twice in the year through their zenith over their head by mean whereof they have two summer and be so near the heat of the line they never lose the heat of the sun so much but the fruit have their increase and continuance in the midst of winter the island be wonderful store with goat and wild hen and it have salt also without labour save only that the people gather it into heap which continual in great quantity be increase upon the sand by the flow of the sea and the heat of the sun kern the same so that of the increase thereof they keep a continual traffic with their neighbour among other thing we find here a kind of fruit call which because it be not common know with we in England I think good to make some description of it the description of the tree that bear the tree bear no leave nor branch but at the very top the fruit grow in cluster hard at the top of the stem of the tree as big every several fruit as a man head but have take off the uttermost bark which you shall find to be very full of string or sinew as I may term they you shall come to a hard shell which may hold of quantity in liquor a pint common or some a quart and some less within that shell of the thickness of half a inch good you shall have a kind of hard substance and very white no less good and sweet then almond within that again a certain clear liquor which be drink you shall not only find it very delicate and sweet but most comfortable and cordial after we have satisfy ourselves with some of these fruit we march further into the island and see great store of * * or goat cabritos alive which be so chase by the inhabitant that we can do no good towards our provision but they have lay out as it be to stop our mouth withal certain old dry cabrito which be but ill and small and few we make no account of be return to our ship our general depart hence the one and thirty of this month the isle of s. jago and sail by the island of saint jago but far enough from the danger of the inhabitant who shot and discharge at we three piece but they all fall short of we and do we no harm the island be fair and large and as it seem rich and fruitful and inhabit by the portugal but the mountain and high place of the island be say to be possess by the moor who have be slave to the portugal to ease themselves make escape to the desert place of the island where they abide with great strength be before this island we espy two ship under sail to the one of which we give chase and in the end board she with a shipboat without resistance which we find to be a good prize a pri^e and Nuno da Si^ua a Portugal pilot take and she yield unto we good store of wine which prize our general commit to the custody of master Doughtie and retain the pilot send the rest away with his pinnace give they a but of wine and some victual and their wear clothes and so they depart the same night we come with the island call by the portugal Ilha that be the burn island the isle of fogo in the north side whereof be a consume fire the matter be say to be of sulphur but notwithstanding it be like to be a commodious island because the portugal have build and do inhabit there upon the south side thereof lie a most pleasant and sweet island the tree whereof be always green and fair to look upon in respect whereof they call it ilha Brava that be the brave island from the bank thereof into the sea do run in many place reasonable stream of fresh water easy to be come by but there be no convenient road for our ship for such be the depth that no ground can be have for anchor and it be report that ground be never find in that place so that the top of fogo burn not so high in the air but the root of Brava be drench as low in the Sea be depart from these land we draw towards the line where we be becalm the space of three week but yet subject to diverse great storm terrible lightning and much thunder but with this misery we have the commodity of great store of fish as dolphin bonito and fly fish whereof some fall into our ship wherehence they can not rise again for want of (@) for when their wing be dry they can fly from the first day of our departure from the island of cape Verde we sail four and fifty day without sight of land and (...) that we fall with be the coast of brasil April 33. degree which we see the five of April in (...) of three and thirty degree towards the pole antarctic and be discover at (@) ^he inhabitant of the country they make upon the coast great fire for a sacrifice (@) ^ee learned to the devil about which they use conjuration make heap of sand a^d other ceremony that when any ship shall go about to stay upon their coast not only sand may be gather together in shoalds in every place but also that storm and tempest may arise to the cast away of ship and man whereof as it be report there have be diverse experiment the seven day in a mighty great storm both of lightning rain and thunder we lose the canter which we call the Christopher but the eleven day after by our general great care in disperse his ship we find she again and the place where we meet our general call the cape of joy the cape of Ioy where every ship take in some water here we find a good temperature and sweet air a very fair and pleasant country with a exceed fruitful soil where be great store of large and mighty deer but we come not to the sight of any people but travel further into the country we perceive the foot of people in the clay-ground show that they be man of great stature be return to our ship we weigh anchor and run somewhat further and harbour ourselves between a rock and the main where by mean of the rock that break the force of the sea we rid very safe and upon this rock we kill for our provision certain sea-wolue common call with we seal their entrance into the river of plate from hence we go our course to six and thirty degree and enter the great river of plate and run into four and fifty and three and fifty fathom and a half of fresh water where we fill our water by the ship side but our general find here no good harbour as he think he shall bear out again to sea the seven and twenty of April and in bear out we lose sight of our flie-boat wherein master Doughtie be but we sail along find a fair and reasonable good bay wherein be many and the same profitable land one whereof have so many seal as will at the least have lade all our ship and the rest of the land be as it be lade with fowl which be wonderful to see abundance of seales and they of diverse sort it be a place very plentiful of victual and have in it no want of fresh water our general after certain day of his abode in this place be on shore in a island the people of the country show themselves unto he leap and dance and enter into traffic with he but they will not receive any thing at any man hand but the same must be cast upon the ground they be of clean comely and strong body swift on foot and seem to be very active the eighteen day of May our general think it needful to have a care of such ship as be absent and therefore endeavour to seek the flie-boat wherein master Doughtie be may. we espy she again the next day and whereas certain of our ship be send to discover the coast and to search a harbour the s and the canter be employ in that business come unto we and give we understand of a safe harbour that they have find wherewith all our ship bare and enter it where we water and make new provision of victual as by seal whereof we slay to the number of two hundred or three hundred in the space of a hour here our general in the admiral ride close aboard the flie-boat and take out of her all the provision of victual and what else be in she and hale she to the land set fire to she the flie-boat cast off and burn and so burn she to save the iron work which berng a do there come down of the country certain of the people naked save only about their waste the skin of some beast with the fur or hair on and something also wreathe on their head the people of the country their face be paint with diverse colour and some of they have on their head the similitude of horn every man his bow which be a ell in length and a couple of arrow they be very agile people and quick to deliver and seem not to be ignorant in the feat of war as by their order of range a few man may appear these people will not of a long time receive any thing at our hand yet at length our general be ashore and they dance after their accustom manner about he and he once turn his back towards they one leap sudden to he and take his cap with his gold band of his head and run a little distance from he and share it with his fellow the cap to the one and the band to the other have dispatch all our business in this place we depart and set sail and immediate upon our set forth we lose our canter which be absent three or four day but when our general have she again he take out the necessary and so give she over the cape of good hope near to the cape of good hope the next day after be the twenty of june june we harbour ourselves again in a very good harbour call by Magellan port s. julian where we find a gibbet stand upon the main port s. julian. which we suppose to be the place where Magellan do execution upon some of his disobedient and rebellious company and here m. Thomas Doughty be try and receive sentence of death which be also here execute m. Thomas Doughtie execute here also some of our man go ashore be by the savage force to retire the seventeen day of August we depart the port of s. julian and the twenty day we fall with the straight or fret of Magellan go into the south sea August at the cape or head-land whereof we find the body of a dead man the straight of Magellan who flesh be clean consume the one and twenty day we enter the straight which we find to have many turn and as it be shutting up as if there be no passage at all by mean whereof we have the wind often against we so that some of the fleet recover a cape or point of land other shall be force to turn back again and to come to a anchor where they can in this straight there be many fair harbour with store of fresh water but yet they lack their best commodity for the water be there of such depth that no man shall find ground to anchor in except it be in some narrow river or corner or between some rock so that if any extreme blast or contrary wind do come whereunto the place be much subject it carry with it no small danger the land on both side be very huge and mountainous the low mountain whereof although they be monstrous and wonderful to look upon for their height yet there be other which in height exceed they in a strange manner reach themselves above their fellow so high that between they do appear three region of cloud these mountain be cover with snow at both the southerly and easterly part of the straight there be land among which the sea have his indraught into the straits even as it have in the main entrance of the fret this straight be extreme cold with frost and snow continual the tree seem to stoop with the burden of the wether and yet be green continual and many good and sweet herb do very plentiful grow and increase under they the breadth of the straight be in some place a league in some other place two league and three league the breadth of the straits of Magellan and in some other four league but the narrow place have a league over abundance of pengwin in the straight the four and twenty of August we arrive at a island in the straits where we find great store of fowl which can not fly of the bigness of goose whereof we kill in less than one day three thousand and victual ourselves thorough therewith September the six day of September we enter the south sea at the cape or head shore the seven day we be drive by a great storm from the enter into the south sea two hundred league and odd in longitude and one degree to the southward of the straight in which height and so many league to the westward the fifteen day of September fall out the eclipse of the moon at the hour of six of the clock at night but neither do the eclipticall conflict of the moon impair our state nor her clear again amend we a whit but the accustom eclipse of the sea continue in his force we be darken more than the moon sevenfold from the bay which we call the bay of sever of friend we be drive back to the southward of the straits 57 degree and a terce of southerly latitude Botero write that another have find this place all land in seven and fifty degree and a terce in which height we come to a anchor among the land have there fresh and very good water with herb of singular virtue not far from hence we enter another bay where we find people both man and woman in their canoas naked and range from one island to another to seek their meat who enter traffic with we for such thing as they have we return hence northward again find the three of October three land in one of which be such plenty of bird as be scant credible to report the eight day of October we lose sight of one of our consort wherein m. winter be who m. winter separate and return as than we suppose be put by a storm into the straits again which at our return home we find to be true and he not perish as some of our company fear he still I think be alive I confer with he of this voyage at bath in septemb 1618. he tell i and desire that it shall be publish that formal possession be then and there take of the say straits and territory with turf and twig after the english manner captain Drake deliver he the say possession in the name and to the use of queen Elizabeth and her successor thus be come into the height of the straits again we run suppose the coast of chili to lie as the general map have describe it namely northwest which we find to lie and trend to the north-east the trend of the coast of chili and eastward whereby it appear that this part of chili have not be true hitherto discover or at the least not true report for the space of twelve degree at the least be set down either of purpose to deceive or of ignorant conjecture the isle Mocha in 38. degree and 30. minute we continue our course fall the nine and twenty of November with a island call la Mocha where we cast anchor and our general hoist out our boat go with ten of our company to shore where we find people who the cruel and extreme deal of the spaniard have force for their own safety and liberty to fly from the main and to fortify themselves in this island we be on land the people come down to we to the water side with show of great courtesy bring to we potato root and two very fat sheep which our general receive and give they other thing for they and have promise to have water there but the next day repair again to the shore and send two man aland with barrel to fill water the people take they for spaniard to who they use to show no favour if they take they lay violent hand on they and as we think slay they our general see this stay here no long but weigh anchor and set sail towards the coast of chili and draw towards it we meet near to the shore a indian in a Canoa who think we to have be spaniard come to we and tell we that at a place call s. jago there be a great spanish ship lade from the kingdom of Peru for which good news our general give he diverse trifle whereof he be glad and go along with we and bring we to the place the port of Valparizo in 33. degree 40. minute which be call the port of Valparizo when we come thither we find indeed the ship ride at anchor have in her eight spaniard and three negro who think we to have be spaniard and their friend welcome we with a drum and make ready a Bottija of wine of chili to drink to we but as soon as we be enter wine of chili one of our company call thomas moon begin to lay about he and strike one of the spaniard and say unto he Perro that be in english go^ down dog one of these spaniard see person of that quality in those sea all to cross and bless himself but to be short we stow they under hatch all save one Spaniard who sudden and desperate leap overboard into the sea and swim ashore to the town of s. jago to give they warning of our arrival they of the town be not above nine household the town of s. jago take present flee away and abandon the town our general man his boat and the spanish ship boat and go to the town and be come to it we rifle it and come to a small chapel which we enter and find therein a silver chalice two cruet and one altar-cloth the spoil whereof our general give to m. Fletcher his minister we find also in this town a Warehouse store with wine of chili wine of chili and many board of cedar-wood all which wine we bring away with we and certain of the board to burn for firewood and so be come aboard we depart the haven have first set all the spaniard on land save one John Griego a greek bear John Gr^ego a pilot take who our general carry with he for his pilot to bring he into the haven of Lima. when we be at sea our general rifle the ship and find in her good store of the wine of chili and five and twenty thousand pezoes of very pure and fine gold of Baldivia gold of Baldivia amount in value to seven and thirty thousand ducat of spanish money and above so go on our course we arrive next at a place call coquimbo where our general send fourteen of his man on land to fetch water but they be espy by the spaniard in 29. degree 30. minute who come with three hundred horseman and two hundred footman and slay one of our man with a piece the rest come aboard in safety and the spaniard depart we go on shore again and bury our man and the spaniard come down again with a flag of truce but we set sail and will not trust they from hence we go to a certain port call Tarapaca where be land Tarapaxa we find by the sea side a Spaniard lie asleep who have lie by he thirteen bar of silver which weigh four thousand ducat spanish we take the silver and leave the man not far from hence go on land for fresh water we meet with a Spaniard and a indian boy drive eight Llamas or sheep of Peru which be as big as ass every of which sheep have on his back two bag of leather each bag contain fifty pound weight of fine silver so that bring both the sheep and their burden to the ship we find in all the bag eight hundred weight of silver hence we sail to a place call arica and be enter the port arica in 1^ degree 30. minute we find there three small bark which we rifle and find in one of they seven and fifty wedge of silver each of they weigh about twenty pound weight and every of these wedge be of the fashion and bigness of a brick-bat in all these three bark we find not one person for they mistrust no stranger be all go aland to the town which consist of about twenty house which we will have ransack if our company have be better and more in number but our general content with the spoil of the ship leave the town and put off again to sea and set sail for lima and by the way meet with a small bark which he board and find in her good store of linen cloth whereof take some quantity he let she go to lima we come the thirteen day of February and be enter the haven we find there about twelve sail of ship lie fast moor at a anchor lima in 11. degree 50. minute have all their sail carry on shore for the master and merchant be here most secure have never be assault by enemy and at this time fear the approach of none such as we be our general rifle these ship and find in one of they a chest full of rial of plate and good store of silk and linen cloth and take the chest into his own ship and good store of the silk and linen in which ship he have news of another ship call the Cacafuego which be go towards Paita and that the same ship be lade with treasure whereupon we stay no long here but cut all the cable of the ship in the haven we let they drive whither they will either to sea or to the shore and with all speed we follow the cacafuego towards Paita think there to have find she but before we arrive there she be go from thence towards panama who our general still pursue and by the way meet with a bark lade with rope and tackle for ship which he board and search and find in she fourscore pound weight of gold and a crucifix of gold with goodly great emerald set in it which he take and some of the cordage also for his own ship from hence we depart still follow the Cacafuego and our general promise our company that whosoever can first descry she shall have his chain of gold for his good news it fortune that John Drake go up into the top descry she about three of the clock and about six of the clock we come to she and board she and shoot at she three piece of ordnance and strike down her misne and be enter the rich ship call the Cacafuego take we find in her great riches as jewel and precious stone thirteen chest full of rial of plate fourscore pound weight of gold and six and twenty tun of silver the place where we take this prize be call cape de San Francisco cape San Francisco in 1. degree to the north. about a hundred and fifty league from panama the pilot name of this ship be Francisco and among other plate that our general find in this ship he find two very fair gilt Bolles of silver which be the pilot to who our general say senior pilot you have here two silver cup but I must needs have one of they which the pilot because he can not otherwise choose yield unto and give the other to the steward of our general ship when this pilot depart from we his boy say thus unto our general captain our ship shall be call no more the cacafuego but the cacaplata and your ship shall be call the Cacafuego which pretty speech of the pilot boy minister matter of laughter to we both then and long after when our general have do what he will with this cacafuego he cast she off and we go on our course still towards the west and not long after meet with a ship lade with linen cloth China si^kes and Porcellan and fine China dish of white earth and great store of China silk of all which thing we take as we list the owner himself of this ship be in she who be a spanish gentleman from who our general take a falcon of gold with a great emerald in the breast thereof and the pilot of the ship he take also with he and so cast the ship off this pilot bring we to the haven of Guatulco the town whereof as he tell we have but seventeen spaniard in it as soon as we be enter this haven we land and go present to the town and to the town-house where we find a judge sit in judgement be associate with three other officer upon three negro that have conspire the burn of the town both which judge and prisoner we take and bring they a shipboard and cause the chief judge to write his letter to the town to command all the townsman to avoid that we may safe water there which be do and they depart we ransack the town and in one house we find a pot of the quantity of a bushel full of rial of plate which we bring to our ship and here one Thomas moon one of our company take a spanish gentleman as he be fly out of the town and search he he find a chain of gold about he and other jewel which he take and so let he go the Portugal pilot set on land his name be Nu^oda Syl^a the island of a ship with a governor for the land of philippina at this place our general among other spaniard set ashore his Portugal pilot which he take at the island of cape Verde out of a ship of s. marry port of Portugal and have set they ashore we depart hence and sail to the island of where our general land and bring to shore his own ship and discharge she mend and grave she and furnish our ship with water and wood sufficient and while we be here we espy a ship and set sail after she and take she and find in she two pilot and a spanish governor go for the land of the philippina we search the ship and take some of her merchandize and so let she go our general at this place and time think himself both in respect of his private injury receive from the spaniard as also of their contempt and indignity offer to our country and prince in general sufficient satisfy and revenge and suppose that her majesty at his return will rest content with this service purpose to continue no long upon the spanish coast but begin to consider and to consult of the best way for his country he think it not good to return by the straits for two special cause the one lest the spaniard shall there wait and attend for he in great number and strength who hand he be leave but one ship it be the more stormy at his be there because it be then the winter sea on in those part can not possible escape the other cause be the dangerous situation of the mouth of the straits in the south sea where continual storm reign and bluster as he find by experience beside the shoalds and sands upon the coast he think it not a good course to adventure that way he resolve therefore to avoid these hazard to go forward to the land of the molucca and thence to sail the course of the portugal by the cape of upon this resolution he begin to think of his best way to the molucca and find himself where he now be becalm he see that of necessity he must be force to take a spanish course namely to sail somewhat northerly to get a wind we therefore set sail and sail six hundred league at the least for a good wind and thus much we sail from the sixteenth of April till the three of june june sir Francis Drake sail on the backside of America to 43. degree of northerly latitude 38. degree the five day of june be in three and forty degree towards the pole arctic we find the air so cold that our man be grievous pinch with the same complain of the extremity thereof and the further we go the more the cold increase upon we whereupon we think it best for that time to seek the land and do so find it not mountainous but low plain land till we come within eight and thirty degree towards the line in which height it please God to send we into a fair and good bay with a good wind to enter the same in this bay we anchor and the people of the country have their house close by the water side a description of the people and country of Albion show themselves unto we and send a present to our general when they come unto we they great wonder at the thing that we bring but our general according to his natural and accustom humanity courteous entreat they and liberal bestow on they necessary thing to cover their nakedness whereupon they suppose we to be god and will not be persuade to the contrary the present which they send to our general be feather and kawles of network their house be dig round about with earth and have from the uttermost brim of the circle cliff of wood set upon they join close together at the top like a spire-steeple which by reason of that closeness be very warm their bed be the ground with rush strew on it and lie about the house have the fire in the midst the man go naked the woman take bulrush and comb they after the manner of hemp and thereof make their loose garment which be knit about their middle hang down about their hip have also about their shoulder a skin of deer with the hair upon it these woman be very obedient and serviceable to their husband after they be depart from we they come and visit we the second time and bring with they feather and bag of tobacco for present and when they come to the top of the hill at the bottom whereof we have pitch our tent they stay themselves where one appoint for speaker weary himself with make a long oration which do they leave their bow upon the hill and come down with their present in the mean time a long oration the woman remain on the hill torment themselves lamentable tear their flesh from their cheek whereby we perceive that they be about a sacrifice in the mean time our general with his company go to prayer and to read of the scripture at which exercise they be attentive and seem great to be affect with it but when they be come unto we they restore again unto we those thing which before we bestow upon they the news of our be there be spread through the country the people that inhabit round about come down and among they the king himself a man of a goodly stature and comely personage with many other tall and warlike man before who come be send two ambassador to our general to signify that their king be come in do of which message their speech be continue about half a hour this end they by sign request our general to send some thing by their hand to their king as a token that his come may be in peace wherein our general have satisfy they they return with glad tiding to their king who march to we with a princely majesty the people cry continual after their manner and as they draw near unto we so do they strive to behave themselves in their action with comeliness in the forefront be a man of a goodly personage who bear the sceptre or mace before the king whereupon hang two crown a less and a big with three chain of a marvelous length the crown be make of knit work wrought artificial with feather of diverse colour the chain be make of a bony substance chain like those of canada and few be the person among they that be admit to wear they and of that number also the person be stint as some ten some twelve etc. next unto he which bear the sceptre be the king himself with his guard about his person clad with coney-skin and other skin after they follow the naked common sort of people every one have his face paint some with white some with black and other colour and have in their hand one thing or another for a present not so much as their child but they also bring their present in the mean time our general gather his man together and march within his fence place make against their approach a very warlike show they be troup together in their order and a general salutation be make there be present a general silence then he that bear the sceptre before the king be inform by another who they assign to that office with a manly and lofty voice proclaim that which the other speak to he in secret continue half a hour and a general amen as it be give the king with the whole number of man and woman the child except come down without any weapon who descend to the foot of the hill set themselves in order in come towards our bulwark and tent the scepter-bearer begin a song observe his measure in a dance and that with a stately countenance who the king with his guard and every degree of person follow do in like manner sing and dance save only the woman which dance and keep silence the general permit they to enter within our bulwark where they continue their song and dance a reasonable time when they have satisfy themselves they make sign to our general to sit down to who the king and diverse other make several oration or rather supplication that he will take their province and kingdom into his hand and become their king make sign that they will resign unto he their right and title of the whole land and become his subject in which to persuade we the better the king and the rest with one consent and with great reverence joyful sing a song the king resign his crown and kingdom to sir Drake do set the crown upon his head enrich his neck with all their chain and offer unto he many other thing honour he by the name of hioh add thereunto as it seem a sign of triumph which thing our general think not meet to reject because he know not what honour and profit it may be to our country wherefore in the name and to the use of her majesty he take the sceptre crown and dignity of the say country into his hand wish that the riches and treasure thereof may so convenient be transport to the enrich of her kingdom at home as it abound in the same the common sort of people leave the king and his guard with our general scatter themselves together with their sacrifice among our people take a diligent view of every person and such as please their fancy which be the young they enclose they about offer their sacrifice unto they with lamentable weep scratch and tear the flesh from their face with their nail whereof issue abundance of blood but we use sign to they of dislike this and stay their hand from force and direct they upward to the live God who only they ought to worship they show unto we their wound and crave help of they at our hand the like they do in hochelaga whereupon we give they lotion plaster and ointment agree to the state of their grief beseech God to cure their disease every three day they bring their sacrifice unto we until they understand our meaning that we have no pleasure in they yet they can not be absent from we but daily frequent our company to the hour of our departure which departure seem so grievous unto they that their joy be turn into sorrow they entreat we that be absent we will remember they and by stealth provide a sacrifice which we mislike our necessary business be end our general with his company travail up into the country to their village great herd of dear where we find herd of dear by a thousand in a company be most large and fat of body we find the whole country to be a warren of a strange kind of coney abundance of strange coney their body in bigness as be the Barbary coney their head as the head of we the foot of a want and the tail of a rat be of great length under her chin be on either side a bag into the which she gather her meat when she have fill her belly abroad the people eat their body and make great account of their skin for their king coat be make of they Albion our general call this country Albion and that for two cause the one in respect of the white bank and cliff which lie towards the sea and the other because it may have some affinity with our country in name which sometime be so call gold and silver in the earth of Albion there be no part of earth here to be take up wherein there be not some probable show of gold or silver at our departure hence our general set up a monument of our be there as also of her majesty right and title to the same namely a plate nail upon a fair great post whereupon be engrave her majesty name the day and year of our arrival there with the free give up of the province and people into her majesty hand together with her highness picture and arm in a piece of six penny of currant english money under the plate where-und be also write the name of our general it seem that the spaniard hitherto have never be in this part of the country neither do ever discover the land by many degree to the southwards of this place after we have set sail from hence we continue without sight of land till the thirteen day of October follow their departure October certain land in eight degree strange canoas like those of java which day in the morning we fall with certain land eight degree to the northward of the line from which come a great number of canoas have in some of they four in some six and in some also fourteen man bring with they and other fruit their canoas be hollow within and cut with great art and cunning be very smooth within and without and bear a gloss as if it be a horn dainty burnish have a prow and a stern of one sort yield inward circlewise be of a great height and full of certain white shell for a bravery and on each side of they lie out two piece of timber about a yard and a half long more or less according to the smallness or bigness of the Boat this people have the neither part of their ear cut into a round circle hang down very low upon their cheek whereon they hang thing of a reasonable weight the nail of their hand be a inch long their tooth be as black as pitch and they renew they often by eat of a herb with a kind of powder which they always carry about they in a cane for the same purpose land leave this island the night after we fall with it the eighteen of October we light upon diverse other some whereof make a great show of inhabitant we continue our course by the land of Tagulada Zelon and Zewarra be friend to the portugal the first whereof have grow in it great store of cinnamome November the fourteen of November we fall with the land of Molucca which day at night have direct our course to run with Tydore in coast along the island of mutyr belong to the king of ternate his deputy or vice-king see we at sea come with his Canoa to we without all fear and come aboard and after some conference with our general will he in any wise to run in with ternate the i will of ternate and not with Tydore assure he that the king will be glad of his come and will be ready to do what he will require for which purpose he himself will that night be with the king and tell he the news with who if he once deal he shall find that as he be a king so his word shall stand add further that if he go to tydore before he come to ternate the king will have nothing to do with we because he hold the Portugal as his enemy whereupon our general resolve to run with ternate where the next morning early we come to anchor at which time our general send a messenger to the king with a velvet cloak for a present and token of his come to be in peace and that he require nothing but traffic and exchange of merchandise whereof he have good store in such thing as he want in the mean time the vice-king have be with the king according to his promise signify unto he what good thing he may receive from we by traffic whereby the king be move with great like towards we and send to our general with special message that he shall have what thing he need and will require with peace and friendship and moreover that he will yield himself and the right of his island the king of ternate offer himself and his k^ngdome to the service of the queen of England to be at the pleasure and commandment of so famous a prince as we serve in token whereof he send to our general a signet and within short time after come in his own person with b^ats and canoas to our ship to bring she into a better and safe road than she be in at that present our general messenger be come to the court be meet by certain noble personage with great solemnity and bring to the king at who hand he be most friendly and gracious entertain the king purpose to come to our ship send before four great and large canoas in every one whereof be certain of his great state that be about he attire in white lawn the great and strange canoas of the king of ternate of cloth of Calicut have over their head from the one end of the Canoa to the other a cover of thin perfume mat bear up with a frame make of reed for the same use under which every one do sit in his order according to his dignity to keep he from the heat of the sun diverse of who be of good age and gravity do make a ancient and fatherly show there be also diverse young and comely man attire in white as be the other the rest be soldier which stand in comely order round about on both side without who sit the rower in certain gallery which be three on a side all along the canoas do lie off fr^m the side thereof three or four yard one be orderly build low than another in every of which gallery be the number of fourscore rower these canoas be furnish with warlike munition every man for the most part have his sword and target with his dagger beside other weapon as lance caliver dart bow and arrow also every Canoa have a small cast base mount at the least one full yard upon a stock set upright thus come near our ship in order they row about we one after another and pass by do their homage with great solemnity the great personage begin with great gravity and fatherly countenance signify that the king have send they to conduct our ship into a better road soon after the king himself repair accompany with six grave and ancient person the king of ternate come to visit s^r Francis Drake who do their obeisance with marvelous humility the king be a man of tall stature and seem to be much delight with the sound of our music to who as also to his nobility our general give present wherewith they be pass well content at length the king crave leave of our general to depart promise the next day to come aboard and in the mean time to send we such victual as be necessary for our provision so that the same night we receive of they meal which they call Sagu make of the top of certain tree taste in the mouth like sour curd but melt like sugar Sagu a kind of meal whereof they make certain cake which may be keep the space of ten year and yet then good to be eat we have of they store of rice hen unperfect and liquid sugar sugar cane and a fruit which they call figo with store of clove the king have promise to come aboard break his promise but send his brother to make his excuse and to entreat our general to come on shore offer himself pawn aboard for his safe return whereunto our general consent not upon mislike conceive of the breach of his promise the whole company also utter refuse it but to satisfy he our general send certain of his gentleman to the court to accompany the king brother reserve the vice-king for their safe return they be receive of another brother of the king and other state and be conduct with great honour to the castle the place that they be bring unto be a large and fair house a castle in ternate where be at the least a thousand person assemble the king be yet absent there sit in their place threescore grave personage all which be say to be of the king council there be beside four grave person apparel all in red down to the ground and attire on their head like the turk and these be say to be * * the turk send from Constantinople which be call new Rome roman and leiger there to keep continual traffic with the people of ternate there be also two turk leiger in this place and one Italian the king at last come in guard with twelve lance cover over with a rich canopy emboss with Gold our man accompany with one of their captain call moro rise to meet he he gracious do welcome and entertain they he be attire after the manner of the country but more sumptuous than the rest the majesty of the King from his waste down to the ground be all cloth of gold and the same very rich his leg be bare but on his foot be a pair of shoe make of Cordovant skin in the attire of his head be fine wreathe hoop ring of gold and about his neck he have a chain of perfect gold the link whereof be great and one-fold double on his finger he have six very fair jewel and sit in his chair of estate at his right hand stand a page with a fan in his hand breathe and gather the air to the King the fan be in length two foot and in breadth one foot set with eight saphire rich embroider and knit to a staff three foot in length by the which the page do hold and move it our gentleman have deliver their message and receive order according be license to depart be safe conduct back again by one of the king council this island be the chief of all the land of Molucca and the king hereof be king of seventy land beside ternate the chief of the Molucca Iles. the king with his people be moor in religion observe certain new moon with fast during which fast they neither eat nor drink in the day but in the night after that our gentleman be return and that we have here by the favour of the king receive all necessary thing that the place can yield we our general consider the great distance and how far he be yet off from his country think it not best here to linger the time any long but weigh his anchor set out of the island and sail to a certain little island a little island to the southward of celebe to the southwards of celebe where we grave our ship and continue there in that and other business six and twenty day this island be thorough grow with wood of a large and high growth very straight and without bough save only in the head or top who leave be not much differ from our broom in England among these tree night by night fiery worm through the whole land do show themselves a infinite swarm of fiery worm fly in the air who body be no big than our common english fly make such a show and light as if every twig or tree have be a burn candle in this place breed also wonderful store of bat bat cray-fish as big as large hen of cray-fish also here want no plenty and they of exceed bigness one whereof be sufficient for four hungry stomach at a dinner be also very good and restore meat whereof we have experience and they dig themselves hole in the earth like coney when we have end our business here we weigh and set sail to run for the molucca but have at that time a bad wind and be among the land with much difficulty we recover to the northward of the island of celebe where by reason of contrary wind not able to continue our course to run westward we be enforce to alter the same to the southward again find that course also to be very hard and dangerous for we by reason of infinite shoald which lie off and among the land whereof we have too much trial januarie in 1579. to the hazard and danger of our ship and life for upon the nine of january in the year 1579. we run sudden upon a rock where we stick fast from eight of the clock at night till four of the clock in the afternoon the next day be indeed out of all hope to escape the danger but our general as he have always hitherto show himself courageous their danger upon a rock and of a good confidence in the mercy and protection of God so now he continue in the same and lest he shall seem to perish wilful both he and we do our best endeavour to save ourselves which it please God so to bless that in the end we clear ourselves most happy of the danger we light our ship upon the rock of three tun of clove clove eight piece of ordnance and certain meal and bean and then the wind as it be in a moment by the special grace of God change from the starboard to the larboard of the ship the help of a current in the delivery we hoist our sail and the happy gale drive our ship of the rock into the sea again to the no little comfort of all our heart for which we give God such praise and thanks as so great a benefit require the eight of February follow we fall with the fruitful island of barateve have in the mean time suffer many danger by wind and shoalds February barateve island the people of this island be comely in body and stature and of a civil behaviour just in deal and courteous to stranger whereof we have the experience sundry way they be most glad of our presence and very ready to relieve our want in those thing which their country do yield the man go naked save their head and privity every man have something or other hang at their ear their woman be cover from the middle down to the foot wear a great number of bracelet upon their arm for some have eight upon each arm be make some of bone some of horn and some of brass the light whereof by our estimation weigh two ounce apiece with this people linen cloth be good merchandise and of good request whereof they make roll for their head linen cloth good merchandise and girdle to wear about they their island be both rich and fruitful rich in gold silver copper and sulphur wherein they seem skilful and expert not only to try the same but in work it also artificial into any form and fashion that please they their fruit be diverse and plentiful as nutmeg ginger long pepper lemon nutmeg and long pepper grow in barateve cucumber Figu Sagu with diverse other sort and among all the rest we have one fruit in bigness form and husk like a bay-berry hard of substance and pleasant of taste which be sod become soft and be a most good and wholesome victual whereof we take reasonable store as we do also of the other fruit and spice so that to confess a truth since the time that we first set out of our own country of England commendation of the island of barateve we happen upon no place ternate only except wherein we find more comfort and better mean of refresh at our departure from barateve we set our course for where arrive we find great courtesy and honourable entertainment this island be govern by five king Maior who they call Raiah as Raiah donaw and Raiah Mang and Raiah Cabuccapollo which live as have one spirit and one mind of these five we have four a shipboard at once and two or three often they be wonderful delight in colour clothes as red and green the upper part of their body be naked save their head whereupon they wear a turkish roll red and green clothes much esteem as do the maluccian from the middle downward they wear a Pintado of silk trail upon the ground in colour as they best like the maluccians hate that their woman shall be see of stranger but these offer they of high courtesy yea the king themselves the manner of the people of java the people be of goodly stature and warlike well provide of sword and target with dagger all be of their own work and most artificial do both in temper their metal as also in the form whereof we buy reasonable store they have a house in every village for their common assembly every day they meet twice man woman and child bring with they such victual as they think good some fruit some rice boil some hen roast some Sagu have a table make three foot from the ground whereon they set their meat that every person sit at the table may eat one rejoice in the company of another they boil their rice in a earthen pot make in form of a sugar loaf be full of hole a strange fashion o^ boil rice as our pot which we water our garden withal and it be open at the great end wherein they put their rice dry without any moisture in the mean time they have ready another great earthen pot set fast in a furnace boil full of water whereinto they put their pot with Rice by such measure that they swell become soft at the first and by their swell stop the hole of the pot admit no more water to enter but the more they be boil the hard and more firm substance they become so that in the end they be a firm and good bread of the which with oil butter Sugar and other spice they make diverse sort of meat very pleasant of taste and nourish to nature the french pock be here very common to all and they help themselves the french pock sit naked from ten to two in the sun whereby the venomous humour be draw out not long before our departure they tell we that not far off there be such great ship as we wish we to beware upon this our captain will stay no long from java mayor we sail for the cape of good hope which be the first land we fall withal neither do we touch with it or any other land until we come to Sierra leona upon the coast of Guinea notwithstanding we run hard aboard the cape this rather be to be impute to variety of weather find the report of the portugal to be most false who affirm that it be the most dangerous cape of the world never without intolerable storm and present danger to traveller which come near the same this cape be a most stately thing and the fair cape we see in the whole circumference of the earth and we pass by it the 18. of june from thence we continue our course to Sierra leona on the coast of Guinea where we arrive the 22. of july Sierra leona and find necessary provision great store of elephant oyster upon tree of one kind spawn and increase infinite the oyster suffer no bud to grow we depart thence the 24. day oister-tree we arrive in England the three of November 1580. being the three year of our departure chap. 4 the three circum-navigation of the globe or the admirable and prosperous voyage of master THOMAS Candish of Trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire into the south sea and from thence round about the circumference of the whole earth begin in the year of our lord 1586. and finish 1588. write by master FRANCIS pretty late of in Suffolk a gentleman employ in the same action publish by master HAKLVYT and now correct and abbreviate we depart out of Plymouth on Thursday the 21. of july 1586. with three sail to wit the desire a ship of one hundred and twenty ton the content of threescore ton and the Hugh gallant a bark of forty ton in which small fleet be one hundred and twenty three person of all sort with all kind of furniture and victual sufficient for the space of two year at the charge of the worshipful master Thomas Candish of Trimley in the county of Suffolk esquire be our general the three and twenty of August we put room for Sierra leona Sierra leona and the five and twenty day we fall with the point on the south side of Sierra leona which master brewer know very well and go in before with the content which be vide-admiral and we have no less than five fathom water when we have least and have for fourteen league in Southwest all the way run into the harbour of Sierra leona sixteen fourteen twelve ten and eight fathom of water we spoil here a town of the negro which kill one of our man with a poison arrow the three day of September diverse of our fleet go up four mile within the harbour with our boat and catch great store of fish and go on shore and take Limmons from the tree and come aboard again see two buff the six day we depart from Sierra leona two buff their departure from Sierra leona and go out of the harbour and stay one tide three league from the point of the mouth of the harbour in six fathom and it flow south Southwest on Wednesday be the seven of the same month we depart from one of the isle of cape Verde alias the isle of Madrabumba the isle of Madrabumba inhabit by Negro which be ten league distant from the point of Sierra leona and about five of the clock the same night we anchor two mile of the island in six fathom water and land the same night and find only upon the island the eight day one of our boat go out and sound round about the island and they pass through a sound at the west end of the island where they find five fathom round about the island until they come unto the very gut of the sound and then for a cast or two they have but two fathom and present after six fathom and so deep and deep and at the east end of the island there be a town a town where negro do use at sometime as we perceive by their provision fresh water there be no fresh water on all the south side as we can perceive but on the north side three or four very good place of fresh water and all the whole island be a wood save certain little place where their house stand which be environ round about with plantan-tree whereof the fruit be excellent meat this place be subject marua^lous much to thunder rain and lightning in this month I think the reason be because the sun be so near the line equinoctial on Saturday the ten we depart from the say island about three of the clock in the afternoon October cape Frio in brasil the wind be at the south-west the last of October run west Southwest about four and twenty league from cape Frio in Brasile we fall with a great mountain which have a high round knop on the top of it stand from it like a town with two little land from it November s. Sebastian island the first of November we go in between the island of saint Sebastian and the main land and have our thing on shore and set up a forge and have our cask on shore our Cooper make hoop and so we remain there until the three and twenty day of the same month in which time we fit our thing build our pinnace and fill our fresh water December the sixteenth day of December we fall with the coast of America in 47. degree @ the land bear west from we about six league off from which place we run along the shore until we come into forty and eight degree 48. degree it be a steep beach all along the seventeen in the afternoon we enter into a harbour where our admiral go in first wherefore our general name the say harbour port desire port desire in which harbour be a island or two where there be wonderful great store of seal and another island of bird which be gray guls. this harbour be a very good place to trim ship in seal and pengwin and to bring they on ground and grave they in for there ebb and flow much water therefore we grave and trim all our ship there here a man and a boy in wash their clothes at a pit they grave and trim their ship be hurt by the savage arrow which be make of cane head with flint they be very wild we take the measure of one of their foot all kind of giant and it be eighteen inch long their use be when any of they die to bring he or they to the cliff by the seaside and upon the top of they they bury they and in their grave be bury with they their bow and arrow and all their jewel which they have in their life time which be fine shell which they find by the sea side which they cut and square after a artificial manner and all be lay under their head the grave be make all with great stone of great length and bigness be set all along full of the dead man dart which he use when he be live and they colour both their dart and their grave with a red colour which they use in colour of themselves their departure from port desire the eight and twenty of December we depart out of the port of desire and go to a island which lie three league to the southward of it where we trim our save pengwin with salt for victual all that and the next day and depart along the coast Southwest and by south the thirty day we fall with a rock which lie about five league from the land much like unto Ediestone which lie off the sound of Plymouth and we sound and have eight fathom rocky ground within a mile thereof the rock bear west Southwest we go coast along south Southwest and find great store of seal all along the coast. this rock stand in 48. degree 1/^ to the southward of the line january 1587. the second day of januarie we fall with a very fair white cape which stand in 52. degree and have seven fathom water a league of the land the three day of the foresay month we fall with another great white cape which stand in 52. degree and 45. minute from which cape there run a low beach about a league to the southward and this beach reach to the open of the dangerous straight of Magellan which be in diverse place five or six league wide and in two several place more narrow under this cape we anchor and lose a anchor for it be a great storm of foul wether and last three day very dangerous the six day we put in for the straits the seven day they enter the straits the 6. of january a spanish take in the straits of Magellan between the mouth of the straits and the narrow place thereof we take a Spaniard who name be Hernando who be there with three and twenty spaniard more which be all that remain of four hundred which be leave there three year before in these straits of Magellan all the rest be dead with famine and the same day we pass through the narrow of the straits where the aforesaid Spaniard show we the Hull of a small bark which we judge to be a bark call the John Thomas it be from the mouth of the straits unto the narrow of the straits the bark John Thomas one of sir Francis drake consort fourteen league and the course lie west and by north. the mouth of the straits stand in two and fifty degree from the narrow of the straits unto Pengwin island be ten league and lie west Southwest somewhat to the southward where we anchor the eight day and kill and salt great store of pengwin for victual the nine day we depart from Pengwin island king Philip city leave desolate in the straits of Magellan which our general call port famine and run south Southwest to king Philip city which the spaniard have build which town or city have four fort and every fort have in it one cast piece which piece be bury in the ground the carriage be stand in their place unburied we dig for they and have they all they have contrive their city very well and seat it in the best place of the straits for wood and water they have build up their church by themselves they have law very severe among themselves for they have erect a gibbet whereon they have do execution upon some of their company it seem unto we that their whole live for a great space be altogether upon muskle and lympit for there be not any thing else to be have except some deer which come out of the mountain down to the fresh river to drink these spaniard which be there be only come to fortify the straits to the end that no other nation shall have passage through into the south sea save only their own but as it appear God enemy to the spaniard avarice which will entail the wide world in the east and west to Spain it be not god will so to have it for during the time that they be there which be two year at the least they can never have any thing to grow or in any wise prosper and on the other side the indian oftentimes prey upon they until their victual grow so short their store be spend which they have bring with they out of Spain and have no mean to renew the same that they die like dog in their house and in their clothes wherein we find they still at our come until that in the end the town be wonderful taint with the smell and the savour of the dead people the rest which remain alive be drive to bury such thing as they have there in their town either for provision or for furniture and so to forsake the town and to go along the seaside and seek their victual to preserve they from starve take nothing with they but every man his harquebus and his furniture that be able to carry it for some be not able to carry they for weakness and so live for the space of a year and more with root leave and sometime a fowl which they may kill with their piece to conclude they be determine to have travel towards the river of plate only three and twenty person be leave alive whereof two be woman which be the remainder of four hundred in this place we water and wooded well and quiet our general name this town port famine port famine in 53. degree it stand in 53. degree by observation to the southward the fourteen day we depart from this place and run south Southwest and from thence south-west unto cape froward five league west Southwest cape froward in 54. degree which cape be the southermost part of all the straits and stand in the latitude of 54. degree from which cape we run west and by north five league and put into a bay or cove on the south side which we call muskle-cove because there be great store of they muskle-cove we rid therein six day the wind be still westerly the one and twenty day we depart from muskle-cove and go northwest and by west ten league to a very fair sandy bay on the north side which our general call Elizabeth Bay Elizabeth Bay the two and twenty we depart from Elizabeth bay in the afternoon and go about two league from that place where there be a fresh water river where our general go up with the shippe-boat about three mile which river have very good and pleasant ground about it and it be low and champion soil and so we see none other ground else in all the straits but that be craggy rock and monstrous high hill and mountain in this river be great store of savage which we see and have conference with they the most brutish savage that ever be see they be men-eater and feed altogether upon raw flesh and other filthy food which people have prey upon some of the spaniard before speak of for they have get knife and piece of rapier to make dart of they use all the mean they can possible to have allure we up far into the river of purpose to have betray we which be espy by our general he cause we to shoot at they with our harquebuss whereby we kill many of they so we sail from this river to the channel of saint Jerome the channel of saint Jerome which be two league off from the river of saint Jerome about three or four league we run west unto a cape which be on the north side and from that cape unto the mouth of the straits the course lie northwest and by west and northwest between which place and the mouth of the straits to the southward February 1587. we lay in harbour until the three and twenty of February by reason of contrary wind and most vile and filthy foul wether with such rain and vehement stormy wind which come down from the mountain and high hill that they hazard the best cable and anchor that we have for to hold which if they have fail we have be in great danger to have be cast away or at the least famish for during this time which be a full month we feed almost altogether upon muskle and limpit and bird or such as we can get on shore seek every day for they as the fowl of the air do where they can find food in continual rainy wether there be at every mile or two mile end a harbour on both side of the land and there be between the river of saint Jerome and the mouth of the straits the straits of Magellan be about 90. league long the western mouth of the straits be in 52. degree and 2. terce their entrance into the south sea the 24. of February land in the south sea call las Anegadas march 1 extreme danger of the Hugh gallant by a great Leake go into the south sea about four and thirty league by estimation so that the length of the whole straits be about ninety league and the say mouth of the straits stand in the same height that the entrance stand in when we pass out of the north sea which be about two and fifty degree and two terce to the southward of the line the four and twenty day of February we enter into the south sea and on the south side of the go out of the straits be a fair high cape with a low point adjoin unto it and on the north side be four or five land which lie six league of the main and much break and sink ground about they by noon the same day we have bring these land east of we five league off the wind be then southerly the first of march a storm take we at north which night the ship lose the company of the Hugh gallant be in nine and forty degree and one second and five and forty league from the land this storm continue three or four day and for that time we in the Hugh gallant be separate from the other two ship look every hour to sink our bark be so leak and ourselves so diluered and weaken with free it of water that we sleep not in three day and three night the fifteen day in the morning the Hugh gallant come in between the island of saint Mary and the main where she meet with the admiral and the content which have rid at the island call Mocha two day the i will of Mocha in 38. degree not subject to the spaniard Arauco be the rich place in the south sea for gold and be not subdue by the spaniard as yet which stand in the southerly latitude of eight and thirty degree at which place some of our man go on shore with the vice-admirals boat where the indian fight with they with their bow and arrow and be marvelous wary of their caliver these indian be enemy to the spaniard and belong to a great place call and take we for spaniard as afterward we learn this place which be call Arauco be wonderful rich and full of gold mynes and yet can it not be subdue at any time by the spaniard but they always return with the great loss of man for these indian be desperate and careless of their life to live at their own liberty and freedom in the afternoon we weigh anchor and run under the west side of saint Mary island where we rid very well in six fathom water and very fair ground all that night s. marry island in 37. degree and 1. terce which be subdue to the spaniard the sixteenth day our general go on shore himself with seventy or eighty man every one with his furniture there come down to we certain indian with two which be the principal of the island to welcome we on shore think we have be spaniard for it be subdue by they who bring we up to a place where the spaniard have erect a church with cross and altar in it a church with cross and altar and there be about this church two or three storehouse which be full of wheat and barley ready thresh and make up in cade of straw to the quantity of a bushel of corn in every Cade the wheat and barley be as fair as clean and every way as good as any we have in England there be also the like cade full of potato rootes which be very good to eat ready make up in the storehouse for the spaniard against they shall come for their tribute this island also yield many sort of fruit hog and hen these indian be hold in such slavery by they that they dare not eat a hen or a hog themselves but the spaniard have make they all in that island christian the indian of s. marry island make all christian thus we fit ourselves here with corn as much as we will have and as many hog as we have salt to powder they withal and great store of hen with a number of bag of potato rootes and about five hundred dry dogge-fish and Guinie wheat which be call maiz. and have take as much as we will have yet we leave great store behind we our general have the two principal of the island aboard our ship and provide great cheer for they and make they merry with wine and they in the end perceive we to be no spaniard make sign as near as our general can perceive that if we will go over unto the main land rich in Gold unto Arauco that there be much gold make we sign that we shall have great store of riches but because we can not understand they our general make some haste and within two or three day we furnish ourselves the eighteen day in the morning we depart from this place and run all that day north-northeast about ten league and at night lay with a short sail off and on the coast the nineteen we run in east northeast with the land and bare in with a place call the conception the conception where we anchor under a island and depart the next morning without go on land the twenty we depart from the conception and go into a little bay which be sandy where we see fresh water and cattle but we stay not there the thirty day quintero stand in 33. degree 50. minute our man march 7. or 8. mile into their enemy land we come into the bay of quintero which stand in thirty three degree and fifty minute here Fernando the Spaniard contrary to his oath forsake we the last of march captain haver go up into the country with fifty or sixty man with their shot and furniture with they and we travel seven or eight mile into the land and as we be march along we espy a number of herd of cattle of kine and bullock which be wonderful wild we see great store of horse mare and colt which be very wild and unhandled there be also great store of hare and coney and plenty of partridge and other wild-fowle the country be very fruitful with fair fresh river all along full of wildfowl of all sort have travail so far that we can go no further for the monstrous high mountain we rest ourselves at a very fair fresh river run in and alongst fair low meadow at the foot of the mountain where every man drink of the river and refresh themselves have so do we return to our ship the like way that we think their town shall be so we travail all the day long not see any man but we meet with many wild dog yet there be two hundred horseman abroad that same day by mean of the Spaniard which they have take the day before from we who have tell they that our force be but small and that we be wonderful weak who though they do espy we that day yet dare they not give the onset upon we for we march along in array and observe good order whereby we seem a great number more than we be until we come unto our ship that night again the next day be the first of April 1587. our man go on shore to fill water at a pit which be a quarter of a mile from the water side and be early hard at their business be in no readiness in which mean while there come pour down from the hill almost two hundred horseman and before our people can return to the rock from the water place twelve of they be cut off part kill and part take prisoner the rest be rescue by our soldier which come from the rock to meet with they who be but fifteen of we that have any weapon on shore 24. Spaniard slay yet we make the enemy retire in the end with loss of some four and twenty of their man after we have skirmish with they a hour after the loss of these man we ride in the road and water in despite of they with good watch and ward until the five of the say month the five day we depart out of this bay of quintero and off from the bay there lie a little island about a league distant whereon there be great store of penguin and other fowl a little island full of penguin whereof we take to serve our turn and sail away north and north and by west for so lie the coast along in this place the fifteen we come thwart of a place which be call morro morro in 23. degree and a half which stand in 23. degree 1/^ and be a excellent good harbour and there be a island which make it a harbour and a ship may go in at either end of the island here we go with our general on shore to the number of thirty man and at our go on shore upon our land the indian of the place come down from the rock to meet with we with fresh water and wood on their back they be in marvelous awe of the spaniard and very simple people and live savage for they bring we to their biding about two mile from the harbour where we see their woman and lodging which be nothing but the skin of some beast lay upon the ground and over they in stead of house be nothing but five or six stick lay across which stand upon two fork with stick on the ground and a few bough lay on it their diet be raw fish which stink most vile and when any of they die they bury their bow and arrow with they with their Canoa and all that they have for we open one of their grave and see the order of they their canoas or boat be marvelous artificial make of two skin like unto bladder most artificial boat and be blow full at one end with quill they have two of these bladder blow full which be sow together and make fast with the sinew of some wild beast which when they be in the water swell so that they be as tight as may be they go to sea in these boat tribute pay in fish and catch very much fish with they and pay much of it for tribute unto the spaniard but they use it beastly the three and twenty in the morning we take a small bark which come out of arica road which we keep and call the George the man forsake it a bark take which they call the Geo^ge arica stand in 18. degree 31. minute a ship take and go away with their boat our admiral pinnace follow the boat and the Hugh Gallant boat take the bark our admiral pinnace can not recover the boat before it get on shore but go along into the road of arica and lay aboard a great ship of a hundred ton ride in the road right afore the town but all the man and good be go out of it only the bare ship be leave alone the twenty six day after two other bark take we depart the twenty seven day we take a small bark the first bark of advice take which come from saint jago near unto quintero where we lose our man first in this bark be one George a greek a reasonable pilot for all the coast of chili the bay of Pisca in 13. degr ^^ the three of may we come into a bay where be three little town which be call Paracca and Pisca where some of we land and take certain house wherein be bread wine fig and hen but the sea go so high that we can not land at the best of the town without sink of our boat and great hazard of we all this place stand in thirteen degree and @ to the southward of the line a island of seales the five of may we depart from this harbour leave the content our vide-admiral within at a island of seal by which mean at that time we lose her company the sixteenth we take with the Hugh gallant be but sixteen man of we in it a great ship which come from Guaianil which be call the Lewis and be of the burden of three hundred ton a ship of 300. ton take after half a hour fight seven degree of southerly latitude have four and twenty man in it wherein be pilot one gonsaluo de Ribas who we carry along with we and a negro call Emmanuel the ship be lade with nothing but timber and victual wherefore we leave she seven league from the land very leak and ready to sink in seven degree to the southward of the line we sink her boat and take away her foresail and certain victual they meet their fleet again two rich ship take one ship worth 20000. pound the seventeen we meet with our admiral again and all the rest of our fleet they have take two ship the one lade with sugar moloss Maiz cordovan-skinne Montego de Porco many pack of pintado many indian coat and some marmalade and a thousand hen and the other ship be lade with wheat-meale and box of marmalade one of these ship which have the chief merchandise in it be worth twenty thousand pound if it have be in England or in any other place of Christendom where we may have sell it we fill all our ship with as much as we can bestow of these good the rest we burn and the ship also and set the man and woman that be not kill on shore the bay of Paita in 5. degree 4. min. the twenty day in the morning we come into the road of Paita and be at a anchor our general land with sixty or seventy man skirmish with they of the town and drive they all to flight to the top of the hill which be over the town except a few slave and some other which be of the mean sort who be command by the governor to stay below in the town at a place which be in building for a fort have with they a bloody ensign be in number about one hundred man a new fort in building now as we be rove between the ship and the shore our gunner shoot off a great piece out of one of the bark and the shot fall among they and drive they to fly from the fort as fast as they may run who get they up upon a hill and from thence shoot among we with their small shot the town of Paita take and burn after we be land and have take the town we run upon they and chase they so fierce up the hill for the space of a hour that we drive they in the end away perforce and be get up the hill we find where they have lay all their stuff which they have bring out of the town and have hide it there upon the mountain 25. pound weight in silver we also find the quantity of five and twenty pound weight in silver in piece of eight rial and abundance of householdstuff and storehouse full of all kind of ware but our general will not suffer any man to carry much cloth or apparel away because they shall not cloy themselves with burden for he know not whether our enemy be provide with furniture according to the number of their man for they be five man to one of we and we have a english mile and a half to our ship thus we come down in safety to the town which be very well build and marvelous clean keep in every street with a town-house or guild-hall in the midst the town of Paita have 200. house in it a bark set on fire and have to the number of two hundred house at the least in it we set it on fire to the ground and good to the value of five or six thousand pound there be also a bark ride in the road which we set on fire and depart direct our course to the island of Puna the island of Puna within 1. degree the equinoctial to the south a great ship burn the twenty five day of May we arrive at the island of Puna where be a very good harbour where we find a great ship of the burden of two hundred and fifty ton ride at a anchor with all her furniture which be ready to be hale on ground for there be a special good place for that purpose we sink it and go on shore where the lord of the island dwell which be by the water side who have a sumptuous house well contrive with many very singular good room and chamber in it and out of every chamber be frame a gallery with a stately prospect into the sea on the one side and into the island on the other side with a great hall below and a very great storehouse at the one end of the hall great store of cable make in Puna which be fill with Botijas of pitch and bash to make cable withal for the most part of the cable in the South-sea be make upon that island this great do make all the indian upon the island to work and to drudge for he and he himself be a indian bear but be marry to a fair woman a Spaniard by reason of his pleasant habitation and great wealth the twenty nine day of May our general go in the shipboate into a little island thereby a little island near unto Puna whereas the say which be the lord of Puna have cause all the hang of his chamber which be of Cordovan leather all guild over and paint very fair and rich with all his householdstuff and all the ship tackle which be ride in the road at our come in with great store of nail spike of iron and very many other thing to be convey all which we find and bring away what our general think requisite for the ship business this island be very pleasant for all thing requisite and fruitful but there be no mine of gold nor silver in it there be at the least two hundred house in the town about the casiques palace and as many in one or two town more upon the island which be almost as big as the i will of wight in England there be plant on the one side of the casiques house a fair garden the isle of Puna be almost as big as the isle of wight Cotton tree with all herb grow in it and at the low end a well of fresh water and round about it be tree set whereon bombasin cotton grow after this manner the top of the tree grow full of cod out of which the cotton grow and in the cotton be a seed of the bigness of a pease and in every cod there be seven or eight of these seed and if the cotton be not gather when it be ripe than these seed fall from it and spring again there be also in this garden figtree which bear continual also pompion melon cucumber radish rosemary and thyme with many other herb and fruit at the other end of the house there be also another orchard a excellent orchard where grow orange sweet and sour limmons pomegranate and lime with diverse other fruit there be very good pasture ground in this island and withal many horse ox bullock sheep very fat and fair great store of goat which be very tame and be use continual to be milk they have moreover abundance of pigeon turkey and duck of a marvelous bigness there be also a very large and great church hard by the casiques house whither he cause all the indian in the island to come and hear mass for he himself be make a christian when he be marry to the spanish woman before speak of and upon his conversion he cause the rest of his subject to be christen in this church be a high altar with a crucifix and five bell hang in the neither end thereof we burn the church and bring the bell away by this time we have hale on ground our admiral and have make she clean burn her keel the second grave of their ship pitch and tar she and have hale she on float again and in the mean while continual keep watch and ward in the great house both night and day the second of june a hundred spaniard assail we whereby of our man be slay drown and take of they we slay forty six the second skirmish with the spaniard the chief town in Puna burn the self same day we go on shore again with seventy man and have a fresh skirmish with the enemy and drive they to retire be a hundred spaniard serve with musket and two hundred indian with bow arrow and dart this do we set fire on the town and burn it to the ground have in it to the number of three hundred house and short after make havoc of their field orchard and garden and burn four great ship more which be in building on the stock the three the content which be our vide-admiral be hale on ground to grave at the same place in despite of the spaniard and also our pinnace which the spaniard have burn be new trim the five day of june we depart out of the road of Puna where we have remain eleven day and turn up for a place which be call Rio where we water they arrive at Puna the 25. of may. the Hugh gallant a bark of 40. tun sink Rio at which place also we sink our rear-admiral call the Hugh gallant for want of man be a bark of forty ton the ten day of the same month we set the indian on shore which we have take before in a balsa as we be come into the road of Puna the eleven day we depart from the say Rio the twelve we double the equinoctial line and continue our course northward all that month the first of july we have sight of the coast of Nueva Espanna be four league distant from land in the latitude of ten degree to the northward of the line the nine we take a new ship of the burden of a hundred and twenty ton wherein be one Michael Sancius who our general take to serve his turn to water along the coast for he be one of the best coaster in the south Sea this Michael Sancius be a Provensall bear in Marseils Michael Sancius a Marsillian and be the first man that tell we news of the great ship call the Anna which we afterward take come from the there be six man more in this new ship we take her sail her rope a great new ship burn the second bark of advice take the river of Copolita aguatul^o in 15 degree and 40. minute northward a bark^ burn a^ile ca^a^s Aguatulco a town of 100 house (@) and firewood to serve our turn set she on fire and keep the man the ten we take another bark which be go with advice of we and our ship all along the coast as Michael Sancius tell we but all the company that be in the bark be flee on shore the six and twenti day of july we come to a anchor at ten fathom in the river of Copalita where we make account to water and the same night we depart with thirty man in the pinnace and row to Aguatulco which be but two league from the aforesaid river and stand in fifteen degree forty minute to the northward of the equinoctial line the seven and twenti in the morning by the break of day we come into the road of Aguatulco where we find a bark of fifty ton which be come from sonsonate lade with cacaos and anile which they have there land and the man be all flee on shore we land there and burn their town with the church and customhouse which be very fair and large in which house be six hundred bag of anile to die cloth every bag whereof be worth forty crown and four hundred bag of cacaos every bag whereof be worth ten crown cacaos go for money in Nueva Espanna these cacaos go among they for meat and money for a hundred and fifty of they be in value one ryal of plate in ready payment they be very like unto a almond but be nothing so pleasant in taste they eat they and make drink of they the eight and twenty day we set sail from Copalita because the sea be so great there that we can not fill water and run the same night into the road of Aguatulco the nine and twenty our general enter two mile into the main land with 30. man our general land and go on shore with thirty man two mile into the wood where we take a mestizo who name be michael de truxillo who be customer of that town and we find with he two chamber full of his stuff we bring he and his stuff aboard and whereas I say he be a mestizo it be to be understand that a mestizo be one which have a Spaniard to his father and a indian to his mother puerto in 19 degree the four and twenty day of August our general with thirty of we go with the pinnace unto a haven call puerto where we have intelligence by Michael Sancius that there shall be a pinnace but before we can get thither the say pinnace be go to fish for pearl twelve league far as we be inform by certain indian which we find there the three posy of advice take puerto burn two new ship burn the river of Sant jago pearl take we take a Mullato in this place in his bed which be send with letter of advice concern we along the coast of Nueva Galicia who horse we kill take his letter leave he behind set fire on the house and burn two new ship of two hundred ton the piece which be in build there on the stock and come aboard of our ship again the six and twenty day we come into the bay of s. jago where we water at a fresh river along which river many be grow here be great abundance of fresh fish here also certain of our company drag for pearl and catch some quantity the second of September we depart from Sant jago this bay of Sant jago stand in nineteen degree and eighteen minute to the northward of the line the three of September the bay of malacca we arrive in a little bay a league to the westward of port call malacca which be a very good place to ride in and the same day about twelve of the clock our general land with thirty man or there about and go up to a town of indian which be two league from the road the town of Acatlan burn which town be call Acatlan there be in it about twenty or thirty house and a church which we deface and come aboard again the same night all the people be flee out of the town at the sight of we the four we depart from the road of malacca the road of Chaccalla and sail along the coast the eight we come to the road of Chaccalla in which bay there be two little house by the water side this bay be eighteen league from the cape the nine in the morning our general send up captain haver with forty man of we before day and Michael Sancius be our guide we go unto a place about two league up into the country in a desert path through the wood and wilderness and in the end we come to a place where we take three householder with their wife and child and some indian one carpenter which be a Spaniard and a Portugal we bind they all and make they to come to the sea side with we our general make their wife to fetch we lemon and orange pine-aples and other fruit whereof they have abundance and so let their husband depart except Sembrano the spanish carpenter and Diego the Portugal and the ten day we depart the road the isle of s. Andrew the twelfth day we arrive at a little island call the isle of Sant Andrew on which there be great store of foul and wood where we dry and salt as many of the fowl as we think good we also kill there abundance of seal and iguanos which be a kind of serpent iguanos good meat with four foot and a long sharp tail strange to they which have not see they but they be very good meat we rid here until the seventeen day at which time we depart Massatlan in 23. degree and a half the four and twenty day we arrive in the road of Massatlan which stand in twenty three degree 1/^ just under the tropic of cancer it be a very great river within but be bar at the mouth and upon the north side of the bar without be good fresh water but there be very evil fill of it because at a low water it be shall half a mile of the shore there be great store of fresh fish in that bay and good fruit up into the country whereof we have some though not without danger the seven and twenty day of September we depart from the road of Massatlan and run to a island which be a league to the northward of the say Massatlan a island a league northwards of Massatlan the escape of one Domingo a Spaniard where we trim our ship and new build our pinnace and there be a little island a quarter of a league from it on which be seal where a spanish prisoner who name be Domingo be send to wash shirt with one of our man to keep he make a escape and swim to the main which be a english mile distant at which place we have see thirty or forty spaniard and indian which be horseman and keep watch there which come from a town call Chiametla which be eleven league up into the country Chiametla as Michael Sancius tell we we find upon the island where we trim our pinnace fresh water by the assistance of God in that our great need by dig two or three foot deep in the sand where no water nor sign of water be before to be perceive otherwise we have go back twenty or thirty league to water which may have be occasion that we may have miss our prey we have long wait for but God raise one flores a Spaniard which be also a prisoner with we to make a motion to dig in the sand now our general have have experience once before of the like fresh water at two or three foot deep in the sand command to put his motion in practice and in dig three foot deep we find very good and fresh water so we water our ship and may have fill a thousand ton more if we have will we stay in this island until the nine day of October at which time we depart at night for the cape of s. Lucar which be on the west side of the point of california the cape of s. Lucar on the point of california Aguada Segura with which we fall on the fourteen of October it be very like the needle at the isle of wight and within the say cape be a great bay call by the spaniard Aguada Segura into which fall a fair fresh river about which many indian use to keep we water in the river and lay off and on from the say cape of s. Lucar until the four of November and have the wind hang still westerly the four of November the desire and the content beat up and down upon the headland of california which stand in twenty three degree and 2/^ to the northward california in 23. degree and two three between seven and eight of the clock in the morning one of the company of our admiral which be the trumpeter of the ship go up into the top espy a sail bear in from the sea with the cape whereupon he cry out with no small joy to himself and the whole company a sail a sail with which cheerful word the master of the ship and diverse other of the company go also up into the main top who perceive the speech to be very true give information unto our general of these happy news who be no less glad than the cause require whereupon he give in charge present unto the whole company to put all thing in readiness which be perform we give they chase some three or four hour stand with our best advantage and work for the wind in the afternoon we get up unto they give they the broad side with our great ordnance and a volee of small shot and present lay the ship aboard the fight between the great s. Anna and we whereof the king of Spain be owner which be admiral of the South-sea call the s. Anna and think to be seven hundred ton in burden now as we be ready on their ship side to enter she be not pass fifty or sixty man at the uttermost in our ship we perceive that the captain of the say ship have make fight fore and after and lay their sail close on their poop their mid-ship with their forecastle and have not one man to be see stand close under their fight with lance javelin rapier and target and a innumerable sort of great stone which they throw over board upon our head and into our ship so fast and be so many of they that they put we off the ship again with the loss of two of our man which be slay and with the hurt of four or five but for all this we new trim our sail and fit every man his furniture the second encounter and give they a fresh encounter with our great ordnance and also with our small shot rake they through and through to the kill and maim of many of their man their captain still like a valiant man with his company stand very stout unto his close fight not yield as yet our general encourage his man afresh with the whole noise of trumpet give they the three encounter with our great ordnance the three encounter and all our small shot to the great discomfort of our enemy rake they through in diverse place kill and spoil many they be thus discomfort and their ship be in hazard of sink by reason of the great shot which be make whereof some be under water within five or six hour fight the great s. Anna yield set out a flag of truce and parl for mercy desire our general to save their life and to take their good and that they will present yield our general promise they mercy and will they to strike their sail and to hoist out their boat and to come aboard which news they be full glad to hear and present strike their sail hoist their boat out and one of their chief merchant come aboard unto our general and fall down upon his knee offer to have kiss his foot and crave mercy the captain and their pilot at their come use the like duty and reverence as the former do the general promise their life and good usage they declare what good they have within board to wit one hundred and two and twenty thousand peso of Gold a be 8. shilling the merchandise in the great ship the spaniard set on shore to the number of 190. a hundred and two and twenty thousand peso of gold and the rest of the riches that the ship be lade with be in silk satin damask with musk and diverse other merchandise and great store of all manner of victual with the choice of many conserve of all sort for to eat and of sundry sort of very good wine these thing be make know they be command to stay aboard the desire and on the six day of November follow we go into a harbour which be call by the spaniard Aguada Segura or puerto here the whole company of the spaniard both of man and woman to the number of a hundred and ninety person be set on shore where they have a fair river of fresh water with great store of fresh-fish foul and wood and also many hare and coney upon the main land our general also give they great store of victual of Garuansas peason and some wine also they have all the sail of their ship to make they tent on shore with licence to take such store of plank as shall be sufficient to make they a bark then we fall to hoist in of our good share of the treasure and allot to every man his portion in division whereof mutiny against the general the eight of this month many of the company fall into a mutiny against our general especial those which be in the content which nevertheless be after a sort pacify for the time on the seventeen day of November which be the day of the happy coronation of her majesty our general command all his ordnance to be shoot off with the small shot both in his own ship where himself go and also in the content which be our vide-admiral this be do the same night we have many firework and more ordnance discharge to the great admiration of all the spaniard which be there for the most part of they have never see the like before this end our general discharge the captain give he a royal reward with provision for his defence against the indian and his company both of sword target piece shoot and powder to his great contentment but before his departure he take out of this great ship two young lad bear in japon two boy of japon which can both write and read their own language the elder be about twenty year old be name Christopher the other be call Cosmus about seventeen year of age both of very good capacity he take also with he out of their ship three boy of three boy bear in the isle of the one about fifteen the other about thirteen and the young about nine year old the name of the elder be Alphonso the second Anthony the three remain with the right honourable the countess of Essex he also take from they one Nicholas Roderigo Nicholas Roderigo a Portugal a Portugal who have be in canton and other part of China in the island of japon be a country most rich in silver mine and in the a spanish pilot he take also from they a Spaniard who name be Thomas de Ersola which be a very good pilot from acapulco and the coast of Nueva Espanna unto the island of ladrone where the spaniard do put in to water sail between acapulco and the phillippinas in which isle of ladrone acapulco be the haven whence they set forth to the good water at the ladrone the wind at east north-east the content whereof Steven hare be master leave behind in the road they find fresh water and potato-roote howbeit the people be very rude and heathen the nineteen day of November aforesaid about three of the clock in the afternoon our general cause the king ship to be set on fire which have to the quantity of five hundred ton of good in she we see burn unto the water and then give they a piece of ordnance and set sail joyful homeward towards England with a fair wind which by this time be come about to east northeast and night grow near we leave the content a stern of we which be not as yet come out of the road and here think she will have overtake we we lose her company and never see she after we be sail from this haven of Agueda Segura in california unto the isle of ladrone the rest of November and all December and so forth until the three of januarie 1588. with a fair wind for the space of five and forty day and we esteem it to be between seventeen and eighteen hundred league the three day of january by six of the clock in the morning we have sight of one of the island of ladrone the island of Guana one of the ladrone in 13. degree and two three commodity of the isle of ladrone call the island of Guana stand in thirteen degree 2/^ towards the north and sail with a gentle gale before the wind by one or two of the clock in the afternoon we be come up within two league of the island where we meet with sixty or seventy sail of canoas full of savage who come off to sea unto we and bring with they in their boat potato-roote and fresh-fish which they have catch at sea and hold they up unto we for to truck or exchange with we which when we perceive we make fast little piece of old iron upon small cord and fish line and so veer the iron unto their canoas and they catch hold of they and take off the iron and in exchange of it they will make fast unto the same line either a potato-roote or a bundle of which we hale in and thus our company exchange with they until they have satisfy themselves with as much as do content they yet we can not be rid of they for afterward they be so thick about the ship that it stem and break one or two of their canoas but the man save themselves be in every Canoa four six or eight person all naked and excellent swimmer and diverse they be of a tawny colour and marvelous fat and big ordinary of stature than the most part of our man in England the colour and stature of the people of the isle of ladrone their image artifficiall canoas wear their hair marvelous long yet some of they have it make up and tie with a knot on the crown and some with two knot much like unto their image which we see carve in wood and stand in the head of their boat like unto the image of the devilll their canoas be as artificial make as any that ever we have see consider they be make and contrive without any edge-tool they be not obove half a yard in breadth and in length some seven or eight yard and their head and sterne be both alike they be make out with rafte of cane and reed on the starre-bord-side with mast and sail their sail be make of matter of sedge canoas sail right against the wind the nimbleness of the people of the ladrone cabo Spirito one of the isle of the P^ili^pinas in 13. degre^s square or trianglewise and they sail as well right against the wind as before the wind these savage follow we so long that we can not be rid of they until in the end our general command some half dozen harquebuss to be make ready and himself strike one of they and the rest shoot at they but they be so yare and nimble that we can not discern whether they be kill or no because they can fall backward into the sea and prevent we by dive the fouteteenth day of january lie at hull with our ship all the middle watch from twelve at night until four in the morning by the break of day we fall with a head-land of the isle of the which be call cabo Spirito santo which be of very great bigness and length high land in the midst of it and very low land as the cape lie east and west trend far into the sea to the westward this cape or island be distant from the i will of Guana one of the ladrone three hundred and ten league from Guana a isle of the la^rones to cabo Spirito Santa be 310. league we be in sail of this course eleven day with scant wind and some foul weather bear no sail two or three night this island stand in thirteen degree and be a place much people with heathen people and all woodie through the whole land and it be short of the chief island of the call about sixty league be well plant and inhabit with spaniard to the number of six or seven hundred person which dwell in a town unwall which have three or four blockhouse part make of wood and part of stone be indeed of no great strength the description of the town of trade from A^apulco to merchant of China merchant call Sanguelos silver exchange weight for weight for Gold they have one or two small galley belong to the town it be a very rich place of gold and many other commodity and they have yearly traffic from acapulco in Nueva Espanna and also twenty or thirty ship from China and from the Sanguelos which bring they many sort of merchandise they bring great store of gold with they which they traffic and exchange for silver and give weight for weight these Sanguelos be man of marvelous capacity in devise and make all manner of thing especial in all handy craft and science and every one be so expert perfect and skilful in his faculty as few or no christian be able to go beyond they in that which they take in hand for draw and imbroider upon satin silk or lawn either beast foul fish or worm for liveliness and perfectness both in silk silver gold and pearl they excel also the fourteen day at night we enter the straits between the island of Lucon and the island of Camlaia the fifteen of january we fall with a island call Capul the island of Capul at which our man stay 9 day and have betwixt the say island and another island but a narrow passage and a ripple of a very great tide with a ledge of rock lie off the point of the island of Capul and no danger but water enough a fair breadth off and within the point a fair bay and a very good harbour in four fathom water hard aboard the shore within a cable length about ten of the clock in the morning we come to a anchor our ship be no soon come to a anchor one of the chief governor of the island come aboard we but present there come a Canoa row aboard we wherein be one of the chief casique of the island whereof there be seven who suppose that we be spaniard bring we potato-roote which they call Comotas and green in exchange whereof we give his company piece of linen to the quantity of a yard for four and as much linen for a basket of potato-roote of a quart in quantity which root be very good meat and excellent sweet either roast or boil this casiques skin be carve and cut with sundry and many streak and device all over his body we keep he still aboard and cause he to send those man which bring he aboard back to the island to cause the rest of the principal to come aboard who be no soon go on shore but present the people of the island come down with their and potato-roote and the rest of the principal likewise come aboard and bring with they hen and hog and they use the same order with we which they do with the spaniard hen and hog for they take for every hog which they call balboye eight rial of plate and for every hen or cock one rial of plate thus we ride at anchor all that day do nothing but buy root hen hog and such thing as they bring refresh ourselves here Thomas Ersola the spanish pilot seek to betray we to the spaniard be hang we ride for the space of nine day about this island of Capul where we have diverse kind of fresh victual with excellent fresh water in every bay and great store of wood the people of this island go almost all naked and be tawny of colour the manner of the people of Capul the man wear only a stroope about their waste of some kind of linen of their own weave which be make of plantan-leave and another stroope come from their back under their twiste which cover their privy part and be make fast to their girdle at their navel which be this a strange nail^ in the yard of man to prevent sodomy for which purpose in Pegu they wear in the same part ball every man and manchild among they have a nail of tin thrust quite through the head of his privy part be split in the low end and rivet and on the head of the nail be as it be a crown which be drive through their privity when they be young and the place grow up agtine without any great pain to the child and they take this nail out and in as occasion serve and for the truth thereof we ourselves have take one of these nail from a son of one of the king which be of the age of ten year who do wear the same in his privy member this custom be grant at the request of the woman of the country who find their man to be give to the foul sin of sodomy desire some remedy against that mischief and obtain this before name of the magistrate moreover all the male be circumcise have the foreskin of their flesh cut away these people whole worship the devil circumcision and oftentimes have conference with he which appear unto they in most ugly and monstrous shape on the three and twenty our general m. Thomas Candish cause all the principal of this island and of a hundred island more which he have make to pay tribute unto he which tribute be in hog hen potato and to appear before he and make himself and his company know unto they that they be Englishmen and enemy to the spaniard and thereupon spread his ensign and sound up the drum which they much marvel at the inhabitant of Capul with all the island adjoin promise to aid the english against the spaniard our departure from the island of Capul the isle of Malbat to conclude they promise both themselves and all the island thereabouts to aid he whensoever he shall come again to overcome the spaniard also our general give they in token that we be enemy to the spaniard money back again for all their tribute which they have pay which they take marvelous friendly and row about our ship to show we pleasure marvelous swift at the last our general cause a saker to be shoot off whereat they wonder and with great contentment take their leaf of we the next day be the four and twenty of january we set sail about six of the clock in the morning and run along the coast of the island of shape our course northwest between the isle of and the isle of masbat the eight and twenty day in the morning about seven of the clock ride at a anchor betwixt two island we espy a frigate under her two course come out between two other island which as we imagine come from sail close aboard the shore along the main island of panama the island of panama here we ride at anchor all that night and perceive that certain spaniard which come from to Ragaun to fetch a new ship of the king there build have disperse their band into two or three part and keep great watch in several steed with fire and shoot off their piece this island have much plain ground in it in many place and many fair and straight tree do grow upon it fit for to make excellent good mast for all sort of ship there be also mine of very fine gold in it which be in the custody of the indian mine of very fine gold in the island of panama the island of Negro in nine degree their departure from the philippina and to the southward of this place there be another very great island which be not subdue by the spaniard nor any other nation the people which inhabit it be all negro and the island be call the island of negro and be almost as big as England stand in nine degree the most part of it seem to be very low land and by all likelihood be very fruitful the nine and twenty day of january about six of the clock in the morning we set sail send our boat before until it be two of the clock in the afternoon pass all this time as it be through a straight betwixt the say two island of panama and the island of negro and about sixteen league off we espy a fair open trend south-west and by south at which time our boat come aboard and our general send commendation to the spanish captain which we come from the evening before by a Spaniard which we have take and will he to provide good store of gold for he mean for to see he with his company at within few year and that he do but want a big boat to have land his man or else he will have see he then and so cause he to be set on shore the eight day of February by eight of the clock in the morning we espy a island near Gilolo Batochina call Batochina which stand in one degree from the equinoctial line northward 11. or 12. small land in 3. degree 10. minute to the southward the fourteen day of February we fall with eleven or twelve very small island lie very low and flat full of tree and pass by some island which be sink and have the dry sand lie in the main Sea these island near the malucco stand in three degree and ten minute to the southward of the line the first day of March have pass through the straits of and we come to a anchor under the south-west part of march 1588. our arrival at where we espy certain of the people which be fish by the sea side in a bay which be under the island then our general take into the shipboat certain of his company and a negro which can speak the morisco tongue the morisco or arabian tongue common in java which he have take out of the great s. Anna make towards those fisher which have espy our boat run on shore into the wood for fear of our man but our general cause his negro to call unto they who no soon hear he call but present one of they come out to the shore side and make answer our general by the negro inquire of he for fresh water which they find and cause the fisher to go to the king and to certify he of a ship that be come to have traffic for victual and for diamond pearl or any other rich jewel that he have nine or ten of the king canoas and on the twelve of march there come nine or ten of the king canoas so deep lade with victual as they can swim with two great live ox half a score of wonderful great and fat hog a number of hen drake goose egg sugar cane sugar in plate sweet orange and sour lyme great store of wine and aquavitae salt to season victual withal and almost all manner of victual else with diverse of the king officer which be there there come two portugal to we which inquire of don Antonio their king then in England and tell we of the javanes as follow the name of the king of that part of the island be Raia Bolamboam Raia Bolamboam who be a man have in great majesty and fear among they the common people may not bargain sell or exchange any thing with any other nation without special licence from their king and if any so do it be present death for he the king himself be a man of great year and have a hundred wife his son have fifty the custom of the country be that whensoever the king do die they take the body so dead and burn it and preserve the ash of he and within five day next after the wife of the say king so dead according to the custom and use of their country every one of they go together to a place appoint and the chief of the woman which be near unto he in account the wife kill themselves after their husband death have a ball in her hand and throw it from she and to the place where the ball rest thither they go all and turn their face to the eastward and every one with a dagger in their hand which dagger they call a Crise and be as sharp as a razor stab themselves to the heart and with their hand all to be-bath themselves in their own blood a strange order and fall grovel on their face so end their day this thing be as true as it seem to any hearer to be strange the man of themselves be very politic and subtle and singular valiant be naked man in any action they undertake and wonderful at commandment and fear of their King for example if their king command they to undertake any exploit be it never so dangerous or desperate they dare not refuse it though they die every man in the execution of the same for he will cut off the head of every one of they which return alive without bring of their purpose to pass which be such a thing among they as it make they the most valiant people in all the southeast-part of the world for they never fear any death for be in fight with any nation if any of they feel himself hurt with lance or sword he will willing run himself upon the weapon quite through his body to procure his death the more speedy and in this desperate sort end his day or overcome his enemy moreover although the man be tawny of colour and go continual naked yet their woman be fair of complexion and go more apparel they tell we further that if their king don Antonio will come unto they fair woman in java don Antonio may be receive as (@) in the east indies they will warrant he to have all the at commandment beside China Sangles and the isle of the and that he may be assure to have all the indian on his side that be in the country after we have full content these portugal and the people of java which bring we victual in their canoas they take their leaf of we with promise of all good entertainment at our return and our general give they three great piece of ordnance at their depart thus the next day be the sixteenth of march we set sail towards the cape of good hope they depart from java the 16. of march 1588. call by the portugal cabo on the southermost coast of Africa the rest of march and all the month of April we spend in traverse that mighty and vast sea between the isle of java and the main of Africa observe the heaven the crosier or south-pole the other star the fowl which be mark unto the seaman of fair weather foul weather approach of land or island the wind the tempest the reins and thunder with the alteration of tide and current the eleven of May in the morning one of the company go into the top and espy land bear north and north and by west of we and about noon we espy land to bear west of we which as we do imagine be the cape of whereof indeed we be short some forty or fifty league and by reason of the skantnesse of the wind we stand along to the southeast until midnight at which time the wind come fair and we hale along westward the twelve and thirteen day we be becalm and the sky be very hazie and thick until the fourteen day at three of the clock in the afternoon at which time the sky clear and we espy the land again which be the cape call cabo Falso cabo Falso which be short of the cape forty or fifty league this cape be very easy to be know for there be right over it three very high hill stand but a small way one of another and the high stand in the midst and the ground be much low by the sea side the cape of good hope bear west and by south from the say cabo Falso the sixteenth day of May about four of the clock in the afternoon the wind come up at east a very stiff gale which hold until it be Saturday with as much wind as ever the ship can go before at which time by six of the clock in the morning we espy the promontory or head-land call the cape which be a reasonable high land and at the westermost point a little of the main do show two hammock the one upon the other they double the cape Bona Speranza and three other hammock lie further off into the sea yet low land between and adjoin unto the Sea this cape of be set down and account for two thousand league from the island of java in the Portugal sea-cart from java to the cape of Bona Speranza be but 1850. league june 1588. but it be not so much almost by a hundred and fifty league as we find by the run of our Ship we be in run of these eighteen hundred and fifty league just nine week the eight day of june by break of day we fall in sight of the island of s. Helena seven or eight league short of it have but a small gale of wind or almost none at all insomuch as we can not get unto it that day but stand off and on all that night the next day have a pretty easy gale of wind we stand in with the shore they anchor at the island of s. Helena the 9 of june our boat be send away before to make the harbour and about one of the clock in the afternoon we come to a anchor in twelve fathom water two or three cable length from the shore in a very fair and smooth bay under the northwest-side of the island this island be very high land and lie in the main sea s. Helena be in the latitude of 15. degree 48. min. to the southward stand as it be in the midst of the sea between the main land of Africa and the main of Brasilia and the coast of Guinea and be in fifteen degree and forty eight minute to the southward of the equinoctial line and be distant from the cape of between five and six hundred league here we go on shore and enter the church which be hang with paint clothes have a altar with a picture of the crucifix and bless virgin in a table there be a causey to the church two house also adjoin a frame with two bell and a cross of freestone the great store of diverse excellent fruit in s. Helena the valley where it stand be pleasant and plant in every place either with fruit tree or with herb there be figtree which bear fruit continual and marvelous plentiful for on every tree you shall have blossom green fig and ripe fig all at once and it be so all the year long the reason be that the island stand so near the sun there be also great store of lymmon-tree orange-tree pomegranate-tree pomecitron-tree date-tree which bear fruit as the figge-tree do and be plant careful and very artificial with very pleasant walk under and between they and the say walk be over-shadowed with the leaf of the tree and in every void place be plant parsley sorrel Basill fenell annis-seed mustardseed radish and many special good herb and the fresh water brook run through diverse place of this orchard and may with very small pain be make to water any one tree in the valley there be also upon this island great store of partridge which be very tame not make any great haste to fly away though one come very near they abundance of partridge in s. Helena but only to run away and get up into the steep cliff we kill some of they with a fowl piece they be within a little as big as a hen and be of a ash-colour and live in covy twelve sixteen and twenty together you can go ten or twelve score but you shall se^ or spring one or two covy at the least great store of feasant turkey in great quantity there be likewise no less store of pheasant in the island which be surpass those which be in our country in bigness and in number of a company we find moreover in this place great store of guinie-cock which we call turkey of colour black and white with red head they be much about the same bigness which we be of in England their egg be white and as big as a Turkey egg there be in this island thousand of goat which the spaniard call cabrito which be very wild exceed number of goat you shall see one or two hundred of they together and sometime you may behold they go in a flock almost a mile long some of they be as big as a ass with a main like a horse and a beard hang down to the very ground we take and kill many of they for all their swiftness for there be thousand of they upon the mountain here be in like manner great store of swine which be very wild fat and large they keep altogether upon the mountain plenty of swine and will very sieldome abide any man to come near they except it be by mere chance when they be find asleep or otherwise according to their kind be take lay in the mire we find in the house at our come three slave which be Negro and one which be bear in the island of java for the portugal use to touch and refresh here at their return from the indies and leave their sick person to be take in by the next Fleet. our departure from s. Helena the twenty day of june have take in wood and water and refresh ourselves with such thing as we find there and make clean our ship we set sail about eight of the clock in the night towards England at our set sail we have the wind at southeast and we hale away northwest and by west the wind be common off the shore at this island of s. Helena on Friday in the morning be the three and twenty day of August at four of the clock we hale east Coruo and flores two island of the Azores and east and by south for the northermost island of the acore on Saturday the four and twenty day of the say month by five of the clock in the morning we fall in sight of the two island of flores and Coruo stand in thirty nine degree and @ and sail away north-east the three of September we meet with a flemish hulk which come from Lisbon and declare unto we the overthrow of the spanish fleet to the singular rejoice and comfort of we all the nine of September after a terrible tempest which carry away most part of our sail by the merciful favour of the almighty we recover our long wish port of Plymouth in England from whence we set forth at the begin of our voyage a letter of master THOMAS Candish to the right honourable the lord Hunsdon lord Chamberlain one of her majesty most honourable privy counsel touch the success of his voyage about the World right honourable as your favour heretofore have be most great extend towards i so I humble desire a continuance thereof and though there be no mean in i to deserve the same yet the uttermost of my service shall not be want whensoever it shall please your honour to dispose thereof I be humble to desire your honour to make know unto her majesty the desire I have have to do her majesty service in the performance of this voyage and as it have please God to give she the victory over part of her enemy so I trust your long to see she overthrow they all for the place of their wealth whereby they have maintain and make their war be now perfect discover and if it please her majesty with a very small power she may take the spoil of they all it have please the almighty to suffer i to circompasse the whole globe of the world enter in at the straight of Magellan and return by the cape in which voyage I have either discover or bring certain intelligence of all the rich place of the world that ever be know or discover by any christian. I navigate alongst the coast of chili Peru and Nueva Espanna where I make great spoil I burn and sink nineteen sail of ship small and great all the village and town that ever I land at I burn and spoil and have I not be discover upon the coast I have take great quantity of treasure the matter of most profit unto i be a great ship of the king which I take at california which ship come from the be one of the rich of merchandise that ever pass those sea as the king register and merchant account do show for it do amount in value to * in Mexico to be sold. which good for that my ship be not able to contain the least part of they I be enforce to set on fire from the cape of california be the uttermost part of all Espanna I navigate to the island of the hard upon the coast of China of which country I have bring such intelligence as have not be hear of in these part the stateliness and riches of which country I fear to make report of lest I shall not be credit for if I have not know sufficient the incomparable wealth of that country I shall have be as incredulous thereof as other will be that have not have the like experience I sail along the island of the Malucos where among some of the heathen people I be well entreat where our countryman may have trade as free as the portugal if they will themselves from thence I pass by the cape of and find out by the way homeward the island of s. Helena where the portugal use to relieve themselves and from that island God have suffer i to return into England all which service with myself I humble prostrate at her majesty foot desire the almighty long to continue she reign among we for at this day she be the most famous and victorious prince that live in the World thus humble desire pardon of your honour for my tediousness I leave your lordship to the tuition of the almighty Plymouth this nine of September 1588. your honour most humble to command THOMAS Candish chap. v. the voyage of OLIVER NOORT round about the globe be the four circum-navigation of the same extract out of the latin diary in the year 1598. on the second day of july the Maurice and the concord set forth from Rotterdam and on the thirteen of September the Henry Fredrick and the hope come up to they where they stay for they on the coast of England their chief pilot be captain * * captain Melis a english man in this voyage m. Adams in the next guide and pilot to the hollander in their circumnavigation as m. Davies and other afterward in their first Indian voyages their exploit be honour to the English Melis a Englishman which have encompass the circumference with m. Thomas Candish on the nineteen they come before Plymouth where the vice-admiralls boat with six man forsake they on the seven and twenty they take two ship of biscay and after some view of they let they depart October the four they meet four ship one of Amsterdam another of England and two french come out of Barbary which relate of the terrible pestilence in that country of which two hundred and fifty thousand man in short space have die in Morocco on the six they be betwixt the great canary and teneriffe on the eight the vide-admiral lose her boat with one man the night and wind sever they on the nine they have almost run on shore on the coast of Barbary by misunderstanding the english pilot who have bid they steer south-west and they hold their course south till they be within half a mile of land on the three of November they have sight of the coast of Guinea on December the four they be hard by cape Palma in 3. @ on the ten they have sight of the prince i will ila and make to it with no little comfort after they have be so long weather-beaten at sea it stand in one degree @ they send their boat first for discovery and have enter with a flag of truce a negro come with a like flag to know what they will have treachery of the islander they demand provision be kind use and Gerrits which know the place and can speak the Portugal tongue with captain Melis and one John breme be sudden and treacherous slay captain Peter Esias escape by flight to the boat which be furious assail by the portugal and the general brother slay the rest hardly return aboard the general call a council of war they agree to assault the castle which have attempt with loss they burn all their sugar house and with force provide themselves with fresh water on the seventeen they depart but the south wind hinder they on the five and twenty they reach cape consalvo cape consalvo where the wind usual in the night blow from land in the day from Sea here they go on shore and find two dutch ship and learned that Peter Verhagens have stay a month in this place and bury eight and thirty of his company many other be sick he enter the river of congo and be force to retire hither and a fortnight before be depart for Anobon he learn also that captain Cleerhagen with a great part of his company be slay in the prince island the rest hardly escape to and in their ship on the six and twenty they set sail from the cape towards brasil 1599 on the first day of januarie 1599 they pass the isle Anobon and find two degree southerly on the eight and twenty they have the sun in their zenith on the three of February they espy by night certain low ground on which the concord have like to have make a fatal discord cape saint Thomas fair cape cape Frio Rio javero s. Sebastian on the five they reach the land of brasil at cape saint Thomas in two and twenty on the six they pass the fair cape and in the evening cape Frio on the nine they come to Rio javero after some loss of time and their company by portugal-wile they depart to saint Sebastian where they have freshwater wood and safe harbour but find no fruit on the fourteen of march a cruel storm assail they and sever the vice-admiral and the hope which yet on the seventeen be restore again to the Fleet. the concord also leak so much that they agree to empty the good and forsake she but the scorbute increase and the winter approach make they resolve to seek the isle of saint Helena which they do but miss it and therefore think to relieve themselves in the ascension or some other island in 20@ they come to the island but barren and inhospitall save that with club they knock down many fowl call Mew^n but the rock without and barrenness within force their departure and when on the first of june they have think to have encounter the isle Ascension they find it the continent of brasil which they imagine to have be fourscore mile distant the portugal prohibit their land s. clara. they come at last to the isle of saint Clara and there erect tent for their sick people some of which present die here they find little but herb and two tree of sour plumb which cure the sick in fifteen day the island be a * * by Miles understand dutch Miles mile in compass and as far from the continent here they burn the concord have before take out what they please they also expose two malefactor to their forlorn fortune this isle be in one and twenty degree fifteen minute southwards from the line on the sixteenth of july they determine to seek port desire port desire which after many tempest they come to on the twenty of September in forty seven degree forty minute in a island three mile from thence southwards they furnish themselves with store of penguin and fish of those fowl they take fifty thousand be as big as goose with egg innumerable which prove very refresh to the disease here they careen their ship and set up a smith forge they go up the river the five of October and go on land find beast like stag and buffal and multitude of ostreche in one nest they take nineteen egg which the dam have forsake the captain of the hope die of the scorbute the captain of the concord be choose his successor and the ship also be term the concord on the twenty day the general go on land to descry the country give strait charge to look well to the boat and not to stir from they which they transgress be out of ambush set on by thirty savage and three slay beside the four wound these savage be of admirable stature paint unto terror their bow short their arrow head with stone on the nine and twenty they prepare to depart on the four of November they be near cape virgin the land be low and plain by the whiteness resemble England often they hence attempt to enter the straits cape virgin but often enter straits with that attempt repel by tempestuous wind raine hailes snowes sickness and contention add their subsidiary assistance these sensible cross be accompany with loss of anchor cable and that which be most irrecoverable time little less than fifteen month be spend before they can fasten any good entrance into the straits although they just seem engulph in the straits all this time and all their way hither have pay the life of almost a hundred of their company for sea-custome from the say cape the land trend southwestward the straits mouth be hence fourteen mile and half a mile in breadth on the south side thereof they espy a man with a kind of cloak suppose therefore but false to be a Christian his face paint and stature ordinary who in vain they invite to their company they see many other and on the five and twenty they espy many man in two island near the cape which they call nassau who forbid the hollander land with their dart and other weapon cape nassau but be chase to a obscure cave where they be all slay before the dutch can win entrance there they find the amaze and affright mother lie prostrate on their infant to protect they from that fatal thunder from who they take four boy and two girl and with they return aboard of one of these have learned to speak dutch they receive this intelligence the land name be castemme castemme Talcke manner of the inhabitant this people or tribe call enoo the name of the lesser island Talcke both store with penguin who flesh yield they food their skin clothe they dwell in cave under the earth in the continent be many ostrich whereon they feed these they call Talcke and another kind of wild beast they dwell in several tribe or family apart whereof one be call Kemenetes dwell in Karay another kennekas in Karamay a three in morine all of stature like we except their broad and high breast paint the man tie their privy member with a string the woman hide they with a penguin skin the man wear long hair the woman be shave they go naked only wear a cloak of penguin skin to the waist the like cover they make of other bird call oripeggre the pengwin they call co^ppogre these skin they compact together with no less industry and art then skinner do with we there be a four family or tribe name Tirimenen and the place of their habitation coin giant see the next story annex of seb. de Weert of giantly stature ten or twelve foot high which have often war with the other lord or tribe who they call pengwine-eater whereby it seem they use other meat haply mans-flesh on the six and twenty they take three hundred pengwine on the isle bear that name before they come at these pengwine isle betwixt two strait be shoald and a island callep pantagom on the eight and twenty day they pass to the continent and see whale they encounter a pleasant river but see not the mouth of it there be many parrot and fair tree whereupon they call it summer-bay on the nine and twenty summer bay port famine pantagom Fuego be the land on the south of the null since find to be (@) island Philip city cape froward they set sail for wood and water to port famine here the land trend so far to the south that pantagom and Fuego seem afar off to join here they find no foot print of the late philip-citie now like a heap of stone the magellane straight be distant thence about four dutch mile the hill on both side be steep and high all the yeere-long cover with store of snow here they cut down wood to make they another Boat the bark of the tree in these part bite like pepper but find no good water and doubt also whether it be philip-citie or port famine indeed they depart and after two mile find a good river whence they have easy provision on the first of December the next day they pass to cape froward which have double with great danger by reason of unsafe anchorage and contrary wind they anchor at eighteen fathom four mile from thence in a great Bay here be good water and a herb like neeswort profitable against the scorbute s^me soldier taste of another herb there grow be well-nigh distract for a time a mile off they find a fit place to build their boat in which they spend twelve day here they have sight of Sebalt de Weert his ship one of Peter * * sir jaques M^^u or as adams^alls ^alls he man^y go out general of this fleet who die in the isle of Brava and Simon coor^es succeed it be here call Peter Verhagens company because be be then chief of the indian company which set they forth Verhagens company which with another of the same fleet have be drive back out of the south sea he report that he have spend above five month in the straight and lose by disease and otherwise so many of his man that of a hundred and ten there be leave but eight and thirty whence he be not able to endure the storm which assault he in the south sea but be force hither when the rest of the fleet better man hold on their course thus hard news storm and mutiny finish this month and year on the second of januarie * * 1600. Maurice Bay ice all the year long in the straits the same report have seb. (@) meni^te Bay g^^se Bay po^^sh Bay they make search of Maurice bay which they observe to extend far to the east and to receive store of Rivers flow into it at the mouth whereof they find great store of ice in their judgement never melt for sound ten fathom they can not reach the bottom thereof this their midsummer season notwithstanding they conjecture the land also to be break island which the height of the mountain make to seem continue and firm they endure continual reins nor can get aught there but muskle which on the eight they go to gather the lesser boat out-sailing her fellow two of her man be slay and wound by the savage their weapon be heavy club with rope tie to they and long dart of wood. at the land of the great boat they all flee have endure diverse storm which endanger they on the rock in meniste bay and some encounter of the savage which have leave three canoas under a high hill and with stone defend they from the hollander they depart on the seventeen day and by a storm be drive into goose bay three mile distant so call of the store of that foul their find fit for swim and long dive but unable to fly here the vice-admiral for diverse misdemeanour be by a council of war adjudge to be set on land which be according execute where famine or wild beast or wild man must needs make a end of his mutinous unquiet life on the first of February they enter a new bay which they call popish bay where the admiral be like to have perish on a sink rock here they have store of storm thunder lightning and muscle in a broad river which run into it on the seven and twenty they have view of a huge mountain of ice in goose Bay cape desire on the last of February they pass cape desire into the south sea with thanks to the almighty for that happy success this sea be not so peaceable but that it entertain they with diverse day storm in which they lose their Boat their company be now a hundred forty seven on the twelve of march they lose sight of the vide-admiral Mocha who have in vain expect they go to the island la Mocha in thirty eight degree in the midst whereof be a high mountain cleave itself in the top to yield water to the subject valley here they barter hatchet and knife for sheep hen Maiz Battalas and other fruit they go to the town which have some fifty house of straw long Cici drink with one door into which they may not be admit they give they drink call Cici somewhat sowerish make of mays which the toothless old woman chew suppose that the elder the woman be the better shall their drink be and steep it in water reserve it for necessary use and for their drunken feast drink in a misorder order at the sound which one make with his mouth according to their bacchanal mystery measure to each his proportion measure with unmeasurable disproportion they have many wife which they buy of their parent so that the father of many daughter be the rich man their life be loose scarce subject to any law if any kill another the kindred of the slay revenge it unless some intercessor prevail to procure a yearly cici-festivall in recompense the inhabitant of chili observe like custom they be clothe above and below with garment make of the wool of large sheep with long neck which they use also to burden of which kind they will sell none to the dutch but of another fat kind not much unlike we this island be about six mile from the continent from it eighteen mile lie another call s. Maries in thirty seven degree and fifteen minute of southerly latitude s. mary a island rich in Gold here they have sight of a spanish ship which they chase and take this ship they say be the king send with lard and meal to Arauco and conception where they have war with the indian the pilot certify they that it be impossible for they to recover s. Maries from whence they have chase this ship to thirty five degree by reason of the southerly wind they tell they of two ship of war wait for intelligence of their come in arica Val Paraiso they hereupon present determine for Val Paraiso and so lose their vide-admiral altogether who they suppose to have lose that isle of s. Mary by the wrong place thereof in plancius his map in thirty eight degree whereas it be in thirty seven degree and fifteen minute they themselves have also be deceive but for note of captain Melis note the help which the dutch have by englishman note w. Adams make mention of this fight who in the same ship come to jap^n the Englishman which they have and follow they hear also of Simon de cordes his arrival there who by a Spaniard dissemble amity be invite to land and so betray to the indian butchery with twenty three man be mistake for spaniard their head set upon pole and in a glorious ostentation show to the spaniard in conception the spaniard make fair semblance of kindness so to have possess themselves of their two ship of which they send notice to lima but the hollander mistrust depart they know not whither the spaniard in Lyma have receive intelligence a year before their come of the hollander and of the name of their chief man and provide themselves according in Val Paraiso or s. jago they take two ship and fly many indian but the spaniard be flee s. jago this Val Paraiso be in three and thirty degree of the south latitude and s. jago be from it eighteen mile within land a town fertile of wine much like claret in taste and colour sheep plenty there be plenty of sheep which they kill only for their suet wherewith they lade whole ship the whole country be fruitful here they receive letter from Derick Gerritz captain of the fly hart one of Verhagens company who think to trade with the spaniard there have but nine sound man in his ship be sudden assault wound and imprison where he write these miserable line his famine proceed from the miss of s. Mary island upon that wrong place in the map aforesaid so that mere famine bring he to these straits in s. jago they have intercept letter which relate the occurrent of the war of chili the indian rebel against the spaniard war betwixt the spaniard and chili Baldivia imperial and force Baldivia the four and twenty of November 1599 slay and carry away captive the inhabitant two hundred spaniard send from Lyma do again there fortify the indian likewise besiege the city imperial and have now almost famish the spaniard these indian be good and expert soldier of which five thousand be in this expedition three thousand of they horseman skilful at their lance and a hundred shot seventy costlet all which furniture they have take from the spaniard in many victory they so hate the spaniard that of whosoever they kill they pluck out his heart and bite it and make drink vessel of their skull they use oration to encourage they to the maintenance of their pristine liberty against the spanish tyranny they have one chief captain only in time of war the first choice of he in their first spanish war be in this sort a heavy piece of timber be by all the competitor carry on their shoulder which while it weary the most to bear five or six hour one be find strong enough to endure it four and twenty together and thereby attain this ducal honour the region of chili from s. jago to Baldivia be the most fertile in the world and of most wholesome air insomuch that few be there sick fertility of chili yea a sword put up into the scabbard all wet with the dew do not therewith rust fruit mays hog horse kine sheep goat be plentiful and wander in great herd beside gold-mine in the sack of Baldivia they burn house temple monastery and strike off the head of their image cry down go the god of the spaniard they thrust gold into their mouth and bid they satiate themselves with that for which they have raise such persecution and of which they make such unsatiable prosecution on the first of April they enter the bay Guasco and thence on the seven depart Guasco on the eleven they come into a great nook call Morre gorch ten mile from which be Morre morrene from which the shore be extend to Aricca Morre Gorch and m. morrene all which tract to s. Francis hill be usual subject to southwind and far in the sea the wind variable on the twenti the air be dark that a man can not see above a stone cast cloud of dust the cause be a cloud of dust like meal which white their clothes in like manner the spanish pilot tell they it be usual in those part by they call Arenales it last all day and cause the general to loose his two other consort till two day after on the five and twenti Lyma they see Lyma bear east from they here the negro confess that in one of the ship which they have take the captain envy the hollander such wealth when he see he can not escape intelligence of gold in saint Maries have throw into the sea three boat load of Gold the pilot be examine confess that there be two and fifty chest of gold whereof each have four Aroben and five hundred pot in each of which be eight ten or twelve pound of Gold he cause also every man to bring forth whatsoever he have and throw it into the Sea this gold come from saint Mary island which three or four spaniard possess employ two thousand indian in the mine on the nine and twenty they espy two sail and give they chase in vain those ship build for that sea where from panama to Lyma they sail mostwhat against the wind which be usual constant out strip the hollander exceed the twenty of May after that they have labour in vain to attain the isle of in five degree of notherly latitude i. they purpose to avoid the danger of the spanish man of war whereof they have intelligence to set sail to the ladicue and thence to the much rain they have in the way not without this benefit to supply their want of water the thirty of june the spanish pilot be for ill demeanour by public sentence cast overboard a prosperous wind happy succeed on the fifteen of September they have sight of the ladrone on the sixteenth Guana a island of the ladrone the indian come in their canoas with fish rootes sugarcane to barter for old piece of iron sometime they may number two hundred of these canoas with two three or five man in each all cry Hiero Hiero that be iron iron with greediness overturn their canoas against the ship side which they regard not be expert swimmer and can easy recover their boat good and self they be subtle deceiver cover a basket of shell with a little rice in the top as if they have be full of rice and upon fit opportunity snatch a sword out of the scabbard and leap into the sea where with deep and long dive they secure themselves from shot the woman be herein equal to the man they will fetch a piece of iron from the bottom of the Sea their boat be neat compact of fifteen or twenty foot long and 1 @ broad wherewith they sail against the wind and if they must turn they never alter their sail but with the poop cut the wave their woman cover their privity with a leaf otherwise naked both man and woman like the picture of Adam and eue. they be libidinous and have thereof many pocky testimony this island be call Guana neither see they any other it be twenty mile large these fruit be very comfortable to their sick man of the scorbute on the seventeen they set sail for the on the twenty they have ice be then in three degree six week together they drink only rain water on the fourteen of October they espy land and thought but false cape Sancto Spirito that it have be the cape of the holy ghost on the sixteenth day there come a balsy or Canoa and in the same a Spaniard which fear to come aboard they display a spanish flag and attire one like a friar to allure he which take effect the general salute he and tell he they be Frenchmen with the king commission find for but want necessary and not know where they now be have lose their pilot. the Spaniard answer this place be call bay bay bay bay seven or eight mile to the north from the straight of the land be fertile and he command the indian to bring rice hog and hen which be present effect and sell for ready money his name be Henry nunes the next day Francisio rodrigo the governor come to the ship and do likewise the indian go most naked their skin draw out with indelible line and figure they pay for their head to the Spaniard ten single ryalls for every one above twenty year old there be few spaniard and but one priest which be of great esteem and have they priest enough all the neighbour nation will be subject to the Spaniard be furnish with necessary provision and now also discover they depart for the straight of and be in no small danger of a rock the same night straight of this whole Tract be waste barren and full of rock a storm of wind have almost rob they the next day of their mast and sail which with such sudden violence assail they from the southeast that in their stormy and tedious voyage they have not encounter a more terrible note on the three and twenty some go on land and eat palmito and drink water after which follow the bloody flux whether of this cause or the land after so long a be at sea uncertain the four and twenty they enter the straight and sail by the island in the midst Capul and in the evening pass by the isle Capul seven mile within the straight near which they find many whirlpool which at first seem shoalds but they can find no bottom the people be all flee here they lose a Londoner John * * Caldwey a Londoner Caldwey a excellent musician surprise as be suspect by some insidiarie indian whereupon they burn their village be eighty mile from Capul which now they leave to attain the other but in a calm wind with violent work of the wave be much toss without much danger by reason of the depth they want a pilot and their map be uncertain the seven of November they take a China junke lade with provision for the owner be of Canton mexican trade yearly at the master and mariner of Chincheo this master be expert in the Portugal tongue and their indian affair which happen very lucky to the hollander ignorant of their course these tell they that in be two great ship which from new Spain yearly sail thither that there be also a dutch ship buy at Malava these ride before and there be two castle or fort to secure they the city also wall about and without it above fifteen thousand Chinois inhabitant occupy in merchandise and handicraft and that four hundred China ship come thither yearly from Chincheo with silk and other precious merchandise betwixt December and Easter they add that two be short expect from japon with iron other metal and victual on the fifteen they take two bark lade with hen and hog which be to be pay for tribute to the spaniard for which they give they some linen bolt in recompense bankingle Mindore lon-bou they pass by the isle bankingle and another call mindore right against which be the isle lon-bou two mile distant and betwixt they both be another lesser island near which be safe passage for ship they agree upon consultation to stay in expectation of the japonian ship at a anchor for the east wind have the monarchy of that season in those part in fifteen degree of north latitude Lusson the isle Lusson be big than England and Scotland to which many island adjoin the riches arise more out of traffic than fertility on the three of December they take one of the japon ship of fifty ton which have spend five and twenty day in the voyage the form be strange the forepart like a chimney the sail of reed or Matt twist the anchor of wood japonian ship and man the cable of straw the japanders make themselves bald except a tuft leave in the hinder part of the head the jesuite have the manage of the Portugal traffic in japon have make way thereto by their preach and be in reputation with their convert there be some franciscans also as demigod neither admit they any other order of religion to help they the general obtain at easy rate one of these wooden anchor for his use and some quantity of provision on the nine they take a bark lade with wine like aquavitae the people all flee and another with Rice and hen on the fourteen the ship come from and there pass betwixt they a sea-fight the spanish admiral come so near and be store with man that they enter the dutch admiral and think themselves master thereof six or seven still lay at one Hollander the vice-admiral also set upon the small Ship fight with spaniard and indian all day the two admiral be fast together and the dutch overweary with multitude be now upon point to yield when the admiral rate their cowardice and threaten to blow they up with gunpowder present this fear expel the other and the dread of fire add real fire to their courage insomuch that they renew the fight and clear the ship of her new master which have no less labour to clear their own ship from the dutch which be no soon do but the sea challenge she for his own dutch victory and devour she in one fatal morsel into his unsatiable paunch the people swim about cry which a little before have cry in another dialect Maina Maina of these miserable wretch be two hundred beside such as be before drown or slay but the fire be almost as dangerous to the dutch as the water to the spanish by often shoot the Timbers be overheat threaten by light flame to make the dutch accompany the spaniard into Neptune entrails but fear awake diligence and diligence cast this fear also into a dead sleep the bless trinity in almost a unity of time divert a trinity of death by yield sink fire but in this divine mercy they forget not their inhuman feritie to the swim remainder of the enemy entertain they with pike shot yea especial a priest in his habit with derision in the ship be five spaniard find dead with silver box about they contain little consecrate schedule testimony of great and bootless superstition in which they exceed the european papist in the midst of Spain and Rome five hollander be slay and twenty six wound in the fight the whole company in the ship be but five and thirty the pinnace have but five and twenty dutch pinnace take and can not withstand the violence of five hundred arm man in the enemy vice-admiral some spaniard some indian which after long fight take she these two be the mexican ship which yearly trade in the for silk gold and musk with other commodity of China hence they depart for borneo to repair the tear ship distant from one hundred and eighty mile this be in five degree in fourteen degree forty five minute mile you must in all this story understand in the dutch account they sail by Bolutan Bolutan a great island one hundred and eighty mile long on the six and twenty they arrive at borneo in a great bay contain some three mile in compass the water still borneo the ground good for ancorage the neighbour river well store with fish which the fisherman there dwell change plentiful for linen clothes the general send to the king for licence to trade the people be very desirous of China piece of linen which they have take before but little respect that which they bring out of Holland on the eight and twenty the pilot which he have send to the king return and a praw of the king with he in which be two brass piece and the king banner the gunner be of Patana in much repute with the King he misdoubt that they be spaniard until his officer have search and find the contrary here they trade for pepper with the patanee which seem to be of chinese original and observe their custom inhabit in a region of their own mean while they have learned that the bornean intend treason towards they and to begin the new year januarie first 1601. see a hundred prawe assemble 1601. and under colour of present from the king they seek to enter the ship till the dutch vigilance and threat make they give over their design with colourable excuse a Patane be the author of this treachery which have slay the Portugall not long before and take their ship with like wile in unlike security this island borneo be one of the great in east India the city of the same name borneo Cap^ be situate in a miry soil and in their praw they may pass from one house to another it contain three thousand house beside many further upland it be very populous the inhabitant tall subtle go arm all of they be they poor husbandman or fisherman their arm be bow javelin point with iron fork quiver with venom dart which poison to death where they draw blood they be all mahometans and will die soon than taste of lard neither keep they any swine they have many wife those witty wary in trade bold and courageous one of they rudelier handle by a Hollander with a javelin have dispatch he if her force have not be intercept they be clothe with linen from the waist downward the base sort go all naked they wear on their head a cotton turban the king a child be under a protector the noble be proud grave and much observe in the midst of their prawe stand a table with silver vessel for their bettele and Arec^a which they usual be chew see little hope of trade they determine to set sail for Bantam the three of januarie in the dark night four bornean come to the ship with purpose to cut the cable so to bring the ship on ground neither have they any more anchor but one leave they on board and that one by which they ride but be perceive and shoot at they leave their praw which the hollander take with they have lose their boat at the next morning they set sail and espy a junke of japan learn of they that they be find for and force for succour to borneo have spend four month wait for their voyage the captain be Emanuel Powis a Portugal then dwell at languasacke in japan the pilot a chinese the company japanders these tell they of a great Holland ship by tempest shake William Adams a Englishman go chief pilot in this ship and live above twenty year in japan of he you may read more hereafter he late die as I hear at Fizando a japonian island to have put in at japan the company by famine and sickness all but fourteen dead they come first to Bongo in thirty four degree forty minute and by the king direction remove to Atonza in 36 1/^ they ride there in safe harbour with four anchor and have freedom of their person and trade and to make a new ship to go whether they will they conjecture hereby that it be Verhagens his admiral ship of two hundred and fifty ton be as this captain tell they well furnish with ordnance ryalls of eight and commodity the general desire this captain at his return to remember his kind greeting to his countryman and after other kindness depart have give he a pass at his request in the name of grave Maurice on the thirteen they pass the line the three time they sail at this time in much fear and danger for want of a pilot and good card on the sixteenth they take a junke of jor and furnish themselves with a skilful pilot out of she without who he have small likelihood in those dangerous sea to have escape shipwreck the island be many banta Crimati which yield diamond which-they sell at malacca and other beside shold they have now but one anchor leave and the cable thereof wear and weak on the twenty eight they come to jortan and hear of Holland ship at Bantam here they buy mace and provision jortan have a thousand house all of timber jortan the king be absent at Passaruan five year before he have besiege Balamboa and destroy the king with all his kindred Passaruan Balamboa he be also call king of Sorbay a city not far distant all which four city be mahometan and very rigid in that swinish superstition the pagode and idol argue permission of ethnic and ancient indian rite the chief priest reside in a place without the city of jortan a man of a hundred and twenty year which have many wife to keep he warm and with their milk to nourish he eat no other meat depart hence they see a great Portugal ship of six hundred ton set fast on the shoald Amboyna which be go to Amboyna to fortify there against the inhabitant and to prohibit all other nation trade the five of February they pass the straight betwixt Balamboa and baly and lean java north east from they on the eleven day they find themselves in thirteen degree baly sun in their zenith and direct their course to cape Bona Esperanca on the eighteen the sun be right over they at noon in the eleven degree twenty minute and a calm continue ten day the nineteen of march the height be twenty four degree forty five minute and on the four and twenty twenty eight degree ten minute on the first of April thirty degree fifty minute on the nineteen the calm and cross wind cause a set allowance of water to be proportion on the twentie-fourth at night they see a light like fire about four mile to the north-west note whereby they be by God grace preserve from hazard for by their reckon they hold themselves two hundred mile distant from the cape whereas this fire give notice of land near the next day their height be thirty four degree and thirty five minute the calm give they licence to mend their sail at night they see another fire and the next morning land bear north easterly on the twenty seven they be in thirty four degree and forty minute within six or seven mile of the say land may the second they be in thirty five deg and fifteen minute and the next morning betwixt east and north have sight of a low land like the end of some island about six mile off in eighty fathom whereby they think themselves near the cape the wind be at east they make westward and shape their course for saint Helena in fifteen degree fifty eight minute where on the six and twenty they arrive and refresh themselves with fresh water saint Helena store of fish and some flesh for the goat and fowl be wild and hardly take they find no orange on the thirty day they depart and june the fourteen they pass the line the four time on the sixteen day they encounter six dutch ship the general whereof be james Heemeskerk find for the east indies they have spend two month on the way and lose their vice-admiral and pinnace have fight with thirteen spanish ship near the salt land the pinnace be take the other they hope escape july the eight they be in twenty seven degree and have store of weed in the sea call saragossa on the thirteen be in thirty two degree weedy Sea thirty minute and then have fifteen day calm and the sea all full of weed on the twenty two they be drive to allowance of their worm-eaten Bread August the first they be in forty degree and leave flores and corue to the west some forty five mile flores and corue on the eleven they see a ship and make towards it in vain they shoot off a piece and strike their main sail whereupon the ship stay and signify the same by a shot which when these will answer the piece break and cut off the gun foot kill his boy and break the main mast in three piece whereupon they be force to make a new the other ship pass from they three ship of Embden encounter they on the eighteen and give they bread and flesh for pepper and Rice and tell they they be not yet attain so near England as their master suppose which have promise the Lysart the day before on the nineteen they have sight of the sorling on the twenty five they have like to run on ground by the Brill and the next day anchor at Amsterdam of SEBALD de wert his voyage to the south sea and misery in the straits nine month wherein WILLIAM * * of w. addams his come to japon follow after in the next book Adams Englishman be chief Pilot. because mention be make of Verhagens fleet which pass the straits a little before Noort I have think good to add somewhat touch that voyage 1598. five ship of Amsterdam the hope admiral of two hundred and fifty ton with one hundred and thirty person the charity vice-admiral of one hundred and sixty tun with a hundred and ten man the faith of one hundred and sixty tun with one hundred and nine man the fidelity of one hundred tun with fourscore and six man the good news of threescore and fifteen tun with fifty six man furnish with all necessary provision sir jaques Mahu be general Simon de cordes vice-admiral Benninghen Bockholt and Sebalt de wert the three captain of the three other ship set sail june the seven and twenty and after much ado and little help at the island of cape V^rd where they lose their general to who cordes succeed and receive oath anew of his company as do each other captain of his own ship be remove in successive order they be force by their own want and the Portugal wile the scorbute or scurvy also infect and infest every ship to depart with intent to refresh their man and make better provision of water and other necessary at the isle Bueno or Anobon but espy land unexpected a hundred and twenty mile or more soon than their reckon about three degree of south latitude this land be in congo they determine to go to cape Lopo consalue the people of Guinnee as they pass along the coast yield a peddle trade the sick man be set on shore the ten of November on the three twenty a french sailor come aboard which promise to do they all favour with the negro King to he be send captain wert who find he on a throne scarce one foot high with a lamb skin under his foot his garment of violet colour cloth with guild lace attire like a rower without shirt shoe or stocking have a particoloured cloth on his head and many glass bead about his neck attend with his courtier adorn with cock feather the palace be not comparable to a stable his provision be bring he by woman a few roast and smoke dry fish in wooden vessel with wine of palm in such spare measure that Masicissa and the renown example of temperance may have be this negro disciple once the dutch captain be fain under colour of courtesy to show the king his manner of diet to call for some of his holland provision to satisfy his bark and thus more provoke entrails but in the spanish wine the guinean forget his temperance and be carry to his rest little refresh be here to be have a boar and two buffal they kill in the wood a little they buy a few bird they take and which worse be as the Scorbuto forsake the sick fever possess the strong on the eight of December they depart and on the sixteenth arrive at Annobon some provision they get there by force and that scurvy exchange of the scurvy and f^^er and lose by sickness thirty man Thomas spring Englishman in this voyage among which Thomas spring a english young man of great towardness in the begin of the year 1599 they depart for the magellane strait in the ten of march in forty two degree the sea be all red as if it have be mix with blood be full of red worm which take up leap like flea on April the six they enter the straits at pinguine island they store themselves with thirteen or fourteen hundred on the eighteen they anchor in the green bay in fifty four degree where they have fresh water and large muscle here they stay till the three and twenty of August in a perpetual stormy winter and lose a hundred of their company always the storm find they work and miserable be their toil without any furtherance to their intend voyage rain winde snow hail hunger loss of anchor spoil of ship and tackle sickness death savage want of store and store of want conspire a fullness of misery but special cold increase their appetite and this decrease their provision and make they seek out for supply on the seven of May they go to take gudgeon towards the south over against the green bay and their descry seven canoas of wild man of ten or eleven foot as they conjecture in stature with red body and long hair which amaze the dutch giant and terrify they with stone and cry and after get into their boat again to assail they but see four or five fall down dead with dutch thunder they flee to land and pluck up big tree barricado themselves and throw stone at the hollander which their leave they in their sudden erect fort. but afterward three of their company be slay who in seek food for life find death at the hand of naked savage who weapon be saw-toothed dart which if they enter must be cut out of the flesh this green bay they call the bay of cordes for their long stay in another bay call the horse bay they erect a new guild or fraternity which society find themselves by oath to certain article which be do with more solemnity of ceremony then prosperous effect they stil^d it the fraternity of the free Lion the general add six choice man to himself in this society and cause their name to be carve in a table fasten on high pillar to be see of all passenger which be deface nevertheless by the savage who also pluck out the corpse from the grave and dismember they and carry one away on the three of September they pass out of the straight and continue till the seven when captain Weert be force by a storm to stay and the faith and fidelity be leave behind in much misery tempest hunger leak etc. the death of their master also attend the loss of their company and thus in the end of the month enter the straits again straits again indeed for in two month they have not one fair day to dry their sail the faith lose the fourteen of October two anchor their trouble leave name of perilous bay to one place of their misery and to another unfortunate which yet follow they to every place not without divine assistance and deliverance the devil add also mutiny in this miserable company and thievery they take a savage woman with two child one half year old yet able to go ready and have all the tooth their loathsome feed with the blood run out of their mouth I loathe to rehearse here they meet with general Noort his man lusty but not able to spare they any relief after a world of straits in the straits too long to recite they depart thence the two and twenty of january 1600. and arrive in the maes the fourteen of july without the straits homeward in fifty degree and forty minute they see three land threescore mile from land store with penguin call * * Sebaldinae 3 land not mention in map Sebaldinae of the indies chap. 5 the voyage of GEORGE SPILBERGEN general of a dutch fleet of six ship which pass by the magellane strait and south sea unto the east indies and thence have encompass the whole circumference of the earth home gather out of the latin journal be the five circum-navigation on the eight of August 1614 they set forth from the tessel after much tempestuous weather on the three of October they attain the height of madera on the ten they lose sight of the canary brave and fogo on the twenty three they have sight of the island brave and fogo from the thirty of October to the seventeen of November be a continual calm with many shower and they be force to stint every man his water dangerous sand December the nine they give thanks to the almighty because they have pass the dangerous sand of on the thirteen we see brasil and by reason of shold the great sun shoot off to give warning to the rest not to come very near the shore on the twenty they come to the island where they anchor and go on shore they take much fish and among they small crocodile of the bigness of a man on the thirty while they stay to refresh their sick man on shore hear the huntsman one of their ship to discharge so often they send to see and find that five bark of portugal and indian have set upon three boat and slay the man whereupon they assail they but other come in to their succour and frustrate the attempt 1615. january the first a conspiracy of certain mutinous person be find out for which two be execute be hang up at yard arm shoot through with six musket and bury on shore the preacher have all the night before labour to fit they for a more happy life other be put in iron and distribute to diverse ship before their departure they call a council and ordain that if any ship lose the rest they shall set up a mark in Corde^ haven or some other usual land place and how long they shall stay for each other and after shall hasten to Mocha they agree to remove thence for want of meet provision for their sick to the isle of s. Vincent there the portugal delay and dally with they trifle away time on the twenty six they take a bark with eighteen portugal who they deny to exchange for few hollander although they offer also many fair manuscript picture plate and other thing take in the prize pertain to the jesuite they find also that intelligence of they have be give by some traitor of their own countryman out of Holland and thus in the begin of February they depart free four of their captive portugal detain the rest for one of which also another Portugal have offer himself with diverse petty present pretend himself a bachelor and the other his kinsman to have wife and child but be not accept they burn the prize and some building pertain to the portugal and have well furnish themselves with orange and pomecitrons march the seven a cruel storm encounter they in 52. degree and six minute which continue diverse day and separate they and on the one and twenty a worse storm happen among some mutunous person magel^ne straight and some of they to still that tempest be cast into the sea by the better part get the better it be the eight and twenty before they enter the strait whence the wind and tide force we out some by contrariety of wind desire to winter in port desire shold in the strait other to hold their course to the cape of good hope April the second they re-enter and anchor because of shold one of which they sound next day a quarter of a league over and find but five cubit water they see here a man * * a giant of giantly stature climb the hill to take view of they this be in the land of fogo or fire which be the south of the strait on the seven they go on shore find no man but two ostrige and a great river of fresh water with store of shrub with sweet black berry on the southside they find pleasant wood full of parrot in fifty four degree the mountain full of snow they call one place pepper-haven of the bark of a tree there bite like pepper on the sixteenth may. they confer with the savage and give they sack and certain knife for pearl join together in fashion of horn but some of the company go on May day on shore to take certain goodly bird be surprise by some of the savage and two slay on the six they pass into the south sea not without terror both from the depth in the way the day before scorn the law of anchorage and after that the dangerous shold and island betwixt the northern and southern jaw of the not straight mouth of the straits open into the wide Sea they be welcome into this peaceable sea with a terrible storm which they fear will have split they on the sorling so for likeness to we they call the island in that sea a little without the strait these strait be dangerous for high land shold and want of ancorage also tedious storm attend their ingress and egress on the one and twenty they have sight of chili and Mocha this island be low and broad to the north full of rock to the south on the twenty spaniard they send out boat to traffic with the people the governor and his son dine with the admiral and seem glad to see such munition against the spaniard as likewise do all the Chilesians at sight of their train and muster their soldier they exchange hatchet coral and the like for great plenty of sheep of which they have two for one hatchet with great courtesy but they bring all to the boat nor will suffer any to go to their house jealous it seem of their wife one of these sheep be of leg and neck very long hare-mouthed and bunch-backed which they use for carriage and culture as ass they have many hen and other fowl on the twenty seven we set sail and twenty eight come near the shore hard by the island of s. Mary break and rocky on the twenty nine we come to harbour therein a Spaniard come aboard they have a pledge leave for he but invite they to a dinner on shore one of the boat espy a convoy of soldier tend to that place where they shall dine whereupon they return aboard with the Spaniard prisoner the next morning they go on shore with three ensign the spaniard set their church on fire and flee in the skirmish two hollander be wound and four spaniard slay their house build of reed yield a goodly flame they find store of hen take five hundred sheep with other spoil here they understand of three ship which have depart thence in April to seek these dutch ship furnish with a thousand spaniard the admiral have forty brass piece the rest proportionable hereupon the dutch determine now to seek they in the isle of conception and after that in Valparisa and then on the shore of arica the Spaniard also report of the like preparation in lima have dutch gunner they enact certain order of military discipline how each ship and each person shall carry himself in the fight if they encounter the enemy and to die rather than yield june the first they set sail and pass not far from Auroca june a town with five hundred spaniard in garrison continual assault by the Chilesians on the three they approach the isle Quiriqueynam near the continent and behind it come up to the town of conception conception island in 36. degree 40. min. wherein beside many indian be two hundred spaniard on the twelve they enter the safe road of Valparisa there be a spanish ship on which the mariner set fire and flee on the thirteen they have at none thirty two degree fifteen minute and in the afternoon come to the fair and secure harbour of quintero they go on shore and see many wild horse which flee here they water and take many fish and for wood and other thing find the place very commodious every where fame have be their overhasty harbinger which cause Spanish preparation for a unwelcome entertainment so that no matter of weight be effect july the second they come to Arricca in twelve degree and forty minute july whether the silver be bring from Potosi and carry thence to panama but find no ship there they depart on the ten they have a calm and rain not without wonder because the prisoner have report a perpetual serenity or fairness of weather in those part on the sixteenth they take a small ship with some store of treasure most of which be embezzle by the mariner they take out the commodity and sink she they have sight of eight sail which the spanish master of the former ship say be the fleet-royall come forth to seek the hollander against the mind of the counsel of Peru which will rather have have they stay but roderigode Mendoza the viceroy kinsman and admiral conceit of himself say that two of his ship will take all England how much more those hen of Holland after so long a journey which have spend and waste they yea he be sure they will yield to he at the very first whereupon the viceroy bid he go and bring they find unto he and Mendoza swear he will never return till they be take or slay the fleet royal of Peru. thus he depart out of the road of Calliou on the eleven of july the jesus Maria admiral have twenty four brass piece four hundred and sixty man of all sort and have cost the king 158000. ducat the vide-admiral s Anne have three hundred man the captain Aluares sir Richard Hawkins in which fight he be a captain but not general which have take a english ship in the south sea before this ship have stand the king in 150000. ducat and be the fair that ever be see in the indies the Carmer have eight brass piece two hundred soldier and mariner beside the commander and their retinue to it be the next not next but equal the s. james. the rosary have one hundred and fifty man and four brass ordnance the s. Francis have no ordnance but seventy musketeer and twenty mariner saint Andrew have eighty musketeer and twenty five mariner the eight be send after the rest uncertain with what furniture july the seventeen they come near each other in the evening a sea fight by night and the dutch admiral send word to the spanish if he please to forbear fight that night but Roderigo can not be so patient but about ten of the clock set upon the great sun in which the admiral himself be and exchange mutual thunder on both side the saint Francis be next rake through by the sun by the hunter another Holland ship be send into a watery mansion and perpetual night she be present assault by the spanish admiral and have soon follow to triumph over the Francis her new conquest in the channel bottom have not her admiral succour she with a boat full of man and cause the vice-admiral to do the like the admiral boat mistake be by a piece from the huntsman drown one man alone escape the next morning five ship send word to the admiral that they will do their best to escape but the dutch admiral and vice-admiral set upon the spanish admiral and vice-admiral and enter a bloody fight the Aeolus another hollandship come in also the two spanish ship be fasten together and give great advantage at last they forsake the vice-admiral and leap into the admiral not find therein above fifty person alive as by their confession after appear mean while they hang out a white flag of peace which be diverse time pluck in by the gentleman choose rather to die then yield the dutch press they the vice-admirals man return again and renew the fight and the dutch vice-admiral be in great peril the spaniard leap into she out of their admiral but repel or slay and the spanish admiral not further endure flee and by benefit of night escape the pursuit of the dutch admiral if out of the fire into the water be a escape for such be the fame that she go to visit the saint Francis as also be say of another of they call the saint Mary the vice-admiral and Aeolus bestir they so with fiery rhetorike and iron dispute that the spanish vice-admiral past hope of escape set up a flag of truce the dutch vice-admiral send two boat to bring the commander aboard but he refuse say he will stay that night except the vice-admiral himself will fetch he or send some captain to remain in pledge and rather desire death then disgrace one of the Aeolus man in this while have take away their flag and the boat depart ten or twelve stay aboard contrary to command that they may be first in the spoil they do together with the dutch what they can do in the night to preserve the ship from sink but see their labour vain they light many light and with horrible clamour for help be of the relentless sea swallow up in the hollander sight the next morning they send out four boat which find thirty swim on the board cry for mercy which to some of the chief they show leave the rest to the sea cruelty or prevent it by human inhumanity some of the dutch against command slay some spaniard the commander or vice-admiral have perish before of his wound some forty dutchman be wound and sixteen slay in those three ship in the rest eighteen wound and four and twenty slay the same day they go for Caliou de lima but the calm suffer they not the admiral and vice-admiral of the spaniard both sink the twenty they pass by the island and see in the haven fourteen ship go to and fro near the shore but can not come near for the shall and therefore go to the road of Caliou de lima to seek for the spanish admiral who afterward they learn in guarme and Peyta to have be sink from the shore the spaniard shoot off their great ordnance one of which carry a bullet of thirty six pound and have almost sink the huntsman they see also on shore a great army in which the viceroy himself be present with eight troop of horse and four thousand foot they agree to go back out of the reach of their shot and cast anchor at the mouth of the haven where they stay to the five and twenty with intent to take some of their ship but in vain they be light of sail on the six and twenty they take a little bark lade with salt and eighty vessel of syrup the man all flee they order that if they meet with the fleet of panama in regard they be in the enemy country where they can not repair their loss and be also find to the Manillas that they will not give audacious onset and shall take heed of be separate which have much endanger they in the last fight and if any hostile ship shall yield the master and chief officer shall not forsake their own ship but cause the enemy to come in boats aboard they lest confusion as late through greediness of spoil shall happen the seven and twenty they set sail the eight and twenty they come to the road of guarme in ten degree beyond the line a pleasant place with a large haven near unto it be a lake of stand water they go on shore but find the people all flee who have leave little pillage some hen orange hog and meal they take August August the three they dismiss some of their spanish prisoner they pass betwixt the i will loube so call of certain fish and the continent the eight they cast anchor near to Peyta it consist of many Timbers fasten strange together as in the picture of the latin book be see the nine they set three hundred man on shore which after a few skirmish return aboard the city be too strong defend they take a indian ship of strange sail with six lusty indian which have be two month a fish and have many delicate fish dry which they distribute through the Fleet. the ten the Aeolus Lucifer and huntsman batter the town with their ordnance and send a great number of man on shore which find the city forsake and the people with their good flee to the mountain they send five of their indian on shore to get fruit and to learn more certainty of the spanish admiral which bring word of her burial in the wave only six escape the indian also bring the letter of captain Gaspar cauldron to paula the commendators wife of Peyta who have flee to the town of saint Michael twelve league from shore shee send the hollander in commiseration of the captive many citron and orange with other provision this woman both for beauty wisdom and virtue be of singular reputation in all those part Peyta to the seaward be strong and impregnable there be in it two church one monastery and many goodly building a excellent haven to which all the ship of panama resort and then they pass by land to Caliou de lima because of the perpetual rage of both element the wind and water in that place they take in the isle loube two fowl of admirable greatness in the beak wing and talon not unlike the eagle neck somewhat like a sheep their head comb as a cock they be two else in height and three in breadth when their wing be display they learn of Pedro de Madriga of lima that Peru chili and relation of the government of Peru and of the city of king or Lima. be command by John de Mendoza marquis des Claros the viceroy which office the king confer for six or eight year with yearly allowance of forty thousand ducat add further a thousand Pesos for extraordinary expense in the feast of Christmas Epiphanie s. Spirito and Easter each of twelve rial and half because at those time he be to entertain all the counsellor of the audience two thousand Pesos also yearly when he furnish the silver fleet the viceroy be serve with great pomp in his palace go not forth without his guard or pensioner and if he go into the country have a hundred lance which have eight hundred Pesos stipend and fifty musket which have four hundred Pesos yearly attend there be four court or audience in panama quito Charlas lima one also in chili in they be the king counsellor to who both civil and criminal cause be commit but with appellation in civil case to the oijdor certain commissioner and in criminal to the alcald these all go in one habit and be allow three thousand Pesos annual pension the viceroy reside in the city of king or reyes call also lima see m. Ellis narration hereof in the tractate proper to America situate in a pleasant valley extend a mile and half in length in breadth three quarter have above a hundred thousand inhabitant beside merchant of other place it have four market place there be two thousand indian artificer dwell in the cercado here reside the archbishop Bartholomew Lobo Guorero which have sixty thousand Pesos of revenue the chief temple have four and twenty Prebends one archdeacon beside schoolmaster and other priest there be four principal pastor to each of which be assign fifteen thousand Pesos beside this temple of saint John evangelist be four other one of saint Marcellus with two pastor and a thousand Pesos revenue the second of saint Sebastian the three of saint Anne with like stipend the four be a hospital of orphan with five hundred Pesos monastery here be of saint Francis of saint Dominicke and of saint Augustine and of our lady Meriedes four monastery each of which have two cloister of their own order that of saint Francis three to wit one of barefoot friar of our lady of guadalupe they have there two college of jesuite which the spaniard call teatines * * jesuite call teatines of which name a merry wit in Spain earnest jest in a emblem or picture in which be paint a purse full of money and one of every order picture in his habit reach but short and his motto according yo no te the jesuite lay fast hold on it say te the word bear a double sense I be a teatine or I attain thou the conceit almost lose in the translation this be relate to i by a Spaniard both there and in Europe in each chief monastery be two hundred and fifty religious there be five monastery of nun call of the incarnation conception Trinity saint joseph and saint Clare our lady also have her temple by the title of Monferrat and deal prado and Loretto they have four hospital for the poor of saint Andrew in which be four hundred sick of saint Anna for the indian of saint Peter for the ecclesiastic of charity for woman another of saint Spirito for sailor and one of saint Lazaro for inveterate disease there be six hundred priest and a thousand student allowance be give to twenty four in the king college by the king to as many in saint torine by the archbishop there be further report to be two hundred doctor in the university of all faculty the professor receive of the king a thousand Pesos pension the two professor of civil law have each six hundred Pesos m. Ellis say they be negro there be four hundred master of Art every year they choose a new rector or chancellor in this city and the suburb be above twenty thousand slave there be see more woman than man the indian * * this seem speak of citizen be free as well as the spaniard save that they pay every six month two Pesos a hen a Fenega of eight royalls and a piece of cloth of cotton or woollen they be find to serve the king * * these the cacique bring in by course some at one time and some at another Ellis Linchoten say this publication of the pope indulgence be worth to the king of Spain yearly 1470 ^58 pound yearly in the mine or husbandry diverse day begin in May and continue their time and course till November those of bring to Potosi beast wheat meal mays Axicoca a herb which they perpetual chew they use for carriage a certain camel-fashioned-sheep by this city the river run close to the wall which by shower sometime so swell that it have carry away the stone bridge of nine arch here be the king contractation house and his treasury the court also of inquisition with two inquisitor each of which have three thousand Pesos pension and a prison peculiar the two notary have four thousand Pesos a piece here be the court or office of the Crusada or the pope bull with officer and like stipend this city be two league from the sea have eight band of foot and as many of horse in garrison the next port be call callao in which be some eight hundred inhabitant from the city to Potossi be all spanish merchandise convey Potossi be call valla imperial comprehend a great mountain in which be silver mine into they be a horrible descent of four hundred step nor may the sun be admit spectator of those act in perpetutuall night which exercise above twenty thousand indian in dig and a hundred more in carry grind and other their mettle work this place be so cold that nothing grow in four league space but a herb call Ycho their provision be all bring from Aricca a pound of bread be there worth two ryals the haven of Aricca be a hundred and eighty spanish league from thence but many village be well inhabit by the way not far hence be Chuquisaca the bishop whereof have 30000. ducat revenue there be the like monastery to those at lima but not so full of monk at Potossi live fifteen hundred shift card-player and nim companion which live by their wit seventie mile from thence be another silver i call Eruco near Pima be Chocola Choca a other mine cold as Potossi where dwell five thousand spaniard cusco be like to lima have six thousand spanish inhabitant a bishop and monk and two college with some six hundred student arequipa have also a bishop two thousand spaniard and a corigidoor but it be tedious to relate the full story of chili the mother-city be s. jago where be a gold i coquimbo have store of brass Baldinia be rich in Gold chili in the year 1599 the inabitant or native of the country kill the spaniard and captive their wife eight hundred in number which they offer to exchange give for each a pair of shoe a bridle a sword and a pair of stirrup but the king forbid armour to be carry to they they pour melt gold into the governors mouth make a cup of his skull and make pipe of his shank-bone in memory of their victory have near it a fort with a spanish garrison but very poor of conception be speak before it have four hundred soldier to keep it with some ordnance but you have listen too long to this dutch intelligence from the spanish captive let we now with our hollander to sea so do they the one and twenty of August but easy perceive the next day the strength of the current to be such a current that without a fair and stiff gale they prevail nothing on the twenty three they anchor before Rio de Tumba for the bar and tide forbid they entrance they agree to turn back to the isle in five degree southerly to refresh themselves but storm reins thunder so haunt they to the thirteen of September that they can not find the island September and manifold disease easy find they on the twenty they have sight of land in Hispania they have thirteen degree and thirty minute and the weather become again very tempestuous October October the first after much sea-trouble they have sight of pleasant land but the sea wrought so that they can not have safe land and so beat off and on till the eleven that they enter the haven of within shot of the castle and hang out a flag of peace two spaniard come aboard and they agree to exchange prisoner for sheep fruit and provision which be according perform on the fifteen Melchior Hernardo come aboard to take view of the fleet which have vanquish the king he be nephew to the viceroy of new Spain and be kind entertain of the admiral his man well appoint in their arm the castle have seventy brass piece have intelligence eight month before of their come on the eighteen they depart the calm keep they from do any thing of moment save that they take a ship which be find for pearle-fishing and in she eleven man two of they friar twelve other escape before by flight they man it with two and twenty d^tch to follow the Fleet. November November the ten they cast anchor before the port selague in nineteen degree understanding by the prisoner of a river near this place full of fish and set with citron and other fruit and meadow not far off full of cattle they send out their boat which espy shoo-print be afraid of spaniard and return after a hot skirmish on the eleven they depart and come to port where they water and furnish themselves with other necessary on the twenty they depart on the twenty six they have twenty degree and twenty six minute they determine the next way to the ladrone on December the three December new island a dangerous rock not without great marvel they behold two island far in the Sea on the four they see a rock and have think it a ship which they expect it be in nineteen degree fifty three league from the continent in the six they have sight of a new island with five hill seem as so many island 1616. in january many die of disease on the three and twenty the ladrone appear january 1616. the land be low and therefore keep aloof that night the next day the savage come about they with their boat and they go on land on the five and twenty sibrand Cornelison a merchant be take with a sudden giddiness at dinner and present die at his burial the ordnance and shot so dismay the indian which bring they provision that they dare come no more they set sail the twenty six for the maniles they perceive these ladrone to be witty strong and to observe some kind of idolatry there be store of fowl and fish on February the nine they have sight of cape Spirito santo and the same night anchor at the maniles February in the ten they have speech with the indian which refuse all trade because they say they come to war with the Spaniard they do not so in Capul whither they come on the eleven but bring they hog and hen with other thing for trifle they stay till the nineteen and then by the help of two indian pilot pass the straits to the manilian port or Bay the fruit much relieve and recover the sick the people wear long garment like shirt have friar in such reverence that to one of our prisoner they prostrate themselves and kiss his hand with incredible honour on the nineteen they anchor before the isle Lucon the great of they in which be the city here they see a house artificial frame on the top of diverse tree and seem far off as a palace find no people they proceed on the eight and twenty they see as they pass a exceed high hill vomit flame name Albaca on the four and twenty they have sight of the other straight in the egress and send their boat to found the way the calm keep they prisoner that they can not pass on the twenty eight they anchor before the isle Mirabelles who two rock seem to threaten the sky behind which be the city here they perpetual watch the come of ship from China to pilot they to the city the way be dangerous neither can the hollander make this strait to pass through it all the time of their stay with all their labour hinder by calmes on march the first they see two sail and send out their boat to take they mar^h but they be too swift on the the three they take one lade with provision of rice oil hen fruit and on the five two more with a Spaniard in they with like provision and after that three other these be go to gather in the tribute which the place adjoin pay to the city here they have intelligence of a fleet of ten great ship build here and send forth under the command of John silue to the Moluccas to fight with the hollander together with four galley and two other ship in they two thousand spaniard beside Chineses japanders and indian their purpose be to reduce all the Moluccas under the Spaniard whereupon they free all their prisoner except one Spaniard and a indian and haste after they on the eleven they encounter so many island that they doubt of egress and by the spanish mariner advise anchor all night and by his help next day recover the wide Sea on the fourteen they ride at anchor all night before the isle Paney by reason of shold Paney Mendanao on the eighteen they sail close by Mendanao but hear of dangerous shelf they in the evening set further off into the Sea on the nineteen they sail again close to the shore and have provision of the islander very cheap on the twenty they reach cape de Cadera where the spaniard as they pass to the Moluccas use to take in water till the three and twenty the calm permit no further sail then the tide force betwixt Mendanao and Tagimo a contrary tide stay they these islander show themselves enemy to the spaniard and offer fifty of their ship in aid on the twenty seven they pass the isle sanguine and many other on the twenty nine they come to Ternata in which be Maleia a town subject to the hollander where of their countryman they be glad entertain these at Maleia reckon this the eight and twenty of march which we reckon the nine and twenty so that with follow the sun in his course they have one day less the straight of bouton be full of shold without they be deep water on the east be fresh water to the west two league be a rocky shall April the eight Cornelius de Vianen go for Banda April the governor show his charter for the Moluccas Banda and without prejudice to the admiral authority and the soldier go on land after so long a navigation may the second they send six ship for macian that the enemy shall not have any clove may. and there anchor before Maurice fort. the english here tell they of the take of Coteway by the dutch on the ten of April rich in nutmeg and the indian move with this success make a new league with the hollander on the eighteen they exchange prisoner spaniard for dutch. the rest of this month and june and july follow they spend the time in these part as occasion be offer not so necessary to our purpose September the fifteen they come to jocatra and repair there their ship September not without fear of John silue with his spanish fleet but on the thirty we hear of his sudden death at malacca as be think by poison and the return of the armada to the maniles ^^th great shame to the Spaniard after four year preparation do little or nothing while they be at jacatra four ship of huge burden come out of Holland with exceed store of spanish ryalls and a other out of japon lade with spanish rial and silver unwrought with brass iron and other commodity the most of which they have take from a Portugal ship find for Marico October the twenty the concord a ship of horn which have depart out of Holland October june 1615. come to jacatra of which you shall have a peculiar relation and because it be not of the company of the indies it be by the general annex to the fleet the man be distribute into other ship November the ten come the nassau to Ba^tam from Mocha in the red sea November well provide thence of spanish rial and turkish ducat December the twelve come thither the Amsterdam and the Middleborough from the strait of Malla^ca the one of seven hundred the other of six hundred ton in which the admiral Spilberg prepare for return on the seventeen of january 1617. they come to the isle mauritius the thirty of march to saint Helena january 1617^ where they find the middleburgh which they have not see in three month hence they depart the seven of April and come into Zealand in july follow a discourse of the present state of the annex to the former journal extract out of SCHOT of Middleborough the portugal have to the grief of the venetian and their own enrich make themselves master of almost all the trade of spicery by their possession of the Moluccas their grow some distaste first betwixt they and the spaniard as in Magellanes voyage be express after the english by the conduct of sir Francis Drake and since in their east indian trade have have traffic there last the hollander have dispossess the portugal and the spaniard or castilian by mean of the tidorian have their fortify the king of ternate be take with some chief man the rest flee and by mateliefe his aid be reduce and there erect the fort Orange Orange in ternate and enter league with the hollander and so wrought that motir Machian and Bachian yield to the dutch the spaniard hold Tidor and the chief city of ternate and some place in Gilolo as shall after follow more particular Maleia or grania Molucco or Hollandia Tacome or Willems^at motir in the isle of ternate the dutch have three fort Maleia otherwise grania the seat of the king and nobility take by matelief Molucco which they call Holland distant from Maleia half a mile north-ward seat on a hill and build with lime and stone for the safety of the haven of Maleia Tacome call also in the northwest coast of ternate commodious for the place betwixt malacca and Tacome the isle motir be by the war of ternate and Tidore for a time desolate till admiral Wittert by entreaty of the Ternateis erect a fort in the north part thereof and bring thither a colony of the inhabitant out of Gilolo whither they have flee the spaniard have think to have bring those motirians thither which have flee to Tidore the inhabitant be above two thousand admiral Van Caerden take Machian and raise therein three fort tafason to the west Machian with three fort Noffaguia to the north and tabelole eastward all which place be populous this island number about nine thousand cayoe from cayoe a neighbour island for fear they remove to tabelole it be the most fertile of all the Moluccas and nourish with her fruit ternate and Tidore which be so addict to war that they neglect culture of their ground Bachian be a great kingdom and fruitful Bachian but not populous the inhabitant be idle and voluptuous and have bring upon themselves the present misery in Lahova the spaniard have a fort and there be yet some seventeen portugal Lahova and eighty family of the native become christian the vice-admiral 1600. take and fortify it with a strong garrison in the continent they have guammequorre to who the sabougians have add themselves forsake the Spaniard guammequorre in Gilolo which be a great island before which lie the small island of the Moluccas in it be a garrison of thirty soldier the native call the dutch to their aid be frank in promise as the dutch also to they further than either party do or well can perform be too grievous as that the dutch shall have all the custom of the native and foreigner shall be free from all payment yea they now deny such composition and be alienate from the dutch for not keep word with they the people be perfidious ambitious inconstant harden in the insolence and mischief which always attend war the king in time past have absolute rule now be contemn upon occasion the people seek new patronage spaniard in Moluccas nuestra Senora rosario the spaniard by bounty and liberality win their heart and make they averse to the Hollander these have the chief city in ternate and call it now our lady of the rove strong and fortify with all munition from the Moluccas here be two hundred spaniard ninety papoo inhabitant of the beside thirty Portugal householder eighty chinese sixty moluccan with their family betwixt this and Maleia they have a fort call saint Peter and saint Paul s.s. Pedro and Paulo strong seat on a hill with six and twenty spaniard twenty papoo and some manilians Tidore they have whole and therein three fort one in the chief city where the king reside Tidore call Taroula in which be ordinary fifty spaniard ten papoo eight native with five brass piece very large the second have thirteen spaniard beside the native and two piece the three call Marico within sight of our lady city be a town well inhabit wall and have a garrison like the former the island scarce yield a thousand arm man in Gilolo which comparative to those Moluccas seem a continent as our Britain to the hebrides the spaniard have first which take from the dutch 1611. against the truce as they say and fortify strong impose a garrison of sixty spaniard and forty papoo second Pilolo crafty take from the dutch also and well provide with sixty spaniard and some manilians the three at the west side of Gilolo over against Machian call Aquilamo with few spaniard and forty tidorian to the Moren or eastern coast of Gilolo they have three other jolo Isiau and jaffongo with they forty five spaniard with the native they have a galley or two at sea beside some lari a kind of small galley and be always well provide of arm often destitute of victual which cause diverse of they to fly away half the clove belong to the king and the merchandise of they be in the portugal hand the king cost for six year be very great with little profit jeronimo de Sylva be now commander in those part a old wary soldier with other officer under he a brief description of the fort soldier and military provision as also of their trade and ship in the east indies under the service of the general state of the unite province and his excellency as it be in july 1616. extract out of the author of the journal in the isle of ternate at Maleia be these captain captain Fridericke hamel William Ertueli Peter Barker Rowland Philips Goswine a mammerent with their several band Molucca^ each of ninety or a hundred man the city wall and strong fortify Tabucke be a fort near keep by the inhabitant as Tacome and Tabou two other in Gilolo in Tidore be the fort Marico under captain William Amsing very strong in motir captain Henry maier have a able garrison and fortress macian be govern by Gilbert Vianen and have three fort as before bartholman Spilbergen be chief in bacian where be the fort barnevelt build of stone and well furnish with arm and man in be a royal fort or castle command by Henry with one hundred and fifty soldier beside other fortress as Hitton and low this last be keep by the ternatois Adrian Blockhousen be governor of the island in Banda be two fort nassau with a garrison of a hundred and twenty hollander beside a very great number of japanders chinese and other and the belgike furnish as well Banda captain Henry beverlincke command both in the island Poleway they have the revenge Poleway with a hundred sixty soldier under two captain Dussen and Verhoeren in the coast of coromandel in be a strong and goodly castle with a garrison of a hundred and twenty soldier the city negapatan and Massepatan show they great favour John de a counsellor of the indies be commander in these part in java the great at jacatra a day journey from Bantam be build a magnificent store-house or arsenal for artificer and provision for the war and for the navy furnish therefore with brass ordnance in all these be soldier three thousand brass piece a hundred ninety three of iron ordnance three hundred and twenty of stone three hundred place forsake upon better consideration be Gemmalanor a fort in the isle of Boutton fort give over another in salor and a magazine or storehouse in Gresei and Achin and macassar in Selibes the king of jor be their great friend but admit no Fort. they have their most profitable trade at jambi in one of the island of sumatra at the straight of malacca in Fieos Priaman place of trade and factory and Silbe on the west of sumatra they have trade in borneo they trade for diamond and bezoar stone in japon james Spex have erect a great store-house at Bantam be their chief factory where all ship be lade under the command of sir John Peter Coenen general precedent of the indies which here keep a exact register and account of all the indian affa^^es their ship in july 1616. be as follow in the Moluccas the old sun the old moon the new sun the new moon the flush the angel of Delft the hope the Lucifer and the larus in japatra the holland at Bantam the faith the nassau the horn the larus of japon the black Lion in and the eagle and the star in Achin the falcon and the huntsman in coromandel the Neptune the golden Lion at jambi the bargain boat the half moon the concord and little Holland be send to the isle Ingane to receive those which have be shipwreck in the Aeolus at jacatra the enchusen at Bantam be also the new horn the Amsterdam the Middleborough the tergoe expect from coromandel the black bear late depart and the Amsterdam and the new Zealand then at sea towards the indies the concord of Amsterdam and the Aeolus of Zealand they have moreover in Banda two small galley and in jacatra and Bantam many small sail chap. 7 the six circum-navigation by WILLIAM CORNELISON senouten of horn who southward from the straits of Magelan in terra-del-fuogo find and discover a new passage through the great south-sea and that way sail round about the world describe what island country people and strange adventure he find in his say passage because the general state of the unite nether-land province have grant patent of trade to the east indian company with prohibition to all other to pass the cape of good hope eastward or through the Magelen straits westward Isaak le maier a merchant of Amsterdam and William Cornelison Schouten of horn a man which have be thrice in the east indies devise and consult of some new way without impeachment of the say patent which they confident suppose may be do by some passage southward from the Magelan straits and to that end agree between they to enterprise such a voyage take order that Isaac le Maire shall provide the one half of the money and William Cornelison Schouten the other half to furnish the say voyage by the help and furtherance of their friend the care thereof and to make provision for the say voyage be refer to William Cornelison Schouten and to finish the say voyage the merchant aforesaid prepare and rig a great and a small ship of horn the great ship call the unity of three hundred sixty ton whereof William Cornelison Schouten be master and chief pilot and jacob le more merchant and principal factor in it have sixty five man and nineteen great piece and twelve sling with musket and other munition for war proportionable with a pinnace to sail another to row a boat and a scute anckor cabel rope sail and all other necessary belong thereunto the lesser ship call the horn of a hundred and ten ton whereof John Cornelison Schouten be master and aris clawson merchant in it twenty two man eight great piece four sling and other furniture as need require and be necessary for such a voyage and for that they will not make know to any man as I say before whether they mean to go they hire all their man both common sailor and officer to sail unto every place whether the master and the merchant will go which make the common sailor and people to speak and guess of that voyage diverse and at the last give they the name of the gold-finder but the merchant name they the south company the ship be ready upon the sixteenth of may 1615. the man be muster by the scout and Schepen of horn and the twenty five of the same month the unity set sail and arrive at the tessel upon the twenty seven the three of june the lesser depart from horn and the next day come to the tessel ann. 1615. upon the fourteen of june 1615. we sail out of the tessel and the sixteenth of the same month be in the sight of Dunkirk pass between Dover and Calais the seventeen ankor in the down William Cornelison Schouten go on shore at Dover to get man to bring we freshwater and the same day set sail from thence the four of july it be order that every man shall have a can of beer a day four pound of biscuit and half a pound of butter beside sweet suet a week and five cheese for the whole voyage the thirteen in the morning we see the island of Tenerifa and great canaria and the same day about noon we sail between they both with a stiff north north-east wind and a swift stream between the fourteen and the fifteen with the same wind and stream we pass Can^ri the twenty on the morning we fall on the north side of cape Verde and have eight fathom deep when we first see the land sail along by the coast and at sunrising the cape lie west and by south from we so that with a north north-east wind we can not get beyond it and be force to anchor at thirty two fathom deep that night it blow hard with a great storm of rain and thunder we have ill weather diverse day the five and twenty the alkaide or governor come aboard our ship with who we agree for eight state of iron that we shall peaceable fetch freshwater from the shore the first of August we set sail from the cape Sierra Liona the one and twenty of August in the morning by sun rise we set sail and see the high land of Sierra Liona about six league from we north-east and by north we likewise see the island of Madrabomba which lie on the south point or corner of the high land of Sierra Liona north from the Baixos or shallows of saint Anna island Sierra Liona be a very high land there be no land so high as it between Capo Verde and the coast of Guinea whereby the point be most easy to be know that day we labour as we can to get to land for the most part have stormy weather run to the point and over the Baixos or shallow of saint Anna at ten nine eight seven and five fathom water and as we sail northward the water wax deep but eastward shallow so that about evening we anchor with a high water at four fathom and a half soft ground and in the night time we have but three fathom and a half but it be fine clear weather the two and twenty in the morning at sunrising William Schouten go aboard the horn and sail in it before we the great ship follow hold our course north north-east with a northwest wind and a ebb under the bough and so get off from the Baixos to eighteen fathom water and from thence to the island of Mabrabomba which be very high Baixos or shallows of saint Anna Mabrabomba and lie all three on a row south-west and north-east half a league from Sierra Liona to seaward there we have shallow water at five and four fathom soft muddy ground we anchor about a league from the land and go on shore find no man dwell therein but perceive the footstep of many great beast but all the land lie waste like a wilderness with low marsh or bog and high hill the three and twenty in the morning jacob le Maire go aboard the horn and from it with both the boat on shore where he find a river at the mouth thereof have many cliff sand and rock whereby no ship can go into it but within it be very deep and broad enough for ship to turn and wind there they can perceive no people to dwell but see three wild ox and a great many monkey and some bird that bark like dog they row at least three league up into it with the flood after long search they find eight or nine Limon tree which they shake and get about seven hundred and fifty lemon most r^pe ready to dry there also they see great store of tortoise and some crocodile but no people we determine to try if we can get into the fresh river with both our ship therein to make povision of fresh water and Limonds and to that end set sail but find the water so shallow that we be force to anchor at six fathom the horn anchor before the river on the low land but there find shallow water they find up the river no sign of man only a buff and a calf and here and there get some lemon the nine and twenty perceive that we be not in the river of Sierra Liona we determine early in the morning to set sail and to go northward of the high land and about noon we get above the island of Mabrabomba westward along towards the north part of the high land till we have twelve and fiftteene fathom water and in the evening get about the point where we anchor at fifteen fathom deep the thirty in the morning we hoist anchor and drive with the stream and a south wound before the village in the right road of Sierra Liona * * the road of Sierra Liona where we anchor at eight fathom sandy ground about a musket shoot from the land there we see eight or nine house cover with straw the moor call unto we in their language to fetch they aboard our ship and because they have no canoe we send our boat on land which present come back again with five moor in it whereof one be their interpreter but before they come they desire that we will leave some of our man to stay with they as pledge for that not long before there have be a french ship there which have take and carry away two of their moor aris clawson the merchant that go a shore with the boat stay there with they and have certain bead he there barter they for lemon and Bananas the interpreter speak all kind of language one with another in the mean time our man have fair weather lade fresh water which be there easy to be have by reason it fall down out of the hill into the road so that we hold the barrel under the shore or fall of the water and fill they put they straight into the scute the water be very good for a few bead and some slight Norremburgh knife we may have have a hundred thousand lemon there at the least if we will for there they grow by whole * * store of lemon wood full the same night we barter with the negro for a shoal of Fish the first of September we hoist anchor and drive before the stream and that evening anchor at the mouth of the sea before a small river the second we set the horn upon the strand to make she clean have a good place to do it for there the water fall seven foot up and down in the evening our man come on board again and bring a little beast name a antelope which they find in a wood in a net or snare set there by the negro and some lemon and after that the boat go out to fish and get a great number and some which they have not cut down in the wood the three in the afternoon the horn be make clean be launch into the water again and our master go out to fish in the evening bring a great shoal of fish with he in fashion like to a shoemaker cut knife and every man a hundred and fifty lemon for his part the four early in the morning we hoist anchor and set sail out of Sierra Liona the five of October we be under four degree seven and twenty minute the same day about noon there be such a noise in the bough of our ship that the master be behnid in the gallery think that one of the man have fall out of the foreship or from the boe-sprit into the sea but as he look out over the side of the ship he see the sea all red as if great store of blood have be pour into it whereat he wonder know not what it mean but afterward he find that a great fish or a sea monster have a horn have therewith strike * * strange accident of a fish strike against the Ship against the ship with most great strength for when we be in Porto desire where we set the ship on the strand to make it clean about seven foot under water before in the ship we find a horn stick in the ship much like for thickness and fashion to a common elephant tooth not hollow but full very strong hard bone which have enter into three plank of the ship that be two thick plank of green and one of oaken wood and so into a rib where it turn upward to our great good fortune for if it have enter between the rib into the ship it will happy have make a great hole and have bring both ship and man in danger to be lose it stick at least half a foot deep into the ship and about half a foot without where with great force it be break off by reason whereof the great monster bleed so much the five and twenty the wind continue we hold on the same course until that time we have sail and no man in our ship unless it be the master William Cornelison Schouten and jacob le Maire our merchant know whether we shall go and then they tell we what voyage they intend which be to seek by another way then the straits of Magelan to enter into the south sea there to discover new country in the south part where they think to find great riches and that if it fall not as they desire and pretend then that they will sail along through the great south sea southward to the east indies this be know our man be very glad and rejoice hope every man for his part to benefit by that voyage to their advancement the six and twenty we be under six degree five and twenty minute with fair weather and a good gale and all the rest of that month for the most part sail southward with a east and a north-east wind we be under ten degree and thirty minute the first of November we pass the sun whereby at noon time it be north from we the three we be under nineteen degree twenty minute than we see some blackbird and two or three fowl call sea-mewes and after noon we have a sight of Martin vad island call Ascension which lie southeast and by east from we under twenty degree there we find our compass to vary north-east-ward twelve degree the wind be north north-east as the day before and hold our course south that day our man have double allowance of wine abrolhos sand because we have past the dangerous sand call Abrolhos the one and twenty we be under eight and thirty degree five and twenty minute and have alteration of water there we cast our lead but find no ground the compass then vary seventeen degree north-east-ward that morning we see the new moon be one and twenty hour old the six of December we see land not very high but white and somewhat flat we fall according to our desire on the north side of Porto desire and at night anchor at ten fathom deep about a league and a half from the shore with a ebb that run southward as strong as the sea run between flush head the seven in the morning we hoist anchor and sail south until noon than we be before the haven of Porto desire port desire lie under seven and forty degree forty minute and make towards the entry thereof where we have very high water so that the cliff whereof Oliver Vande Noort write which sail into that haven must be leave northward from we be clean under water but on the south point there lie certain cliff open which we take to be those and therefore go southward on but sail southward of the right channel into a crooked bay and there at high water anchor at four fathom and a half and when the water be low we have but fourteen foot-water whereby the unity lie with her stern fast on ground it be full of cliff the wind be west from the land and smooth water to our great fortune for if we have have a east wind with any gale for certain we have lose our ship upon the cliff we find many egg and take great muscle and other fish and among the rest smelt of sixteen inch long and for that cause we call that place the smell Bay our shallop go to the penguin island penguin lie east southeast two league from Porto desire and come aboard again late in the evening bring two sea lion and a hundred and fifty penguin S^ale^ which we eat the next day smell Bay the eight in the morning with the land-wind we sail out of the smell bay and anchor right before the haven of Porto desire and send our shallop out to sound the depth of the channel and find twelve and thirteen fathom enter in after noon with a high water and a north-east wind we set sail the horn first and so enter into the haven when we have sail about a league and a half into the river the wind turn and we anchor at twenty fathom there the ground be slippery stone for about half a hour after the wind blow hard north-west both our ship lie with two anchor a piece out present drive upon the south shore for there five and twenty anchor can not have hold they so that we very think both our ship will there be cast away the great ship sit with her side upon the cliff and shake with the fall water somewhat lower and still keep staunch but the horn fall upon the cliff so that the water go clean from it whereby at a low water a man may have go dry foot under the keel right against the main mast the keel be above a fathom out of water fearful to behold but as the wind blue hard north-w it keep it from fall over which appear to be so for that when the wind cease it fall from the land against the wind upon the side at least three foot lower then the keel whereat we be all abash think we have sure lose she but when the flood come with still weather it rise up again whereat we all rejoice in the morning with calm weather we wound off from the brickwall and the same night the horn come to we the nine in the morning we set sail again and go further into the river king island almost cover with egg and come to king island so call by Oliver Vande Noort the horn go behind it and there anchor but we can not get in with the unity because the wind be contrary our man go on shore into the island which be almost cover over with egg for a man stand still on his foot with his hand may reach to fifty four nest each have three or four egg a piece much like but somewhat great then sea-mues egg the bird be blackish sea-mues we carry thousand of they aboard and eat they the eleven the boat go low into the river on the south side to seek for man and water and find nothing but brackish water there they see some estrige and beast like heart with very long neck which be afraid of we upon the high part of the hill we find some bury place which be heap of stone and we not know what that mean pull the stone off from one of they giant see the voyage of Magel^an and under they find man bone of ten and eleven foot long they bury the dead upon the top of the hill flat on the ground and cover they also with stone which keep they from be devour by beast or bird the twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen and sixteenth our man go continual on land to seek for water but find none every day bring good store of bird and fish on board the seventeen we lay our ship within king island on the wall with a high water to make it clean where it be dry that we may go round about it dry foot the eighteen the horn be also lay on shore about two musket shoot from our ship to make it clean the nineteen as we be busy about both the ship to make they clean and burn reed under the horn the flame of the fire sudden get into the ship and present take such hold thereof that in the twinkle of a eye it be so great that we can by no mean quench it by reason it lie fifty foot dry from the water side and by that mean we be constrain to stand still and see it burn before our eye not able to do any thing to save it the twenty at a high water we launch the unity into the water again and go to the horn and quench the fire but the ship be burn clean down to the water the next day when we have cast the water out of that part of it that be leave we save all the wood iron-worke anchor ordnance and what else that be to be get and put it into our ship the twenty five our man find certain hole full of fresh water which be white and very thick from whence some of they daily fetch water in little rondlet on their shoulder some go arm with musket to defend they other fetch bird and egg seales and young sea lion which we eat and be of a reasonable good taste the thirteench about noon we sail out of Porto desire but the sea be calm we anchor before the haven and when the wind begin to rise hoist anchor and put to Sea the eighteen we see Sebaldes islands southeast from we about three league they lie sebalds island as Sebald Dewert write distant from the straight east northeast and west Southwest about fifty league than we be under fifty one degree the twenty we see Steencrosse drive and perceive that we have a great stream that go Southwest than we be under fifty three degree and guest that we be about twenty league southward from the straits of Magelan the eleven we be under three and fifty degree the three and twenty in the morning we have a south wind and about noon it wax calm than the wind blue west and we have ground at fifty fathom black sandy with small stone after that the wind turn north with smooth water and fair weather the water show as white as if we have be within the land we hold our course south and by west about three of the clock afternoon we see land west and west Southwest from we and not long after that we see it also in the south then have a north wind we go east southeast to get above the land it blow so hard in the hollow water that we be force to take in our toppe-sayle the four and twenty in the morning we see land on starre-boord not above a great league distant from we there we have ground at forty fathom and a west-wind the land stretch east and south with very high hill that be all cover over with ice we sail along by that land and about noon past it and see other land east from it which also be very high and ragged these land as we guess lay about eight league one from the other and seem as if there be a good passage between they which we be the better persuade unto for that there run a hard stream southward between both those land then about noon we be under fifty four degree and forty six minute and after noon we have a north wind and make towards this open but about evening it calm and that night we drive forward with a hard stream and little wind there we see a innumerable number of pengwin store of whale and thousand of whale so that we be force to look well about we and to wind and turn to shun the whale lest we shall sail upon they the five and twenty in the morning we be close by the east land which be very high and craggy which on the north side reach east southeast as far as we can see that land we call Statesland s^t^sland and maurice-land but the land that lie west from we we name maurice-land we perceive that on both side thereof there be good road and sandy bay for on either side it have sandy strand and very fair sandy ground there be great store of fish pengwin and porpoise as also bird and water enough but we can see no tree we have a northwind in the entry and go south south-west with a stiff course at noon we be under fifty five degree thirty six minute and then hold our course south-west with a good sharp wind and rain the new (@) call (@) of ma^re and a stiff gale we see the land on the south side of the passage upon the west end of Maurice van nassawe land reach west south-west and south-west as far as we can see it all very high and craggie-land in the evening the wind be south-west and that night we go south with great wave or billow out of the south-west and very blue water whereby we judge and hold for certain that we have great deep water to loefward from we nothing doubt but that it be the great South-sea whereat we be exceed glad to think that we have discover a way which until that time be unknown to man as afterward we find it to be true there we see extreme great sea-mewes big of body than swan their wing be spread abroad each of they above a fathom long these bird be unaccustomed to see man come to our ship great fowl very tame and sit thereon and let our man take and kill they the six and twenty we be under seven and fifty degree with a fly storm out of the west and south-west the whole quarter with very high and blue water we hold our course southward and in the northwest saw very high land in the night we turn north-west-ward the seven and twenti we be under six and fifty degree and one and fifty minute the weather very cold with hail and rain the wound west and west and by south and we go southward and then cross northward with our main sail the eight and twenti we hoist our top-sail than we have great billow out of the west with a west wound and then a north-east and therewith hold our course south and then west and west and by south and be under fifty six degree and forty eight minute the nine and twenty we have a north-east wind and hold our course south-west and see two island before we lie west Southwest from we about noon we get to they but can not sail above they so that we hold our course north about they they have dry gray cliff and some low cliff about they they lay under fifty seven degree southward of the equinoctial line ^arneve^s land we name they barnevel island from they we sail west northwest about evening we see land again lie north west and north northwest from we which be the land that lie south from the strait of Magellan which reach southward all high hilly land cover over with snow end with a sharp point which we call cape horn it lie under fifty seven degree and forty eight minute cape horn then we have fair weather and a north wind with great billow out of the west we hold on course west and find a strong stream that run westward the thirty we still have great billow out of the west with hollow water and a strong stream that go westward which assure we that we have a open way into the south sea than we be under fifty seven degree thirty four minute the one and thirty we have a north wind and sail west and be under fifty eight degree then the wind turn west and west south-west somewhat variable we pass by cape Van horn and can see no more land and have great billow out of the west and very blue water which then full assure we that we have the broad south sea before we and no land the wind be very variable with great store of hail and rain which force we oftentimes to wind to and fro the first of February we have cold weather with a storm out of the south-west and sail with our main sail lie northwest and west northwest the second the wind west we sail southward and be under fifty seven degree fifty eight minute and find twelve degree northward variation of the compass that day we see many great sea-mewes and other bird the three we be under fifty nine degree twenty five minute with indifferent weather and a hard west wind and guess that we be that day under fifty nine degree and a half but see no land nor any sign thereof in the south the four we be under fifty six degree forty three minute with variable wind most south-west and wound to and fro as the wind blow with eleven degree northeastward variation of compass the five we have a strong stream out of the west with hollow water whereby we can bear no sail but be force to drive with the wind the twelfth our man have each of they three cup of wine in sign of joy for our good hap for then the straits of Magellan lay east from we the same day by advice of all our counsel at the request of our chief merchant the new passage by we discover between mauritius land and the Statesland be name the straits of more although by good right it shall rather have be call William schouten straight after our master name by who wise conduction and skill in sail the same be find during the time that we pass through that new strait and sail southward about that new-found land till we get to the west side of the straits of Magellan for the most part we have a very strong stream hollow water continual rain mist moist and thick weather with much hail and snow whereby we endure much trouble misery and disease but in regard that we have so lucky discover that passage and hope that the place which we be yet to discover will likewise fall out well we be encourage and not once think upon our former hard passage with assure mind determine to go forward on our voyage the four and twenti we hoist our upper ordnance out of the hold and place it above upon our deck the five and twenti of january we hoist all our sail because we enter into a peaceable sea and have past all storm and hard weather the seven and twenti we hoist up our second tire of ordnance and place it in our second orlope for in Porto desire we have lay it down in the hold and all thing that may hinder the wound and then be under forty degree with fair weather a south and south southeast wound and a good gal^ as the day before and hold our course Northward the eight and twenti our counsel and the four master determine to sail to the isle of John Fernando there to refresh we because some of our man by mean of the great pain and labour take by they be extreme weary and some have the flux that day we be under thirty five degree fifty three minute in the evening we bear but small sail fear to fall upon the land by night and because we will not pass beyond it in the night we sail north-east the first of march in the morning we see the island of John Fernando right before we island of John Fernando north north-east with a south wind fair weather and a good gale about noon we get to they under thirty three degree and forty eight minute these be two island both of they very high land the small lie most westward be a very dry bare island with nothing in it but bare hill and cliff the great lie eastward be also full of very high hill but have many tree and very fruitful therein be many beast as hog and goat upon the coast admirable number of good fish which make the spaniard oftentimes come thither to fish and in short time fill their ship and carry they to Peru. we go on the west side of those island which be not well for we for there we must have go about eastward to get into the road which lie on the east point of the great island for go about on the west side behind the land we shall have get under the land in the calm water because the land there be high and calm so that we can not get to the land to anchor with our ship and therefore send our boat out to sound the depth which come aboard again in the evening and tell we that close by the land we have forty and thirty fathom sandy ground which still lessen till it come to three fathom good to anchor in beside a fair green valley full of green tree pleasant to behold but because of the shortness of the time they go not on shore and in diverse place see fresh water in great stream run down off the hill they likewise see many goat and other beast upon the hill which they can not well know be so far off they have also in short time take a great number of good fish for the hook be no soon in the water but present they take fish so that continual without cease they do nothing but draw up fish most of they be Corcobados and steenbrasses and see many sea-wolue these news cheer up our man special those that be trouble with looseness hope there to refresh themselves that night it be calm weather so that the stream drive we somewhat backward the second day we be with our ship close under the land again but can not get so near what mean soever we use to find ground we once again send our man on land some to fish and some to seek for cattle they see many hog goat and other beast but by reason that the wood be thick they can not get they and the while that some of they fetch water they that be in the boat have take almost two ton of fish all with hook and so we be force to leave that fair island and can get nothing else there the three day we drive at least four league beneath the island notwithstanding that all that quarter we do the best we can to sail near to it whereof at last be weary see it be unpossible to be do we determine to leave they and to hold on our course to perform our voyage every day have a good forewind to the great grief of our sick man who thereby be clean out of comfort but God help they these island be under thirty three degree forty minute this resolution take we set our course northwest and by west with a good south gale of wind and fair weather the eleven day we pass Capricorni the second time with a southeast wind our course northwest there we have the general east and east southeast wind and hold our course north northwest to the fifteen till we be under eighteen degree than we change our course and go west and make our row shallop ready to use it when we come near any land the three of April be Easter day we be under fifteen degree twelve minute at which time we have no variation of compass for the needle stand right north and south than the flux begin much to trouble our man for at time half of they at the least have it dog island in 15. degree 1^ minute 92^ league from Peru. the ten day we see three league from we a low island not very great with great number of sea-mewes and fish and set our course to the island think to have some refresh whereof in regard of the flux we have great need about noon we get to the island and cast out our lead but find no ground and therefore put out our Shalop about evening they come aboard again and can get nothing but only some green herb which taste like unto Holland tuinkar they say that there they have see three dog that neither bark nor make any noise and in it find some place full of rain water that have fall that day the island as we perceive seem at high water for the most part to be overflow it have nothing about it but a kind of wall like a ditch full of green tree pleasant to behold and in the middle of they and elsewhere much salt-water it be under fifteen degree twelve minute distant from the coast of Peru by our estimation nine hundred twenty and five league that quarter the wind be north and we hold our course west towards the island of Solomon and call that island dog island in the night it blow hard with a great shower of rain another island the fourteen the wind east and east southeast we sail west and west and by north with wind and weather aforesaid and see much fish and many bird after noon we see another low island northwest from we be very great and reach north-east and south-west whereat we rejoice hope to get water and some refresh there and make to it hold our course northwest about evening be with our ship about a league from the land there come a Canoe to meet we with four indian in it all naked of a reddish colour very black long hair they keep a good way from our ship first call to we make sign to have we come on land but we understand they not nor they we notwithstanding that we answer and call to they in spanish javan and our own Netherlands speech about evening at sunne-setting we get to the land but find no ground nor no change of water although we be so near to the shore that with a musket we may shoot into it and therefore put to sea again and the Canoe to land where a great many indian stand upon the shore to watch for they not long after again there come another Canoe from the land to our ship but will not as the first come aboard they call to we and we to they but understand not one the other at last their Canoe overthrow in the water but they soon turn it up again and leap quick into it they show and point towards the land and we the like to they towards the ship but they will not come wherewith we hold on our course and leave the island sail south and south-west to get above the land the island be not broad but somewhat long and full of tree which as we guess be and tree it lie under fifteen degree fifteen minute have white sand ground that night we see fire upon the land in diverse place the fifteen day in the morning have in the night sail about ten league south south-west we sail close along by the land where we see many naked man stand on shore call and cry as it seem to bid we come on land and then again there come another Canoe from the land towards our ship with three indian in it which also call to we and will not come aboard but row to the Shalop and go close to it our man show they all the friendship they can give they some bead and knife but they understand not one another have be a little while by the Shalop they leave it and come so near to our ship that we cast out a small rope to they which they take but will not enter into the ship but go into the Shalop which come back from the land without do any thing and have be a good while in it at the last one of they come into the gallery and draw out the nail of the window in the merchant and master cabin and take they away hide they in his hair they be desirous of iron for they venture to pull out the bolt with their hand and to carry they away lover of iron as in the ladrone we seek to keep one of they in the ship and to send one of our man with the other two in their Canoe to land to make friendship with they but they will not they be very thievish people all naked only a piece of a Mat hang before their privy member their skin be mark with diverse figure as snake dragon and such like thing which show very blue as if they have be burn thereon with gunpowder we give they wine as they sit in the Canoe but they will not give we the cup again we send our Shalop once again to the land with eight musketeer and six man with sword Claus johnson our under merchant and arice clauson the merchant of the horn go with they to see what be to be get in the island and to make friendship with they but as soon as they be by the strand and the man go on shore there come at least thirty indian out of the wood with great club or cudgel and will have take our man arm from they and think to draw the Shalop upon the land venture to take two of our man out of the Shalop think to carry they into the wood but our musketeer have their musket ready discharge three of they among they and very think that they either kill or sore wound some of they they likewise have long staff with very long sharp thing at the end thereof which as we think be fin of black fish they also cast stone with sling but God be thank hurt none of our man bow they have not as far as we can see our man see some of their woman that cry and clasp their man about the neck but know not what they mean and think they do it to get they from thence island without ground that island by reason we can there find no ground to anchor we call the island without ground on the out side it be low plain ground full of palm tree but within full of salt water at last when we see that there be nothing to be get we determine to leave it and with a east wind hold our course west to seaward there we have slight water and no billow as the day before we have out of the south and therefore we guess that southward there be more land it be under fifteen degree about a hundred league distant from dog island the sixteenth day in the morning betimes we see another island northward from we another island which we make to but find it as the other without anchor ground within also be all drown land yet on the side it be full of tree but no palm nor tree we put out our Shalop to sound the depth but go to the shore find no ground and therefore come aboard again without do any thing or see any man we send our Shalop once again to see if we can get any refresh or water upon the land who return again tell we that they have find fresh water not far from the shore in a pit or keel which they may bring with bucket to the strand but hard to get into the ship for the Shalop by reason of the billow lay fast at a dreg by which mean the man be force to draw one another with a rope on land and in like sort on board again so that it be very troublesome and dangerous to go on the land and therefore fetch but four small fat of water there also we find such herb as we have in the dog island whereof we bring a sackful aboard and some crab as also some shell and horn that have fish in they of very good taste that evening we hold on our course westward with a east-wind and a indifferent gale rainy weather and smooth water water island the same day we be under fourteen degree forty six minute that island be fifteen league distant from the other we call it the water island because there we get some water the seventeen day we give our man six cup of water and sod a great kettle with pottage make of the green herb that we have in water island which do our man some good and ease they of their looseness the eighteen day in the morning we see another low island south-west from we fly island lie west northwest and east southeast as far as we can see at the least twenty league distant from the other we make to it and be hard by it send out our boat to sound the depth they tell we they find ground by a point of land from whence there come a stream at twenty five and forty fathom run soft down about a musket shoot from the land whereupon we send the boat with our empty cask thither hope to find water when it come to the land they let the Schut lie fast at a dreg in the water and draw one another with a rope through the water to land as they do before there they seek a good way within a wood for fresh water but because they have no arm with they and see a wild man who as they think have a bow in his hand they turn present back to the Shalop and come aboard again without do any thing and lie a good way from the shore there come five or six wild man to the strand who see that our man be go go back again into the wood. upon that island there be great store of green wild tree be also full of salt-water within when our man come into the ship they be cover all over with fly in such abundance that we can not know they their face hand and scute all full and the oaer also as far as they be out of the water be cover over with black fly wonderful to behold those fly come with they aboard our ship and slay so thick upon our body and in our face that we know not how to shun they for we can hardly eat or drink but all be full of they we still wipe our face and hand and make flappe to kill as many as we can this continue two or three day with great trouble unto we all at last we have a good gale of wind whereby and with continual kill they in the end when three or four day be pass we be rid of they we call that island the fly island and therewith set forward from it and have some rain as also the next day whereby we gather so much water with clothes and sail that it help we well in the night we make no great way but often time let the ship drive that we may not by night fall upon such low island and spoil our ship the three and twenty we be under fifteen degree four minute and then again have great hollow billow out of the south which the next day also continue the wind be north-east and most part east and east and by south there they say that which we seek for lay yet two hundred and fifty league further the five and twenty we fill four vessel full of rain water and still have hollow billow out of the south as we common have in the spanish sea out of the northwest may. the three of may the wind be still east southeast and we sail west and at noon be under fifteen degree three minute that day we see many great Dorados which be the first that we have see in the south Sea the nine we be under fifteen degree twenty minute and at that time as we think be 1510. league distant from the coast of Peru and chili a strange sail about noon we see a sail which as we guess be a bark come out of the south and go northward towards we we present make towards it and as it come near to we we shoot at it with one of our piece right over she to make they strike but they will not then we shoot again but yet they will not strike with that we put out our Shalop with ten musketeer in it to take she which call to they we shoot another piece yet without any intent to reach or to hurt they but they will not strike but seek as well as they can to get away from we and get to loofe-ward of we but our Shalop be too crafty for they row to they and be about half a musket shoot from they s^ot four musket one after another as they draw near to she and before they can reach she some of her man in great fear leap overboard whereof one of they have a little child and another be hurt and have three hole in his back but not very deep for it be ha^leshot those we fetch out of the water again they also throw much of their good overboard and among the rest three hen our man leap into their ship and carry they into our ship they not once resist for in truth they have no arm when they be in our ship we fetch two man more that be leave in they which present fall down before we and kiss our foot and hand one of they be a very old man the other a young man we can not understand they but use they kind and present the Shalop row to fetch those that leap overboard to save their life but they get but two of they that drive upon one of their oar and point to our man with their hand to the ground as much to say that the rest be drown one of those two that be hurt who we dress have long yeallowish hair in that ship there be at least eight woman three young suck child and some of nine or ten year old so that we make account they be three and twenty in all clean naked people both man and woman only something hang before their privy member about evening we set the man on board their ship again that be welcome to their wife which clasp they about the neck and kiss they we give they bead which they hang about their neck and some knife and show they all the friendship we can and they the like to we give we two fine matiens and two nut for they have not many that be all they have to eat and drink and they have drink out all the water out of the nut so that they have no more drink we see they drink salt water out of the sea and give it also to their young child to drink drinker of sea-water which we think to be against nature they have certain clothes which they wear before their privy member and therewith cover themselves against the heat of the sun of a yeallowish colour they be reddish people that anoint themselves with oil the woman have short hair like our man in Holland man hair be long curl and very black the manner and c^onas of the negro their ship be of a strange fashion it be make of two long fair canoas with a good space between they in each Canoa about the middle thereof there lay two whole broad plank of fair red wood to keep out the water and diverse plank lay cross over from the one Canoa to the other which be make fast together and hang a good way over on both end without the canoas very close above to keep out the water before at the end of one of the canoas on starre-boord there stand a mast at the end thereof have a fork whereon the yard lay the sail be make of mat and as the wind blow they sail without compass or any instrument for the sea but hook to fish withal whereof the upper part be stone the other black bone or tortoise shell and some of they be mother of pearl their rope be very fair and almost as thick as a cable make of such stuff as the figge-frayles in Spain be when they sail from we they hold their coruse southeast the ten we have the wind south southeast and southeast and by south and hold our course west and south-west in the morning after breakfast we see very high land on larboard lie southeast and by south about eight league from we we make to it and sail all that day with a good gale but can not reach it the eleven in the morning we be near a high island and about two league southward from thence another long low island that day we sail over a bank of fourteen fathom deep stony ground lie about two league from the land and as soon as we be over it we can find no more ground one of the ship aforesaid come to we they also carry a Canoe in their ship which what time soever they can put out and be very good seaman their ship be of the fashion aforesaid with good sail and be so swift of sail that few ship in Holland can ou^ sail they they steer behind with two oar on each Canoe a man and sometime row with their oar before when they will wind the ship also wind of itself when they pull the oar out of the water and let it go or alone with the wind we put out our Shalop to find which come and tell we that they have find ground at fifteen fourteen and twelve fathom sheluie ground about a canon shoot from the land we present make to it to anchor and take in our sail the negro see that make sign to we to go to the other island and sail thither before we but we anchor at the end of the island at five and twenty fathom sandy ground a great canon shoot from the land that island be a high hill almost like one of the island full of tree most tree therefore we call it island island the other island be much long but low lie east and west as soon as we be at a anchor there come three small ship that sail up and down about our ship and at least nine or ten canoe board we some from the land and some out of the little ship among the which two of they put out little white flag in sign of peace and we do the like their canoe which have three and four man a piece in they be flat before and sharp behind hew out of a whole piece of reed wood wherewith they can row exceed swift and when they come near the ship they leap into the water and swim to our ship with their hand full of nut and vbe root which they barter with we for nail and bead whereof they be very desirous they give four or five nut for one nail or a small string of bead so that the same day we barter for a hundred eighty nut and at last there come so many on board that we scarce know how to bestir ourselves we send our Shalop towards the other island to see if there we can not lie better for there we lie in the open sea but the Shalop be no soon off from the ship row along by the land but it be enclose round about by twelve or thirteen canoe of the other island and still more come to they the people within they show as if they be mad have certain staff of hard wood in their hand like club sharp at the point and a little burn they board our Shalop and think to have take it from we but our man be thereby constrain to defend themselves let flee three musket among they whereat first they laugh and mock think it but a sport but the three time one of they be shoot into the breast clean through his body which his fellow see go present to help he and find he to be so sore hurt all of they keep off from the Shalop and go to one of their small ship with sail and call to it will have have they to over row the Shalop as we guess but they will not for their canoe have be aboard our ship where they have be well use and friendly deal withal those people be very thievish they be lusty man well proportion and of great stature thievish people and go all naked and unarmed only their privy member cover their hair be dress after diverse fashion some short and some fine curl some have long hair find up in pleit in several manner they be notable swimmer that island lie under sixteen degree ten minute the twelve in the morning after breake-fast-time there come more canoe aboard our ship with nut Bananas root and some little hog and some vessel full of fresh water that day we barter with they for one thousand two hundred nut we be eighty five man aboard and every one have twelve nut they strive who shall get first aboard and those that can not get to the ship leap out of their canoe and dive under the other canoe to get to the ship to sell their ware hold Vbas root and bunch of nut in their mouth and climb so many and so fast up to the ship that we be force to keep they down with staff when they have sell their ware they leap out of the ship and swim to their canoe again they wonder at the greatness and strength of the ship and some of they creep down behind at the rother under the ship and knock with stone upon the bottom thereof to proou^ how strong it be there come a Canoe from the other island that bring we a young black wild hog which the king send we for a present we will have give the messenger somewhat for it but he will not take it make sign that the king have charge he not to take any thing at noon the king himself come in a great ship with a sail of the fashion aforesaid like a ice Slead with at least thirty five canoe to accompany he Thi^ king be by his man call Lato^ we receive he with drum and trumpet whereat they wonder because they never have see nor hear the like before they show we great honour and much friendship outward with bow their head clap their fist together over their head and other strange ceremony when he be a little way from we he begin to call and to cry out aloud as if he have pray after his manner all the rest of his man do the like we not knowl what it mean but guest that it be in stead of a welcome present thereupon the king send we a matien by three of his man ^o who we give a old hatchet a few bead some old nail and a piece of linen cloth which he willing receive lay it three time upon his head and bow it in token of reverence or thanks and courtesy those that come into our ship fall on their knee and kiss our foot and wonder much at our ship we can not know the king from the other indian for he be likewise clean naked but only that they show he reverencee and he command over his man we make sign that the king shall come aboard of our ship his son come aboard and we entertain he well but he himself dare not or will not come but they altogether make sign to have we come to the further island with our ship where there be enough of all thing to be have among other thing we barter with they for angle of hair that be make of reed as in Holland but somewhat thick with hook of mother of pearl the king son go to land again and the Canoa wherein he go have a great piece of wood on larboard wherewith it keep upright upon that piece of wood their angle lay ready to take fish the thirteen in the morning there come at least forty five canoas aboard to traffic with we with a armado of three and twenty small ship make like ice-sleads each of they one with a other have five and twenty man a piece in they and every small Canoa four or five we not know what their intent be the canoas deal with we barter nut for nail and make show as if they be our great friend but afterward we find it otherwise all of they make sign to we to sail to the other island the king who the day before have be at our ship come likewise in his ship with a sail to our ship and all of they make a great noise we will glad have have he aboard but he will not wherewith we suspect treason fear some mischief and the rather because all the ship and canoas keep close round about our ship and that the king go out of his ship into a Canoa and his son into a other and present they strike upon a kind of drum that be in his ship whereat all the indian begin to cry out aloud which we esteem to be a warning give unto they altogether to fall upon we to take our ship from we and then the ship wherein the king sail before he go out of it board we come so hard upon we as if it will have sink we but it strike against our ship with such a force that the two head of the canoas before brake in piece wherewith the man that be in it among they have some woman leap into the water and swim to windward the rest begin to fling great number of stone at we think therewith to fear we but we shoot at they with musket and three great piece lade with musket shoot and old nail wherewith all they that be in the ship and canoas that lie about our ship leap into the water we make reckon that some of they have forget the way to go home again and that diverse of they also be sore wound and therewith they go back they know not what such manner of shoot mean but yet when they see how we have handle they with our shot they keep aloof out of the reach of our piece and we hoist anchor set forward again on our voyage hold our course west and west and by south we be of opinion that the king at that time have assemble all his force for he have at the least a thousand man or rather more among they we see one that be clean white when we be about four league off from the island many of our man will have have we go back again to the island by force to go on land to refresh ourselves in regard that we have but little water but the master and the merchant will not the first island that be so high we name island and the other that lay a league distant from it we call traitor island because the most part of the indian that seek to betray we traitor island come from that island the fourteen in the morning we see another island right before we about seven league distant from we which seem to be round and as we guess be thirty league distant from the island aforesaid that island we call the hope and make towards it hope there to get water hope island and better refresh but come to it can find no ground and therefore put out our Shalop to found a long the shore which about a musket shoot from the land find ground at forty fathom small black and soft stony ground sometime also they have twenty and thirty fathom but as soon as they be a shalop length or two from it they have no ground again then ten or twelve canoas come to our ship but we will not let they come aboard but show they friendly countenance and barter with they for four fly fish for the which we give they some bead which we let down by a rope at the stern of the ship and they take they tie the fish to the rope and we pull they up in the mean time our Shalop found along by the land which they in the canoas see present make towards it and be close by it at first speak unto the man but withal compass they about with fourteen canoas and therewith some of they leap overboard think to fall upon the Shalop or to draw it away with they which our man perceive shoot with their musket among they there be six musket and other arm courtelass and pike in the Shalop and therewith kill two of the indian as they sit in their canoas where of one present fall dead overboard the other sit still with his hand wipe off the blood upon his breast but at last f^ll likewise overboard the rest in the canoas be thereat in so great fear that in all haste they make away at which time we see many man stand upon the shore that cry and make a great noise but for that we there can find no fit anchor ground we take our Shalop in again and go forward on our voyage hold our course south-west the better to get to the south hope there to find firm land and it be so rough near to the island that it be a very bad place for a boat to go on shore the island be all full of black cliff green on the top and black earth and be full of tree and green herb we also see many house along by the seaside and close by the strand there be a great village the land be hilly but not very high the eighteen be under sixteen degree five minute we have variable west wind that day we call our council together to who William Cornelison Schouten our master show that then we be at the least one thousand six hundred league eastward from the coast of Peru and chili and have not discover any part of as our intent be that there be not any appearance to discover any thing to our contentment that we also have sail further westward than we intend that sail forward in that manner without all doubt we shall fall southward upon Guinea and that if there we shall find no passage or way to get through it be very dangerous uncertain and not know that then both ship and good will be lose and we ourselves likewise shall perish it be unpossible to come eastward back again from thence by reason of the steadfast east-wind that in the west part continual blow that we also have but small store of victual and see no mean as yet to increase they and therefore ask their counsel whether it be not their best way to alter their course and to sail northward thereby to get northward to Guinea and so to the moluccoe which they consider of and well weigh find his reason to be true and think it necessary to be do and therefore all with one consent agree to sail northward not to fall southward upon Guinea be a uncertain way but rather northward to hold a certain course which be present put in effect and we set our course north northwest the nineteen the wind south and our course north at noon we see two land north-east and by east about eight league from we which seem to lie about a canon shoot distant one from the other then we go north-east to sail about the land with fair weather but no great gale the twenty the wind be north-east and we do the best by labour to get to the land the one and twenty the wind be east with a small gale and when we be about a league from the land there come twenty canoe to our ship to who we show all sign of friendship but one of they with a wooden Assagay sharp at the point in his hand threaten to shoot at one of our man and cry aloud as they do in the other island which we think be a sign among they to fall upon we whereupon we discharge two of our great piece and therewithal some of our musket whereby two of they be hurt and the rest present make away as they flee throw a shirt overboard which they have steal out of our gallery the two and twenty day there come diverse canoe to our ship bring some nut and Vbas root other bring a live hog and two roast hog for the which we barter and give they slight knife bead and nail those people also be thievish and will swim and dive exceed well as those in the other land can do their house stand along the strand which be round and make of leaf sharp on the top and close like a paint-house to let the water fall down about five and twenty foot in compass and ten or twelve foot high with a low hole to go in stoop in they there be nothing to be see but some dry herb like hay to sleep upon and a angle rod or two and in some a wooden club or staff that be all their household stuff the both best and worse sort for the king himself have no more here we find a convenient water place the four and twenty day aris clauson reymie simonson snocke and Cornelison Schouten go on land to be hostage to make friendship with the indian and for they we have six of their principal man in our ship who we use friendly give they meat and drink and some present as they do to our man give they and Vbas root to eat and water to drink the king show our man great reverence and give they four little hog that day our man fetch five fat full of water peaceable without quarrel for when any of the indian come near our boat the king himself come thither and drive they thence or send one of his man to do it his man be very obedient unto he for as it chance that one of our courtelass be steal away from we and we tell one of the king gentleman thereof he give some of the indian charge to fetch it again and present he that have take it be seek for and although he be go a good way of they bring he back who be come the Courtelasse be lay down at our foot and he be beat with staff they make sign unto we with their finger upon their throat that if the Herico that be the king know of it his head shall be cut off and after that we have nothing steal from we neither on the shore nor in the ship nor elsewhere neither dare they take a fish that we angle for those people be very fearful of our shoot for when we shoot off a musket they all run quake and shiver away and we put they in more fear when we show they that we can shoot with the great piece which the king desire we once to do which be do they be all so fearful and abash thereat that all of they as also the king sit under his Belay or canopy notwithstanding all that we can say or do to persuade thew sore amaze run into the wood and leave our man sit there alone but not long after they come again scarce half well assure the five and twenty day aris clawson Claus johnson and Daniel le Maire go on land again to barter for hog but they will not barter but after the king have say his prayer which he use to do every time that we go on shore show we great friendship and we the like to he the six and twenty day jacob le Maire our merchant and aris clawson go on shore but can get no hog of the indian because they themselves have great need of they have little else to eat but Vbas root nut a few hog and some Bananas our man be very welcome unto they and have great reverence show they for they tread upon mat and the king and his lieutenant give they their crown which they take off from their own head and set they on their head in recompense whereof jacob le Maire give they some present of little worth wherewith they be very well please crown make of feather the crown be make of long small white feather and underneath and above mix with some red and green feather for they have many parrot and some dove whereof they make great account for every one of the king council have a dove by he sit upon a stick those dove be white on their back and all the rest black save their breast which be reddish all that day we fetch water and barter for good store of nut and Vbas root the seven and twenty and eight and twenty day we get all our water into the ship than William Cornelison Schouten our master and aris clawson go on land with the trumpet which the king take great pleasure to hear and with much ado get two hog the king lieutenant put a string about his foot or his hand climb quick up a smooth high tree and in a trice fetch down ten nut which at one crush with a stick or a piece of wood he so soon open that our man wonder to see it they tell we that they always have war with the man of the other island and show we many hole and cave in the hill and bush and grove in the way from whence they issue out and spoil and kill each other and will glad have have we go with our ship to the other island to help they there to fight against those indian with our piece but it be no profit unto we we refuse it they be in great fear of we although we show they all the friendship we can and doubt that we will take their country from they the king promise we that if we will go thence in two day he will give we ten hog and a great number of nut which they call ali. when he enter into the ship he fall down upon his face and pray than we lead he into the hold and there again he pray he wonder much at that he see as we also do at his behaviour his man kiss our foot and take they in their hand and lay they on their head and their neck in sign of submission in the evening by moonshine aris clawson go out to fish and have take a great shoal of fish go to the king there he find a number of young wench dance before he one play on a hollow piece of wood like a pump which make a noise whereat the young wench dance after their manner very fine and with a good grace according to the measure of the noise of the instrument the thirty day in the morning the king send we two little hog for a present the same day the king of the other island come to see the king of that island and with he bring sixteen hog and three hundred man in his company all of they have certain green herb hang about their midle whereof they make their drink when the king be near unto the other king he begin a far off with strange ceremony and reverence to bow down his body fall with his face upon the ground and pray with a great noise and much zeal as we think the other king go to meet he and likewise with a great noise and strange gesture use he very reverent and after much ado they both rise up on their foot and go and sit together under the king Belay and there be assemble together at least nine hundred man when they go to sit down they pray again according to their manner hang down their head and bow down to the ground hold their hand one in another which we admire after noon aris clawson be on shore jacob le Maire Claus johnson Ban be send for who go a shore with four trumpet and a drum to the two king there the trumpet blue and the drum play before they wherein they take great pleasure after that come a company of peasant bring with they a quantity of green herb which they call homely drink such as the three hundred man aforesaid have about their middle and all together at once begin to chaw the herb in their mouth which be chawd they take it out of their mouth and lay it all in a wooden vessel like a trey or trough and when they have chawd a great deal they pour water into it and so stir and press it together and give the liquor thereof to the king to drink who drink thereof with their gentleman they also present that notable drink as a special and a goodly present to our man but they have enough and more then enough of the sight thereof they also bring a great number of Vbas rootes which they have roast and sixteen hog that be only rip and the gut take out but all bloody and not wash and have certain hot stone put into their belly and outward their hair singe off by the fire be well roast after their manner and they eat they as savourly and with as good a appetite as we can do when they be well sodden or roast after our manner those people yield great reverence and respect unto their king for all the meat which they bring before their king who in their language they call Herico they lay it upon their head and kneel on their knee set it down before the King of those sixteen hog aforesaid each king give we one present we therewith in this sort first they lay they upon their head and kneel lay they with great humility at our foot and with they give we eleven little live hog and some indifferent great and we give they three copper beaker four knife twelve old nail and some bead wherewith they be well please those people be man of good understanding and of great stature for the least man of they be as big as the tall of we and the tall of they be far high than any of we they be strong man and well proportion of body and limb they go very fast and swim and dive under the water excellent well their colour be altogether brown yellow they be very curious in the dress and trim of their hair some have it curl some frizzle some wear it find up in long fold four five or six together as our woman do in hair-lace and some which be strange to see have their hair stand upright upon their head about a quarter of a ell long like hog bristle the king have a long lock of hair on the left side of his head that hang down beneath his hip find up with a knot or two his gentleman have two such lock on each side of their head one they go naked all alike both man and woman only some little thing handsome tie before their privy member the woman be very unsightly both in face and body of small stature their hair cut close to their head as our in Holland their breast long hang down to their belly like leather satchel they be very lecherous for they suffer themselves to be use by their man open in all man sight and in the king own presence only under a mat. we can not perceive that they worship God or any god or use any devotion neither the one nor the other but live without care it be likely they have some religion by the image which m. Candish see in other land of the ladrone and by the prayer before mention horn island like bird in the wood. they have no skill of buy or sell but with flag they deliver we somewhat and we in like sort to they again they neither sow nor reap nor do any work there the earth of itself yield all that they need to sustain their life as and such like fruit when the water fall the woman look upon the shore on the sea side for fish and when they will they take they with their hook and eat they raw so that there man may plain behold and see the golden world whereof the poet write when we leave that island we call it horn island after the name of the town from whence we come and the bay wherein we anchor the unity bay after our ship name that day for the most part we be busy to get out and to hoist up our anchor one of our cable be fret in piece with the sharpness of the ground where it lay so we lose that anchor and the cable fret upon a cliff break as we wound it up and lose that anchor also this bay lie on the south side of the land in a dock under fourteen degree fifty six minute june we depart the first of june the one and twenty we make towards land which we see very low and go near unto it find many sand which stretch northwest of from the land there be three or four land all very small but full of tree there a Canoe board we be of the same fashion as afore but somewhat great able to hold five or six man the man in all respect as the former and speak the same language but somewhat black have some thing before their privy member their arm be bow and arrow which be the first bow that we see among the indian in the south sea we give they some bead and nail but they point towards the west to tell we that there be more land where their king dwell and many thing to be have therefore we hold our course westward again find no fit place to anchor in this island lie south south-west and west from we under four degree forty seven minute the two and twenty the wind east southeast we sail west and west and by north under four degree forty five minute that quarter we have a good gale of wind and fair weather and that day see at least twelve or thirteen land one close by another west south west from we reach southeast and northwest about half a league but sail along by they leave they on larboard the four and twenty the wind south at noon we see land on larboard be three low land that lie south-west from we very green and full of tree two of they be two mile long a piece the three very little the shore be hard cliffy ground there likewise we can find no anchor we call they the green land we also see a high island that have seven or eight hovel forth right lie west and by north from we in the night we hold off and on stay till day the five and twenty in the morning as we be all sail by the aforesaid island we see other land before we in the south-west which be exceed high which we think to be the point of Guinea we make towards it leave the other high island that lie westward which we call saint john island because it be saint John baptist day s. john island about noon we get to it and sail along by it with a east southeast wind but can find no anchor ground we send out our Shalop to found the depth and go along by the shore between the ship and it and be somewhat near the shore there come two or three canoas to it with black indian in they all naked without any thing before their member which fierce cast stone at our man with ^lings but as soon as our man begin to shoot at they they flee away the Shalop come on board again without find any ground tell we that the people language be clean contrary to the former we sail along by the coast which be very high and green pleasant to behold where we see much land as it have be house at evening we get about the point into a bay there we anchor at five and forty fathom unfit and uneven ground the same evening there come two canoas to the ship and speak to we but we understand they not all that night they hold watch against we with fire all along their coast we lay about a canonshot distant from the shore against a run river that night it be very still calm moonshine weather the wound on the land there come some canoe close under the gallery of our ship from whence we throw they some bead show they all the friendship we can withal make sign unto they to bring we some nut hog ox or goat if they have any but they stay still most part of the night by we cry and hollow after their manner they be wild black and rude man this land as we guess lay distant from the coast of Peru one thousand eight hundred forty league the six and twenty in the morning there come eight canoas about our spippe whereof one have eleven man in it the other four five six and seven man they row close about our ship and be well furnish with arm after their manner as assagaye or club wooden sword and sling we show they what friendship we can and give they bead and other trash make sign to they to go on shore to fetch we hog hen nut and other fruit such as they have but they have another meaning and altogether begin fierce to sling with their sling and other weapon think to master we but we stand upon our guard shoot with our musket and great shot among they and slay at least ten or twelve of they they leave the great Canoa and three other and leap into the sea swim to land we put out our Shalop and row it among those that swim away and slay some of they bring three of they prisoner into our ship that be sore wound and four of their canoas which we hew in piece to make fire for the cook the hurt man be cure but one of they die about noon our man row with the two wound man to the land along the shore th^re the prisoner cry to their fellow to bring we hog Bananas and nut wherewith one Canoa come aboard that bring a little hog and a bunch of Bananas we set one of the man at ten hog ransom the other that be sore hurt we let go in the Canoa because we doubt he will not live those man have two hole bore in their nose on either side one wherein they wear ring strange to behold there we see another island lie north from that great island the seven and twenty we fill our empty vessel full of water and that day we get a hog from the land and there see diverse red bird the eight and twenty there come certain canoas aboard our ship but bring nothing with they neither will they ransom their man therefore we let he go on shore again we think those people to be papoo for all their hair be short and they eat beetle and chalk mingle with it that night we hoist anchor and set sail with a small gale of wind the nine and twenty the wind be variable and our course be northwest and northwest and by north with fair weather till noon than it calm at evening we be still in the sight of the point of the island and yet we sail along by the land which reach northwest and north and by west with many bay and crookes the same day we see three high island more that lie northward from the great island about five or six mile then we be under three degree twenty minute the thirty in the morning drive in a calm diverse canoas with black indian come aboard our ship who in sign of peace as they enter break their assagaye over their head they bring we nothing but desire something of we they seem to be better and friendly people than the other for they cover their privy member with leaf and have better kind of canoas set out before and behind with some carve work they be very proud of their bead which they paint with chalk and the hair of their head also upon the three or four island from whence those canoas come there be great store of tree july the first of july in the morning we anchor between a island of two mile long and the firm land of Guinea about noon there come twenty five canoas towards our ship with many man well arm be the same people who the day before break their assagaye over their head and make a friendly show unto we but with intent to abuse we as after it appear who see we to lie in a calm think to take our ship from we we have two anchor hang out before at the bough a little pull up whereon they sit on each anchor a man with a Pingay or girdle in their hand wherewith they use to hold or draw forth their canoas and so think to draw the ship to shore the rest hang fast upon the ship we still stand upon our guard at last they begin fierce to throw at we with stone and other weapon and thereby hurt one of our man be the first that be hurt in all our voyage but we shoot among they with our musket and with our upper tire of ordnance and kill at least twelve or thirteen of they and hurt many more and while they flee away our man row with the Shalop well arm after they and take one prisoner be a young man about eighteen year old who we name Moses after our man name that be hurt those people eat bread make of root of tree after this fight we sail all along by the land with a good gale west northwest and northwest and by west the second we be under three degree twelve minute and that day see low-land on larboard and also a great high hill and right before we a low island we sail soft west northwest with slight water east north-east the three we see high land again west from we about fourteen league from the other island under two degree and forty minute the four as we be busy to pass by the aforesaid four island we see at least twenty two or twenty three other great and small high and low which we leave on star-brood many island only two or three on larboard they lay close one by the other some a league or a league and a half and some more than a cannon shoot distant one from another under two degree twenty five or thirty minute little more or less the six sometime we have a hard wind and sometime calm with rain lighten and thunder and before noon see a very high hill be south-west from we which we sail unto our master be of opinion that it be Banda by reason it be very like to the hill call Geomenapi in Banda and very like for height but go near unto it we may see two or three hill more l^ke unto it that l^y on the north side of the first hill about six or seven league distant whereby we know that it be not so behind that hill we see very much land east and westward which be so long that on either side we can not see a end thereof sometime high and then low reach east southeast whereby we guess it to be Guinea and for that night come upon we we hold off from it the seven in the morning before day we wound again towards the high hill which be a burn island cast fire and flame from the top thereof Vul^ans island and therefore we call it Vulcan island the wind than be south-west with fair weather this island be well inhabit and have many tree in it the people come with some canoas to our ship but be very fearful of we they call unto we but we understand they not neither can our black moor tell what they say they be all naked only their privy member cover their hair some short some long there we find no ground and so can not anchor in the north and northwest we see more island at which time we go northwest and by west to a low island that we see before we which in the evening we get unto then we take in our sail and let the ship drive there we find diverse colour of water green white and yellow which we guess to be water come out of river for it be sweet than the sea-water there many tree leaf and bough drive in the water whereon some bird and crab sit the eight the wind be variable we hold our course west south-west and west northwest with fair weather and a reasonable gale of wind have on starre-boord a high and on larboard a low island reasonable high we make towards the land which about evening we get unto and find good sandy ground at seventy fathom deep about a cannon shoot from the land there certain canoas come to we with a kind of ill-favoured people all papoo their hair short and curl have ring in their nose and ear and string about their head or arm and hog tooth hang about their neck for a ornament they also eat betel and be all defective person some great leg other swell arm and so forth whereby it be to be think that thereabouts it be unwholesome land and the rather because their house stand upon stake about eight or nine foot from the ground there we have three degree forty three minute and find a little show of ginger the nine in the morning lie at anchor our Shalop row to look for a fit place to anchor the ship in and return tell we that they have find a fit bay where unto we go and anchor at twenty six fathom good sandy ground mix with clay there about stand two small village from whence there come many canoas a^o^rd our ship that bring a few nut but they esteem they very dear for four nut ask a fathom o^ linen cloth whereof they be very desirous they also have some hog which they hold at a dear rate and what need soever we say we have thereof and make sign to they to bring we some they will not do it that day every man in our ship have allowance of five pound of bread and a measure and a half of oil a week a cup and a half of sack a day and a niperkin of aquavita all our pottage as pease beanes gurt and our flesh Bacon and fish be spend and we know not where we be be uncertain whether we be far or near to the indian island as also what place we be in though we sail continual by the land not know whether it be Guinea or no we only gh^st at it for all the card that we have do not agree nor be like to the land that we see that land for the most part reach northwest and by west sometime some what more westerly and sometime again more northerly the twelve we sail still west northwest along by the coast with fair weather and without sunshine at noon be under two degree fifty eight minute with help of the stream that set we about the west as it do all along the coast of Guinea the thirteen and fourteen we sail along by the aforesaid coast sometime by high and then by low land the fifteen we have the wind and hold our course as aforesaid along by the coast with good weather after noon we come to two low inhabit island about half a league from the main land which stand full of tree we make towards they and there find good anchor ground at forty thirty twenty five and twenty to six and five fathom deep and there anchor at thirteen fathom good ground the master row with the boat and the Shalop well arm to the land think to get some nut which there be upon the land in great abundance but go on shore the indian lie in ambush right against the place where we come to land and watch for we shoot so fierce at we with their bow that they hurt at least sixteen of our man some in the arm other in the leg neck and hand and other place and we shoot at they with musket and sling but at last by reason that the indian shoot so thick we be force to retire there we be under two degree fifty four minute the sixteenth in the morning we sail in with our ship between both the island and anchor at nine fathom where we have good lie after noon our boat and Shalop row to the lesser island to fetch some and burn two or three of the indian house about evening our man come aboard again and bring so many nut that every one of we have three nut for his part those people be clean naked their privy member and all the seventeen in the morning there come two or three canoas towards our ship and throw nut into the water make sign to we to fetch they whereby they seek to be friend with we we make sign to they to come aboard at last take better courage they come close to the ship and bring we as many nut and Bananas as we desire which we draw up by rope into the gallery give they old nail rusty knife and bead in barter they also bring we a little green ginger and yellow root which be use in stead of saffron barter also with we some of their bow and arrow so that at last we be great friend with they the eighteen we barter still for nut and Bananas and some cassavie and papede which be also to be have in east India there we see some jar or earthen pot which as we think come from the spaniard those people be not so inquisitive to look into our ship as other be for they know what shoot with great piece mean and call the island wherein they dwell Moa Moa island (@) Arimoa cassavie which lie most easterly the other over against it they call jusou and the uttermost be a very high island lie about five or six league from Guinea they name Arimoa we buy as many nut and bananas as we desire so that every man have fifty nut and two bunch of Bananas those people use cassavie for their bread but it be nothing like to that of the west indies they bake it also in round cake the twenty in the morning we set sail after we have again barter for more victual they make sign to we to lie still and they will bring we more the one and twenty we sail along by the land west northwest and at noon be under one degree thirteen minute then we see a number of island whereunto the stream drive we and about noon we get to they and anchor at thirteen fathom that evening we have much rain thunder and lightning the three and twenty in the morning we set sail with good weather and a good gale and be a little from the land six great canoas follow we and yet we see no man on land bring dry fish which we take to be steenbrass nut Bananas tobacco and some small fruit like prune there also come some indian from a other island that bring we some victual that also have some China porceline for we barter for two dish whereby we be persuade that many christian ship have be there for they wonder not as other do at our ship they be another kind of people than the former of a yellow colour and great of body some of they have long hair some short and also use bow and arrow whereof we have some in barter they be very desirous of bead and iron-worke and have green blue and white glass ring stick in their ear which we guess they have from the spaniard the four and twenty we be under half a degree with a little gale and sail northwest west and south-west along by a fair great island very green and pleasant to behold which we call William schouten island schouten island after our master name and the west point thereof the cape of good hope the five and twenty we see much land on larboard lie south south-west from we some very high and some very low the seven and twenty we see three island more the coast reach northwest and by west the seven and twenty we be under nine and twenty minute southward of the line and see much land southward from we some high and some very low and past west northwest along by it the eight and twenty and nine and twenty the weather be variable a earthquake that night we have a earthquake which make our man for fear to run out of their cabin our ship seem as if it strike against the ground but we cast out our lead and find no ground the thirty we sail in a great bay or hollow place so that we seem to be round about enclose with the land we do our best to find a open but can not and therefore sail northward again that day it thunder and lighten so sore that our ship shake therewith and sometime seem to be on a light fire wherewith we be in no small fear and after it ensue so great a shower of rain that we never have see the like before the one and thirty we perceive that we be enter into a place where we have the land round about we therefore we hold our course north and that evening past the equinoctial line the second time and be close by the land anchor at twelve fathom good ground about a cannon shoot from a island that lie close by the firm land but there we see no man nor any thing grow the first of August we hoist anchor with great labour for it lay under a cliff August but at last we get it up we be then fifteen minute northward of the line in the evening with the hard stream we go close to the land and by reason it be calm anchor in uneven ground and not deep the second it be very calm and we drive with the stream west and west and by north with rainy weather the three we hold our course as before with a calm and find a bank so far in the sea that we can scarce see the land in some place be forty in a other twenty fifteen and twelve fathom sandy ground we anchor at fathom because it wax night and the master desire to see how the stream go it be west south-w the same day we be under five and thirty minute northward of the line and see many whale and tortice we guess by the height that we be at the end of the land of Guinea have sail along by the coast two hundred and eighty league that day we see two island more westward from we raynes and calmes trouble we the five in the morning as our Shalop row to land we see first two and then three canoas more come off from the land and make towards our Shalop and be hard by it put out a flag of peace and our man the like and then go aboard the canoas follow they and also come aboard they bring we nothing but a muster or show of indian bounty and erty with some rice tobacco and two paradise bird Bean^ or pease we barter for one of they that be white and yellow we can understand they reasonable well for they speak Tarnata word and one of they speak good malaian which language aris clawson our merchant can speak well some of they speak some spanish and among they they have a spanish felt. they wear fair clothes about their middle and some have silk breeches on of diverse colour some also have wreath about their head which they say be turk or moor in religion they wear gold and silver ring upon their finger their hair be all coal black they barter their ware with we for bead but rather desire linen they be very wary and fearful of we we ask they what the name of this country be but they will not tell we but by many circumstance we judge and very believe that we be at the east end of Gilolo on the middlemost point of the land Gilolo for Gilolo reach out with three point to the east and that they be man of Tidore friend to the spaniard as we also find it so to be which make we all rejoice that after so many wind and turn and trouble endure we be come to the place which we know and hope in short time to come among our countryman a thing which we so long and so much have hope for and desire the six day in the morning we have a good gale south southeast and bad lie there hoist anchor to go on our voyage to the and hold our course north with a good gale to go north about the north point of Gilolo the seven it rain Moratay and we see the north-east point of Gilolo call Moratay which lie southeast from we the eight about noon we be under four degree three minute northward of the line that night it rain hard with thunder and lightning there we find the stream to go northward the nine and ten the wind be variable with rainy weather and we be under the height of three degree fifty minute the eleven in the morning we see the land of Gilolo call Moratay again on the north-east point of Gilolo the current we do the best we can to reach it but the stream put we off from the land towards the north and can not reach it that day the twelve and thirteen we be under two degree fifty eight minute with variable wind and much rain and the like the fourteen fifteen and sixteenth the seventeen with great labour and much trouble we get under the land late in the evening and drive along by the coast with fair weather that night we see many fire upon the land the eighteen it be still weather and we ^rave along by the land about noon two canoe come to we with a flag of peace soppy from the village call soppy they be Tarnataens with who we can speak well and some of they be of Gammacanor they show we that a pinnace of Amsterdam have lie there three month to lade rice and that about a month or two before also a english ship have be there how glad we be then when we be so well assure^ that we be come to so good and long desire a place after so much pain and trouble that we have endure with eighty five sound man when we have spend all our victual every man may judge that have prove the like adventure there we be under two degree forty seven minute and anchor at ^ight and twenty fathom some of those man stay that night with we the next day to bring we to the road of soppy the nineteen we sail into the bay and there anchor at ten fathom sandy ground about a canon shoot from the shore that day we barter for some Sagow some hen two or three tortoise and a little rice the seventeen of September we have a good gale and do our best to get to Tarnata that morning beside we see a sail to looseward from we September which also make towards Tarnata be the morning star of Rotterdam of three hundred ton burden have in her six and twenty grea^ piece at noon our Shalop come from that sh^p where she have lie three night they be in ^he creek o^ Sabou find there the admiral there in one of the admiral Speilberg his sh^ps by who man we understand of Speilbergh his act and voyage they also tell we that there be ten ship well furnish at the Manillas their general be John D^rickeson Lam of horn to set upon the spanish fleet that be come to Tarnata we also understand that Peter Bot sail home with four ship be cast away upon mauricius island with three ship by mean of a storm that cast he upon the cliff where many of his man and himself also be drown the four ship escape October the three and twenty of October we set sail and the eight and twenty go by jacatra where we anchor without the island there we find three ship of Holland the horn the eagle and the and three english ship the next night one of our man die which be the first man that die that voyage in the unity beside two more that die in the horn the one John Cornelison Schouten our master brother in the south sea by the dog island and one about the coast of Portugal so that until then there die but three man in both the ship and then we have leave eighty four man live all indifferent well the one and thirty the ship call Bantam with John peterson koeven of horn precedent of Bantam for the east India company come before jacatra the fi^st of November the precedent John peterson koeven send for William Cornelison Schouten our master and the merchant to come on land where be come in the presence of his council there assemble he tell they in the name of the east indian company that they must leave their ship and good there and deliver it up into his hand and although our master show he many reason to persuade the contrary say that they do they great wrong they be force to do as the precedent appoint they who tell they that if they think they do they wrong that they shall right themselves in Holland and so our ship and good be stay and attach there to receive the ship and all her furniture the precedent appoint two master of ship and two merchant which be deliver by inventory unto they by our master and the merchant this be do upon Monday the first day of November after our reckon but upon a Tues^ay the second of November by our countrimens reckon there the reason of the difference of the time fall out thus a day d^ff^rence in computation of time now cause as we sail westward from our own country and have with the sun compass the globe of the world we have one night or sunsetting less than they and they that come out of the west and sail to the east thereby have one day or sunsetting more than we which make a quarter difference and so as we make our reckon of the time then with ourselves and do the like with our countryman that week we lose the Tuesday leap from Monday to Wednesday and so have one week of six day our sh^p be in this manner take from we some of our man put themselves into service with the east indian company the rest be put into two ship that be to go home into Holland call the Amsterdam and the Zealand their general be George Vande the master William Cornelison Schouten jacob le Maire and ten of our man go with the general in the Amsterdam the master name John Cornelison may alias meuscheater and aris clawson and the pilot Claus peterson with ten other in the Zealand the master name Cornelis Riemlande of Midleburgh which set sail from Bantam the fourteen of December the two and thirty our merchant jacob le Maire die the first of january 1617. we lose the sight of the Zealand the four and twenty we be under the island mauricius at anchor where we refresh ourselves and the thirty set sail from thence the six of march as we guess we pass the cape but see it not the one and thirty we be under the island of saint Helena where we find the Zealand which arrive there certain day before we the six of April after we have refresh ourselves and take in fresh water both our ship set sail and the fourteen of April see the island of Ascention the three and twenty we see two ship to looseward from we under one degree southward of the line but because we can not reach they we hold on our course the four and twenty in the morning we be the five time under the equinoctial line and the eight and twenty we see the north-star which we have not see in twenty month before the first of july we come with the Amsterdam into Zealand where the day before the Zealand likewise be arrive and so perform our voyage in two year and eighteen day navigation and voyage of englishman along the coast of Africa to the cape of good hope and from thence to the red sea the abassine arabian persian indian Shore continent and land the three book chap. i. of the first English voyages to the east-indies before the establishment of the east-indian society @. i. of MAMDEVILE stevens fitch and diverse other englishman their indian voyage have now take sea-view of the universe and encompass the whole circumference of the globe in the former six voyage the first of portugal and spaniard the second and three of english the three last of hollander the english general drake and Candish first compa^s^rs of the world and the most fortunate magellan ship not himself effect renown then happy voyage who the hollander follow guide by english instruction and mariner not their fortune^ therein not a little further by english pilot and their note as be before observe of Melis Adams and other we be in the next place to take more exact survey of the world in the principal navigation to the most famous and remote region thereof glorious and happy be those six worthy which prove themselves true son of the sun and Tethys a far more germane and genuine issue than that dare Phaeton who ask and attempt his father chariot but exchange it and himself for this miserable epitaph but these have attain what they seek and what he in his vulcanian chariot lose these in neptunian chariot gain and follow the sun round about the world at once seem to imitate the heavenly orb as so many terrestrial planet and to rule the element spur the air brie^^ling the ocean contemn the narrow limit of know earth and fill the world with their fame but other also for their marine adventure be worthy honour if not compass that honour of those first worthy worthy to be repute first and worthy yet in another kind attempt as great a design of as dangerous hazard long peregrination costly expense and profitable advantage as the former such be those which have pass the black guinean and double the * * cape of good hope hopeful promontory from thence pierce into the erythraean and indian sea land island enrich our world with a world of rarity for contemplation and use to leave to other nation the english exploit in this kind be the subject of this book especial they which since the establish of the east indian company or society of merchant have trade those part which be begin in the happy and flourish reign of that glorious ELIZABETH praise of quern Elizabeth who name can not end with her life but as than it fill the christian turkish persian american indian world of place so still it seem to begin renew and flourish in glorious verdure and to promise a perpetual spring through all world and age of Time before her time I confess diverse of our nation have merit honour in this attempt as bishop of shireborne send by that famous and religious king alfred his trau^^ls to Ind^a w. M^lm Augloram and gest Ep^s^ aug. to saint Thomas his sepulchre in India whence he bring precious spice and jewel 883. twice record by William of malmesbury as likewise a certain Englishman mention by Matthew Paris 1243. which travel the east part of the world with the tartar in their famous expedition that I say nothing of sir John mandevill his many year travel through all the east write by himself and by that famous geographer Ortelius commend for his geography I fear corrupt by some leaden legendary spirit in other passage and many other which history dignify in the time of the holy-land war for their eastern travel and many more no doubt bury in the ruin of time by oblivion and obscurity in her time we have record of diverse indian voyage by englishman before that society begin first the voyage of Thomas steven from Lisbon to Goa by the cape of good hope be write by himself from Goa Thomas steven the ten of November 1579. and be extant in master hakluit second tome of voyages likewise the voyage of master Ralpe Fitz by Syria and Babylonia to Ormus and thence into Ralph and through many country of the east indies begin 1583. and continue till 1591. be to be read in the say second tome of master Hakluit and in Linschoten George Raymond and james Lancaster also a voyage 1591. with three tall ship the Penelope admiral the merchant royal vice-admiral and the Edward Bonaventure rear-admiral to diverse island and region of the east indies by master George Raymond of which the merchant royal be send back from Soldanha near the cape Bona esperanza which both the other ship double and near the cape do Corientes be sever by a storm and the say voyage be only accomplish by master james Lancaster in the rear-admiral for these I refer the desirous reader to master hakluit print book this last voyage I have by i write by Henry may Purser of the say ship but because his relation be principal touch the accident in their return wherein he be cast away in a french ship on the bermuda I have refer that discourse to a fit place englishman dutch voyage in the four place we may reckon those englishman in diverse of those dutch voyage about the globe Timothy shotten Thomas spring John cald-well and other yea the name of englishman be so famous in the east that the hollander in their first trade thither varnish their obscurity with english lustre and give out themselves English John newbury moreover master John newbury be not only companion with master Ralph fitch in his say voyage and prisoner with he at Goa but before that in the year 1580. have travel to Ormus and thence into the continent as by his journal which I have in fit place may appear pass through the country of Persia Media Armenia Georgia Anatolia to Constantinople and thence into Danubius Valachia Polonia Prussia Denmark and so into England @. 2 the voyage of master Benjamin wood into the east indies and the miserable disastrous success thereof in the year 1596. by the charge principal of sir Robert Dudley be set forth a fleet of three ship the bear the bear whelp and the Benjamin commit unto the command and conduct of master Benjamin wood. the merchant employ in this voyage be master Richard allot and master Thomas bromfield of the city of London these man for their better furtherance intend to pierce as far as China obtain the gracious letter of queen Elizabeth of famous memory to the king of China in their behalf which begin in this manner this their honourable expedition and gracious commendation by her majesty to the king of China in their marchandize affair have not answerable success but have suffer a double disaster first in the miserable perish of the fleet and next in the loss of the history and relation of that tragedy some break plank as after a shipwreck have yet be encounter from the west indies which give we some notice of this east indian disaduenture this intelligence we have by the intercept letter of licentiate Alcazar de Villa Senor auditor of the royal audience of saint Domingo and judge of commission in puerto rico and captain general of the province of new Andalusia write to the king and his royal council of the indies a extract whereof so much as concern this business here follow wherein let not the imputation of robbery or piracy trouble the reader be the word of a Spaniard and the deed of english in the time of war betwixt we and Spain a other commission your royal audience commit unto i a extract of a spanish letter which I find among master hakluit pap^^s to punish offender that do usurp a great quantity of good of your majesty in the island of Vtias of the state that I have in the end of the last year I send relation to your majesty insert a declaration of one Thomas a english man of the good that in the say island he and his companion have and for this only I will make a summary relation of the case and the state of the suit by the which will appear that out of England go three ship for the India oriental of Portugal which take three Portugal ship subject to your majesty three Portugal ship take by the English whereof one of they come from the city of Goa and from the captain they take a great rich stone which he say he carry for your majesty the proportion whereof go in the say relation they have in they also many bag of royalls of eight and four for the pay of the soldier which your majesty have in garrison in a castle frontier of the say India and the say englishman rob they of it and much more good appertain to your majesty subject and by sickness of the englishman remain only four which in a boat put all the good they can which they have rob from your majesty and your subject and with it chance to a river in the island of Vtias three league from this island where they take out their good on land where their boat be sink and lose so they remain on thIsland with only one small boat make of board which they have take from certain fisherman at the head of saint John of this island with the which they come for water hither and leave one George a Englishman one of the four that arrive in the say island of Vtias who be find by don rodrigo de Fuentes juan Lopez de Aliceda juan morales juan Martinis juan Ruiz Pedro he give they notice of the thing above say and of the stone stone gold plate teston and other good that be in the say island and the part and place where the three englishman and their good they may find whereupon they consult and agree to pass to the say island of Vtias to possess and benefit themselves with the good that they shall there find and so they pass over and carry with they a letter of George the Englishman that his companion shall deliver themselves to they with their weapon and good and be come near to the place where the englishman be they set up a white flag of peace and the englishman see this set up another and so come peaceable to speak together where they promise they their faith and friendship whereupon the englishman yield themselves with their arm and good to the say don rodrigo and his consort who take possession of all and part among themselves the money and hide and keep secret the stone and stone gold plate and other good leave a small quantity of plate in bar and silk to make this small part manifest that the truth may not be know what quantity of stone gold plate and the rest of the good they usurp they consult and agree to murder the englishman with who they have eat drink and sleep in company of peace who have kill Richard and Daniel and will have kill Thomas he escape into the mountain from they and the say don rodrigo and his consort come back again to this island with intent to kill as they do kill George the Englishman with poison and send back again to the say island of Vtias to seek tomas for to kill he also who with a piece of timber pass over to this island with great admiration they have knowledge thereof seek all the mean they can to kill he here the say don rodrigo and juan Lopez Aliceda come to this city and before the governor manifest and make denunciation of a small quantity of good that they find in Vtias and the rest of their complice present themselves for witness false prove that they have find no more good than that little that they there manifest and that they have kill three englishman in fight to get it and thus they plot many false in^ormations before Christo fall de marcado a chief officer which be send with commission of your governor to fetch the plate and good so manifest and by their persuasion many false witness have depose who have use many trick invention cavil and false device to cover the truth and they send by three passage to the island of Vtias to approve the so kill of the three englishman and that their manifestation be true intend to remain with the rest which they usurp who understand that there be diligence do to approve their delict some of they have break the prison and goal and flee out of they especial the say don rodrigo de Fuentes who be in prison with a chain and bolt and two soldier for guard he file off his iron break the prison and flee away by night and carry with he two blacke-moore of his that be attach for your majesty and go to the river of Toa two league from the city where he remain a long time in sight of this city with a horse lance pistol and sword who be favour of many kinsfolk and friend of his wife I can apprehend although I do many diligence in the mean while I take the examination of his complice who have confess the deed and that the say don rodrigo be actor of all by who counsel and direction they be all govern but they have not declare all the stone gold plate and amber say that they be in the island separate and divide that the one may hide his thing without the privity of the other the proovance and likelihood do much charge the say don rodrigo and therefore I have proceed against he for absence and rebellion and they discover in their confession all their complice who I have examine for witness one against another be a case wherein complice may serve for witness this cause be conclude by a extraordinary diligence I have apprehend he and for that the suit be of two thousand leaf I have make a memorial to take his confession of more than two hundred question and he have confess almost as much as his complice and deny to have the great stone and the rest the say don rodrigo have take from Daniel the Englishman two chain of gold the one hang with a Agnus and the other with a crucifix of gold and with it a collar of gold which Thomas the Englishman declare to have fifty piece amele to be wear for a woman chain with certain bracelet and ring of gold with many small stone which declare the say juan Martin one of his complice and the say don rodrigo only confess two chain and three ring which he say be steal from he and his say complice have declare that three bag of teston of eight and four royalls which fall to the part of he and John Ruiz they have pass to this island which the say John Ruiz have confess and as witness have declare that he bring they and carry they by the order of the say don rodrigo unto his house which he will not deliver say that they be steal from he in the mountain where he do hide they and his complice have declare that he take in the say island a great mass of break silver which Thomas the Englishman declare to be fifty pound weight the say don rodrigo deny the same and have take more two sack of plate in bar which by witness I do prove to weigh more than two hundred pound weight each of they he have deliver of all this only ten pound and a half and say that he spend and sell twelve pound and a pound and a half be steal out of his house and that he give to Christopher de Mercado twenty and six pound when he go with commission from your governor to fetch the plate manifest he deny all the rest affirm that he bring from the island of Vtias a pot full of plate which he say fell from he into a river and have prove that he carry token from George the Englishman where he shall find the great stone in a press make up between two board he deny the same and have prove that the first time that he go to the island he bring thence a purse of velvet without tell or show to his companion what be in it at the mouth thereof do appear certain board of the volume of two hand together and it be presume it be that whereinto Thomas the Englishman declare the stone be put and he will not deliver the say purse say that it be steal from he he declare and manifest some little piece of wood that he bring in it and two witness his complice declare that those small piece that he manifest he bring out of the same island many day after be send thither by order of the say Christopher de Mercado many other token and presumption concur that he have the say stone and the rest and the rest of the stone it be likewise prove present after they return from the say island the first time that they pass thither it be public say and fame that the say don rodrigo have find a stone of great value and to cover the truth he be furnish with many information which I have prove to be false which be pass before Christopher de Mercado when he go with the say commission to bring the good manifest for the which the say don rodrigo give he the say twenty six pound of plate and he and his complice one hundred two and twenty crown of gold and four hundred and fifty royalls of four and other thing of the good that they usurp in the say island the say don rodrigo direct his complice what they shall say and do and therefore they tell not the truth in many examination that I take of they till such time that the say don rodrigo be flee out of the prison so fail of his counsel they present declare and confess the fact will serve for witness and it do appear by many other witness that they before deny the truth and after his escape (@) declare the same and conceal the same before at the request and persuasion of the say don rodrigo also appear that he send three small carvel to the island to the place where they say they have kill three english man in fight and he confess he do the same to the end that his first declaration may seem to be true that he send they by order of the say John Lopez de Alyceda constable of the vale of Coa more which have no jurisdiction civil nor criminal so I apprehend he and commit he and have bring the say Thomas english man to this city who declare before your governor by interpreter the fact of this suit the say don rodrigo procure to kill he and for the same he request of the licentiate Antonio de Robles physician a proportion of poison which both he and the say John Martin have declare and appear that the say John Lopez do not pass to the say island as constable nor carry with he any scrivener of two that be present when they embark themselves and have confess and as a witness declare that he pass to the island not as a officer but as a companion and therefore take his share of the teston the say don rodrigo hold for his principal defence to have pass to the island with a constable and that all be do by his order and that the say information be false I have charge the say don rodrigo of these and other offence that by the process appear and command that he may have a copy of they that with in the space of fifteen day he may allege and prove what be convenient in his right with all charge of publication conclusion and citation for all the act and sentence leave the process in rebellion make ag^anst he in his force and vigour he let pass the say term and I grant he other three term of fifteen day which likewise he let pass and in the end of they he refuse i and general all the inhabitant in this city and thirty league about it except only six friend of he and your royal officer they refuse so I accompany myself only with one bailiff for the time of trial reserve to have power to accompany myself for the sentence with your auditor which be look for here and come to this port for your royal audience of Sancto Domingo and I grant he the fourscore day of the law and he have make no proof nor can make none for all that be in the say island of Vtias have declare the delict of the which the say don rodrigo be charge and there will be find no other by who to make proof of any thing to the contrary and the cause be conclude the say audite pass without enter into this port. and the say bailiff and other person that I pretend to accompany i refuse i say that if they do justice the kindred of the wife of the say don rodrigo which have take his part will do they harm and in not do the same they do charge their conscience and notwithstanding any person with who I may be accompany that may not be without suspect and the refusal be so general and available I accompany myself at the last with bachelor joseph Derebolledone natural of the island of the canary which chance to come to this port. likewise the say juan Ruiz be prisoner break his prison and gaol and withdraw himself into the cathedral church of this city and make himself strong in the tower from whence I gate he and a suit be follow before the judge ecclesiastical where I defend your majesty right and make a information in the which I allege all the say good to belong to your majesty he have commit robbery in the usurpation of it and oother grievous delict that they ought not to enjoy the immunity ecclesiastical which he pretend and with many judgement and opinion of theology the judge ecclesiastical give sentence that he ought not to be relieve of the say immunity ecclesiastical for that by the say information may be better understand this suit and justice of your majesty which I have think good to send and if to the contrary the say don rodrigo do write may be understand the credit that may be give to one that have do such delict and make so many invention and false information to obscure and remain without punishment with your royal good a conclusion of the suit be make with they all and I give and pronounce sentence in the which I condemn the say juan Lopez exaliced juan ruis joan Martin Pedro Camacho to death and loss of half their good apply for your majesty chamber and more I condemn the aforesaid in and that within five day of the notification of this my sentence they give and deliver the good that they share all that yet remain undeliver to the accomplishment of that which Thomas the english have declare therefore say and his companion to have take in the island of Vtias of which they aforesaid and complice be possess of hide and keep secret that it may be put into your majesty chest who it be and to who it do belong the same sentence I give with my companion against the say don rodrigo defuente and remain pronounce in secret have other to sentence that they may come forth together in the pronunciation I command that within the five day they deliver the say good which not accomplish I do command a mandate to be dispatch that they may be execute with the which I hope to discover these good and they shall be restore to your majesty for the which I will do all the diligence possible for my intention be not to execute they and thus God keep the catholic person of your majesty from Portorico the second of October 1601. @. 3 the travail of JOHN mildenhall into the indies and in the country of Persia and of the great Mogor or mogul where he be report afterward to have die of * * see my pilgrimage lib. 5. cap. 7. @. 4. poison write by himself in two letter follow the twelve of February in the year of our lord God 1599 ay John mildenhall of London merchant take upon i a voyage from London towards the east-indies in the good ship call the Hector of London Richard parsons be master which carry a present to the in the same voyage April 27. 1599 the seven and twenty of April 1599 we arrive at zante where I fright a Satea and go into the island of cio from thence to Smyrna and from thence to Constantinople where I arrive the nine and twenty of October 1599 and there I stay about my merchandise till the first of May 1600. sir Henry lillo be then ambassador may. 1600. upon which day I pass from Constantinople to Scanderone in Asia where in company of a chaus and some six other turk I take my voyage for Aleppo over land Aleppo and arrive in Aleppo the four and twenty day of the say may in safety without any trouble or molestation by the way and there abide two and forty day find there master Richard coulthrust for consul july 7. 1600. and the seven of july 1600. I depart from Aleppo in company with many other nation as armenians Persians turk and diverse other to the number of six hundred people in our Carravan and only of english m. John Cartwright preacher from whence we go to by our which be within three day journey and stand upon the edge of the river Euphrates bir. from thence we go to Vrfa which be five day journey which we find very hot Vrfa caracmit from thence we go to caracmit which be four day journey from thence to a city under the government of a nation call the courde yet under the subjection of Constantinople which be seven day journey and from thence to van which be three day journey from van. a great lake of salt water a city of great strength and by the side of the castle be a great lake of salt water navigable and be in compass nine day journey about which I myself have row round about and once a year at the come down of the snow water from the mountain there be abundance of fish which come of themselves to one end of the lake which I may compare to our herring-time at Yermouth where the countrypeople do resort from diverse place and catch the say fish in great abundance which they salt and dry and keep they all the year for their food the fish be as big as pilchard from thence we go to nacshian which be six day journey nacshian Chiulfal Sultania Casbin com. Cashan and from nacshian to Chiulfal which be half a day journey and there we stay eighteen day from thence we go to Sultania and from thence to Casbin in Persia which be fifteen day journey and there we abide thirty day from thence to come which be three day journey from thence we go to Cashan which be seven day journey from thence m. Cartwright depart from we and go to Spauhoan the chief city in Persia from Cashan to yesd which be ten day journey from thence I go to Curman which be ten day journey yesd and from thence to Sigistam which be fourteen day journey and from thence to Candabar which be also fourteen day journey the second letter of JOHN mildenhall to m. richard staper write from Casbin in Persia the three day of October 1606. worshipful sir my duty remember not have any other of more ancient love then yourself I have think good to remember the manifold courtesy receive and partly to requite they with the first news of the success of this my voyage unto the court of the great king of Mogor and Cambaia at my arrival in Lahora the of 1603. I dispatch a post for the king court with my letter to his majesty that I may have his free leave to come unto he and treat of such business as I have to do with he from my prince who forthwith answer my letter and write to the governor of Lahora to use i with all honour and courtesy and to send a guard of horse and foot with i to accompany i to agra he arrive at agra 21 day journey from Lahora his present to the king of Mogor where his court be be one and twenty day journey from Lahora and be near arrive I be very well meet and a house with all thing necessary be appoint for i by the king where repose myself two day the three day I have audience and present his majesty with nine and twenty great horse very fair and good such as be hardly find better in those part some of they cost i fifty or threescore pound a horse with diverse jewel ring and earring to his great like and so I be dismiss with his great favour and content the three day after have make before a great man my friend he call i into his council and come into his presence he demand of i what I will have and what my business be I make he answer that his greatness and renown kindness unto christian be so much blaze through the world that it be come into the furthermost part of the western ocean and arrive in the court of our queen of England most excellent majesty this voyage be make in q Elizabeth reign who desire to have friendship with he and as the portugal and other christian have trade with his majesty so her subject also may have the same with the like favour and far because there have be long war between her majesty and the king of Portugal that if any of their ship or port be take by our nation that he will not take it in evil part but suffer we to enjoy they to the use of our queen majesty all this the king command to be write down by his secretary and say that in short space he will give i answer with that I withdraw myself with leave and go to my house within eight or ten day after he send i home in money to the value of five hundred pound sterling the first time with very comfortable speech short after as I be inform he send to certain jesuite which live there in great honour and credit two in agra and two other in Lahora and show they my demand whereat the jesuite be in a exceed great rage and whereas before we be friend now we grow to be exceed great enemy the jesuite calumniation of our nation and the king ask their opinion in this matter they flat answer he that our nation be all thief and that I be a spy send thither for no other purpose to have friendship with his majesty but that afterward our man may come thither and get some of his port and so put his majesty to much trouble say withal that they have eleven year serve his majesty and be find by their bread and salt that they have eat to speak the truth although it be against christian with these and many more such speech the king and his council be all flat against i and my demand but make no show thereof to i in any respect but I know it by friend which I have in his court. afterward they cause five commandment to be draw and send they i withal thing that I have write save they have leave out the take of the ship and the port of the portugal which when I have read I present go to the court and make demand of the other article the king answer that he will again speak with his council and make answer in this manner rest my business and every day I go to the court and in every eighteen or twenty day I put up ars or petition and still he put i off with good word and promise that this day and tomorrow I shall have they in this manner see myself delay and be at exceed great expense of eighteen or twenty servant horseman and foot I withdraw myself from go to the court in so much that in thirty day I go not at length the king remember i send to call for i at my come he ask the cause why I come not as I be wont I answer that I have come into his country only upon the great renown of his excellency and have waste five year in travail five year spend in travail and can not obtain so much as a commandment at his hand which be whole for his profit and nothing for his loss add that if I have ask some great reward of he he will much more have deny i rich garment bestow by the grand Mogor upon master John mildenhal with that he present call for garment for i of the christian fashion very rich and good and will i not to be sad because every thing that I will have shall be accomplish to my own content so with these sweet word I pass six month more and then see nothing accomplish I be exceed weary of my linger and can do nothing and the rather for that I be out of money I shall have declare before how the jesuite day and night seek how to work my displeasure first they have give to the two chief counsellor that the king have the sundry practice of the jesuite at the least five hundred pound sterling a piece that they shall not in any wise consent to these demand of i so that when I come to present they they will not accept of any thing at my hand although I offer they very large and where I have any friendship they will by all mean seek to disgrace i but God ever keep i in good reputation with all man moreover whereas I have hire in Aleppo a armenian name seffur to who I give twenty ducat the month which serve i very well for my interpreter four year now come near to the point of my special business a armenian serve he four year for interpreter the jesuite have soon wrought with he also in such sort that he quarrel with i and go his way whereby I be destitute of a drugman and myself can speak little or nothing now in what case I be in these remote country without friend money and a interpeter wiseman may judge yet afterward I get a schoolmaster and in my house day and night I so study the persian tongue he study six month the persian tongue in agra that in six month space I can speak it something reasonable then I go in great discontentment to the king and give he to understand how the jesuite have deal with i in all point and desire his majesty licence to depart for my own country where I may have redress for my injury receive and withal tell he how small it will stand with so great a prince honour as his majesty have report to be many year delay to delay i so many year only upon the report of two jesuite who I will prove be not his friend nor care not for his profit nor honour and desire a day of hear that now I myself may make plain unto his majesty which for want of a drugman before I can not do the great abuse of these jesuite in this his court beseech you again to grant i licence to depart and that I may not be keep any long with delay at these word the king be move against the jesuite and promise that upon the Sunday follow I shall be hear and that the jesuite shall be present this speech I have with the king upon the Wednesday come before the place of council the Sunday follow there be meet all the great state of the court to hear the controversy between we at the first the king call i and demand what injury I have receive of the jesuite I answer that they have abuse my prince and country most false call we all thief and if they have be of another sort and calling I will have make they eat their word or I will have lose my life in the quarrel second in say that under colour of merchandise we will invade your country and take some of your fort and put your majesty to great trouble now that your majesty may understand the untruth of these man false suggestion the queen ambassador leaguer at Constantinople know you all that her majesty have her ambassador leaguer in Constantinople and every three year most common do send a new and call home the old and at the first come of every ambassadoor she tend not they empty but with a great and princely present according whereunto her highness intent be to deal with your majesty this profit of rich present and honour like to redound to your majesty by have league of amity and intercourse with christian prince and to have their ambassador Leigers in your court these man by their crafty practice will deprive you of and our ambassador be resident as pledge in your court what dare any of our nation do against your highness or any of your subject upon these and other such like speech of i the king turn to his noble and say that all that I say be reason and so they all answer after this I demand of the jesuite before the king in these twelve year space that you have serve the king how many ambassador and how many present have you procure to the benefit of his majesty with that the king elder son stand out and say unto they name they that it be most true that in a eleven or twelve year not one come either upon ambassage or upon any other profit unto his majesty hereupon the king be very merry and laugh at the jesuite not have one word to answer then I say if it please your majesty I will not only procure a ambassador but also a present at my safe return again into your country diverse other demand and question be at that time propound by the king and his noble unto i and I answer they all in such sort as the king call his viceroy which before be by the jesuite bribe make my great enemy and command he the great Mogor grant large privilege to master John mildenhall he depart from agra John mildenhall return home ward by Casbin the italian be our enemy for seek trade in those part that whatsoever privilege or commandment I will have he shall present write they seal they and give they i without any more delay or question and so within thirty day after I have they sign to my own contentment and as I hope to the profit of my nation afterward I go and present they unto the prince his elder son and demand of he the like commandment which he most willing grant and short after be deliver unto i and so depart from the court I bring they with i into Persia which be here in Casbin with myself ready to do you any service and I will have come myself when I write this letter save that there be two italian merchant in agra that know of all my proceed who I doubt as I have good cause lest they will do i some harm in Bagdet or some other place they always be enemy to our nation that they shall find any new trade this way as to you it be well know and within four month I mean to depart by the way of moscovia where arrive I will not fail but satisfy you at large of all matter your worship to command JOHN mildenhall @. 4 the voyage of captain JOHN Davis to the eastern India pilot in a dutch ship write by himself to the right honourable my exceed good lord and master robert earl of Essex etc. right honourable and my exceed good lord my duty must advise i to present this journal of my east indian voyage to your lordship most judicial view wherein I have use my best diligence to discharge my duty as near as my slender capacity can effect the same according to those direction which your lordship give i in charge at my departure when it please you to employ i in this voyage for the discover of these eastern part of the world to the service of her majesty and the good of our country what I have see I do signify in this journal to your lordship and that which I have learn by the report of other nation when it shall please God to make i happy by your lordship favourable presence I will make far know to your lordship aswell of the king of Portugal his place of trade and strength as of the interchangeable trade of those eastern nation among themselves beginning at Cefala which be his first foot beyond the cape of esperanza and so proceed to Mosambique Ormus Diu Goa onor mangalor Cocbin Columbo Negapatan Porto grande in Bengala and malacca as also to the city of Macao in the province of canton in the famous kingdom of China and to the land of the and Amboyno which place be all in the portugal possession serve for his security and refuge moreover he have trade in Monomotapa melinde Ad^n Arabia Cambaia on the coast of coromandel balaguate and Orixa of all which nation there be some dwell in Achen in the i will of sumatra trade in merchandise where I have meet with arabian and a nation call Rumos who have trade many hundred year to Achen these Rumos * * Constantinople be call new Rome and thence in the east the turk be call Rumos of that their chief city come from the red Sea there be in Achen many chinese that use trade of who I have be kind use and can well inform your lordship of that worthy kingdom of China the trade of Gusarate be very ample all which the portugal with the lock of discretion have provident long conceal which now through God favour be make know unto we I have here enclose send your lordship the alphabet of the achen language with some word of the same which they write after the manner of the hebrew I have also send by master Tomkins of their coin which be in usual payment that of gold be name a master and be nine penny half penny near those of lead be call Caxas whereof a thousand six hundred make one mas. good my lord remember the poor widow mite for sure if I can do more in this service or otherwise it shall not be omit from Middleborough this first of August 1600. your lordship most dutiful servant JOHN Davis a brief relation of master JOHN Davis chief pilot to the zelander in their East-India voyage depart from Middleborough the fifteen of march 1598. the fifteen hereof we depart from Flushing with two ship in consort the lion and lioness the lion be four hundred tun have in she a hundred three and twenty person the lioness two hundred and fifty tun have a hundred person mushroom clerk and monef of Middleborough owner and only adventurer thereof Cornelius Howteman chief commander of both ship have a commission from grave Maurice by the name general the two and twenty we anchor in Tor bay with bad wind the seven we set sail the twenty we have sight of Porto santo the three and twenty we fall with Palma the last hereof we come with the island of cape Verde April the first we anchor at saint Nicholas one of the say land in latitude sixteen degree sixteen minute here we water the seven we depart the nine may. we fall with saint jago the nine we fall with the coast of Brasill in seven degree of south latitude not be able to double cape saint Augustine for be about the line we have very unconstant weather june and bad wind Fernando Loronha be in this desperate case we shape our course for a small i will name Fernando Loronha in four degree of south latitude the fifteen we anchor upon the north-side thereof in eighteen fathom we find in this island twelve negro eight man four woman it be a very fruitful isle and have exceed good water it abound with goat it have also beef hog hen melon and guinea corn with plenty of fish and sea-bird these negro be place here by the portugal to manure the i will three year pass in which there have no ship be with they the six and twenty we depart from this i will the wind at east north-east the last hereof we double cape saint Augustine August the ten we pass the abrollos which be the great of our fear the shold lie from the coast of Brasill far off into the sea in one and twenty degree and be dangerous September abrollos whereupon our baase for so a dutch captain be call choose a master of misrule by the name Kesar now the authority of riot lie in this disorder officer who after dinner can neither salute his friend nor understand the law of reason and those that aught to have be most respective be both lawless and witless in this dissolute manner we waste three day which be end and have again recover our former discretion we shape our course for cape Bona esperanza sail towards the court of Bacchus unto who this idolatrous sacrifice be make as by the end appear November bay of Soldania the eleven we anchor in the bay of Saldania in thirty four degree of the south Pole ten league short of cape Bona esperanza where there be three fresh river the people come to we with ox and sheep in great plenty which they sell for piece of old iron and spike nail the best of that we buy cost not more than the value of one penny in old iron their cattle be large and under several mark have upon the back by the fore shoulder a great lump of flesh like a camel back their sheep have exceed great tail only of fat weigh twelve or fourteen pound they have no wool but a long shag hair the people be not circumcise their colour be olive black black than the brasilian their hair curl and black as the negro of angola their word be for the most part in-articulate and in speak they clock with the tongue like a brood hen which clock and the word be both pronounce together very strange they go all naked have only a short cloak of skin and sandal tie to their foot they paint their face with diverse colour they be a strong active people and run exceed and be subject to the king of Monomotapa who be report to be a mighty king their weapon be only hard dart the fleming offer they some rude wrong they absent themselves three day in which time they make great fire upon the mountain in the country the nineteen hereof there come great troop of they to we bring very much cattle with they and in the time of barter sudden take their advantage they set upon we and stew thirteen of our people with hand dart which at four pike length can not offend notwithstanding the fleming flee before they like mouse before cat throw away their weapon most base and our baase to save himself stay aboard and send we corslet two-hand-sword pike musket and target so we be arm and lade with weapon but there be neither courage nor discretion for we stay by our tent be belegr with cannibal and cow we be in muster giant with great arm body but in action babe with wren heart hereupon master Tomkins and myself undertake to order these fellow m. Tomkins Englishman from that excellent method which we have see in your lordship most honourable action some consent to we but the most part unwilling and diverse run to the pottage pot for they swear it be dinner time this night we go all aboard only leave our great mastiff dog behind we who by no mean will come to we for I think he be ashamed of our company this land be a good soil and a wholesome air full of good herb as mint Calamint Plantine Ribwort scabious and such like the seven and twenty we set sail the last hereof we double cape Bona esperanza December the six we double cape which be the most southerly promontory of Africa where the compass have no variation this cape lie in thirty five degree of the south Pole january 1599 1599 the six we fall with the i will Madagascar short of cape Romano we spend this month to double that cape Madagascar February bay of saint Augustine not be able we bear room with the bay saint Augustine which lie upon the south west part of Madagascar in three and twenty degree fifty minute the three we anchor in the same bay where we see many people upon the shore but when we land they flee from we for the other voyage our baase be in this bay where he great abuse the people and take one of they find he to a post and shoot he to death with other shameful disorder after seven day by much mean that we make some of they come to we and bring we milk and one cow which we buy and after will no more abide we they be a strong well-shaped people and coal black their language sweet and please their weapon halfepike head with iron as a harpon which they keep very bright they go whole naked the country seem to be very fruitful and have great store of Tamaryn tree we find beanes grow upon a high tree the cod be two foot long with answerable bigness and be very good meat here be many chameleon it be no small misery that we english endure especial in this Bay but God the everliving commander be our only succour the eight we come aboard dog hungry and meatlesse the fourteen we set sail from this place which we name hungry bay shape our course upon the north side of the i will the nine and twenty we come with the island Comoro March hungry Bay isle Comoro five lie between twelve and thirteen degree and be five land Mayotta saint Christopher Spirito Sancto the thirty we anchor at Mayotta close by a town where we find many people that seem to rejoice at our come they come aboard our ship with present of victual the king send to have our chief come ashore promise he kindness so our baase go the king meet he with many people have three drum beat before he he be rich apparel so be his follower with long silk garment embroider after the turkish manner the king have use we with such kindness as we require write a letter in our behalf to the queen of for there be no King the seventeen we depart the nineteen we anchor at April before a city name Demos which have be a strong place as by the ruin appear their house be build with free hew stone and lime the wall of the city be most ruinate that which remain be as big as P^immoth this queen use we exceed friendly but she will not be see in the^e island we have Rice ox goat orange lemon and citron the inhabitant be negro but smooth haired in religion mahometist their weapon be sword target bow and arrow these island be please in sight and fruitful in nature here we find merchant of Arabia and India but what commodity the island yield I can not learn they desire weapon and iron they great regard paper the eight and twenty we depart pass through the island Mascarenhas by the shold do Almirante the three and twenty we fall with the island of Maldivia may. Maldivia which be very low close by the water whole cover with tree so that we see the tree but not the shore here we anchor and refresh ourselves many of the country boats pass by we but none will come to we whereupon our baase send out the ship boat to take one of they the four and twenty they bring a boat aboard we cover with mat like a close barge in this boat be a gentleman and his wife he be apparel in very fine white linen after the turkish manner in his ring be rich stone his behaviour be so sweet and affable his countenance so modest and his speech so graceful as that it make apparent show he can not be less than a nobleman he be unwilling to have his wife see notwithstanding our baase go with he into his boat to see she he also open her casket wherein be some jewel and ambergreese he report that she sit with mournful modesty not uong one word what be take from they I know not but in depart this gentleman show a princely spirit his colour be black with smooth hair a man of middle stature in these island there be great trade by reason of the for they make rope cable sail wine oil and a kind of bread of that tree and his fruit they report that there be 11000. of these island the seven and twenty we set sail this morning there come a old man aboard we that speak a little Portugal he be our pilot through the channel for by chance we fall with the true passable channel name Maldivia in latitude four degree fifteen minute of the north-pole where the compass be vary seventeen degree westerly in miss this channel it be a dangerous place the trade of ship through this channel be very great of diverse nation from most place of India as I hope in your lordship presence at large to inform your honour the three we fall with the coast of India june in eight degree and forty minute of northerly latitude near about cochin and coast this shore we shape our course east for Camorin and from thence to the island sumatra the thirteen we see the coast of sumatra in five degree forty minute of northerly latitude the sixteen we speak with the people stay at a island by the shore to take in water the one and twentietth we anchor in the bay of Achin Achin in twelve fathom be here the king send his officer to measure the length and breadth of our ship to take the number of our man and ordnance which they do with those officer our baase send two of his people with present to the king a looking-glass a drinking-glasse and a bracelet of coral the one and twenty our man come aboard who the king have apparel after his country manner in white Calicut cloth they bring news of peace welcome and plenty of spicery we find four bark ride in the bay three of Arabia and one of Pegu that come to lade pepper here be also a Portugal name don Alfonso Vincent that come with four bark from malacca to prevent our trade as the sequel do show the three and twenty at midnight the king send for our baase and send a noble man for his hostage he go present on shore who the king use very kind promise he free trade he apparel he after the country manner and give he a cryse of honour this cryse be a kind of dagger who haft and handle for it have no cross nor hilt be make of a kind of mettle which the king esteem far beyond gold and be set with r^bies this mettle have a fine lustre it be death to wear this cryse but from the king gift and have it there be absolute freedom to take victual without money and to command the rest as slave the six and twenty our baase come aboard with a boat-load of pepper report word above credit how the king have use he of his mighty fortune and of the wonderful trade that he have procure with no small he further say that the king do often demand of he if he be not of England which he do strong deny use some unfit speech of * * Englishmen abuse by hollander our nation further say he be aboard I wish I have give a thousand pound that we have no english among we thus we poor soul be thrust into the corner the seven and twenty our merchant go on shore with their merchandise have a house by the king appointment the twenty our baase be with the king be exceed well entertain july the king very importunate to know if he be english tell i true say the king for I love soldier and I must further tell you Alfonso have be earnest with i to betray you but it shall not be for I be your friend and therewith give he a purse of Gold he give thanks answer that he be not of England but of Flanders and at the king service I have hear of * * England famous England say the king but not of Flanders what land be that he further inquire of their king state and government whereof our baase make large report refuse the authority of a king relate the government of aristocraty he further make suit to the king to give commandment that his subject shall not call he english for it be a bitterness unto he which the king grant again he require to know if there be no englishman in the ship he answer there be some english * * diverse englishman in this voyage in the ship but they have be breed up in Flanders I understand say the king that there be some that differ both in apparel language and fashion what be those he answer English of which my chief pilot be one well say the king I must see those man as touch your merchandise it shall be thus I have war with the king of jor this kingdom of jor be the south-point of malacca you shall serve i against he with your ship your recompense shall be your lade of pepper this be agree the twenty eight our baase come aboard accompany with one of the sabandar the secretary merchant of Mecka turk arabian and don Alfonso with some portugal all which depart pass drink the king begin to show a alter countenance the twenty hereof say to our baase wherefore do not that english pilot come to i August for he will not suffer i nor m. Tomkins to go on shore I think when you have your pepper you will run away without do i service as you have promise whereupon I be present send for the one and twenty I come on shore the two and twenty I go to the king early in the morning who do use i very friendly I stay with he four hour or better banquet and drink after a hour he cause the sabandar to stand up * * davis his entertainment with the king of Achin and bid i likewise stand up the sabandar take off my hat and put a roll of white linen about my head then he put about my middle a white linen cloth that come twice about i hang down half my leg embroider with gold then again he take the roll from my head lay it before the king and put on a white garment upon i and upon that again one of red then put on the roll upon my head I sit down in the king presence who drink to i in aquavitae and make i eat of many strange meat all his service be in gold and some in fine porcelain he eat upon the ground without table napkin and other linen he inquire much of England of the queen of her bassa and how she can hold war with so great a king as the Spaniard for he think that Europe be all spanish in these his demand he be full satisfy as it seem to his great good like the three and twenty the prince send for i I rid to his court upon a elephant he use i exceed well excessive eat and drink be our entertainment during the small time of my be on shore I meet with a very sensible merchant of China that speak spanish of who I learn some thing which I hope will give your lordship good contentment here be many of China that use trade and have their particular town so have the portugal the gusarate the arabian and those of Bengala and Pegu. our baase dislike that I so much frequent the chinaes company command i aboard the next day have some sour look of the king he come aboard with a dull spirit September the first hereof the king make show that we shall receive in ordnance for the battery of jor and take in soldier to depart for that service there be many galley man and bring out of the river ride half a mile from our ship the sea full of prawe and boat all man there come aboard we the secretary name Corcoun and the chief sabandar name Abdala with many soldier weapon with courtelass hand-dart Cryses and target they bring with they many kind of meat and a great jar of aquavitae herewith they make show of friendship with banquet we mistrust some treachery fill our top with stone make fast our grate and prepare our weapon whereat our baase be exceed angry command all to be dissolve but we will not there be in this country a kind of seed whereof a little be eat a strange se^d and strange treachery make a man to turn fool all thing seem to he to be metamorphose but above a certain rate it be deadly poison with this all the meat and drink which they bring be infect in banquet the sabandar and secretary send for i m. Tomkins keep i company and use some word to one of his company but what I know not in short time we be foole-frolicke gape one upon a other like antic our baase be prisoner and know it not sudden when a token be give from the other ship for there the like treachery be use by the secretary who go from our ship thither to act the same they set upon we murder our baase and slay diverse other m. Tomkins myself and a Frenchman defend the poop which if they have recover our ship have be lose for they have the cabin and some be below among the ordnance by creep in at the port the master of our ship which they call captain leap into the sea so do diverse other but recover the ship again and come aboard when all be do in the end we put they to flight for our top plague they sore which when I see I leap from the poop to pursue they m. Tomkins leap after i there come a Turk out of the cabin and wound he grievous they lay together tumble each for his life which see I run the Turk in with my rapier and our shipper present with a half pike thrust he down the throat into the body in the other ship all the chief be murder and the ship take we cut our cable and drive to she and with our shot make the indian fly so we recover the ship the galley dare not come near we in this great misery it be some pleasure to see how the base indian do fly how they be kill and how well they be drown the sea be cover with indian head for they swim away by hundred the sabandare Abdala and one of the king near kinsman be slay with many other and the secretary hurt the king be by the seaside with many people when the news come of the sabandar death and their great overthrow the furious infidel murder all our man a shore only eight except who the king fetter for slave we lose in this misfortune threescore and eight person of which we be not certain how many be captive only of eight we have knowledge we lose two fine Pinnasses of twenty ton a piece and our ship boate. this day we depart and anchor before the city pider where we have send a pinnace for rice hope to have news of she but have not the second there come eleven galley with portugal as we think to take our ship we sink one and beat the rest so they flee this afternoon come aboard we the son of lafort a french merchant dwell in seething-lane who be one of the eight prisoner with this message from the King shame you not to be such drunken beast as in drunkenness to murder my people who I send to you in kindness therefore he require our best ship for satisfaction and for the relief of our man Doe'this say he to lafort and I will make you a great nobleman but we will not and be distress of water depart to the island pulo Botum upon the coast of Quedia in six degree fifty minute where we refresh and water during the time of our abode in Achien we receive into both our ship a hundred and forty tun of pepper what stone or other merchandise I know not but at the day of treason our merchant lose all the money and merchandise ashore which they report to be of great value and many young adventurer be utter ruinate among which I do most grieve at the loss of poor John davis who do not only lose my friendly factor but also all my Europe commodity with those thing which I have provide to show my duty and love to my best friend so I may conclude that although India do not receive i very rich yet she have send i away reasonable poor the isle sumatra be a please and fertile soil abound with many rare and excellent fruit of grain they have only rice which be their Bread they plow the ground with buffs of which there be great plenty but with small skill and less diligence Rice the rice grow in all respect as our barley of pepper they have exceed plenty garden of a mile square pepper it grow like hop from a plant root and wind above a stake set by it until it grow to a great bushy tree the pepper hang in small cluster three inch long and a inch about each cluster have forty pepper corn it yield increase equal with mustard seed they be able to lade twenty ship yearly and more might if the people be industrious and laboursome the whole country seem to be a garden of pleasure the air be temperate and wholesome have every morning a fruitful dew or small rain the haven that go to the city of Achien be small have but six foot at the bar and there stand a fort make of stone round without cover battlement or flanker low wall like a pound a worse can be conceive before this fort be a very pleasant road for ship the wind still come from the shore a ship may ride a mile off in eighteen fathom close by in four and six fathom of beast here be elephant horse buff ox and goat with many wild hog the land have plenty of gold and copper mine diverse kind of gum balm mine of gold and other commodity and many kind of drug and much indigo of stone there be ruby saphire and garnets but I know not that they grow there they have pass good timber for ship the city of Achien if it may be so call be very spacious build in a wood city so that we can not see a house till we be upon it neither can we go into any place but we find house and great concourse of people so that I think the town spread over the whole land their house be build eight foot or better from the ground upon post of wood with free passage under the wall and cover of mat the poor and weak thing in the World I see three great market place which be every day frequent as fair with all kind of merchandise to sell. the king be call sultan Aladin and be a hundred year old as they say sultan Aladin yet he be a lusty man but exceed gross and fat in the begin of his life he be a fisherman of which this place have very many for they live most upon fish and go to the war with the former king show himself so valiant and discreet in order the king galley that gain the king favour he be make admiral of his sea-force and by his valour and discretion the king so embrace he that he give he to wife one of his near kinswoman the king have one only daughter marry she to the king of jor by who she have a son this child be send to Achien to be nourish under his grandfather be heir to the kingdom the king that now be be now chief commander both by land and Sea the old king sudden die this king take the protection of the child against which the nobility resist but he have the king force and take opportunity end the life of more than a thousand nobleman and gentleman and of the rascal people make new lord and new law in fine the child be murder and then he proclaim himself king by the right of his wife hereupon arise great war between he and the king of jor which continue to this day these twenty year he have by force hold the kingdom and now seem to be secure in the same his court be from the city half a mile upon the river have three guard before any can come to he and a great Greene between each guard his house be build as the rest be but much high he sit where he can see all that come to any of his guard but none can see he the wall and cover of his house be mat which sometime be hang with cloth of gold sometime with velvet and sometime with damask he sit upon the ground crosslegged like a tailor and so must all those do that be in his presence he always wear four Cresis two before and two behind exceed rich with diamond and ruby and have a sword lie upon his lap he have attend upon he forty woman at the least some with fan to cool he some with clothes to dry his sweat some give he other water the rest sing pleasant song he do nothing all the day but eat and drink from morning to night there be no end of banquet and when his belly be ready to break than he eat Arecca Betula which be a fruit like a nutmeg wrap in a kind of leaf like tobacco with sharp chalk make of pearl oyster-shel chaw this it make the spittle very red draw the rheum exceed and procure a mighty stomach this make the tooth very black and they be the brave that have the black tooth by this mean get again his stomach he go with a fresh courage to eat and for a change with a crack gorge he go into the river where he have a place make of purpose there get a stomach by be in the water he his great man and woman do nothing but eat drink and talk of venery if the poet fable have any show of truth then undoubted this king be the great Bacchus for he hold all the ceremony of gluttony as in all place of Europe the custom be by uncover the head to show reverence in this place it be whole contrary for before any man can come to the king presence he must put of his hose and shoe and come before he barelegged and barefooted hold the palm of the hand together and heave they up above his head bow with the body must say which do duty be discharge and so he sit down crosslegged in the king presence he do only spend the time in eat with woman and cockfighting and such as be the king such be his subject for the whole land be give to no other contentment his state be govern by five principal man with their inferior officer his secretary and four call sabandar with these rest all authoritie^ the king will be their Law for it seem there be no freeman in the land for the life and good of all be at the king pleasure he will make no offender happy by death but cut off their hand and foot and banish they to a i will name polo-wey if he put any to death the elephant tear he to piece or they drive a stake into his fundament and so he die there be jail and many fetter prisoner that go about the town his woman be his chief counsellor he have three wife and very many concubine which be very close keep he have very many galley I think a hundred some that will carry four hundred man make like a wherrie very long and open without deck forecastle chase or any upper building their oar be like shovel of four foot long which they use only with the hand not rest they upon the galley they bear no ordnance with these he keep his neighbour in obedience a woman be his admiral for he will trust no man their weapon be bow arrow javelin sword target they have no defensive arm but fight naked he have great store of brass ordnance which they use without carriage shoot they as they lie upon the ground they be the great that I have ever see and the mettle be report to be rich of Gold the trust of his land force stand upon his elephant these people boast themselves to come of Ishmael and Hagar and can reckon the genealogy of the bible perfect in religion they be mahometist and pray with bead as the papist do they bring up their child in learning and have many school they have a archbishop and spiritual dignity here be a prophet in Achien who they great honour they say that he have the spirit of prophecy as the ancient have have he be disguise from the rest in his apparel and great embrace of the King the people be general very cunning merchant and whole dedicate thereunto of mechanical artesman they have goldsmith gun-founder shipwrights tailor wever hatter pot-maker and aquavitae stiller which be make of Rice for they must drink no wine cutler and smith as touch their burial every generation or kindred have their particular place to bury their dead which be in the field they lay the corpse with the head towards Mecha have a free stone at the head and another at the foot curious wrought thereby signify the worthiness of the person but in the place of the king burial every grave have a piece of gold at the head and another at the foot weigh at the least five hundred poun^ weight cunning emboss and wrought this king have two such piece in make and almost finish which we see that be a thousand pound weight a piece and shall be rich set with stone I do great desire to see the king burial because of the great wealth therein but can not I do almost believe it to be true because this king have make two such costly monument the people that trade in this place be of China Bengala Pegu java coromandel Gusarate the turk be call Rumos in the indies the reason of that name be their metropolitan and imepriall city Constantinople call new Rome of which Rome they call they Rumos their tradition of Ophir be rather to be mark then this etymology and conceit of Rumos in the red Sea Arabia and Rumos Rumos be in the red sea and be the place from whence Solomon send his ship to Ophir for gold which be now call Achien as by tradition they do affirm and the Rumos people from salomons time to this day have follow the same trade they have diverse term of payment as cash mas Cowpan Pardaw Tayell I only see two piece of coin the one of gold the other of lead that gold be of the bigness of a penny it be as common as penny in England and be name master the other be like a little leaden token such as the vintner of London use call Caxas a thousand six hundred cash make one mas. four hundred cash make a cowpan four cowpan be one mas. five mass make four shilling sterling four mass make a perdaw four perdawe make a Tayel so a master be nine penny @ of a penny they sell their pepper by the Bhar which be three hundred and threescore of our pound for three pound four shilling their pound they call a cat which be one and twenty of our ounce their ounce be big than we by so much as sixteen be big than ten the weight by which they sell precious stone be call mass 10. @ whereof make a ounce once every year they have a custom that the king with all his nobleman and whole pomp of his land must go to the church to look if the Messiah be come which happen at our be here there be many elephant I think forty very rich cover with silk velvet and cloth of gold diverse nobleman ride upon each elephant but one elephant above the rest be exceed rich cover have a golden little castle upon his back this be lead spare for the * * the promise return of Mahomet expect Messiah to ride in the king ride alone likewise in a little castle so they proceed with a very solemn procession some have target of pure massy gold other great half moon of gold with streamer banner ensign drum and trumpet with other music very please to see come to the church with great solemnity they at length look in and not find the Messiah use some ceremony then the king come from his own elephant ride home upon the elephant prepare for the Messiah where they end the day with feast and all please sport the i will be divide into four kingdom pider Manancabo and aru. Achien be the chief the rest be tributary to he Arundell hold with the king of jor and refuse subjection I have only hard of five principal city to be in this i will pider Daia Manancabo return to our proceed after the slaughter of Achien seek relief September the ten hereof we anchor at the land pulo lotum in six degree fifty minute by the kingdom of Queda where we water and refresh there be in our ship three letter close seal superscribe a. b. c. which upon the death of our baase be to be open by a. one Thomas Qu^mans be appoint our chief who be slay at Achien then B. be open whereby Guyan lofort who escape captivity by be the king messenger be appoint our chief who we so receive the letter c. be not open the last hereof we set sail our course again for Achien with hope by some mean to recover our man the six we come in sight of Achien the twelve we come into the bay October where we find ten galley set out against we we come up with one of they and give her diverse shot but in a calm under the land she escape the rest dare not come near we for they be very coward proud and base the eighteen hereof we shape our course for the city Tanassarin for it be a place of great trade the five and twenty we anchor among the land in the bay in eleven degree twenty minute of the pole Arctic be here we be very much cross with bad wind so that we can not recover the city for it stand twenty league within the bay be in very great distress of victual we depart hence shape our course for the island Nicobar hope there to find relief the twelve we anchor at the island Nicobar in eight degree of north latitude where the people bring we great store of hen orange lemon and other fruit November Nicoba^ and some ambergris which we buy for piece of linen-cloth and table napkin these isle be pleasant and fruitful low land and have good road for ship the people be most base only live upon fruit and fish not manure the ground and therefore have no rice the sixteenth we depart shape our course for the i will Zeilon for we be in great distress especial of Rice December the six by God great goodness we take a ship of Negapatan which be a city in the coast of Coromandell she be lade with rise find to Achien there be in she threescore person of Achien of java of Zeilon of pegu Narsinga and coromandel by these people we learn that in Zeilan there be a city name * * Matecalon in Zeilan a city of great trade Matecalon a place of great trade and that there we may load our ship with cinnamon pepper and clove they also say that in Zeilon be great store of precious stone and pearl that the country do abound with all kind of victual and that the king be a exceed enemy to the portugal they also tell we of a city name trinquanamale where be the like trade so they promise to lade our ship and royal to victual we for little money hereupon we labour by all possible mean to recover the say place but can not for the wind be exceed contrary then these indian tell we that if we will stay until january we shall have more than a hundred ship come close by that shore lade with spicery linnen-cloth and China commodity beside stone and other wealth to stay there as a man of war our governor will not agree but to stay and in take any thing to pay for the same he be content for so be his commission to this the company will not agree whereupon the eight and twenty hereof we shape our course homeward prise discharge have beat sixteen day upon this coast to recover Matecalon we discharge our prize the eighteen hereof have take the best part of her rice for which our chief pay they to their content but the company take away the money and merchandise from the indian with much disorder we take with we twelve of the indian of several place who after we can a little understand they tell we that the merchant have great store of precious stone in the ship which they have hide under the Timbers of what truth that report be I know not they will not suffer master Tomkins nor i to go aboard the prize for what reason I know not 1600. the five hereof our meat be poison but God preserve we for one taste the same by chance or greediness for it be fresh fish be present infect March 1600. before the meat come to we it be strong poison for our surgeon take almost a spoonful of poison out of one fish but this be not the first time if the grieve will complain the ten we fall with cape Bona Esperaza where we have a great storm the six and twenty we double the same the thirteen we anchor at the i will saint * * s. Helena Helena which be rocky and mountainous lie in sixteen degree of south latitude April here we find good water fig and fish in plenty there be goat but hard to get the fifteen at sunset there come a caravell into the road who anchor a large musket-shot to windward of we she be utter unprovided not have one piece mount we fight with she all this night and give she as I think better than two hundred shot in eight hour she never make shot nor show of regard by midnight she have place six piece which she use very well shoot we often through and slay two of our man so the sixteenth in the morning we depart have many sick man shape our course for the i will * * il. Ascention Ascention where we hope to have relief this three and twenty we have sight of ascension in eight degree of south latitude this i will have neither wood water nor any green thing upon it but be a fruitless green rock of five league broad the four and twenty at midnight we agree to go for the i will Fernando Loronio where we be acquaint and know that there be relief sufficient for at this i will we stay ten week outward find when we can not double cape saint Augustine the six we arrive at the i will Fernando Loronio where we stay six day to water and refresh ourselves may. the thir^eenth we depart shape our course for England july the nine and twenty of july we arrive at Middleborough @. v. WILLIAM Adams his voyage by the Magellan straits to * * this voyage though not by the cape of good hope yet because it be to japon I here deliver see before pag. 78. japon write in two letter by himself as follow have so good occasion by hear that certain english merchant lie in the island of java although by name unknown I presume to write these few life desire the worshipful company be unknown to i to pardon my boldness the reason that I write be first for that conscience bind i to love my country and my countryman your worship therefore shall understand to who these present shall come that I be a kentish-man bear in a town call Gillingam two english mile from Rochester one mile from Chattam where the king ship lie and that from the age of twelve year I be bring up in limehouse near London be prentice twelve year to one master Nicholas Diggines and have serve in the place of master and pilot in her majesty ship and about eleven or twelve year serve the worshipful company of the Barbary merchant until the indian traffic from Holland begin in which indian traffic I be desirous to make a little experience of the small knowledge which God have give i so in the year of our lord God 1598. I be hire for chief pilot of a fleet of five sail which be make ready by the chief of the indian company Peter Vanderhag and Hance Vanderuek^ the general of this fleet be a marchatt call jaques Mayhay in which ship be admiral I be Pilot. so it be the three and twenty or four and twenty of june before we set sail * * Adam chief pilot of a fleet of five sail it be somewhat too late ere we come to the line to pass it without contrary wind for it be about the midst of September at which time we find much southerly wind and many of our man be sick so that we be force to go to the coast of gynny to cape Lopo Gonsalues cape Lopo Gonsalues where we set our sick man a land whereof many die and of the sickness few better have little or no refresh and the place be unhealthy therefore to fulfil our voyage we set our course for the coast of Brasill determine to pass the straits of Magellan and by the way come to a island call Nobon at which island we land and take the town which contain about eighty house in which island we refresh ourselves have ox orange the isle of Nobon take and diverse other fruit but the unwholsomenesse of the air be such that as one better another fell sick we spend upon the coast of the cape Gonsalues and of Annobon about two month time till the twelve or thirteen of November at which time we set sail from Annobon find the wind still at the south by east and south southeast till we get four degree by south the line at which time the wind favour we come to the southeast and east southeast and east so that we be up between the island of Annobon and the straits of Magellan about five month one of our five sail spend her main mast by which we be much hinder for with much travel we set a new mast in the Sea then the nine and twenty of march we see the land in the latitude of fifty degree have the wind two or three day contrary so in the end have the wind good we come into the straits of Magellan the six of April 1599 at which time the winter come so that there be much snow April 6. 1599 and our man through cold on the one side and hunger on the other grow weak we have the wind at north-east some five or six day in which time we may have pass through the straits but for refresh of our man we wait water and take in of wood and set up of a pinnace of fifteen or sixteen ton in bigness at length we will have pass through but can not by reason of the southerly wind with wet and also very cold with abundance of snow and ice wherefore we be force to winter and stay in the straits from the six of April until the four and twenty of September they winter in the s^aights of Magellan in which time the most part of our provision be spend in so much that for lack of victual many of our man die through hunger now have pass through the straits and come into the south sea we find many hard stream be drive to the southward in fifty four degree be then very cold at length we find reasonable wind and weather with which we follow our pretend voyage towards the coast of Peru but in long travel we lose our whole fleet be separate the one from the other yet before the disperse of our fleet we have appoint if we lose one another with storm and foul weather that in chili in the latitude of forty six degree many of their man die for want of food they stay in forty six degree and refresh themselves the mouth of Baldivia the isle of Mocha we shall stay one for another the space of thirty day in which height according to agreement I go in six and forty degree and stay eight and twenty day where we refresh ourselves find the people of the country good of nature but by reason of the spaniard they will not have deal with we at the first they bring we sheep and potato for which we give they bell and knife whereof they be very glad but in the end the people go up from their house into the country and come no more unto we we stay there eight and twenty day and set up a pinnace which we have in our ship in four part and in the end depart and come to the mouth of Baldivia yet by reason it blow much wind we enter not but direct our course out of the bay for the island of Mocha unto the which we come the next day find none of our Fleet. so not find they we direct our course for the island of Maria and the next day we come by the cape which be a league and a half from the island and see many people toss about the cape and find good ground anchor in fifteen fathom in a fair sandy Bay a fair sandy Bay we go with our boat hard by the water side to parley with the people of the land but they will not suffer we to come a land shoot great store of arrow at our man nevertheless have no victual in our ship and hope to find refresh we forcible land some seven and twenty or thirty of our man and drive the wild people from the water side have most of our man hurt with their arrow they be on land we make sign of friendship and in the end come to parley with sign and token of friendship which the people understand so we make sign that our desire be to have victual for iron silver and cloth which we show they wherefore they give our folk wine with to eat and other fruit and bid our man by sign and token to go aboard and the next day to come again and then they will bring we victual so be late our man come aboard the most part of they be hurt more or less and yet we be very glad that we have come to a parley with they hope that we shall get refresh the nine of November 1599 the next day be the nine of November 1599 our captain with all our officer prepare to go a land have take counsel to go to the water side but not to land more than two or three man for there be people in abundance and be also unknown our man therefore be w^lled not to trust they this counsel be conclude the captain himself go in one of our boat with all the force that we have and be by the shore side the people of the country make sign that they shall come a land but that do not like our captain well in the end the people come not near unto our boat our captain with the rest resolve to land against that which be conclude in our ship before the go on land at length three and twenty man land with musket and march up towards four or five house and when they be about a musket-shot from the boat more than a thousand indian who lay entrench immediate fall upon our man with such weapon as they have and kill they all to our knowledge so our boat wait long to see if any of they will come again twenty three man slay but see no hope to recover they our boat return with this sorrowful news that all our man that land be slay which be a lamentable thing to hear for we have scarce so many man leave as can wind up our anchor the isle of maria. the next day we wait and go over to the island Maria where we find our admiral who have arrive there four day before we and depart to the isle from Mucha the day before we come from thence have the general master and all his officer wound on land and God have so plague we that all our officer be slay so that the one of we bemoan the other nevertheless be glad that we be come together my good friend Timothy shotten be pilot in that Ship be at the island of Maria Timothy shotten of London pilot of the admiral cloth good merchandise in japan one of their fleet yield to the Spaniard at saint jago in thirty three degree see before in the voyage of o^^uer nooked they take their course from japan from the road of the isle o^ Maria November 27. the north part of japan lie in 35. degree 1 they be four month and twenty two day between the isle of Maria and japan Bungo which lie in the latitude of thirty seven degree twelve minute by south the line on the coast of chili we take counsel to take all thing out of one ship and to burn the other but the new captain can not agree which of the ship they shall burn and so can not conclude it have much cloth in our ship it be agree that we shall leave the coast of Peru and direct our course for japan understand that cloth be good merchandise there and also upon that coast of Peru the king ship have knowledge of our be there seek for we understand that we be weak by reason of the loss of our man which be all too true for one of our fleet as we understand afterward be force to yield themselves into the enemy hand in saint jago for which reason have refresh ourselves in the island Maria more by policy then by force we depart the twenty seven of November from the road or island of Maria with our two ship and for the rest of our fleet we hear no news of they so we take our course direct for japan and pass the line equinoctial together until we come in twenty eight degree to the northward of the line in which latitude the twenty second and twenty three of February 1600. we have a wonderful storm of wind as ever I be in with much rain in which storm we lose sight of our great ship whereof we be very sorry be leave alone yet we hope in japan to find one another then according to wind and weather we follow our former intention for japan and in the height of thirty degree seek the north cape of the forename island but find it not by reason that it lie false in all chartes and globe and map for the cape lie in thirty five degree @ which be a great difference in the end we come in thirty two degree 1/^ and then have sight of the land be the nineteen of April so that between the cape of Maria and japan we be four month and twenty two day at which time there be no more than six beside myself that can stand upon their foot now be in safety we let our anchor fall about a league from a place call Bungo at which time many boat come unto we and we let they come aboard be not able to resist they yet the people do we no harm we not understand each other but by sign and token after two or three da^es space a jesuite come unto we from a place call langasacke to which place the carake of Macao be yearly wont to come which with other japoner that be christian be our interpreter which be ill for we they be our mortal enemy nevertheless the king of Bungo the place where we arrive do we great friendship for he give we a house on shore for our sick man have all refresh that be needful we have when we come to anchor in Bungo four and twenty man sick and whole of which number the next day three die the rest for the most part recover save three which lie long time sick and in the end also die six of their man die the emperor hear of we send present five galley or frigate unto we to bring i to the court where his majesty be which be distant from Bungo about eighty english league now this be at the city of Os^ca which be eighty league from Bungo when I come before he he demand of i of what country we be so I answer he in all point for there be nothing that he demand not both concern war and peace between country and country the particular whereof be too long to write after this conference I be command to prison be well use with one of our mariner that come with i to serve i some two day after the emperor call i again he be call the second time demand the reason of our come so far I answer we be a people that seek all friendship with all nation and to have trade of merchandise in all country bring such merchandize as our country have and buy such merchandize in strange country as our country desire through which our country on both side be enrich he ask much concern the war between the spaniard and portugal and we and the reason the particular of all which I give he to understand who seem to be very glad to hear it after this I be command to prison again but my lodging be better in a other place so I continue nine and thirty day in prison hear no more news neither of our ship nor captain whether he be recover of his sickness thus far go his first letter to his wife crucify the usual punishment of malefactor in japan the je^uites and portugal accusation nor of the rest of the company in which time I look every day to be cross as the custom of justice be in japan as hang be in our land now in this long time of imprisonment the jesuite and the portugal give many evidence to the emperor against we allege that we be thief and robber of all nation and if we be suffer to live it shall be against the profit of his majesty and the land for than no nation can come there without rob but if justice be execute on we it will terrify the rest of our nation from come there any more and to this intent they sue to his majesty daily to cut we off make all the friend they can to this purpose but God be merciful unto we and will not suffer they to have their will of we at length the emperor give they this answer that as yet we have do no hurt or damage to he nor to any of his land the emperor answer and therefore that it be against reason and justice to put we to death and if our country and they have war one with the other that be no cause that he shall put we to death the emperor answer they in this manner they be quite out of heart that their cruel pretence fail for the which God be praise for ever and ever now in this time that I be in prison the ship be command to be bring so near to the city where the emperor be as she may the which be do so the one and forty day of my imprisonment the emperor call i before he again he be call the three time before the emperor demand of i many question more which be too long to write in conclusion he ask i whether I be desirous to go to the ship to see my countryman I answer that I will very glad do it so he bid i go then I depart and be free from imprisonment and this be the first news that I have that the ship and company be come to the city wherefore with a rejoice heart I take a boat and go to our ship where I find the captain and the rest the ship be bring to he city of sacay recover of their sickness but at our meeting aboard we salute one another with mourn and shead of tear for they be inform that I be execute and long since dead thus God be praise all we that be leave alive come together again all thing be take out of the ship together with all my instrument etc. and I have nothing leave i but my clothes on my back likewise whatsoever the rest of the company have be also take away unknown to the emperor which when he understand he give order that they shall be restore to we again but be so disperse abroad they can not be have yet fifty thousand rial in ready money be command to be give we fifty thousand rial in ready money be give unto they the city Sakay the emperor himself see the delivery thereof to the hand of one that be make our governor who keep they in his hand to distribute they unto we as we have need for the buy of victual for our man with other particular charge etc. so in the end of thirty day our ship lie before the city call Sakay three league or two league 1/^ from Ozaca where the emperor at that time lie commandment come from the emperor that our ship shall be carry to the easter part of the land call whither according to his commandment we be carry the distance be about a hundred and twenty league our passage thither be long by reason of contrary wind so that the emperor be there long before we come to the land of and near to the city Eddo where the emperor be about 120. league^ from Sacai be arrive we seek all mean by supplication to get our ship clear and to seek our best profit to come where the hollander have their trade in which suit we spend much of the money give we also in this time three or four of our man rebel against the captain and i and make a mutiny with the rest of our man so that we have much trouble with they for they will not abide i any long in the ship but every one will be a commander and they will every one have their part of the money that be give by the emperor it will be too tedious to write the particular of all that pass herein therefore for quietness sake we divide the money to every one as his place be and this be after we have be two year in japan after which time when we have receive a denial that we shall not have our ship but must abide in japan our company have their part of the money disperse themselves every one where he think best in the end the emperor give every man to live upon two pound rice a day and yearly so much as be worth eleven or twelve ducat a year myself the captain and mariner all alike so in process of four or five year the emperor call i and as he have do diverse time before so one time he will have i to make he a small ship I answer that I be no carpenter and have no knowledge thereof well do it so well as you can he build a ship of 80. tun for the emperor say he if it be not good it be no matter wherefore at his command I build he a ship of the burden of eighty ton or there abouts which ship be make in all proportion as our manner be he come aboard to see it like it very well by which mean I come in more favour which he so that I come often in his presence who from time to time give i present and at length a yearly revenue to live upon the emperor bestow a yearly revenue on he of 70. ducat and two pound of Rice a day much about seventy ducat by the year with two pound of Rice a day also now be in such grace and favour by reason I learn he some point of geometry and the mathematics with other thing I please he so that what I say can not be contradict at which my former enemy jesuite and portugal do great wonder and entreat i to be friend they to the emperor in their business and so by my mean both spaniard and portugal have receive friendship from the emperor I recompense their evil unto i with good so to pass my time to get my live it have cost i great labour and travel at the first but God have bless my labour in the end of five year I make supplication to the king to go out of this land desire to see my poor wife and child according to conscience and nature with the which request the emperor be not well please and will not let i go any more for my country but that I must continue in his land etc. yet in process of time be in great favour with the emperor I make supplication again by reason we have news that the hollander be in Ache^ and Patania which rejoice we much with hope that God shall bring we to our country again by one mean or other then I make supplication again and bold speak myself with he at which he give i no answer I tell he if he will permit i to depart I will be a mean that both the english and hollander shall come and traffic there in his land he answer that he be desirous of both those nation company for traffic but will not part with i by any mean but bid i write to that purpose see therefore I can not prevail for myself he obtain liberty for the captain I sue that my captain may depart which suit he present grant i so have get his liberty he embark in a japan junck and sail to Patane but he tarry there a year space wait for Holland ship and see none come he go from Patane to jor where he find a fleet of nine sail of which fleet matleef be general and in this fleet he be make master again which fleet sail to malacca and fight with a armado of portugal in which battle he be shoot and present die so that as yet I think no certain news be know the captain slay at malacca whether I be live or dead therefore my desire be that my wife and two child may hear that I be here in japan so that my wife be in a manner a widow and my child fatherless which thing only be my great grief of heart and conscience etc. I be a man not unknown in Ratcliff and limehouse to my good master m. Nicholas Diggines and m. Thomas best and m. Nicholas Isaac and William Isaac brother with many other also to m William jones and m. Becket therefore may this letter come to any of their hand or the copy of this letter I know that company mercy be such that my friend and kindred shall have news that I do as yet live in this vale of my sin^^^ pilgrimage the which thing again and again I do desire for jesus sake you shall understand that the first ship that I do make make a voyage or two and then the king command i to make a other he build a other ship for the king of 120. ton 1609. the which I do be of the burden of a hundred and twenty ton in this ship I have make a voyage from Meaco to Eddo be about the length as from London to the lizard or land end of England in the year of our lord 1609. the king lend this ship to the governor of to go with eighty of his man to sail to acapulco in the year of our lord 1609. a great ship call the s. Francisco be about a thousand ton the s. Francisco a spanish ship of 1000 ton cast away on the coast of japan in 35. degree 50. min. be cast away upon the coast of japan in the latitude of thirty five degree and fifty minute by distress of weather she cut overboard her main mast and bear up for japan and in the night befote they be aware they run the ship upon the shore which be cast away in the which one hundred thirty and six man be drown and three hundred forty or three hundred fifty save in which ship the governor of as a passenger be to return to Spania but this governor be send in the big ship of my building in ann. 1610. to acapulco and in ann. 1611. this governor return another ship in her room with a great present and with a ambassador to the emperor give he thanks for his great friendship and also send the price of the emperor ship in good and money which ship the spaniard have now in the a new and great pension give unto he now for my service which I have do and daily do be employ in the emperor service he haeh give i a live like unto a lordship in England with eighty or ninety husbandman who be as my servant and slave the like precedent be never do to any stranger before thus God have provide for i after my great misery his name have and have the praise for ever amen now whether I shall come out of this land I know not until this present there have be no mean but now through the trade of the hollander there be mean in the year of our lord 1609. two holland ship come to japan their intention be to take the carrack two ship of Holland come to japan in the year 1609. that yearly come from Macao and be some five or six day too late nevertheless they come to Firando and come to the court to the emperor where they be in great friendship receive condition with the emperor yearly to send a ship or two and so they depart with the emperor pass now this year 1611. there be a small ship arrive with cloth another small ship of Holland arrive there 1611. lead elephant tooth damask and black tafficies raw silk pepper and other commodity and they have show cause why they miss the former year 1610. according to promise yearly to come this ship be well receive and with great kindness entertain you shall understand that the hollander have here a indies of money for they need not to bring silver out of Holland in to the east indies for in japan there be much silver and gold in japan commodity vendible for ready money there be much silver and gold to serve their turn in other place where need require in the east indies but the merchandise which be here vendible for ready money be raw silk damask black taffity black and red cloth of the best lead and such like good so now understand by this Holland ship late arrive here that there be a settle trade drive by my countryman in the east indies I presume that among they some either merchant master or mariner must needs know i therefore I have embolden myself to write these few line in short be desirous not to be over-tedious to the reader this island of japan be a great land the length and breadth of japan and lie to the northwards in the latitude of eight and forty degree and the souther-most part of it in five and thirty degree and the length of it east by north and west and by south for so it lie be two hundred and twenty english league the breadth south and north of it thirteen degree twenty league to the degree be two hundred sixty league and be almost square the disposition of people the people of this island of japan be good of nature courteous above measure and valiant in war their justice be severe execute without any partiality upon transgressor of the Law they be govern in great civility I think no land better govern in the world by civil policy the people be very superstitious in their religion and be of diverse opinion many jesuite and franciscan friar in japan there be many jesuite and franciscan friar in this land and they have convert many to be christian and have many church in the island thus in short I be constrain to write hope that by one mean or other in process of time I shall hear of my wife and child and so with patience I wait the good will and pleasure of God almighty desire all those to who this my letter shall come to use the mean to acquaint my good friend with it that so my wife and child may hear of i by which mean there may be hope that I may hear of my wife and child before my death the which the lord grant to his glory and my comfort amen date in japan the two and twenty of October 1611. by your unworthy friend and servant to command in what I can william Adams endorse to my unknown friend and countryman desire this letter by your good mean or the news or copy of this letter may come to the hand of one or many of my acquaintance in limehouse or elsewhere or in Kent in Gillingham by Rochester a letter of WILLIAM Adams to his wife from japan love wife you shall understand how all thing have pass with i from the time of my absence from you we set sail with five ship from the texel in Holland the four and twenty of june 1598. and depart from the coast of England the five of july and the one and twenty of August we come to one of the isle of Capo Verde call Sant' jago the isle of cape Verde where we abide four and twenty day in which time many of our man fall sick through the unwholsomenesse of the air and our general among the rest now the reason that we abide so long at these land be that one of the captain of our fleet make our general believe that at these land we shall find great store of refresh as goat and other thing which be untrue here I and all the pilot of the fleet be call to a council in which we all show our judgement of dislike the place which be by all the captain take so ill that afterward it be agree by they all that the pilot shall be no more in the council the which be execute the fifteen day of September we depart from the isle of Sant' jago and pass the equinoctial line and in the latitude of three degree to the south our general die their general die wherewith many contrary wind and rain the season of the year be very much pass we be force upon the coast of guiney fall upon a head-land call cabo the new general command to bear up with cape de Lopo consalue cabo in guiney Capo de Lopo consalue Nobon take by the hollander there to seek refresh for our man the which we do in which place we land all our sick man where they do not much better for we can find no store of victual the nine and twenty of December we set sail to go on our voyage and in our way we fall with a island call Nobon where we land all our sick man take the island in by force their town contain some eighty house have refresh our man we set sail again at which time our general command that a man for four day shall have but one pound of bread that be a quarter of a pound a day with the like proportion of wine and water which scarcity of victual bring such feebleness that our man fall into so great weakness and sickness for hunger that they do eat the calf skin April 3. 1599 the straight of Magellan wherewith our rope be cover the three of April 1599 we fall with the port of saint julian and the six of April we come into the straight of Magellan to the first narrow and the eight day we pass the second narrow with a good wind where we come to a anchor and land on penguin island where we lade our boat full of penguin which be fowl great than a D^cke wherewith we be great refresh the ten we weigh anchor have much wind which be good for we to go through but our general will water and take in provision of wood for all our fleet in which straight there be enough in every place with anchor ground in al^ place three or four league one from another in the mean time the wind change and come southerly so we seek a good harbour for our ship on the north-side a good harbour four league of Elizabeth Bay all April be out we have wonderful much snow and ice with great wind for in April May june july and August be the winter there be in fifty two degree 1/^ by south the equinoctial many time in the winter we have the wind good to go through the straits but our general will not we abide in the straight till the four and twenty of August 1599 on the which day we come into the south sea the 24. of August 1599 they come into the south Sea where six or seven day after in a great storm we lose the whole fleet one from another that storm be long we be drive into the latitude of fifty four degree 1/^ by south the equinoctial the weather break up and have good wind again the nine of October we see the admiral of which we be glad eight or ten day after in the night have very much wind our foresail fly way and we l^st company of the admiral then according to wind and weather we directe^ our course for the coast of chili where the nine and twenty of October they arrive on the coast of chili the 2d of October we come to the place appoint of our general in forty six degree where we set up a pinnace and stay eight and twenty day in this place we find people with who we have friendship five or six day who bring we sheep for which we give they bell and knife and it seem to we they w^re content but short after they go all away from the place where our ship be and we see they no more they trade with the people of the country in 46 degree th^ il^ of Mocha eight and twenty day be expire we set sail mind to go for Baldivia so we come to the mouth of the bay of Baldivia and be very much wind our captain mind change so that we direct our course for the isle of Mocha the first of November we come to the i will of Mocha lie in the latitude of eight and thirty degree have much wind we dur^t not anchor but direct our course for cape Maria two league by sou^h the island of Maria where have no knowledge of the people the second of November our man go on land and the people of the land fight with our man and hurt eight of nine but in the end they make a false composition of friendship which our man do believe the next day our captain (@) three and twenty of our chief man go on land mean for merchandise to get victual have wonderful hunger two or three of the people come straight to our boat in friendly manner with a kind of wine and rootes with make token to come on land make sign that there be sheep and Oxen. our captain with our man have great desire to get refresh for our man 2d man slay Thomas Adams slay go on land the people of the country lie entrench a thousand and above and straightway fall upon our man and slay they all among which be my brother Thomas Adams by this l^sse we have scarce so many man whole as can weigh our anchor so the three day in great distress we set our course for the island of Santa Maria the isle of s. Mar^a th^y meet with their admiral the general and 27. man slay at Mocha where we find our admiral who when we see our heart be somewhat comfort we go aboard they and find they in as great distress as we have lose their general with seven and twenty of their man slay at the island of Mocha from whence they depart the day before we come by here we take counsel what we shall do to get victual to go on land by force we have no man for the most part be sick there come a Spaniard by composition to see our ship and so the next day he come again and we let he depart quiet the three day come two spaniard aboard we without pawn to see if they can betray we when they have see our ship they will have go on land again but we will not let they show that they come without leave and we will not let they go on land again without our leave whereat they we^e great offend we show they that we have extreme need of victual and that if they will give we so many sheep and so many beef they shall go on land so against their will they make composition with we which within the time appoint they do accomplish have so much refresh as we can get we make all thing well again our man be for the most part recover of their sickness there be a young man one Hudcopee which know nothing but have serve the admiral who be make general and the master of our ship be make vice-admiral who name be jacob Quaternak of Rotterdam so the general and vice-admiral call i and the other pilot be a Englishman call Timothy shotten which have be with m. Thomas Candish in his voyage about the world to take counsel what we shall do to make our voyage for the best profit of our merchant at last it be resolve to go for japan for by report of one D^rrick gerritson Timothy shotten a Eng^ishman pilot in the admiral D^rrick gerritson which have be there with the portugal woollen cloth be in great estimation in that island and we gather by reason that the and the most part of the east indies be hot country where woollen cloth will not be much accept wherefore we all agree to go for japan so leave the coast of chili from thirty six degree of south-latitude the seven and twenty of November 1599 we take our course direct for japan they leave the coast of chili and ail direct for japan they crode the equinoctial l^ne these isle seem to be the ladrone 8. of their man run away with their pinn^sse they lose their admiral the 24. of February 1600. a i will call^d Colonna the 12. of April 16^0 they discover japan near unto Bungo they come to a anchor and pass the line equinoctial with a fair wind which continue good for diverse month in our way we fall with certain island in sixteen degree of north-latitude the inhabitant whereof be men-eater come near these island and have a great pinnace with we eight of our man be in the pinnace run from we with the pinnace and as we suppose be eat of the wild man of which people we take one which afterward the general send for to come into his ship when we come into the latitude of seven and twenty and eight and twenty degree we find very variable wind and stormy weather the four and twenty of February we lose sight of our admiral which afterward we see no more nevertheless we still do our best direct our course for japan the four and twenty of march we see a island call Colonna at which time many of our man be sick again and diverse dead great be the misery we be in have no more but nine or ten able man to go or creep upon their knee our captain and all the rest look every hour to die the eleven of April 1600. we see the land of japan near unto Bungo at which time there be no more but five man of we able to go the twelfth of April we come hard to Bungo where may bark come aboard we the people whereof we willing let come have no force to resist they at which place we come to a anchor the people offer we no hurt but steal all thing that they can steal for which some pay dear afterward the next day the king of that land send soldier aboard to see that none of the merchant good be steal two or three day after our ship be bring into a good harbour there to abide till the principal king of the whole island have news of we and until it be know what his will be to do with we in the mean time we get favour of the king of that place to get our captain and sick man on land which be grant and we have a house appoint we in which all our man be lay and have refresh give they after we have be there five or six day come a Portugal jesuite with other portugal the portugal accuse they for pirate who report of we that we be pirate and be not in the way of marchandize which report cause the governor and common-peeple to think evil of we in such manner that we look always when we shall be set upon cross which be the execution in this land for the every and some other crime thus daily more and more the portugal incense the justice and people against we and two of our man as traitor give themselves in service to the king be all in all with the portugal have by they their life warrant the one be call Gilbert de cunning who mother dwell at Middleborough who give himself out to be merchant of all the good in the ship the other be call John Abelson Van Owater these traitor seek all manner of way to get the good into their hand^ and make know unto they all thing that have pass in our voyage nine day after our ^^^uall he war send for to the great King the great king of the land send for i to come unto he so take one man with i I go to he take my leave of our captain and all the other that be sick commend myself into his hand that have preserve i from so many peril on the sea I be carry in one of the king galley to the court at Osaca where the king lay about eighty league from the place where the ship be the twelve of May 1600. I come to the great king city he come to the court. who cause i to be bring into the court be a wonderful costly house guild with gold in abundance come before the king he view i well and seem to be wonderful favourable he make many sign unto i some of which I understand and some I do not in the end there come one that can speak Portuges by he the king demand of i of what land I be the king question and what move we to come to his land be so far off I show unto he the name of our country and that our land have long seek out the east-indies and desire friendship with all king and potentate in way of merchandise have in our land diverse commodity which these land have not and also to buy such merchandise in this land which our country have not then he ask whether our country have war I answer he yea with the spaniard and portugal be in peace with all other nation further he ask i in what I do believe I say in God that make heaven a^d earth he ask i divers other question of thing of religion and many other thing as what way we come to the country have a chart of the whole world I show he through the straight of Magellan at which he wonder and think i to lie thus from one thing to another I abide with he till midnight and have ask i what merchandise we have in our ship I show he all in the end he be ready to depart I desire that we may have trade of merchandise as the portugal and the spaniard have to which he make i a answer he be send to prison he be send for again he be send to prison the second time but what it be I do not understand so he command i to be carry to prison but two day after he send for i again and inquire of the quality and condition of our country of war and peace of beast and cattle of all sort of the heaven it seem that he be well content with all my answer unto his demand nevertheless I be command to prison again but my lodging be better in another place the rest of this letter by the malice of the bearer be suppress but seem to be in substance the same with the former I have add this also as contain diverse thing not mention in the former this William Adams late die at Firando in japan as by * * the james return home this year 1621. the last ship we receive intelligence @. 5 the second voyage of JOHN Davis with sir EDWARD MICHELBORNE knight into the east-indies in the tiger a ship of two hundred and forty tun with a pinnace call the tiger whelp which though in time it be late than the first of the east-indian society yet because it be not set forth by they I have here place the five of December 1604. we set sail from the cow in the i will of wight the three and twenty we arrive at teneriffe in the road of Aratana the fourteen of january at night we be trouble with extreme heat lightning thunder and rain all the night the sixteenth we pass under the equinoctial line shape our course for the i will Loronnah the wind be at south southeast our course south south-west and some three degree southward of the line we meet with such multitude of fish as it be incredible to report so that with our hook line and harp iron we take so many dolphines bonito and other fish that our man be so weary with eat of fish that we can not tell what to do with it moreover there be fowl call pasharabove and Alcatrarzes we take many of those pasharabove for it be a foul that delight to come to a ship in the night and if you do but hold up your hand they will light upon it the other foul call Alcatrarzi be a kind of hawk that live by fish for when the bonito or dolphines do chase the fly fish under the water so that he be glad to flee from they out of the water to save his life pasharabove this Alcatrarzi fly after they like a hawk a partridge of these fly fish I have see so many flee together that you will have think they to be a great flock of bird afar off they be but little fish scarce so big as a hear the i will of Fernando de Loronnah the two and twenty we come to a anchor at the i will of Loronnah be four degree to the southward of the line where in go on shore our Skiffe be overset by reason of the violent breach that the sea make at which time be drown a kinsman of our general call master Richard Michelburne and all the rest be save the five and twenty our long boat go to fill some empty cask with water come again within the danger of that unfortunate sea and be overset and two more of our man drown here we be very (@) trouble in get wood and water aboard because the land be so dangerous that (@) be force to pull our cask on shore with rope and so back again when it be fill not six day before we come hither there be a Hollander here which send his boat for water which be break all into piece against the rock and his man brain beat out and their arm and leg cut from their body the six and twenty our general go on shore to see the island and march up and down in the same we find nothing but a wild country inhabit only by six negro which live like slave in this island have be great store of goat and some wild ox but by reason the Portugal carake sometime use to water here when they go into the east indies and that these poor slave be leave there as their servant to kill and dry goat against their come thither they have destroy both goat and ox so that we can find but few in this island be great store of turtle-dove Alcatrarzes and other fowl which we kill with our piece and find they to be very dainty meat also here be good store of Maiz or Guynie wheat here be likewise plenty of rot tree whereon grow the fine bombast and abundance of wild goard and water-melon when we be furnish with wood and water we come aboard the twelve of February we find ourselves to be in seven degree five minute to the southward in which place at night I think I see the strange sea that ever be see which be a strange glitter of the Sea that the burn or glitter light of the sea do show to we as though all the sea over have be burn flame of fire and all the night long the moon be down you may see to read in any book by the light thereof the thirteen day in the morning we descry a island or rather indeed a rock the name be Ascention the height eight degree thirty minute to the southward the first of April towards night we descry land from the main top which bear of we south southeast when according to our reckon and account April we be not near by forty league but yet the variation of the compass do tell we that we be on land thirty league before we see land the second day in the morning we be hard by the shore which be ten or twelve league to the northward of the bay of Saldannah the three day we sail by a little island which captain John davis take to be a island that stand some five or six league from Saldannah whereupon our general sir Edward Michelburne desirous to see the island take his Skiffe accompany with no more than the master mate the purser and myself and four man that do row the boat and so put off from the ship we come on land while we be on shore they in the ship have a storm which drive they out of sight of the island and we be two day and two night before we can recover our Ship upon the say island be abundance of great coney island coney and seal whereupon we call it coney island the eight day we come to a anchor in the road of Saldannah the nine we go on shore find a goodly country they land in the road of Saldannah inhabit by a most savage and beastly people as ever I think God create in this place we have excellent good refresh in so much that I think the like place be not to be find among savage people for we neither want beef mutton nor wildfowl all the time we lay there this country be very full of ox and sheep which they keep in great herd and flock as we do our cattle in England moreover it do abound with store of wild beast and fowl as wild deer in great abundance Antelops babious fox and hare ostrich crane pelican heron goose duck pheasant partridge and diverse other sort of excellent fowl of which fowl we kill great store with our piece it be also most pleasant water with wholesome spring which have their beginning from the top of exceed high mountain exceed high mountain which fall into the valley make they very fruitful also there be a kind of tree not much unlike to bay tree but of a far hard substance that grow close by the sea side the people of the country bring we more bullock and sheep than we can spend all the time we stay there so that we carry fresh beef and mutton to sea with we for a piece of a old iron hoop not worth two penny you may buy a great bullock and for a piece of iron not worth two or three good horse nail you may buy a sheep they go naked save only they wear upon their shoulder a sheep skin and before their privity a little flap of a skin their woman some be well feature some of their man have but one stone copper be now in great request with they a certain kind of root may. the cape Bona esperanza cape Das Agu^lhas which cover as much as though they have none at all before they in the time of our be there they live upon the gut and filth of the meat which we do cast away feed in most beastly manner for they will neither wash nor make clean the gut but take they and cover they over with hot ash and before they be through hot they pull they out shake they a little in their hand and so eat both the gut the excrement and the ash they live upon raw flesh and a certain kind of root which they have which grow there in great abundance in this place we lie on shore from the nine of April until the three of may. by which good recreation and refresh we find ourselves in as good health as when we put to sea at the very first the seven of May we be south of the cape of Bona Esperanca by estimation ten league this night we pass over the shoald of cape the nine day rise a mighty storm at which time we lose sight of our pinnace be drive by violence of weather from she this storm continue for the space of two day and two night most fearful and dangerous with rain lightning and thunder and often ship of much water the portugal call this place the lion of the sea the lion of the Sea by reason of the extreme fury and danger which they find in double of this cape in the extremity of our storm appear to we in the night upon our main topmast head a flame about the bigness of a great candle which the portugal call hold it a most divine token that when it appear the worst be past as thank be God we have better weather after it some think it to be a spirit other write that it be a exhalation of moist vapour that be engender by foul and tempestuous weather some affirm that the ship be fortunate where it light and that she shall not perish it appear unto we two night together after which time we have a fair wind and good weather the twenty four the isle Diego Roiz the i will de Diego Roiz in 19 degree 40. minute stand in the latitude of nineteen degree and forty minute to the southward and in the longitude of ninety eight degree and thirty minute bare north of we about five of the clock eight league off we bare room to have land but the wind grow so stiff in the night that we alter our determination about this island we see great store of white bird have in their tail but two long feather these bird and diverse other accompany we with such contrary wind and gust that we often split our sail and bolt to and again we rather go to the lee-ward than gain any thing the wind blow so stiff at the east south east the three day of june stand our course for the isle Cirne we descry the isle Diego Roiz again june 3 and bare room with it think to have stay there to attend a good wind but find it to be a very dangerous place the i will of Diego Roiz be a very dangerous place the isle do Banhos we dare not come to a anchor there for fear of the rock and shold that lie about it and upon better consideration we alter our purpose and stand for east India the fifteen of june we have sight of land which be the isle do Banhos in six degree and thirty seven minute to the southward and in one hundred and nine degree of longitude these land be false lay in most charts lie too much to the west here we send our boat to see if they can find any good ground to anchor in but search both the south and west shore they can find none there be five of these land they abound with fowl fish and Coco nut our boat go on shore and bring great store of they aboard we which we find to be excellent meat see we can find no good anchor by reason that in some place close under the shore it be so deep that we can find no ground and in other place be such sharp rock and shold that we dare not anchor have but bad and contrary wind we leave these land and stand our course as near as we can lie for India the ninteenth of june we have sight of land which be the i will of Diego stand in the latitude of seven degree their boat go on shore the i will of Diego thirty minute southward and in longitude one hundred and ten degree forty minute by our account this seem to be a very pleasant island and of good refresh if there be any place to come to a anchor we seek but little for anchor there because the wind be bad and the tide force we to the shore so that we dare not stay to search there any further this island seem to be some ten or twelve league long abound with bird and fish and all the island over seem to be a mighty wood of nothing else but coco-tree what else this island yield we know not july they pass the equinoctial line a island or land in two degree of northerly latitude adjoin to sumatra the eleven of july we pass again the equinoctial line where we be becalm with extreme heat lightning and thunder the ninteenth we descry land which be many land as we think lock in one which lie under the high land of the great island of sumatra here we send off our boat to get some fresh water but the sea go with such a violent breach upon the shore that they dare not land the people of this island make great fire also along the shore with intent as we think to have have we come on land this island or land be in two degree of northerly latitude the five and twenty we come to a anchor by a little island where we send our boat on shore for water but find none they return with some Coco nut affirm that the island be very full of Coco tree which have very few nut upon they we see three or four people upon this island but they go away and will not come near we those people we imagine to be leave there to gather the and to make they ready against other shall come and fetch they the i will of bata the six and twenty we come to a anchor within a league of a great island call bata lie in twenty minute of south latitude here we build up our Shalop and name she the bat in this island be none inhabitant it do exceed abound with wood and fresh water Rivers as also with fish monkey and a kind of fowl which they affirm to be that country whereof in our time of be there I kill one which be great than a hare a great fly Squirel or bat. and in shape very like a s^^^rrill save only from each of his side do hang down two great flappe of skin which when he do leap from tree to tree he will spread forth like a pair of wing as though he do seem to fly with they they be very nimble and will leap from bough to bough oftentimes take hold with nothing but their tail because our Shalop be build in the kingdom of these beast she be call after their name the bat. the nine and twenty day travail along the shore in this island I discover a road ride under a little island about four league from i which make i very glad hope it have be our pinnace which we lose in the great storm near under the cape of Bona Esperatca with which news by night I gate aboard our general who in the morning send i with captain John davis three bark to see if we can find she but when we come to the place we find three bark ride under the island they make sign unto we to come aboard they and tell we they have hen we answer they that we will go fetch some money and will come again the next morning and buy some of they understand portuguse we dare not go aboard they because we be but evil provide the next morning be better furnish we go think to have some better commodity of they but they have weigh anchor and be all go it seem they be afraid of we by their haste away August the four of August we weigh anchor and stand for Priaman the nine of August our general man the Shalop and send we along the coast to see if we can find any roader and espy a sail we give her chase which when she perceive she can not go from we she come to a anchor and forsake their bark and row all on shore to a island in a small boat where we can not come at they we lay there bark aboard not find any one man in it the chief lade be oil nut and fine mat but see it be but such mean stuff and know that if we shall have take it our general will not have like of it we leave she not take any thing from her worth the speak of the ten and eleven day we stand close along the main land whereas we espy eight prawe ride over against a place call Tico which when we first espy we be in good hope Tico a town in sumatra that we may find our pinnace among they when we come up with they she be not there but they put we in comfort tell we there be a english ship at Priaman which be not pass six league from this town of Tico then stand out to sea we see our admiral and in short time get aboard tell our general the news we have not sail a league further their ship come on ground but our ship come on ground upon a rock of white coral but God be thank have a great gale in very short time we get she off again without any hurt at all and come near unto the road of Priaman we descry our pinnace to be there th^y meet with their pinnace which they have lose so long before Priaman in forty minute of southerly latitude which we have lose so long before in the great storm in double the cape of Bona Esperanca the captain and master of the pinnace meet we half a league from the road in their Skiffe and at our come aboard of we our general do welcome they with a peal of great ordnance and after many discourse pass of what have happen in the time of each other absence we come to a anchor in five fathom water very good ground in the road of Priaman which stand in forty minute of southerly latitude the fourteen our general send i on shore with a present to the governor and to other to see what price pepper be at and to buy fresh victual and to know whether our man may come safe on shore but when we come on shore the governor dare not speak with we private by reason of certain war that be among they by which mean they be grow jealous one of another these war grow upon this occasion the king of Achen have two son he keep the elder at home with he to succeed he after his death and the young he make king of Pedir whereupon the elder son take his father prisoner affirm that he be too old to govern any long and afterward make war upon his young brother thus see little good to be do in this place have refresh ourselves with fresh victual we resolve to depart from thence the one and twenty we weigh anchor and stand for Bantam on which day we take two prawe have nothing in they but a little rice the one of these prawe hurt two of our man very sore after they have enter she for our man think because they see some leap overboard they have all leap overboard but they be deceive for the first two man that enter be sore hurt by two which lie close hide behind their sail who assoon as they have wound they most desperate leap overboard swim away like water spaniel so take such thing as best fit we we leave their prawe do they no further harm the three and twenty we take a fisherboat have nothing of value in he let he go without any hurt save only one of they be shoot through the thigh at the first meeting when they resist we the five and twenty we descry a sail and send our Shalop longboat and Skiffe to see what she be for our ship and pinnace can not fetch she up because they be becalm these boat come up with she bid he strike sail but she will not so we fall in fight with she from three of the clock in the afternoon till ten of the clock at night by which time our pinnace have get up to we then she strike her sail and yield so we make she fast to our pinnace and tow she along with we all night in the morning our general send for they to see what they be and send three of we to see what she be lade withal when he have talk with they they tell he they be of Bantam wherefore know not what injury he may do to the english merchant a ship of Bantam take and free dismiss that have a factory in Bantam at that present and understand by we that their load be salt Rice and China dish he send they aboard their own bark again not suffer the worth of a penny to be take from they they stand towards Priaman and we towards Bantam leave each other this bark be of the burden of some forty tun the second of September we meet with a small ship of guzarate or Cambaya they take a ship of Guzarate Sillibar in four degree of southerly latitude be about eighty tun which ship we take and carry into the road of Sillibar stand in four degree of southerly latitude into which ride many prawe continual come to refresh themselves for here you may have wood water Rice buffles-flesh goat hen plant and fresh-fish but all very dear the eight and twenty day have dispatch all our business we weigh anchor and stand for Bantam the three and twenty of October we come to a anchor in the road of Marrah October the road of Marrah be in the straight of Sunda here we take in freshwater in this place be great store of buffle goat hen duck and many other good thing for refresh of man they esteem not so much of money as of Calicut clothes pintado and such like stuff the people be well use will use you well but you must look to they for steal for they think any thing well get that they can steal from a stranger the twenty eight Bantam the eight and twenty we weigh anchor and stand for Bantam which stand in six degree and forty minute of southerly latitude this day we come within three league of the town where we come to a anchor all night here we think to have see the english fleet but it be go for England three week before we come nevertheless those that remain in the country as factor of our nation come aboard we be very glad to see any of their countryman in so foreign a place and withal tell our general that the company of the hollander ship that be in the road have use very slanderous report of we to the king of Bantam the effect whereof be that we be thief and disordinate liver and such as do come for nothing but to deceive they or use such violence as time will give we leave to execute and that we dare not come into the road among they but keep two or three league from thence for fear of they after our general have hear this report it so move he that he weigh anchor send the hollander word that he will come and ride close by their side and bad the proud of they all that dare to put out a piece of ordnance upon he and withal send they word if they do go about either to brave or to disgrace he or his countryman he will either sink they or sink by their side there be of these hollander five ship the one of they of seven or eight hundred tun the rest of a far small burden but of this message notwithstanding we come and anchor close by they we never have answer but whereas the hollander be wont to swagger and keep great stir on shore all the time before our be there they be so quiet that we can scarce see one of they on land the second of November have see our countryman we take our leave and stand our course for Patane the second of November they depart from Bantam Pedra Branca three prawe and in our way as we sail between the chersonesus of malacca and Pedra Branca we meet with three prawe which be afraid of we anchor so near unto the shore that we can not come near they either with our ship or pinnace wherefore our general man his Shalop with eighteen man and send we to they to request they that for his money he may have a pilot to carry his ship to pulo Timaon which be about some five day sail from the place where we meet with they but they see our ship and pinnace at anchor about a mile from they and that they be not able to come any near they tell we plain that none of they will go with we and be at anchor weigh and be go away see that we begin a fight with they all three one of they we take in less than half a hour who man which be seventy three in all gate out of she and run on shore the other fight with we all night and in the morning about the break of day she yield unto we our general come to we in his Skiffe a little before she yield two prawe take they be lade with Benjamin storax pepper China dish and pitch the three praw get from we while we be fight with the other our general will not suffer we to take any thing from they but only two of their man to pilot we to pulo Timaon because they be of java these people of java be very resolute in a desperate case their chief weapon be javelin dart dagger and a kind of poison arrow which they shoot in trunk they have some harcubush but they be nothing expert in use they poison arrow shoot in trunk Grece a town in java they also have target the most part of they be Mahumetans they have be at Palimbam and be go back again to Greece a port town on the north-east part of java where they dwell the twelve of November we dismiss they stand our course towards Patane the six and twenty of November we see certain land bear of we northwest which neither we certain land nor our new pilot know but have a very contrary wind to stand our course for Patane we think it very necessary to search those land for wood and water hope by that time we have water to have a better wind the seven and twenty we come to a anchor within a mile of the shore in sixteen fathom good ground on the southside of these land here send our boat on shore we find some of they to be sink land nothing above the water but the tree or root of they in one of they we find a reasonable good water place and all the land a wilderness of wood it be a very uncomfortable place have neither fruit fowl nor any kind of beast wherewithal to refresh man these land we take to be some of the break land lie southeast from the i will of Bintam the break land near the i will of Bintam December the second of December have take in wood and water we weigh anchor stand our course for Patane as near as a bad wind will give we leave for we find the wind in these month to be very contrary keep still at north northwest or north-east the twelve day near unto pulo Laor we descry three sail and send our pinnace and Shalop after one of they pulo Laor be the near unto we we stay with our ship think to have meet with the other two but in the night they stand away another course so that we see they no more in the morning we descry our pinnace and Shalop about four league to leeward with the other ship which they have take the wind and current be against they another ship take they be not able to come up to we we see that go to they when we come we find she to be a juncke of pan-hange be in burden above a hundred ton lade with Rice Pan hang pepper and tin go to Bantam in java our general not esteem any such mean luggage take as much rice as serve for his provision and two little brass gun and pay they royal for all not take any thing else from they save only one man to be our pilot to Patane who be willing to come along with we when he see our general use they so well the other two pilot which we take before out of one of the three prawe be unskilful man wherefore our general reward they for the time that they have be with he send they back again into their own country by the juncke which we take that be go to java the thirteen day we leave she stand our course for pulo Timaon pulo Timaon over against pan-hange join on the king of pan-hange his country here we be trouble very much with contrary wind and current for the sea run always from the begin of November to the begin of April to the southward and from April to November back again to the northward the wind also in the aforesaid first five month be most common northerly the monsons in these part and in the other seven month southerly all the ship of China Patane jor pan-hange and other place which be to the northward come to Bantam or Palimbam when the northerly be come and return back again when the southerly come which monsoin come in the month before mention this be observe you shall have both wind and tide with you here as I say before I find such contrary violent wind and current in three week he can not get one league a head that I can not in three week get a league a head this country of pan-hange be a very plentiful country and full of gentry after the fashion of those country store of ship and victual very cheap this country lie between jor and Patane and reach on the sea-coast to cape Tingeron be a very high cape and the first land-fall that the carack of Macao or junck of China cape Tingeron or Camboia prawe do make as they come for malacca java sumatra jumbe jor Palimbam Grece or any other part to the southward here as I stand for patane about the twenty seven of December I meet with a juncke of the japon which have be pyrate along the coast of China and Camboia their pilot be dead with ignorance and foul weather they have cast away their ship on the shold of the great island borneo and to enter into the country of borneo they dare not for the japon be not suffer to land in any port in India with weapon be account a people so desperate and dare that they be fear in all place where they come these people their ship be split with their shalop enter this juncke wherein I meet they which be of Patane and kill all the people sa^e one old pilot. this juncke be lade with Rice which when they have possess and furnish with such furniture necessary and arm as they save out of their sink ship they shape their course for japan b^t the badness of their juncke contrary wind and unseasonableness of the year force they to leeward which be the cause of my unlucky meet they after I have hale they and make they come to lee-ward send my boat aboard they I find they by their man and furniture very unproportionable for such a ship as they be in which be a juncke not above seventy ton in burden and they be ninety man and most of they in too gallant a habit for sailor and such a equality of behaviour among they that they seem all fellow yet one among they there be that they call captain but give he little respect I cause they to come to a anchor and upon further examination I find their lade to be only rice and for the most part spill with wet for their ship be leak both under and above water upon question with they I understand they to be man of war that have pillage on the coast of China and Camboia and as I say before have cast away their ship on the shold of borneo here we ride at anchor under a small island near to the i will of Bintam two day entertain they with good usage not take any thing from they think to have gather by their knowledge the place and passage of certain ship on the coast of China to have make my voyage but these rogue be desperate in wind and fortune being hopeless in that paltry juncke ever to return to their country resolve with themselves either to gain my ship or to lose their life and upon mut^all courtesy with gift and feast between we sometime fi^e and twenty or six and twenty of their chief come aboard whereof I will not suffer above six to have weapon their be never the like number of our man aboard their juncke I will captain John davis in the morning to possess himself of their weapon and to put the company before mast and to leave some guard on their weapon while they search in the rice doubt that by search and find that which will dislike they they may sudden set upon my man and put they to the sword as the sequel prove captain davis be beguile with their humble semblance will not possess himself of their weapon though I send twice of purpose from my ship to will he to do it they pass all the day my man search in the rice and they look on at the sunne-setting after long search and nothing find save a little storax and Benjamin they see opportunity and talk to the rest of their company which be in my ship be near to their juncke they resolve at a watchword between they to set upon we resolute in both ship this be conclude they sudden kill and drive overboard all my man that be in their ship and those which be aboard my ship sally out of my cabin where they be put with such weapon as they have find certain target in my cabin and other thing that they use as weapon myself be aloft on the deck know what be likely to follow leap into the waste where with the boat swain carpenter and some few more we keep they under the halfe-decke at their first come forth of the cabin they meet captain davis come out of the gun-roome captain John davis slay who they pull into the cabin and give he six or seven mortal wound they thrust he out of the cabin before they his wound be so mortal that he die assoon as he come into the waste they press so fierce to come to we as we receive they on our pike they will gather on our pike with their hand to reach we with their sword it be near half a hour before we can stone they back into the cabin three or four of the japonian leader kill in which time we have kill three or four of their leader after they be drive into the cabin they fight with we at the least four hour before we can suppress they often fire the cabin burn the bedding and much other stuff that be there and have we not with two demy-culuering from under the halfe-decke beat down the bulk head and the pump of the ship we can not have suppress they from burn the ship this ordnance be charge with crosse-barre bullet and case-shot and bend close to the bulk head so violent mar therewith board and splinter one and twenty japoan slay with demiculuer shoot that it leave but one of they stand of two and twenty their leg arm and body be so tear as it be strange to see how the shot have massacre they in all this conflict they never will desire their life though they be hopeless to escape such be the desperateness of these japonian only one leap overboard which afterward swim to our ship again and ask for grace we take he in and ask he what be their purpose he tell we that they mean to take our ship and to cut all our throat he will say no more but desire that he may be cut in piece the next day to wit the eight and twenty of December we go to a little island to the leeward of we and when we be about five mile from the land the general command his people to hang this japonian but he break the rope and fall into the Sea I can tell whether he swim to the land or not we take our course right to the little foresaid island and come there to a anchor the thirty of December we remain there three day to mend our boat and to take in wood and water in this island we find a ship of Patane out of which we take the captain and ask he whether the ship of China be come to Patane or no he tell we that they be not yet come but that they will come thither within few day we make the captain of that ship to be our pilot because he know very well to what place the chinish ship will come the ten of january we purpose to stay their till it please God that we shall meet the chinish ship the twelve of januarie one of our mate climb up to the top of the mast and descry two ship which come towards we but because of the wind they be force to go to the lee-ward of the island assoon as we have sight of they we weigh anchor and make towards they and we fetch up the great of they the twelve of januarie in the night we fight a little with they and board they and bring they to a anchor the next day to wit the thirty of januarie we unlade some of their good to wit raw silk and other silk they have fifty ton of silver of their country but we take little or none of it because we have good hope that we shall meet with the other chinish ship after we have take some of their silk we let they depart the fifteen of january and give they twice as much as we have take from they and cast they off we take our course back again to China bata they return from the i will of Bintam two small land call pulo sumatra but we can not fetch it up because we have contrary wind so that we be force to put lee-ward unto two small land which they of java call pulo sumatra where we come to a anchor the two and twenty of januarie the four and twenty day as we ride at anchor there arise a great storm of wind with which our cable break so that we be force to put into the near creek the second of February five Holland ship meet with we sail homeward which put into the same road where we be February captain Warwick be general of these ship he send to our general to dine with he our general go to he he tell we that our english merchant in Bantam be in great peril and that still they look for nothing else then that the king of java will assault they because we have take the china ship whereby the king of Bantam have lose his custom wherefore captain Warwick request our general that he will cease to go any further and will sail home unto England with he our general answer that he have not as yet make his voyage and that therefore he will not return until it shall please God to send he somewhat to make up the game the hollander perceive that they can not persuade our general to give over his purpose February the three depart from we the three of February our general consider that if he shall proceed on his voyage it will be very dangerous for the english merchant which be resident in those part and see that he have but two anchor and two cable to help himself withal think good to repair his ship and to return home with that poor voyage that he have make when our ship be ready and that we have take in wood and water they return home we hoist up our sail the five of February to return for England the seven of April we have sight of the cape of Bona esperanza after we have pass a great storm April 7. 1606. the seventeen of April we come to the i will of Helena where we water Helena and find refreshment as wine and goat which we ourselves kill in the say island be many wild swine and goat there be also great store of partridge Turkey cock and guinea hen this island be not inhabit we depart from thence the three of may. the fourteen we pass under the equinoctial line may. they arrive in Milford haven in Wales they come to Portsmouth the seven and twenty of june we arrive in Milford haven in Wales the nine of july we come to a anchor in Portsmouth roade where all our company be dismiss and here we end our voyage have be out upon the same full nineteen month in the year 1606. chap. 2 a privilege for fifteen year grant by her majesty to certain adventurer for the discovery of the trade for the east-indies the one and thirty of December 1600. elizabeth by the grace of GOD queen of England France and Ireland defendor of the faith etc. to all our officer minister and subject and to all other people aswell within this our realm of England as elsewhere under our obedience and jurisdiction or otherwise unto who these our letter patent shall be see show or read greeting whereas our most dear and love cousin George earl of Cumberland and our well-beloved subject sir John hart of London knight sir John Spencer of London knight the name of the adventurer sir Edward Michelburne knight William Candish esquire Paul ban Robert Lee Leonard holiday John watts John More Edward Holmden Robert hampson Thomas Smith and Thomas Cambell citizen and alderman of London Edward Barker esquire Thomas marsh esquire Samuel Bachouse esquire james Lancaster richard staper Thomas cordell William garway Oliver style William Quarles Bartholomew Barnes William off Robert chamberlain John Haruy Richard wiseman William stone Francis cherry Thomas alabaster Richard Barret John Swynerton the young Thomas Garaway William Romny james Deane John Eldred Andrew ban Edward Loaning Thomas jackson Nicholas leate John wolstenholme Nicholas peard William chamber Rowland Bachouse Humphrey Smith Robert Sandy Henry Robinson Richard Poyntel John highlord William Haryson Humphrey style Humphrey Robynson Nicholas ferror Thomas Farryngton John Combe Robert off Roger how John Hewet james Turner morris Abbot james carrel Robert Brooke Richard Chamblyn George Chamblyn Leonard white John Cornelius Ralph Basby William genyng Gyles Paslow Robert bell Thomas white Nicholas Ling William Palmer Ellys crippe John Merrycke Humphrey hanford Thomas symons Robert Cox William Wustall John Humphrey Thomas Bostocke Bartholomew Holland Richard Cox William walton William freeman Thomas southacke John Friar Francis dent Richard bull Richard Pierce Roger hen Robert cobb Robert Robynson Francis Euington Francis Taylor Thomas Westrow John Midleton Robert gore Ralph gore William Cater George Cater John busbridge Thomas Horton William bond merchant-taylor of London William Cotton John stockley Roger owfield Augustine Skinner Richard wise Robert Towerson Richard Taylbye Robert Middleton Robert Bateman Richard Gosson Robert Waldore Richard wrag John wrag William dale Laurence waldo Henry Brydgman Samuel armytage Edward Haryson Edward nicolson Clement mosely John Newman Humphrey Wallot Thomas Richardson Thomas boothby John coachman Reinald Greene Richard burret Robert Myldmay William Hyne George chandeler Edward Lutterfoord William burrell Stephen Haruy Thomas henshaw William Ferrys William aldersey William Hewet William Fisher joseph Salbancke Nicholas Manly Nicholas salter William Willastone William angel Nicholas Barnsly John Hawkins Roger die Richard Clarke Thomas Hewet George whitemore Henry Polstee William greenwell Robert johnson Bartholomew Huggott Humphrey Robert buck Ambrose wheeler William hale Richard Hull junior John hodgson Alphonsus foot George vt^y disfranchize the six of july 1661. Edmund Spencer Robert dewsy Richard Piott William bonham Edward Barkeham George Coles Ralph Hammer james Colymer Samuel hare George vtlye Gregory Allen Henry archer jeffry kerby John cason Richard beale Thomas shipton John Fletcher Thomas Talbot Robert Pennyngton Humphrey milward Richard Herne Ralph Allen John Brooke Anthony Gibson Robert key Hugh Crompton Richard washer George holman Morryce Luellen Richard parsons Francis Barker William Turner John greenwood Richard den Richard ironside George smith james Dunkyn Edward Walter andrew chamblayn Robert Startford Anthony Stratford William Myllet Simon Laurence Thomas lydall Stephen hodgson Richard Wright William Starker William Smith John Ellacots Robert Bayly and Roger Cotton have of our certain knowledge be petitioner unto we for our royal assent and licence to be grant unto they that they at their own adventure cost and charge as well for the honour of this our realm of England as for the increase of our navigation and advancement of trade of merchandise within our say realm and the dominion of the same may adventure may set forth one or more voyage with convenient number of ship and Pynnasses by way of traffic and merchandise to the east indian in the country and part of Asia and Africa and to as many of the land and city town and place thereabouts as where trade and traffic of merchandise may by all likelihood be establish or have diverse of which country and many of the land city and port thereof have long sithence be discover by other of our subject albeit not frequent in trade of merchandise know you therefore that we great tender the honour of our nation the wealth of our people and the encouragement of they and other of our love subject in their good enterprise for the increase of our navigation and the advancement of lawful traffic to the benefit of our commonwealth a body Politic the style of the corporation have of our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion give and grant and by these present for we our heir and successor do give and grant unto our say love subject before in these present express name that they and every of they from henceforth be and shall be one body corporate and politic indeed and in name by the name of the governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies one body corporate and politic indeed and in name real and full for we our heir and successor we do erect make ordain constitute establish and declare by these present and that by the same name of governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies they shall have succession and that they and their successor by the name of governor and company trade into the east indies be and shall be at all time hereafter person able and capable in law and a body corporate and politic and capable in law to have purchase receive possess enjoy and retain land tenement privilege liberty jurisdiction franchise and hereditament of whatsoever kind nature and quality soever they be to they and their successor and also to give grant demise alien assign and dispose all and singular other thing land tenement and hereditament by the same name that to they shall or may pertain to do and that they and their successor by the name of the governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies may plead and be implead answer and be answer defend and be defend in whatsoever court and place and before whatsoever judge and justice and other person and officer in all and singular action plea suit quarrel cause and demand whatsoever of whatsoever kind nature or sort in such manner and form as other our liege people of this our realm of England be person able and capable may or can have purchase receive possess enjoy retain give grant demyse alien assign dispose plead and be implead answer and be answer defend and be defend release and be release do permit and execute and that the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor may have a common seal to serve for all the cause and business of they a common seal and their successor and that it shall and may be lawful to the say governor and company and their successor the same seal from time to time at their will and pleasure to break change and to make new or alter as to they shall seem expedient and further we will and by these present for we our heir and successor we do ordain that there shall be from henceforth one of the same company to be elect and appoint in such form and manner as hereafter in these present be express which shall be call the governor of the say company and that there shall be from henceforth four and twenty of the say company to be elect and appoint in such form as hereafter in these present be express which shall be call the committee of the say company who together with the governor of the say company for the time be shall have the direction of the voyage of or for the say company and the provision of the ship and merchandise thereto belong and also the sale of all merchandise of or for the say company and the manage and handle of all other thing belong to the say company Thomas Smyth alderman the first governor and for the better execution of this our will and grant in this behalf we have assign nominate constitute and make and by these present for we our heir and successor we do assign nominate constitute and make the say Thomas smith alderman of London to be the first and present governor of the say company to continue in the say office from the date of these present until another of the say company in due manner be choose and swear unto the say office according to the ordinance and provision hereafter in these present express and declare if the say Thomas Smith shall so long live the first committee for the direction of the affair the company be 24. and also we have assign nominate and appoint and by these present for we our heir and successor we do assign nominate constitute and make the same Paul baning Leonard holiday John More Edward Holmden Richard staper Thomas cordell William garway Oliver style james Lancaster Richard wiseman Francis cherry Thomas alabaster William romney Roger how William chamber Robert Sandy John Eldred Richard wiche John highlord John Middleton John Combe William Haryson Nicholas Ling and Robert bell to be the four and twenty first and present committee of the say company to continue in the say office of committee of the say company from the date of these present for one whole year next follow and further we will and grant by these present for we our heir and successor unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that it shall and may be lawful to and for the say governor and company for the time be or the more part of they present at any public assembly common call the court hold for the say company the governor of the say company be always one from time to time to elect nominate and appoint one of the say company to be deputy to the say governor which deputy shall take a corporal oath before the governor a deputy to the governor and five or more of the committee of the say company for the time be well faithful and true to execute his say office of deputy to the governor of the company and after his oath so take shall and may from time to time in the absence of the say governor exercise and execute the office of governor of the say company in such sort as the governor ought to do and further we will and grant by these present for we our heir executor and successor unto we the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that they or the great part of they whereof the governor for the time be or his deputy to be one and from time to time and all time hereafter shall and may have authority and power yearly and every year on the first day of july or at any time the first day of july or with in 6. day after the yearly election of the governor within six day after that day to assemble and meet together in some convenient place to be appoint from time to time by the governor or in his absence by the deputy of the say governor for the time be and that they be so assemble it shall and may be lawful to and for the say governor or deputy of the say governor and the say company for the time be or the great part of they which then shall happen to be present whereof the governor of the say company or his deputy for the time be to be one to elect and nominate one of the say company which shall be governor of the same company for one whole year from thence next follow which person be so elect and nominate to be governor of the say company as be aforesaid before he be admit to the execution of the say office shall take a corporal oath before the last governor be his predecessor or his deputy or any six or more of the committee of the say company for the time be that he shall from time to time well and true execute the office of governor of the say company in all thing concern the same and that immediate after the say oath so take he shall and may execute and use the say office of governor of the say company for one whole year from thence next follow and in like sort we will and grant every brother to take a corporal oath that as well every one above name to be of the say company or fellowship as all other hereafter to be admit or free of the say company shall take a corporal oath before the governor of this say company or his deputy for the time be to such effect as by the say governor or company or the more part of they in any public court to be hold for the say company shall be in reasonable manner set down and devise before they shall be allow or admit to trade or traffic as a freeman of the say company and further we will and grant by these present for we our heir and successor the four and twenty committee to be yearly elect on the first of july or six day after unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that the say governor or the deputy of the say governor and the company and their successor for the time be or the great part of they whereof the governor or the deputy of the governor from time to time to be one shall and may from time to time to be one shall and may from time to time and at all time hereafter have authority and power yearly and every year on the first day of july or at any time within six day after that day to assemble meet together in some convenient place to be from time to time appoint by the say governor of the say company or in his absence by his deputy and that they be so assemble it shall and may be lawful to and for the say governor or his deputy and the company for the time be or the great part of they which then shall happen to be present whereof the governor of the say company or his deputy for the time be to be one to elect and nominate twenty four of the say company which shall be committee of the say company for one whole year from thence next ensue which person be so elect and nominate to be committee of the say company as aforesaid the committee shall take a corporal oath before they be admit to the execution of their say office shall take a corporal oath before the governor or his deputy and six or more of the say committee of the say company be their last predecessor for the time be that they and every of they shall well and faithful perform their say office of committee in all thing concern the same and that immediate after the say oath so take they shall and may execute and use the say office of committee of the say company for one whole year from thence next follow and moreover our will and pleasure be and by th^se present for we if the governor die or be remove a new to be choose our heir and successor we do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and to their successor that when and as often it shall happen to the governor of the say company for the time at any time within one year after he shall be nominate elect and swear to the office of the governor of the say company as be aforesaid to die or to be remove from the say office which governor not demean himself well in his say office we will to be remooveable at the pleasure of the say company or the great part of they which shall be present at any their public assembly common call their general court hold for the say company that then and so often it shall and may be lawful to and for the residue of the say company for the time be or the great part of they within convenient time after the death or remove any such governor to assemble themselves in such convenient place as they shall think fit for the election of the governor of the say company or that the say company or the great part of they be then and there present shall and may then and there before their departure from the say place elect and nominate one other of the say company to be governor of the say company in the place or steed of he that so die or be so remove which person be so elect and nominate to the office of governor of the say company shall have and exercise the say office for and during the residue of the say year take first a corporal oath as be aforesaid for the due execution thereof and this to be do from time to time so often as the case shall so require and also our will and pleasure be and by these present for we our heir and cuccessor we do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and to their successor that when and as often as it shall happen any of the committee of the say company for the time be at any time within one year next after that they or any of they shall be nominate elect and swear to the office of committee of the say company as be aforesaid to die or be remove from the say office which committee not demean themselves well in their say office we will to be removable at the pleasure of the say governor if any of the committee new to be choose and company or the great part of they whereof the governor for the time be or his deputy to be one within convenient time after the death or remove of any of the say committee to assemble themselves in such convenient place as be or shall be usual and accustom for the election of the governor of the say company or where else for the governor of the say company for the time be or his deputy to be one be then and there present shall and may then and there before there departure from the say place elect and nominate one or more of the say company to be committee of the say company in the place and steed place or steed of he or they that so die or be or be so remove which person or person so elect and nominate to the office or office of committie or committee of the say company shall have and exercise the say office and office for and during the residue of the say year take first a corporal oath as be aforesaid for the due execution thereof freedom for the son and apprentice of such as be free of the company and this to be do from time to time so often as the cause shall require and further we do by these present for we our heir and successor will and grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east-indies and their successor that they and all that be or shall be of the say company of merchant of London trade into the east-indies and every of they and all the son of they and every of they at their several age of one and twenty year or upward and further all such the apprentice factor or servant of they and every of they which hereafter shall be implay by the say governor and company in the say trade of merchandise of or to the east-indies beyond the sea or any other the place aforesaid in any part of the say east-indies shall and may by the space of fifteen year from the feast of the birth of our lord God last pass before the date hereof free traffic and use the trade of merchandise by sea in and by such way and passage already find out the place of the freedom of this company or discover or which hereafter shall be find out and discover as they shall esteem and take to be fit into and from the east-indies into the country and part of Asia and Africa and into and from all the land port haven city creak town and place of Asia Africa and America or any of they beyond the cape of Bona Sperancia to the straits of Magellan where any trade or traffic of merchandise may be use or have to and from every of they in such order manner form liberty and condition to all intent and purpose as shall be from time to time at any public assembly or court hold by or for the say governor or company by or between they of they of the say company or fellowship of merchant of London trade into the east-indies or the more part of they for the time be present at such assembly or court the governor or his deputy be always present at such court or assembly limit and agree and not otherwise without any molestation impeachment or disturbance any statute usage diversity religion or faith or any other cause or matter whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding so always that the same trade be not undertake nor address to any country island port haven city creak town or place already in the lawful and actual possession of any such christian prince or state as at this present be or at any time hereafter shall be in league or amity with we our heir or successor and who do not or will not accept of such trade but do overt declare and publish the same that the company may assemble in any convenient place to be utter against his or their good will and like and further our will and pleasure be and by these present for we our heir and successor we do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east-indies and to their successor that it shall and may be lawful to and for the say governor and company and their successor from time to time to assemble themselves for or about any the matter cause affair or business of the say trade in any place or place for the same convenient during the say term of fifteen year within our dominion or elsewhere and there to hold court for the say company and the affair thereof and that also it shall and may be lawful to and for they or the more part of they be so assemble and that shall then and there be present in any such place or place whereof the governor or his deputy for the time be to be one to make ordain and constitute such and so many reasonable law constitution order and ordinance authority to make reasonable law by the great part of a general assembly as to they or the great part of they be then and there present shall seem necessary and convenient for the good government of the same company and of all factor master mariner and other officer employ or to be employ in any of their voyage and for the better advancement and continuance of the say trade and traffic and the same law constitution order and ordinance so make to put in and execute according and at their pleasure to revoke or alter the same or any of they as occasion shall require and that the say governor and company so often as they shall make ordain or establish any such law constitution order and ordinance in form aforesaid shall and may lawful impose ordain limit and provide such pain punishment penalty by imprisonment of body or by fine or amercement or by all or any of they upon and against all offender contrary to such law constitution order and ordinance or any of they as to the say governor to punish offender either in body or pu^^e so it be not contrary to the law of the realm and company for the time be or the great part of they then and there be present the say governor or his deputy be always one shall seem necessary requisite and convenient for the observation of the same law constitution order and ordinance and the same fine and amercement shall and may levy take and have to the use of (@) say governor and company and their successor without the impediment of we our heir or successor or of any the officer or minister of we our heir or successor or without account to we our heir or successor to be render or make all and sundry which law constitution order and ordinance so as aforesaid to be make we will to be due observe and keep under the pain and penalty therein to be contain so always the say law constitution order ordinance imprisonment fine and amercement be reasonable and not contrary or repugnant to the law statute or custom of this our realm and for as much as the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies freedom of custom of good outward for four year have not yet experience of the kind of commodity and merchandize which be or will be vendible or to be utter in the say part of the east indies and therefore shall be drive to carry to those part in their voyage diverse and sundry commodity which be likely to be return again into this realm we therefore of our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion for the better encourage of the say governor and company of merchant trade into the east indies and for the advancement of the say trade do grant unto the say governor and company and to their successor that they and their successor during the four first voyage which they shall make or set forth for or towards the say east indies shall or may transport and carry out of our realm of England and the port creek and haven thereof all such and so much good and merchandize be good and merchandize lawful passable and transportable out of this realm and not prohibit to be transport by any law or statute of this realm as shall be by they their factor or assign ship in any ship or ship vessel or vessel to be employ in any of the say four first voyage free of custom subsidy or poundage or any other duty or payment to we or our successor due or belong for the ship or transport of the same or any of they and yet nevertheless our will and pleasure be and we do by these present straight charge and command that all and every such good and merchandize so to be transport out of this realm shall from time to time during the say four first voyage as be aforesaid shall from time to time be due enter by the customer controller or other officer of such port creek or place where the same good or merchandize shall happen to be ship or lade to be transport as aforesaid and also of our further especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion we do for we our heir successor six and six month time for payment of custom and subsidy inward grant to and with the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that when and as often at any time during the say term and space of fifteen year as any custom pondage subsidy or other duty shall be due and payable unto we our heir or successor for any good ware or merchandize whatsoever to be return out or from any the land port haven city town or place aforesaid unto the port of London or any of the haven creek member or place to the same port belong that the customer and all other officer for the time be of we our heir or successor for or concern receipt of custom poundage subsidy or other duty unto who it shall appertain shall upon the request of the governor and company of the say merchant of London trade into the east indies or any other their agent factor or assign give unto the say governor and company their agent factor or assign six month time for the payment of the one half and after those six month end other six month time for the payment of the other half of their say custom poundage or other subsidy or duty receive good and sufficient bond with surety to the use of we our heir and successor for the true payment of the same according and upon the receipt of the say bond with surety from time to time to give unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies for the time be their agent factor or assign their cocket or other warrant to take out and receive on land the same good ware and merchandise by virtue thereof without any disturbance and that also as often as at any time during the say term of fifteen year any good ware or merchandise of the say governor and company for the time be lade from our port of London or any the creek member or place to the same port belong to be transport to or towards any of the port land haven city town or place aforesaid shall happen to miscarry or be lose before their safe arrival or discharge in the port if good miscarry outward the value of custom shall be allow in other good afterward ship for and to the which the same shall be send that then and so often and so much custom poundage subsidy or other duty as they answer to we for the same before their go forth of our say port haven or creek shall after due proof make before the treasurer of England for the time be of the say loss and the just quantity thereof be by virtue hereof allow by the say governor and company their agent or factor by warrant of the say treasurer to the say customer or officer in the next good ware or merchandise that the say governor and company or their successor shall and may ship for or towards those part according to the true rate of the custom poundage or subsidy before pay for the good ware or merchandise so lose or miscarry or any part thereof and for that the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies be like to bring into this our realm a much great quantity of foreign commodity from the part of the say east indies then can be spend for the necessary use of the same our realm which of necessity must be transport into other countey and there vent we for we our heir and successor of our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion do grant to and with the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that at all time from time to time during the space of thirteen month next after the discharge of any the same foreign commodity so to be bring in the subsidy poundage custom and other duty for the same be first pay or compound for the custom of good be pay at come into the realm it shall be lawful for any natural subject to ship it out again upon the first custom within thirteen month as aforesaid it shall be lawful for the say governor and company and their successor or any other the natural subject of this our realm which may or shall buy the same of they to transport the same in english bottom free out of this realm as well ungarble as garble without payment of any further custom poundage or any further subsidy to we our heir or successor for the same whereof the subsidy custom poundage or other duty shall be so former pay or compound for as aforesaid and so provide and the say customer or other officer or officer to who in that behalf it shall appertain for the time be by virtue hereof shall upon due and sufficient proof thereof make in the custom house of or belong to the same port of London give they sufficient Cocket or certificate for the safe pass out thereof according and to the end no deceit to be use herein to we our heir or successor certificate shall be bring from the collector of the custom subsidy poundage or other duty inward of we our heir or successor to the collector of the custom subsidy poundage or other duty outward of we our heir or successor to the say good ware or merchandise have within the time limit answer their due custom subsidy poundage or other duty for the same inward and moreover we of our further especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion have grant and by these present for we our heir and successor do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London that it shall be lawful in the first voyage to carry out in foreign coin procure by the company or bullion the value of thirty thousand pound so as six thousand thereof be coin in the mint trade into the east indies that it shall and may be lawful for they their factor or assign in their first voyage or fleet which be now in prepare for their first adventure to the say east indies to transport out of this our realm of England all such foreign coin of silver either spanish or other foreign silver as they have procure prepare and get or shall procure prepare and get as likewise all such other coin of silver as they have procure or shall procure to be coin in our mint within our tower of London out of such plate or Bullyon as it shall be provide for the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies their factor or assign before the go forth of the same fleet in these three first voyage so as the whole quantity of coin or money to be transport in this their say first voyage do not exceed the value or sum of thirty thousand pound sterling and so as the sum of six thousand pound at the least parcel of the say sum of thirty thousand pound be first coin in our mint within our tower of London before the same shall be transport as aforesaid any law statute restraint or prohibition in that behalf notwithstanding and in like manner of our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion we have grant and by these present do for we our heir and successor after the say first voyage in all the rest of the voyage they may carry out in every voyage thirty thousand pound of such foreign coin as they bring into the realm so as six thousand thereof be new coin in the mint grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that it shall and may be lawful to and for the say governor and company and their successor after the say first voyage set forth yearly for and during the residue of the say term of fifteen year to ship and transport out of this our realm of England or dominion of the same in any their other voyage to and towards any of the part aforesaid in form aforementioned all such foreign coin of silver spanish or other foreign silver or bullion of silver as they shall during the say term bring or cause to be bring into this our realm of England from the part beyond the sea either in the same kind sort stamp or fashion which it shall have when they bring it in or any other form stamp or fashion to be coin within our mint within our tower of London at their pleasure so as the whole quantity of coin or money by they to be transport in any their say voyage during the residue of the say term do not exceed the value or sum of thirty thousand pound in any one voyage and so as the sum of six thousand pound at the least parcel of the say sum or value of thirty thousand pound so to be transport as aforesaid be first coin within our say tower of London before the same shall be transport in any of the say voyage any law statute restraint or prohibition in that behalf in any wise notwithstanding and further we of our ample and abundant grace mere motion and certain knowledge have grant and by th^se present for we our heir and successor do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that they and their successor that the trade shall be trade according to the ordinance of the company and not otherwise and their factor servant or assign in the trade of merchandise for they and on their behalf and not otherwise shall for the say term of fifteen year have use and enjoy the whole entire and only trade and traffic and the whole entire and only liberty use and privilege of trade and traffic and use feat and trade of merchandise to and from the say east indies and to and from all the land port haven city town or place aforesaid in such manner and form as be above mention and that the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and every particular and several person that now be or that hereafter shall be of that company or incorporation shall have full and free authority liberty and faculty licence and power in form aforesaid to trade and to traffic to and from the say east indies and all and every the part thereof in form aforesaid according to the order and manner and agreement hereafter to be make and agree upon by the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor or the more part of they present at any court or public assembly of or for the say company the governor of the say company or his deputy for the time be always present at such court or assembly and not otherwise and for that the ship sail into the say indies must take their due and proper time to proceed in these voyage which otherwise as we well perceive can be perform in the rest of the year follow therefore we of our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion for we our heir and successor do grant to and with the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that in any time of restraint six good ship and six good pinnace well furnish with ordnance and other munition for their defence and five hundred mariner that six ship and six Pinnasses shall be yearly permit to go into the east indies and five hundred mariner any restraint notwithstanding except the navy royal go forth englishman to guide and sail in the same six ship and six pinnace at all time during the say term of fifteen year shall quiet be permit and suffer to depart and go in the say voyage according to the purport of these present without any stay or contradiction by we our heir or successor or by the lord high admiral or any other officer or subject of we our heir or successor for the time be in any wise any restraint law statute usage or matter whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding provide nevertheless that if we shall at any time within the say term of fifteen year have just cause to arm our navy in warlike manner in defence of our realm or for offence of our enemy or that it shall be find needful to join to the navy of we our heir or successor the ship of our subject to be also arm for the war to such a number as can be supply if the say six ship and six pinnace shall be permit to depart as above be mention then upon knowledge give to we our heir or successor or by any admiral to the say governor and company about the twenty day of the month of july or three month before the say governor and company shall begin to make ready the same six ship and six pinnace that we may not spare the say six ship and six pinnace and the mariner requisite for they to be out of our realm during the time that our navy shall be upon the sea that then the say governor and company shall forbear to send six such ship and six pinnace for their trade of merchandise until that we shall revoke or withdraw our say navy for this service and we of our further royal favour and of our especial grace certain knowledge and mere motion have grant and by these present for we our heir and successor a prohibition to all other subject not free of this company for trade into those part upon several pain without the licence and assent of the company do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and to their successor that the say east indies nor the land haven port city town or place thereof nor of any part thereof shall not be visit frequent or haunt by any of the subject of we our heir or successor during the say term of fifteen year contrary to the true meaning of these present and by virtue of our prerogative royal which we will not in that behalf have argue or bring in question we straight charge command and prohibit for we our heir and successor of what degree or quality soever they be that none of they direct or indirect do visit haunt frequent trade traffic or adventure by way of merchandise into or from any of the say east indies or into and from any of the land port haven city town or place aforesaid other than the say governor or company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and such particular person as now be or hereafter shall be of that company their agent factor and assign during the say term of fifteen year unless it be by and with such licence and agreement of the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies in write first have and obtain under their common seal to be grant upon pain that every such person or person that shall trade or traffic into or from any of the say east indies other than the say governor or company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor shall incur our indignation and forfeiture and loss of the good merchandise and other thing whatsoever which so shall be bring into this realm of England or any the dominion of the same forfeiture of good and ship contrary to our say prohibition or the purport or true meaning of these present as also the ship and ship with the furniture thereof wherein such good merchandise or thing shall be bring the half of all the say forfeiture to be to we our heir and successor and the other half of all and every the say forfeiture we do by these present of our especial grace certain knowledge the division of the forfeiture and mere motion clear and whole for we our heir and successor give and grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and further all and every the say offender for their say contempt to suffer imprisonment during our pleasure imprisonment and such other punishment as to we our heir or successor for so high a contempt shall seem meet and convenient and not to be in any wise deliver until they and every of they enter into bond of a thousand pound how the company may grant licen^^ to other at what time shall become find unto the say governor for the time be in the sum of a thousand pound at least at no time there after during this present grant to sail or traffic into any of the say east indies contrary to our express commandment in that behalf herein set down and publish and further for the better encouragement of merchant stranger and other to bring in commodity into this our realm we for we our heir and successor do grant unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade in to the east indies that they and their sucessour may from time to time for any consideration or benefit to be take to their own use grant or give licence to any person or person to sail trade or traffic into or from any of the say east indies so as such licence be grant or give before such good ware and merchandize be lay on land and so as such licence be make by the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies for the time be under their common seal and further of our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion we have condescend and grant and by these present for we our heir and successor we do condescend and grant that her majesty will not grant to any other to enter into these part during the term of 15. year that the company may admit other at their pleasure into this freedom unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies and their successor that we our heir and successor during the say term of fifteen year will not grant liberty licence or power to any person or person whatsoever contrary to the tenor of these our letter patent to sail pass trade or traffic to the say east indies or into or from the land port haven city town or place aforesaid or any of they contrary to the true meaning of these present without the consent of the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies or the most part of they and our will and pleasure be and hereby we do also ordain that it shall and may be lawful to and for the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies or the more part of they whereof the governor for the time be or his deputy to be one to admit into and to be of the say company all such apprentize to any of the say fellowship or company and all such servant and factor of or for the say company and all such other as to they or the most part of they present at any court hold for the say company the governor or his deputy be one shall be think fit and agreeable with the order and ordinance to be make for the government of the say company provide always that if any of the person before name and appoint by these present to be free of the say company of merchant of London trade into the east indies proviso that if any name in the pa^ent do not brin^ in his promise adventure set down it shall be lawful for the company to disfranchise he shall not before the go forth of the fleet appoint for this first voyage from the port of London bring in and deliver to the treasurer or treasurer appoint or which within the space of twenty day next after the date hereof shall be appoint by the say governor and company or the more part of they to receive the contribution and adventure set down by the several adventure in this last and present voyage now in hand to be set forth such sum of money as have be by any of the say person by these present nominate to be of the say company express set down and write in a book appoint for that purpose and leave in the hand of the say Thomas smith governor of the say company or of the say Paul banning alderman of London and subscribe with the name of the same adventurer under their hand and agree upon to be adventure in the say first voyage that then it shall be lawful for the say governor and company or the more part of they whereof the say governor or his deputy to be one at any their general court or general assembly to remove disfranchize and displace he or they at their will and pleasure and the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies for they and their successor do by these present covenant promise and grant to and with we our heir and successor that they the say governor and company and their successor in all and every such voyage as they at any time or time hereafter during the say term shall make out of this realm by virtue of this our grant and letter patent the first voyage only except the company do promise to bring in after every voyage return within si^ month as great a quantity of silver gold or foreign coin as they shall c^^^ie ou^ the first voyage except all silver or gold carry forth by the company shall be ship at the port of London Dartmouth and Plymouth the privilege shall not extend into any place be in the actual possession of any prince in league or amity with her majesty shall and will upon every return which shall be make back again into this realm or any of our dominion or within six month next after every such return bring into this our realm of England from the say east indies or from some other part beyond the sea out of our dominion as great or great value in bullion of gold or silver or other foreign coin of gold or silver respective for every voyage the first voyage only except as shall be by force of these present transport or carry out of this realm by they or any of they in any kind of silver abovesaid whatsoever in any of the say voyage and that all such silver as by virtue of this our grant and letter patent shall be ship or lade by the say governor and company or their successor to be transport out of this realm in any of the say voyage shall from time to time at the set forth of every such particular voyage be ship or lade at the port or haven of London Dartmouth or Plymouth or at some of the same port and haven and at no other port or haven whatsoever within this our realm or the dominion thereof and that all and every such silver as from time to time shall be ship and lade in the say port of London Dartmouth and Plymouth or any of they to be by force of these present transport out of this realm as be aforesaid shall from time to time be due enter by the customer controller Collector or other officer to who it shall appertain of every such port or haven where the same shall happen to be ship or lade in the custom book belong to the say port or haven before such time as the same shall be ship or lade to be transport as aforesaid without any custom or subsidy to be pay for the same and that in like manner all and all manner of gold and silver whatsoever which shall be bring into this realm or any of our dominion by the say governor and company or any of they according to the true meaning of these present shall likewise be from time to time due enter by the customer controller or other officer of every such port creek or place where the same gold or silver shall happen to be unship or bring to land before such time as the same gold or silver or any part thereof shall be unship or bring to land as be aforesaid provide always nevertheless and our will and pleasure be that these our letter patent or any thing therein contain shall not in any sort extend to give or grant any licence power or authority unto the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies or to any of they to undertake or address any trade unto any country port island haven city creek town or place be already in the lawful and actual possession of any such christian prince or state as at this present be or at any time hereafter shall be in league or amity with we our heir and successor and which do not or will not except of such trade but do overt declare and publish the same to be utter against he or their good will and like any thing in present before contain to the contrary thereof notwithstanding provide also that if it shall hereafter appear to we our heir or successor that this grant or the continuance thereof shall not be profitable to we our heir and successor and to this our realm that then and from thenceforth upon and after two year warning to be give to the say company by we our heir or successor under our or their privy seal or sign manual this present grant shall cease be void and determine to all intent construction and purpose and further of our special grace certain knowledge and mere motion we have condescend and grant and by these present for we our heir and successor do condescend and grant to the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east-indies and their successor that if at the end of the say term of fifteen year it shall seem meet and convenient to the say governor and company or any the party aforesaid that this present grant shall be continue and if that also it shall appear unto we our heir and successor that the continuance thereof shall not be prejudicial or hurtful to this our realm if this privilege be find unprofitable for th^ realm then within two year warning give under the privy s^ale the same shall be void but if it shall be find beneficial than the same to be renew with some addition but that we shall find the further continuance thereof profitable for we our heir and successor and for our realm with such condions as be herein mention or with some alteration or qualification thereof that then we our heir or successor at the instance and humble petition of the say governor and company or any of they to be make unto we our heir and successor will grant and make unto the say governor and company or any of they so sue for the same and such other person and person our subject as they shall nominate and appoint or shall be by we our heir or successor new nominate not exceed in number four and twenty new letter patent under the great seal of England in due form of law with like covenant grant clause and article as in these present be contain or with addition of either necessary article or change of these into some other part for and during the full term of fifteen year then next follow will hereby and straight charge and command all and singular our admiral vice-admirals justice major sheriff escheator constable bailiff and all and singular other our officer minister leadgeman and subject whatsoever to be aid favour help and assist unto the say governor and company and to their successor and to their deputy officer factor servant assign and minister and every of they in execute and enjoin the premise aswell on land as on sea from time to time when you or any of you shall thereunto be require any statute act ordinance proviso proclamation or restraint heretofore have make set forth ordain or provide or any other matter cause or thing whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding although express mention of the true yearly value or certainty of the premise or of any of they or of any other gift or grant by we or any of our progenitor to the say governor and company of merchant of London trade into the east indies or to any of they before this time make in these present be not make or any statute act ordinance provision proclamation or restraint to the contrary hereof heretofore have make ordain or provide or any other thing cause or matter whatsoever in any wise notwithstanding in witness whereof we have cause these our letter to be make patent witness ourself at Westminster the one and thirty of December in the three and forty year of our reign s. HUBERD chap. 3 the first voyage make to east India by master JAMES lancaster now knight for the merchant of London 1600. with four tall ship to wit the dragon the Hector the ascension and Susan and a victualler call the guest @ i. the preparation to this voyage and what befall they in the way till they depart from Saldania the merchant of London in the year of our lord 1600. join together and make a stock of seventy two thousand pound to be employ in ship and merchandize for the discovery of a trade in the east India to bring into this realm spice and other commodity they buy four great ship to be employ in this voyage the dragon of the burden of six hundred ton the Hector of the burden of three hundred ton the Ascentic^ of the burden of two hundred and threescore ton these ship they furnish with man victual and munition for twenty month and send in they in merchandise and spanish money to the value of seven and twenty thousand pound all the rest of their stock be spend and consume about the ship and other necessary appertain to they with money lend to the mariner and sailor beforehand that go upon the voyage the merchant be suitor to her majesty who give they her friendly letter of commendation write to diverse prince of India offer to enter into a league of peace and amity with they the copy of which letter shall hereafter appear in their place and because no great action can well be carry and accomplish without a absolute authority of justice shee grant to the general of their fleet master james Lancaster for his better command and government a commission of marshal Law the thirteen of February 1600. the say master james Lancaster the general be place in the dragon the great ship be admiral master John Middleton captain in the Hector the vide-admiral master William Brand chief governor in the ascension and master John Heyward in the Susan and more in every of the say ship three merchant to succeed one the other if any of they shall be take away by death these ship be ready and depart from Wolwich in the river of Thames the thirteen of February after the english account 1600. with four hundred and fourscore man in they in the dragon two hundred and two man in the Hector a hundred a eight in the ascension fourscore and two and in the Susan fourscore and eight the guest a ship of a hundred and thirty ton be add as a victualler these ship stay so long in the river of Thames and in the down for want of wind that it be Easter day before they arrive at Dartmouth where they spend five or six day in take in their bread and certain other provision appoint for they from thence they depart the eighteen of April 1601. and ride in Tor bay till the twenty in the morning while we ride there the general send aboard all the ship instruction for their better company keep at their come to the sea and further give direction if any of the fleet shall be separate the one from the other by storm of wind tempest or other casualty what * * April 1601. these place be the calm of Canary and if weakness permit not to double the cape So^danha the three cape saint Roman in Madagascar to cirne and so to Suma^ra their first place of trade may the five place to repair unto for their meeting together again the second of April 1601. the wind come fair and we hoist our anchor and depart out of Tor bay direct our course towards the land of the canaria the wind hold fair the five of May in the morning we have sight of Alegranza the northermost island of the Canarias and direct our course between Forteventura and the grand canaria and come to the south part of the grand canaria think to water there we fall into the calm which proceed by reason of the high-land that lie so near the seaside the seven of May about three of the clock in the afternoon we depart from the grand canaria have the wind at north-east and we direct our course south-west by south and south south-west till we come into 21. 1 degree from the eleven to the twenty our course be for the most part south till we come into eight degree the wind be always northerly and north-east in this height we find the calm and contrary wind which upon this coast of Guinea at this time of the year be very familiar with many sudden gust of wind storm thunder and lightning very fearful to be see and dangerous to the ship unless a diligent care be have that all sail be strike down upon the sudden perceive the air never so little to change or alter and yet many time although the master of ship be careful and look unto it with great diligence the suddenness be such that it can hardly be prevent from the twenty of May till the one and twenty of june we lay the most part becalm and with contrary wind at south and turn up and down with this contrary wind with much ado^ we get into two degree of the north side of the line where we espy a ship to the which the general give chase command all the rest of the ship to follow he and by two of the clock in the afternoon we have set she up and take she she be of the city of viana in Portugal and come from Lisbon in the company of two carracke and three galleon find for the east India which ship she have lose at Sea the three galleon be ship of war and go to keep the coast of the east India from be trade with other nation we take out of her a hundred six and forty butt of wine a hundred threescore and sixteen jar of oil twelve barrel of oil and five and fifty hogshead and fat of meal which be a great help to we in the whole voyage after the general divide these victual indifferent to all the ship to every one his proportion without partiality the last of june about midnight we double the line and lose the sight of the north-star have the wind at southeast and we hold our course south south-west and double the cape of saint Augustine some six and twenty league to the eastward the twenty of july we be shoot into nineteen degree forty minute to the southward of the line the wind inlarge daily to the eastward here we discharge the guest the ship that go a long with we to carry the provision that our four ship can not take in in England after we have discharge she we take her mast sail and yards and break down her high building for firewood and so leave she float in the sea and follow our course to the southward the four and twenty of july we pass the tropic of Capricorn the wind be north-east by north we hold our course east southeast now by reason of our long be under the line which proceed of our late come out of England for the time of the year be too far spend by six or seven week to make a quick navigation many of our man fall sick therefore the nine and twenty of july be in 28.1/^ degree he write a remembrance to the governor of each ship either to fetch Saldavia or saint Helena for refresh thus follow on our course the first of August we come into the height of thirty degree August south of the line at which time we meet the south-west wind to the great comfort of all our people for by this time very many of our man be fall sick of the scurvy in all our ship and unless it be in the general ship only the other three be so weak of man that they can hardly handle the sail this wind hold fair till we come within two hundred and fifty league of the cape esperanza and then come clean contrary against we to the east and so hold some fifteen or sixteen day to the great discomfort of our man for now the few whole man we have begin also to fall sick so that our weakness of man be so great that in some of the ship the merchant take their turn at the helm and go into the top to take in the top-sail as the common mariner do but God who show mercy in all distress send we a fair wind again so that the nine of September we come to Saldania where the general before the rest bear in and come to a anchor they arrive at S^ldania and hoist out his boat to help the rest of the ship for now the state of the other three be such that they be hardly able to let fall a anchor to save themselves withal the general go aboard of they and carry good store of man and hoist out their boat for they which they be not able to do of themselves and the reason why the general man stand better in health then the man of other ship be this he bring to sea with he certain bottle of the juice of lemon the best remedy for the scurvy which he give to each one as long as it will last three spoonful every morning fast not suffer they to eat any thing after it till noon this juice work much the better if the party keep a short diet and whole refrain salt meat which salt meat and long be at the sea be the only cause of the breed of this disease by this mean the general cure many of his man and preserve the rest so that in his ship have the double of man that be in the rest of the ship he have not so many sick nor lose so many man as they do which be the mercy of God to we all after the general have holpen the rest of the ship to hoist out their boat they begin all to be great comfort then he himself go present aland to seek some refresh for our sick and weak man where he meet with certain of the country people and give they diverse trifle as knife and piece of old iron and such like the most universal language and make sign to they to bring he down sheep and oxen. for he speak to they in the cattle language which be never change at the confusion of Babel which be moth for ox and kine and baa for sheep which language the people understand very well without any interpreter after he have send the people away very well content with their present and kind usage order be present give that certain of every ship company shall bring their sail aland and build tent with they for their sick man and also to make fortification of defence defence necessary if by any occasion the people shall take any conceit of offence against we and thereby offer we any violence and the general prescribe a order for buy and s^lling with the people which be manner of trade with the savage that at such time as they shall come down with the cattle only five or six man appoint for that purpose shall go to deal with they and the rest which shall never be under thirty musket and pike shall not come near the market by eight or ten score at the near and always to stand in their rank in a readiness with their musket in their rest what occasion soever shall befall and this order be most strict observe and keep that no man dare once go to speak with any of the people without special leave and I take this to be the cause why we live in so great friendship and amity with they contrary to that which late have befall the hollander which have five or six of their man slay by their treachery the three day after our come into this bay of Saldania the people bring down beef and mutton which we buy of they for piece of old iron hoop as two piece of eight inch a piece for a ox and one piece of eight inch for a sheep with which they seem to be well content within ten or twelve day we buy of they a thousand sheep and two and forty ox and may have buy many more if we will now within twelve day they cease to bring we any more cattle but the people many time come down to we afterward and when we make they sign for more sheep they will point we to those we have buy which the general cause to be keep graze upon the hill about our tent and be the cause as we judge they think we will have inhabit there and therefore bring we no more but God be thank we be well store to satisfy our need and may then very well forbear buy these ox be full as big as we and be very fat and the sheep many of they much big but of a very hairy wool yet of exceed good flesh fat and sweet this bay be in 34. degree south of the line and to our think much better than our sheep in England the people of this place be all of a tawny * * quality of the people and their difficult language the healthfulness of this Bay colour of a reasonable statute swift of foot and much give to pick and steal their speech be whole utter through the throat and they clock with their tongue in such sort that in seven week which we remain here in this place the sharp wit among we can not learn one word of their language and yet the people will soon understand any sign we make to they while we stay here in this bay we have so royal refresh that all our man recover their health and strength only four or five except but before our come in and in this place we lose out of all our ship one hundred and five man and yet we make account we be strong at our departure out of this bay than we be at our come out of England our man be so well enure to the southern climate @. 2 their departure from Saldania and proceed in their voyage to Achen in sumatra with their trade at saint Maries Antongill Nicubar the strange plant of Sombrero and other occurrent 1601. the four and twenty of October the general cause all our tent to be take down and our man to repair aboard the ship and be fit both of wood and fresh water the nine and twenty of October we put to sea and go out by a small island that lie in the mouth of the say bay which be exceed full of seal and pengwine so that if there be no other refresh one may very well refresh there over the bay of Saldania stand a very high hill flat like a table and be call the table such another plain mark to find a harbour in be not in all that coast for it be easy to be see or eighteen league into the Sea November 1. the cape double Novemb. 26. Sunday the first of November in the morning we double the cape of have the wind west north-west a great gale the six and twenty of November we fall with the head-land of the island of saint Laurence somewhat to the east of cape Sebastian and be within five mile of the shore we sound and find twenty five fathom the variation of the compass be little more or less sixteen degree for in a east and west course the variation of the compass help much and especial in this voyage decemb. 15. from the six and twenty of November till the fifteen of December we ply to the eastward the near our course we can lie always strive to have get to the island of Cirne i will of Cirne or d. Rodrigues which in some card be call Diego Rodriques but we find the wind always after our come to the island of saint Laurence at east and east southeast and east north-east so that we can not obtain it and to strive long in hope of change of wind we can not for now our man begin again to fall sick of the scurvy then the captain of the vice-admiral call to the general and think it best to bear into the bay of Antongile and there to refresh our man with orange and lemon to clear ourselves of this disease which be by he and the whole counsel call for that purpose well approve the seventeen of December we have sight of the southermost part of the island of saint Mary isle of s. Mary and s. Laurence and the next day we anchor between saint Mary and the great island of saint Laurence and send our boat aland to saint Maries where we have some store of lemon and orange which be precious for our diseased man to purge their body of the scurvy now as we ride here buy orange end lemon there arise upon we a very great storm so that three of our ship be put from their Anchros but within some sixteen hour the storm cease and the ship return and weigh their anchor again the general think it not good to make any long stay there see the uncertainty of the weather and that there be upon this island so little refresh to be have only these orange and lemon a little goat milk and some small quantity of Rice we see only one cow and that they drive away assoon as they see we come on land see this place so dangerous to ride in the general give present order to sail towards the bay of Antongile the time of the year be spend the easterly wind come against we and our man sick people of s. mar^e this island of s. Mary be high land and full of wood the people be black very handsome and tall man and of curl hair only before in their forehead they strike it up as the woman do here in England so that it stand some three inch upright they be whole without apparel only their privy part cover they be very tractable to converse withal yet seem to be very valiant the most of their food be Rice and some fish yet at our be there we can buy but small store of rice for the time of their store be far spend and their harvest be at hand there be two or three water place on the north part of this island but none of they very commodious yet with some travel there be water enough to be have the twenty three of December we depart from this island of s. Mary and the twenty five be Christmas day we come into the bay of Antongill decemb. 23. the bay of Antongill and come to a anchor in eight fathom water between a small island and the main lie in the bottom of the bay a very good and a safe road but the best ride be near under a small island for the defence of the wind that blow there for while we abide in this bay there blow a exceed great storm and those of our ship that ride near the small island be under the wind speed best for two of our ship drive with three anchor ahead the ground be ozy and not firm at our go a land in the little island we perceive by write upon the rock of five Holland ship which have be there and be depart about two month before our come in and have have some sickness among their man and have lose as we perceive between one hundred and fifty and two hundred man while they ride in that place the next day after our come to a anchor we go a land to the main island where the people present repair to we and make we sign of the five Holland ship depart and that they have buy the most part of their provision yet they enter into barter with we for Rice and hen orange and lemon and another fruit call and hold all at high rate and bring but a pedlar quantity our market be near to a great river into which we go with our boat and some man that be appoint to be buyer go ashore the rest remain in the boat always ready with their weapon in their hand and the boat some fifteen or twenty yard off into the water where the people can not wade to they and be ready at all time if they a shore have have any need to take they in so we trifle off some day before as aforesaid we can bring they to any real trade for all these people of the south and east part be very subtle and crafty in their barter buy and sell that unless you hold a near hand with they you shall hardly bring they to trade in any plain sort for they will ^ift you continual to give a little more and t^en no man will sell without that price so that you must not enlarge to any one more than another for in so do the want of this discretion in Virginia while one out of need or seem bounty will give a great price than another to the savages for their comedy so heigthn the prize and make they overvalue their corn etc that it prove much hindrance to the plantation a pinnace rear all will have that price or none the general see this command measure to be make of almost a quart and appoint how many glass bead shall be give for every measure and he that will not deal in this manner shall not deal at all the like order be set down for orange lemon and how many for every bead or else not our merchant after a little hold off consent and our deal be frank and round without any contradiction or word so that while we abide here we bring 15. @ ton of rice forty or fifty bushel of their pease and bean great store of orange lemon and and eight beef with many hen while we ride in this bay we rear a pinnace which we bring in piece in our ship out of England and cut down tree of which there be very great and great store which tree we saw out in board and sheathe she this pinnace be of some eighteen ton and very necessary and fit to go before our ship at our come into India in the time we stay here there die out of the general ship the master mate the preacher and the surgeon with some ten other common man and out of the vice-admiral there die the master with some other two and out of the ascension by a very great mischance be slay the captain and the boatswaine mate for as the master mate out of the general ship be carry a land to be bury the captain of the ascension take his boat to go aland to his burial and as it be the order of the sea to shoot off certain piece of ordnance at the burial of any officer the gunner of the ordnance shoot off three piece and the bullet be in they one stroke the ascension boat and slay the captain and the boatswaine mate stark dead how vain a thing be man so that they that go to see the burial of another be both bury there themselves those that die here die most of the flux which in our opinion come with the water which we drink for it be the time of winter when it rain very much which cause great flood to overflow the country so that the water be not wholesome as in most place in these hot country they be not in the time of their reins this disease also of the flux be often take by go open and cold in the stomach which our man will often do when they be hot we set sail out of this bay the six of march an^ h^ld on our course towards the India and the sixteenth we fall with a island call rogue-pize which lie in 10. ^/^ degree to the south of the equinoctial line to this island the general send his boat the isle of rogue-pize to see whether there be any safe ride for the ship but the boat for the most part find deep water where the ship can not safe ride as we coast along this island it seem very fair and pleasant exceed full of foul and Coco nut-tree and there come from the land such a pleasant smell as if it have be a garden of flower and sure if there be any good ride for ship in this island it must needs be a place of very great refresh for as our boat go near the land they see great store of fish and the fowl come wonder about they in such sort that with the oar wherewith the mariner rowe^ they kill many which be the fat and the best that we taste all the voyage and of these there be such exceed great abundance that many more ship than we have with we may have refresh themselves therewith 1602. dangerous rock the thirty of march 1602. be in six degree to the south of the line we happen upon a ledge of rock and look overboard and see they under the ship about five fathom deep it much amaze we fall upon the sudden and unexpected then as we be present cast about the ship we find eight fathom and so hold on our course east one of our man be in the top see a island southeast of we some five or six league off be but low land thisle of Candu this we judge to be the island of Candu although in our course we can not by computation find ourselves so far shoot to the eastward bear on our course some thirteen or fourteen league other rock we fall upon another flat of rock then we cast about to the southward and sail some twelve league find other rock so that prove diverse way we find flat of rock round about we and twenty and thirty and in some place forty and fifty fathom water in the midst of the flat here we be for two day and a half in exceed danger and can find no way to get out but at last we resolve to seek to the northward and in six degree forty three minute God be thank we find six fathom water the pinnace always go before we and sound with commandment to make sign what depth she have that thereby we may follow she thus thanks be to God be deliver out of this pound we follow our course with variable wind till the nine of May about four of the clock in the afternoon the isle of Nicubar at which time we have sight of the land of Nicubar and bare in and anchor on the north-side of the channel but the wind change to the south-west we be force to hoist our anchor and to bear over to the southside of the channel and so come to a anchor under a small island that lie on the say shore here we have fresh water and some Coco nut other refresh we have little yet the people come aboard our ship in long canoas which will hold twenty man and above in one of they and bring gum to sell in stead of amber and therewithal deceive diverse of our man for these people of the east be whole give to deceit they bring also hen and Coco nut to sell but hold they very dear so that we buy few of they we stay here ten day place of our ordnance and trim of our ship because we will be in all readiness at our arrival at our first port which we be not now far from April 20. the twenty of April in the morning we set sail to go towards sumatra but the wind blow so hard at south south west and the currant be against we that we can not proceed but beat up and down our ship fall into two leak so that we be force to go to the island of Sombrero the i will of Sombrero some ten or twelve league to the northward of Nicobar here we in the admiral lose a anchor for the ground be foul and grow full of counterfeit coral and some rock which cut our cable asunder so that we can not recover our anchor the people of these land go naked have only the privity find up in a piece of linen cloth which come about their middle like a girdle and so between their twist they be all of a tawny colour and anoint their face with diverse colour they be well limbed but very fearful for none of they will come aboard our ship or enter into our boates. the general report that he have see some of their priest or sacrificer all apparel but close to their body as if they have be sew in it and upon their head a pair of horn turn backward with their face paint green black and yellow and their horn also paint with the same colour and behind they upon their buttock a tail hang down very much like the manner as in some paint clothes we paint the devil in our country he demand wherefore they go in that attire answer be make he that in such form the devil appear to they in their sacrifice and therefore the priest his servant be so apparel tree sufficient for main mast a strange plant. in this island grow tree which for their tallness greatness and straightness will serve the big ship in all our fleet for a main mast and this island be full of those tree here likewise we find upon the sand by the sea side a small twig grow up to a young tree and offer to pluck up the same it shruke down into the ground and sink unless you hold very hard and be pluck up a great worm be the root of it and look how the tree grow in greatness the worm diminish now as soon as the worm be whole turn into the tree it root in the ground and so grow to be great this transformation be one of the strange wonder that I see in all my travail for this tree be pluck up little the leave strip off and the pill by that time it be dry turn into a hard stone much like to white coral so that this worm be twice transform into different nature of these we gather and bring home many @. 3 their entertainment and trade at Achen 29. of may. 1602. sumatra the nine and twenty of May we set sail from this island of Sombrero and the second of june we have sight of the land of sumatra and the five of june we come to anchor in the road of Achen some two mile of the city where we find sixteen or eighteen sail of ship of diverse nation some goserats some of Bengala some of Calicut call Malabares some pegues and some patanye which come to trade there there come aboard of we two holland merchant which have be leave there behind their ship to learn the language and manner of the country these tell we we shall be very welcome to the king who be desirous to entertain stranger and that the queen of England be very famous in those part by reason of the war and great victory the fame of q. Elizabeth which she have get against the king of Spain the same day the general send captain John Middleton captain of the vide-admiral with four or five gentleman to attend upon he to the king to declare unto he that he be send from the general of those ship who have a message and a letter from the most famous queen of England to the most worthy king of Achen and sumatra and that it will please his royal majesty to give to the say messenger audience to deliver his message and letter with a sufficient warrant for the safety of he and his people according to the law of nation hold in that behalf this messenger be very kind entertain by the king who when he have deliver his message glad grant his request and commune with he about many question and after cause a royal banquet to be make he and at his departure give a robe and a tuck of calico wrought with gold which be the manner of the king of this place to those he will grace with his special favour and withal send his commendation to the general will he to stay one day aboard his ship to rest himself after his come from the disquiet sea and the next day to come a land and have kind audience and frank leave with as great assurance as if he be in the kingdom of the queen his mistress and if he doubt of any thing of this his royal word such honourable pledge shall be send he for his further assurance as he shall rest very well satisfy therewith the three day the general go a land very well accompany with some thirty man or more to attend upon he and first at his land the holland merchant meet he and carry he home to their house as it be appoint for as yet the general will make choice of no house of his own till he have speak with the king but stay at the hollander house till a noble man come from the king who salute the general very kind and declare that he come from his majesty and represent his person then he demand the queen letter of the general which he refuse to deliver say he will deliver it to the king himself for it be the order of ambassador in those part of the world from whence he come to deliver their letter to the prince own hand and not to any that do represent the king person so he demand to see the superscription which the general show he and he read the same and look very earnest upon the seal take a note of the superscription and do likewise write her majesty name and then with courtesy take his leave and repair to the court to tell the king what have pass who present send six great elephant the honourable entertainment of the english general by the king of Achen with many trumpet drum and streamer with much people to accompany the general to the court so that the press be exceed great the big of these elephant be about thirteen or fourteen foot high which have a small castle like a coach upon his back cover with crimson velvet in the middle thereof be a great basin of gold and a piece of silk exceed rich wrought to cover it under which her majesty letter be put the general be mount upon another of the elephant some of his attendant ride other go a foot but when he come to the court gate there a noble man stay the general till he have go in to know the king further pleasure but present the say nobleman return and will the general to enter in and when the general come to the king presence he make his obeisance after the manner of the country declare that he be send from the most mighty queen of England to congratulate with his highness and treat with he concern a peace and amity with his majesty if it please he to entertain the same and therewithal begin to enter into further discourse which the king break off say I be sure you be weary of the long travail you have take I will have you to sit down and refresh yourself you be very welcome and here you shall have whatsoever you will in any reasonable condition demand for your princess sake for she be worthy of all kindness and frank condition be a princess of great nobleness for fame speak so much of she the general perceive the king mind deliver he the queen letter which he willing receive and deliver the same to a noble man stand by he then the general proceed to deliver he his present which be a basin of silver with a fountain in the midst of it weigh two hundred and five ounce a great stand cup of silver a rich lookingglass a head-piece with a plume of feather a case of very fair dag a rich wrought embroider belt to hang a sword in the queen present send to the king of Achen and a fan of feather all these be receive in the king presence by a nobleman of the court only he take into his own hand the fan of feather and cause one of his woman to fan he therewithal as a thing that most please he of all the rest the general be command to sit down in the king presence as the manner be upon the ground a mettle of gre^t esteem call Tambayck where be a very great banquet provide all the dish in which the meat be serve in be either of pure gold or of another mettle which among they be of great estimation call Tambaycke which grow of gold and brass together in this banquet the king as he sit aloft in a gallery about a fathom from the ground drink oft to the general in their wine which they call rack this wine be make of rice and be as strong as any of our aquavitae a little will serve to bring one asleep the general after the first draught drink either water mingle therewithal or pure water the king give he leave so to do for the general crave his pardon as not able to drink so strong drink after this feast be do the king cause his damosel to come forth and dance and his woman to play music unto they and these woman be rich attire and adorn with bracelet and jewel and this they account a great favour for these be not usual see of any but such as the king will great honour the king also give unto the general a fine white robe of calico rich wrought with gold and a very fair girdle of Turkey work and two cress which be a kind of dagger all which a noble man put on in the king presence and in this manner he be dismiss the court with very great courtesy and one send along with he to make choice of a house in the city where the general think most meet but at this time he refuse this kindness and rather choose to go aboard his ship and leave the king to consider of the queen letter the tenor whereof hereafter follow elizabeth by the grace of God queen of England France and Ireland of the christian faith and religion to the great and mighty king of Achem etc. in the island of sumatra our love brother greeting the eternal God of his divine knowledge and providence have so dispose his blessing and good thing of his creation for the use and nourishment of mankind in such sort that notwithstanding they grow in diverse kingdom and region of the world yet by the industry of man stir up by the inspiration of the say omnipotent creator they be disperse into the most remote place of the universal World to the end that even therein may appear unto all nation his marvellous work he have so ordain that the one land may have need of the other and thereby not only breed intercourse and exchange of their merchandise and fruit which do superabound in some country and want in other but also engender love and friendship betwixt all man a thing natural divine whereunto we have respect right noble king and also to the honourable and true royal fame which have hither stretch of your highness human and noble usage of stranger which repair into that your kingdom in love and peace in the trade of merchandise pay your due custom we have be move to give licence unto these our subject who with commendable and good desire sail to visit that your kingdom notwithstanding the danger and misery of the sea natural to such a voyage which by the grace of GOD they will make be the great that be to be make in the world and to present traffic unto your subject which their offer if it shall be accept by your highness with such love and grace as we hope for of so great and magnanimous a prince we for they do promise that in no time hereafter you shall have cause to repent thereof but rather to rejoice much for their deal shall be true and their conversation sure and we hope that they will give so good proof thereof that this beginning shall be a perpetual confirmation of love betwixt our subject on both part by carry from we such thing and merchandise as you have need of there so that your highness shall be very well serve and better content than you have heretofore be with the portugal and spaniard our enemy who only and none else of these region have frequent those your and the other kingdom of the east not suffer that the other nation shall do it pretend themselves to be monarch and absolute lord of all these kingdom and province as their own conquest and inheritance as appear by their lofty title in their writing the contrary whereof have very late appear unto we and that your highness and your royal family father and grandfather have by the grace of GOD and their valour know not only to defend your own kingdom but also to give war unto the portugal in the land which they possess as namely in malaca in the year of the humane redemption 1575. under the conduct of your valiant captain Ragamacota with their great loss and the perpetual honour of your highness crown and kingdom and now if your highness shall be please to accept into your favour and grace and under your royal protection and defence these our subject that they may free do their business now and continue yearly hereafter this bearer who go chief of this fleet of four ship have order with your highness licence to leave certain factor with a settle house of factory in your kingdom until the go thither of another fleet which shall go thither upon the return of this which leave factor shall learn the language and custom of your subject whereby the better and more love to converse with they and the better to confirm this confederacy and friendship betwixt we we be content if your highness be so please that you cause capitulation reasonable to be make and that this bearer do the like in our name which we promise to perform royal and entire as well herein as in other agreement and argument which he will communicate unto you to who we do great desire your highness to give entire faith and credit and that you will receive he and the rest of his company under your royal protection favour they in what shall be reason and Iustice and we promise on our behalf to reansw in like degree in all that your highness shall have need out of these our kingdom and we desire that your highness will be please to send we answer by this bearer of this our letter that we may thereby understand of your royal acceptance of the friendship and league which we offer and great desire may have a happy beginning with long year to continue at his next go to the court he have long conference with the king concern the effect of the queen letter wherewith the king seem to be very well please and say if the content of that letter come from the heart he have good cause to think well thereof and for the league her majesty be desirous to hold with he he be well please therewith and for the further demand the general make from she in respect of the merchant traffic he have commit all those point to two of his nobleman to confer with he and promise what her majesty have request shall by all good mean be grant with this content answer after another banquet appoint for the general he depart the court. and the next day he send to those nobleman the king have name to he to know their appoint time when they will sit upon this conference the one of these nobleman be the chief bishop of the realm a man of great estimation with the king as the Turk have his mufti so other mahometan prince have their chief priest in all country of that profession and all the people and so he well deserve for he be a man very wise and temperate the other be one of the most ancient nobility a man of very good gravity but not so fit to enter into those conference as the bishop be a day and a meeting be appoint where many question pass betwixt they and all the conference pass in the arabic tongue which both the bishop and the other nobleman well understand now the general before his go out of England entertain a jew who speak that language perfect which stand he in good steed at that time about many demand the general make touch freedom for the merchant the bishop say unto he sir great use of the arabian tongue what reason shall we show to the king from you whereby he may the more willing grant these thing which you have demand to be grant by he to who the general answer with these reason follow her majesty mutual Loue her worthiness in protect other against the king of Spain the common enemy of these part her noble mind which refuse the offer of those country nor will she suffer any prince to exceed she in kindness who force have exceed the spaniard in many victory and hinder the portugal attempt against these part the grand-signor of Turkey have already enter into league with her majesty on honourable condition reason of another kind moreover it be not unknown to the king what prosperity trade of merchandise bring to all land with increase of their revenue by the custom of these also prince grow into the more renown and strength and be the more fear for the wealth of their subject which by the concourse of merchandise grow and increase and the more kind that stranger be entertain the more the trade do grow the prince be thereby much enrich also and for Achem in particular this port lie well to answer to the trade of all Bengala java and the Moluccas and all china and these place have vent of their merchandise will not let to resort hither with they so that by this mean the royalty of the king crown will great increase to the decrease and diminish of all the portugal trade and their great force in the indies and if it shall happen that his majesty want any artificer he may have they out of our kingdom give they conten^ for their travail and free course to go as they have good will to come and any other necessary that our country bring forth and may spare shall be at the king command and service but I hope his majesty will not urge any demand more than her majesty may willing consent unto or that shall be contrary to her honour and law and the league she have make with all christian prince her neighbour further the general demand that his majesty will cause present proclamation to be make for our safety and that none of his people shall abuse any of we but that they may do their business quiet and this last request be so well perform that although there be a strict order that none of their own people may walk by night yet we may go both night and day without impeachment of any only if they find any of we abroad at unlawful hour the justice bring they home to the general house and there deliver they after these conference end the bishop demand of the general note of his reason in writing as also of his demand of the privilege he demand in her majesty name for the merchant and he will show they to the king and within few day he shall have his majesty answer to they and with these conference and much gratulation and with some other talk of the affair of Christendom they break up for that time the general be not negligent to send his demand to the noble man which for the most part be draw out before hand for he be not unready for these business before he come aland in the kingdom cockfighting in Achen at his next go to the court and sit before the king behold the cockfighting which be one of the great sport this king delight in he send his interpreter with his obeisance to the king desire he to be mindful of the business whereof he have confer with his nobleman whereupon he call the general unto he and tell he that he be careful of his dispatch and will willing enter into peace and league with her majesty and for his part will hold it true and for those demand and article he have set down in writing they shall be all write again by one of his secretary and shall have they authorize by he which within five or six day be deliver the general by the king own hand with many good and gracious word the tenor of which league and article of peace be too long to be insert according to their desire be to the english grant first free entry and trade second custom free whatsoever they bring in or carry forth and assistance with their vessel and ship to save our ship good and man from wrack in any danger three liberty of testament to bequeath their good to who they please four stability of bargain and order for payment by the subject of Achen etc. five authority to execute justice on their own man offend six justice against injury from the native seventh not to arrest or stay our good or set prize on they eight freedom of conscience this league of peace and amity be settle the merchant continual go forward provide pepper for the lade of the ship but there come in but small store in respect of the last year sterility so by some of they he understand of a port about a hundred and fifty league from thence in the south part of the same island call Priaman where he may lade one of his small ship Henry Middleton captain John Da^is this be his second voyage to the indies in the three with sir e. mich. he be slay as before be show then he prepare the Susan and place for captain and chief merchant in she m. Henry Middleton he be also not a little grieve that captain John davis his principal pilot have tell the merchant before our come from London that pepper be to be have here for four spanish royal of eight the hundred and it cost we almost twenty the general daily grow full of thought how to lade his ship to save his own credit the merchant estimation that set he a work and the reputation of his country consider what a foul blot it will be to they all in regard of the nation about we see there be merchandise enough to be buy in the indies yet he shall be likely to return home with empty ship beside the Portugal ambassador have a diligent eye over every step we tread but be no whit accept of the King for the last day of his be at the court he have demand of the king to settle a factory in his country and to build a fort at the come in of the harbour his reason be for the more security of the merchant good because the city be subject to fire discontent betwixt the portugal and the King but the king perceive what he mean give he this answer back again have your master say he a daughter to give unto my son that he be so careful of the preservation of my country he shall not need to be at so great a charge as the build of a fort for I have a fit house about two league from this city within the land which I will spare he to supply his factory withal where they shall not need to fear either enemy or fire for I will protect he hereupon the king be much displease at this insolent demand and the ambassador go from the court much discontent @. 4 Portugal wile discover a prize take near malacca Portugal subtlety retort short after this there come to our house a indian to sell hen which be appertain to a Portugal captain who come to that port with a ship lade with Rice out of the port of Bengala this captain lie in the ambassador house and the general mistrust he come only for a spy to see and perceive what we do and yet he give commandment he shall be well entreat and they shall always buy his hen and give he a reasonable price for they at last he himself take occasion pleasant to commune with the indian whence he be and of what country say a young man of his presence merit some better mean then buy and sell of hen sir say he I serve this Portugal captain yet be neither bound nor free but be free bear I have be with he so long time that now he partly esteem i as his own and so great they be that we can strive with they then say the general unto he if thy liberty be precious unto thou thy person merit it but what will thou do for he that will give thou thy liberty without plead with thy master for it sir say the indian freedom be as precious as life and my life I will adventure for he that shall do it prove i therefore in any service that I can do for you and my willingness shall soon make good what I have say well say the general thou have will i to prove whether thou mean true or no. I will ask of thou what the ambassador say of i and my ship which I have in this place and what pretence he have sir say the indian he have have a spy aboard of all your ship a chinese a spy for the Portugal discover who be continual conversant with your people so that he have a draught draw not only of your ship and their greatness but also of every piece of ordnance that each ship have and how they be place and the number of your man that be in they and he find your ship strong and well appoint but by reason of the sickness that have be in they they be but weak of man and easy to be take if any force come upon they on the sudden and within few day he mean to send his draught to malacca for force to attempt your ship as they ride the general laugh pleasant to hear these thing say the ambassador be not so idle as he think he for he well know say he that I care little for all the force of these part it be but to make thou and the rest that be about he believe that you be strong than you be but go thy way and be here once in a day or twain and tell i whether the ambassador go forward in his proceed and when those messenger shall depart with the plot thou speak of and although it will benefit i little to know these thing yet I will give thou thy liberty for thy good will thou show therein as I have promise thou to do this indian go away very well content as any man may easy perceive by his countenance and the lightness of his pace now when he be go the general turn about and say to i we have meet with a fit man to betray his master if we can make any benefit of the treason and sure he be not deceive in his opinion for by this mean whatsoever the ambassador do all the day we have it either that night or at the further the next day in the morning and this fellow carry the matter so wary that he be neither mistrust of any of the ambassador house nor know to any of we what business he go about for he have the right condition of a spy be wily fearful careful subtle and never trust any to hear what conference he have with the general but deliver his mind unto he alone and that in such careless sort as if he have answer the general idle whatsoever he demand of he for he stand in fear of our own people lest they will bewray the sell of his hen which cover all his come and go to our house the next day the general be send for to the court and the king have conference with he the force of the king of sumatra about a embassage that the king of siam have send he touch the conquest of malacca and with what force he will assist he by sea if he undertake that service for this king of sumatra be able to put a very great force of galley to sea if he may have but some four or five month warning beforehand to make they ready this conference the general further with many reason and take a occasion to enter into talk of the spanish ambassador how insolent proud he carry himself and that his come into his majesty kingdom and court be for no other purpose but only as a spy to see and discover the strength of his kingdom I know it well say the king for they be enemy of i as I have be to they but what cause thou to see this the general answer he that he can take nothing in hand but his spy attend upon he to mark what he go about and to what end and among other thing say he he have take a draught of his ship and mean to send it to malacca and to procure force to set upon he at unaware the king smile to hear the general mention these thing and say thou need not fear any strength that shall come from malacca for all the strength they have there be able to do thou no harm the general answer I do not say he fear their strength what they can do to i but it may be much to my hindrance that they understand the time I mean to go to sea they shall thereby be advise to keep themselves within their port so that I shall not be able to offend they be it so say the king yea say the general and therefore I will entreat your majesty to make stay of two of the ambassador servant that be now go to malacca within these few day who take not their passage from hence but will go to another port of you and there hire a bark to transport they thence because they will be sure not to be intercept and if your majesty intercept they there you shall be privy to some of their plot and pretence well say the king let i understand of their departure from hence and thou shall see what I will do for thou so the general take his leave of the king well content and have daily conference with his merchant that sell hen so that there be not any thing do or say in the ambassador house but he be privy to it now the time be come that the embassodor two servant be to depart with their plot and their master letter and they go down to a port about five and twenty league from Achen but the general be not slack to advise the king thereof who have give order before so that at their come thither and when they have hire their passage and have embark themselves with all their letter and be go over the bar a mile from the city a frigget go after they and cause the bark to strike sail that the justice may see what their lade be and when the justice come aboard and see two portugal there he ask they from whence they come and whether they be go they answer they come from Achem and belong to the Portugal ambassador nay say the justice but you have rob your master and run away like thief with his good and therefore I will return you again to he from who you be flee and there you shall answer it but in this hurly-burly and search of they they lose their plot and their letter and their trunk be break open and they send to Achem find back again to the court to be deliver to the ambassador if they do belong unto he the general have some intelligence of these thing and the next time he come to the court the king call he unto he and say now what say thou be thou content the general make he obeisance and give he humble and hearty thanks for his clemency and kindness towards he and with some other conference the general depart for that time the merchant of hen come daily follow his merchandise and as the general suspect and he himself afterward confess not without his master consent to advise from we as well as he advise from his master but now the summer be past and September come the time that the general mean to go to sea to seek mean to supply his necessity and now fall out the great cross of all to his pretence the ambassador himself have his dispatch from the king to be go which the general know go to the court and where the king sit see the sport that be make before he he send his interpreter to he desire that it will please he to hear a certain request which he have unto his majesty whereupon the king immediate call for he and demand what he will have he to do it have please your highness say the general to do i many courtesy and therefore I be further embolden to proceed to request one kindness more at your majesty hand what be that say the king smile be there more portugal go to malacca to hinder thy pretence yea say the general the ambassador himself as I be give to understand have your majesty dispatch to be go at his pleasure and be determine to depart within five day and what will thou have i to do say the king only stay he but ten day till I be go forth with my ship well say the king and laugh thou must bring i a fair Portugal maiden when thou return and then I be please with this answer the general take his leave and depart and hafted all that he can to be go for he have leave the merchant behind he and under the protection of the king till his return and in the mean time to buy what pepper they can to help to furnish the ascension lade which be now more than three part lade but the general will not leave she behind he ride in the port but take she in his company for she ride but in a open place all the three ship be make ready this be captain of a ship of Holland call Speilberge english favour to the Hollander and there be a captain of a dutch ship in the road who desire the general that he may go to sea in his company and take part of his adventure his ship be above two hundred ton but have as little money to lade himself as we and therefore refuse no consort so the general be content to give he @ of what shall be take and he rest therewith content the general have take his leave of the king and present two of the chief merchant unto he m. starkie and m. styles the king gracious take they into his protection and safeguard for these merchant with some other be leave behind as I say before for the provide of such pepper as be there to be have against the return of the ship from the Sea the ship be ready we set sail the eleven of September towards the straits of malacca now let i tell you how the king deal with the ambassador of Portugal after our departure which every day urge his dispatch to be go but still upon one occasion or other his passage be defer the king subtle deal with the portugal at last four and twenty day after our departure the king say unto he I marvel you be so hasty to be go see the english ambassador be abroad at the sea with his ship if he meet you he will be able to wrong you and do you violence I care little for he say the ambassador for my be so nimble with sail and oar that if I have but her length from he I will escape all his force well say the king I be the more willing you shall depart because I see you rest so assure of your own safety and so he have his dispatch to be go this service come well to pass for we for if he have go away in time such advice will have be give from malacca by frigate into the straits that all ship will have have warning of we but by this mean we lie within five and twenty league of malacca itself and be never descry whereby to be prevent the three day of October we be in the straits of malacca lay off and on the Hector espy a sail this be the carack of s. Thome in India and call to the rest of the ship we all descry she and be towards night a present direction be give that we shall all spread ourselves a mile and a half one from another that she may not pass we in the night the ship fall with the Hector that first espy she and present she call unto she and shoot off two or three piece of ordnance so that the rest of the ship have intelligence and draw all about she and begin to attempt she with their great ordnance and she return shoot again but when the admiral ship come up he discharge six piece together out of his prow and then her main yard fall down after that she shoot no more nor any of our ship fear lest some unfortunate shot may light between wind and water and so sink she for the general be very careful so the fight cease till the morning at the break of day the captain with some of the rest enter their boat and the Hector be next she call they to come aboard he and master John Middleton the captain be vice-admiral the carrack yield to the English bring the boat and captain aboard the general to who they render their ship and good the general present cause all the chief man of the prize to be place aboard our ship and only place but four of our man aboard the prize for fear of rifle and pillage the good thing that be within she and those four suffer none other to come aboard and their charge be if any thing shall be miss to answer the same out of their wage and share for when the ship be unlade the boatswain and the mariner of the same ship do whole unlade she and none of we come within she to do any labour only they receive the good into their boat and carry they aboard such ship as the general appoint they to do so that by this order care to avoid rifle and spoil good take in the prize there be neither rifle thieve pillage or spoil which otherwise will hardly have be avoid in such business as this within five or six day we have unlade she of nine hundred and fifty pack of calico and pintado beside many packet of merchandise she have in she much rice and other good whereof we make small account now a storm arise all their man be set aboard and we leave she ride at a anchor this ship come from a place call saint Thoma that lie in the bay of Bengala and be go for malaca when we intercept she she have in she above six hundred person man woman and child her burden be nine hundred ton the general will never go aboard to see she his cate to prevent suspicion and his reason be to take away suspicion both from the mariner that be there and the merchant that be at London lest they may charge or suspect he for any dishonest deal by help himself thereby he be very glad of this good hap and very thankful to God for it and as he tell i he be much find to God that have ease he of a very heavy care and that he can not be thankful enough to he for this blessing give he for say he he have not only supply my necessity to lade these ship I have but have give i as much as will lade as many more ship as I have if I have they to lade so that now my care be not for money but rather where I shall leave these good that I have more than enough in safety till the return of the ship out of England the one and twenty of October our ship return out of the straits of malaca for Achen where by the way a great spout of water come pour out of the heaven a great spout of water and fall not far from our ship which we fear much for these spout come pour down like a river of water so that if they shall light in any ship she be in danger to be present sink down into the sea it fall with such a extreme violence all whole together as one drop or as water pour out of a vessel and sometime dure a quarter of a hour together so that the sea boil with froth of a exceed height by the violence of the fall of the spout @. v. their present to and from the king his letter to queen ELIZABETH their departure for Priaman and Bantam and settle a trade there the four and twenty of October return to Achen we cast our anchor in the port of Achen in sumatra where the general go a shore and find all the merchant well and in safety who give great commendation of their good and kind entertainment receive from the king in the general absence wherefore the general willing to gratify the king with such thing as he have take in the prize sort out a present of diverse thing that he think may be most to his like and at his first go to the court present they unto he the king receive the present and welcome the general and seem to be very joyful for the good success he have against the Portugal and jest say he have forget the most important business that he request at his hand which be the fair Portugal maiden he desire he to bring with he at his return to who the general answer that there be none so worthy that merit to be so present therewithal the king smile and say if there be any thing here in my kingdom may pleasure thou I will be glad to gratify thy good will after this the general command the merchant to put aboard the ascension all such pepper cinnamon and clove as they have buy in his absence which be scarce the ship full lade but at that time there be no more to be have nor that year to be hope for and therefore he will the merchant to put all their thing aboard the ship for his resolution be to depart from thence and go for Bantam in where he understand both of good sale for his commodity and great return of pepper to be have and at a much more reasonable price than they can buy it at Achen this determination once know all man hasten to put their thing aboard so the general make the king privy to his departure and go to the court and have long conference with he who deliver he a letter for her majesty write in the arabian tongue the tenor whereof be as follow the letter of the king of Achen to the queen of England glory be to God who have magnify himself in his work glorify his dominion ordain king and kingdom exalt himself alone in power and majesty he be not to be utter by word of mouth nor to be conceive by imagination of the heart he be no vain phantasm no bound may contain he nor any similitude express he his blessing and his peace be over all his goodness in the creature he have be proclaim by his prophet heretofore and since that often and now again by this write at this present inferior unto none for this city which be not slack to show their love have manifest it in the entertainment of that society which fill the orison with joy and have confirm it to the eye by a sign which bring knowledge of remembrance of it general and particular and for that their request be just with purpose for exchange and they themselves of honest carriage and their kindness great in do good in general to the creature help the creature in prosperity and adversity joint give liberal unto the poor and such as stand in need of their abundance preserve the creature to their uttermost with a willing mind which for they now be extend unto India and * * or Carmania Arach send forth the chief man of discretion and note call also the best of the creature to counsel herein this be the sultana which do rule in the kingdom of England France Ireland Holland and Friesland God continue that kingdom and that empire long in prosteritie and because that he which have obtain the write of these letter from the king of the kingdom of * * or Achen Ashey who do rule there with a absolute power and for that there come unto we a good report of you declare and spread very joyful by the mouth of captain james Lancaster God continue his welfare long 1 and for that you do record that in your letter there be commendation unto we and that your letter be patent privilege almighty God advance the purpose of this honourable consociation and confirm this worthy league and for that you do affirm in they that the sultan of * * or Spain Afrangie be your enemy and a enemy to your people in what place soever he be from the first until now and for that he have lift up himself proud and set himself as king of the world yet what be he beside his exceed pride and haughty mind in this therefore be our joy increase and our society confirm for that he and his company be our enemy in this world and in the world to come so that we shall cause they to die in what place soever we shall meet they a public death and moreover you do affirm that you desire peace and friendship with we to God be praise and thanks for the greatness of his grace this therefore be our serious will and honourable purpose true in this write that you may send fr^m your people unto our * * or Bandar port to trade and to traffic and that whosoever shall be send unto we in your highness name and to whosoever you shall prescribe the time they shall be of a joint company and of common privilege for this captain and his company so soon as they come unto we we have make they of a absolute society and we have incorporate they into one corporation and common dignity and we have grant they liberty and have show they the best course of traffic and to manifest unto man the love and brotherhood between we and you in this world there be send by the hand of this captain according to the custom unto the famous * * of London city a ring of gold beautify with a ruby rich place in his seat two vesture weave with gold embroider with gold enclose in a red box of * * or China Tzin write in * * that be by computation of time Tarich of the year 1011. of Mahomet peace be unto you translate out of the arabic by WILLIAM BEDWEL for a present to her majesty he send three fair clothes rich wrought with gold of very cunning work and a very fair ruby in a ring and give to the general another ring and a ruby in it and when the general take his leave the king say unto he have you the psalm of David extant among you * * psalm of David know to the mahometans the general answer yea and we sing they daily then say the king ay and the rest of these noble about i will sing a psalm to God for your prosperity and so they do very solemn and after it be end the king say I will hear you sing another psalm although in your own language so there be in the company some twelve of we we sing another psalm and after the psalm end the general take his leave of the king the king show he much kindness at his departure desire God to bless we in our journey and to guide we safe into our own country say if hereafter your ship return to this port you shall find as good usage as you have do all our man be ship we depart the nine of November be three ship the dragon the Hector and the ascension we keep company two day in which time the general dispatch his letter for England and send away the ascension she fetch her course homeward towards the cape of esperanza and we along the coast of sumatra towards Bantam to see if we can mere with the Susan which have order to lade upon that coast. as we sail along the coast of sumatra we sudden fall among certain land in the night dangerous flats and the day approach we marvel how we come in among they without see any of they they be all low land and full of flatte and rock so that we be in great danger before we can clear ourselves of they but thanks be to God who deliver we from many other danger as he do also deliver we from these so hold on out course from Priaman Priaman we pass the equinoctial line the three time and come thither the six and twenty of November and find the Susan there which the general have send before from Achen to lade there now when they see we they be very glad of our come and have provide towards their lade some six hundred bahar of pepper and sixty six bahar of clove here our pepper cost we less than at Achen but there be none grow about this port but be bring some eight or ten league out of the country from a place call Manangcabo s^ore of gold in dust. this place have no other merchandise grow there only there be good store of gold in dust and small grain which they wash out of the sand of river after the great flood of rain that fall from the mountain from whence it be bring this be a place of good refresh and be very wholesome and healthful and yet it lie within fifteen minute of the line at this port have refresh ourselves with the good air fresh victual and water the general give commission to the captain of the Susan to make what haste he can for his lade the Susan first send home December the four 1602. they depart from Priaman they arrive in the road of Bantam which will be accomplish with some hundred bahar of pepper and so to depart for England and the four day of December we take our course towards Bantam in the island of and we enter the straits of Sunda the fifteen of December and come to a anchor under a island three league from Bantam call Pulopansa the next day in the morning we enter the road of Bantam and shoot off a very great peal of ordnance out of the dragon be our admiral and out of the Hector such a one as have never be ring there before that day the next day in the morning the general send his vice-admiral captain John Middleton aland with a message to the king declare that he be send by the queen of England and have both a message and a letter to deliver to his majesty from she and require his majesty safe conduct and warrant to come aland to deliver the same the king return he word that he be very glad of his come and send back a nobleman with captain Middleton to welcome the general and to accompany he aland the general take some sixteen man in his company and go aland with the nobleman to the court the king of Bantam a child of 10. or 11. year of age the queen letter and present to the k. of Bantam where he find the king be but a child of ten or eleven year of age sit in a round-house with some sixteen or eighteen nobleman of the country about he in some reasonable estate the general do his obeisance and the king welcome he very kind and after the general have have some conference about his message he deliver to the king hand her majesty letter with a present of plate and some other thing withal which the king receive with a smile countenance and refer the general for further conference to one of his noble who be then protector after some hour and a half conference have of many thing the say nobleman as from the king receive the general under the king protection and all his company will he to come aland and buy and sell without any kind of molestation for there he shall be as safe as if he be in his own country and to this all the noble agree with one consent there pass many speech of diverse thing trade begin which for brevity sake I omit to trouble the reader withal for my purpose be to show the effect of this first settle of the trade in the east-indies rather than to particularize of they the general after his kind welcome and conference have take his leave of the king and the rest of his noble and present give order for the provide of house whereof the king will he to make his best choice wheresoever he will so within two day the merchant bring good ashore and begin to sell but one of the king noble come to the general and say it be the custom of that place that the king shall buy and furnish himself before the subject shall buy any thing the general be well content for he be advise that he will give a reasonable price and pay very well the king be serve the merchant go forward in their sale so that within some five week much more be sell there in good then will have lade our two ship a rial of 8. be ^oure shilling six penny sterling and yet they bring away from thence two hundred and seventy six bag of pepper these contain sixty two pound weight a piece and cost at first penny 5. @ rial of eight the piece beside our anchorage and the king custom which anchorage for our two ship cost we by agreement the general make with the savendar or governor of the city fifteen hundred rial of eight and one rial of eight upon every bag of custom we trade here very peaceable although the javians be reckon among the great picker and thief of the World but the general have commission from the king after he have receive a abuse or two that whosoever he take about his house in the night he shall kill they so after four or five be thus slay we live in reasonable peace and quiet but continual all night we keep a careful watch as we go buy pepper we send it aboard so that by the ten of February our ship be full lade and ready to depart but in this mean time the captain of the Hector master John Middleton fall sick aboard his ship in the road for the general observe this from the begin of the voyage that if he himself be ashore the captain of the vice-admiral keep aboard because both shall not be from their charge at one time the general hear of his sickness go aboard to visit he and find he weak than he himself feel which experience have teach he to know in these hot country and so it happen with captain Middleton then walk up and down the death of captain John Middleton who die about two of the clock next morning now the general begin to put all thing in order and hasten his departure and appoint a pinnace of about forty ton which he have to be lade with commodity and put in she twelve man with certain merchant a pinnace of 40. ton with 12. man ^ent to the Moluccas a factory settle in Bantam a letter and present from the king of Bantam to the queen and send she for the Moluccas to trade there and settle a factory against the return of the next ship out of England moreover he leave eight man and three factor in Bantam the chief of which factor be master William starkey who he appoint to sell such commodity as be leave they and to provide lade for the ship against the next return also the general go to the court to take his leave of the king where he receive a letter for her majesty and a present for she of certain bezar-stone very fair and to the general he give a very fair dagger which they much esteem there and a good bezar-stone with some other thing and thus the general take his leave of the king with many kind countenance and good word @ v. their departure for England and occurrent in the way the twenty of February they return for England the twenty day of February we go all aboard our ship shoot off our ordnance and set sail to the sea towards England with thanks to God and glad heart for his blessing towards we the two and twenty and three and twenty of the same month we be in the straits of Sunda and the six and twenty we be clear of all the isle that lie in those straits and clear of all the land hold our course south-west so that the eight and twenty we be in eight degree and forty minute to the south of the line upon Sunday the thirteen of march we be past the tropic of Capricorn they double the tropic of Capri^orne hold our course for the most pare south-west with a stiff gale of wind at southeast the fourteen day of April we be in thirty four degree judge the land of Madagascar to be north of we the eight and twenty day we have a very great and a furious storm so that we be force to take in all our sail this storm continue a day and a night with a exceed great and rage sea so that in the reason of man no ship be able to live in they but God in his mercy cease the violence thereof and give we time to breath a terrible storm and to repair all the distress and harm we have receive but our ship be so shake that they be leaky all the voyage after the three of May we have another very sore storm which continue all the night and the sea do so beat upon the ship quarter that it shake all the iron work of she Rother and the next day in the morning our Rother break clean from the stern of our ship and present sink into the Sea they lose their Rother in a storm this strike a present fear into the heart of all man so that the best of we and most experience know not what to do and special see ourselves in such a tempestuous sea and so stormy a place so that I think there be few worse in all the World now our ship drive up and down in the sea like a wrack which way soever the wind carry she so that sometime we be within three or four league of the cape esperanza then come a contrary wind almost 40. degree o^ south latitude and drive we almost to forty degree to the southward into the hail and snow and sleet cold weather and this be another great misery unto we that pinch we exceed sore so that our case be miserable and very desperate yet all this while the Hector keep by we careful the company whereof be some comfort unto we and many time the master of the Hector come aboard our ship so at the the last it be conclude to take our mizzen mast and put it forth at the stern port to prove if we can steer our ship into some place where we may make another Rother to hang it to serve our turn home but this device be to small purpose for when we have fit it and put it forth the sea be somewhat grow with lift up the mast it do so shake the stern and put all in such danger that it be needful to make all convenient haste to get the mast into the ship again which we be very glad when we have bring it to pass now we be without all remedy unless we make a new Rother and can bring it to pass to hang it in the sea which to perform let every man judge how easy a thing it be our ship be of seven or eight hundred t^nnes and in so dangerous a sea as this be but necessity compel to prove all mean then the general command the carpenter to make a Rother of the say mizzen mast to prove what we can do but this bar fall in our way that at such time as we lose our Rother we lose also the most of our Rother iron wherewith to fasten the Rother but yet we go forward and make all the haste we can and one of our man dive to search what Rother iron remain who find but two and one that be break to help we withal yet by God help find a fair day we make fast the say Rother and sail on our course homeward but within three or four hour the sea take it off again and we have much ado to save it and with the save of it we lose a other of our iron so that now we have but two to hang it by and our man begin to be desirous to leave the ship and go into the Hector to save themselves nay say the general we will yet abide God leisure to see what mercy he will show we for I despair not to save ourselves the ship and the good by one mean or other as God shall appoint we and with that he go into his cabin and write a letter for England purposi to send it by the Hector command she to depart and leave he there but not one of the company know of this command the letter be very brief and the tenor little more or less as follow right worshipful what have pass in this voyage and what trade I have settle for this company a letter in a desperate case send for England and what other event have befall we you shall understand by the bearer hereof to who as occasion have fall I must refer you I will strive with all diligence to save my ship and her good as you may perceive by the course I take in venture my own life and those that be with i I can tell where you shall look for i if you send out any pinnace to seek i because I live at the devotion of the wind and sea and thus fare you well desire God to send we a merry meeting in this world if it be his good will and pleasure the passage to the east India lie in 62.1/^ degree by the northwest on the America side your very love friend JAMES lancaster this letter be deliver the general think they will have be go in the night according to their commission but when he espy the ship in the morning he say to i these man regard no commission now the ship keep some two or three league from we and come no near for the master be a honest and a good man and love the general well and be loath to leave he in so great distress and now it be time for we to seek all mean that can be to save ourselves and the ship then the carpenter mend the Rother we have save and within two or three day the weather begin to be somewhat fair and the sea smooth so we put out a sign to the Hector to come near we out of which the master master Saunder Cole come and bring the best swimmer and diverse that he have in his ship master Saunder Cole master of the Hector who help we not a little in the business we have to do thus by God good blessing we hang our Rother again upon the two hook that be leave so that we have some good hope to obtain one port or other to relieve ourselves withal now we have be beat to and fro in these mighty sea and have many more storm of weather then be here express sometime for one whole month together so that our man begin to fall sick and disease and the wind fall so short that we can fetch no part of the coast of Africa which be near to we commit ourselves therefore to God we set sail straight for the island of saint Helena for we know we have double the cape of esperanza by the height we be in to the northward as we be in our course the mainyard fall down and strike one of our man into the sea and he be drown this be the end God be thank of all our hard fortune the five day of june we pass the tropic of Capricorn and the sixteenth in the morning we have sight of the island of saint Helena at the sight whereof there be no small rejoice among we we bear close along by the shore the better to get the best of the road they arrive at saint Helena in the harbour where we come to a anchor right against a small chapel which the portugal have build there long since our ship ride in twelve fathom water which be the best of the harbour at our go a shore we find by many writing that the carracke of Portugal have depart from thence but eight day before our come in this island there be very good refresh of water and wild goat but they be hard to come by unless good direction be give for the get of they and this course our general take he appoint four lusty man and of the best shot he have to go into the island and make their abode in the midst of it and to every shot he appoint four man to attend he to carry the goat that he kill to the rendezvous thither go every day twenty man to fetch home to the ship what be kill so there be no hoyt or rumour in the island to fear the goat withal and by this mean the ship be plentiful relieve and every man content while we stay here we fit our ship and search our Rother which we hope will last we home all our sick man recover their health through the store of goat and hog wherewith we have refresh ourselves have great need of good refresh for in three month we have see no land but be continual beat in the sea the five day of july we set sail from this island our course be northwest the thirteen day the i will of Ascention we pass by a island call the ascension which stand in eight degree no ship touch at this island for it be altogether barren and without water only it have good store of fish about it but deep water and ill ride for ship from hence we hold our course still northwest they pass the aequinoctial the wind be south and southeast till the nineteen day and then we pass the aequinoctiall-line the four and twenty day we be six degree to the northward at which time we judge ourselves to be a hundred and fifty league from the coast of Guinea then we steer away north and by west and north till the nine and twenty at which time we have sight of the island of fogo the i will of fogo here we be becalm five day strive to pass to the eastward of this island but can not for the wind change and come to the north-east so we stand west northwest the seven of August 1603. the seven day of August we be in sixteen degree and the twelve day we pass the tropic of cancer that lie in 23.1/^ degree hold our course northerly but the three and twenty the wind come westerly the nine and twenty we pass the island of saint Marie the wind fair the seven day of September we take sound judge the land end of England to be forty league from we the eleven day we come to the down well and safe to a anchor for the which thank be almighty God who have deliver we from infinite peril and danger in this long and tedious navigation chap. 4 a discourse of java and of the first English factory there with diverse indian english and dutch occurrent write by master EDMUND scot contain a history of thing do from the eleven of February 1602. till the six of October 1605. abbreviated @. i. the description of with the manner and fashion of the people both javan and chynaess which do there inhabit be a island which lie in a hundred and forty degree of longitude from the middle part of it and the inhabitant and in the nine degree of latitude be also about a hundred forty and six league long east and west and some ninety league broad south and north the middle part of which land be for the most part all mountain the which be not so steep but that people do travel to the top of they both on horseback and on foot some inhabitant do dwell upon those hill which stand next to the sea but in the very middle of the land so far as ever I can learn the mid. land there be no inhabitant but there be wild beast of diverse sort whereof some do repair near the valley adjoin to the sea and devour many people towards the sea for the most part be low moorish ground wherein stand their principal town of trade the chief whereof lie on the north and north-east side of the island as chiringin Bantam jackatra and i^rtan or Greesey the city the which low ground be very unwholesome and breed many disease especial unto stranger which come thither and yield no merchandise worthy trade for or speak of but pepper the which have be bring in time pass from all place of the land to Bantam as the chief mart town of the county which town for trade do far exceed Achen or any town or city thereabouts and pepper be wont to be bring thither from diverse other country which of late year be not by reason that the dutchman trade to every place and buy it up this town of Bantam be about three english mile in length also very populous there be three market keep on every day Bantam one in the forenoon and two in the afternoon that especial which be keep in the forenoon do so abound with people that they throng together as in many fair in England yet I never see any kind of cattle to sell by reason that there be very few tame in the country their food be altogether Rice with some hen their food and some fish but not much or in no abundance the javan house be altogether build of great cane and some few small Timbers be slight building in many of the principal man house their house be good workmanship show as car^ings etc. and some of the chief have a square brick room be build in no better form than a brick-kiln which be only to put in all their household stuff when fire come but they seldom or never lodge nor eat in they there be many small river run through the town also there be a good road for ship whereby if they be people of any reasonable capacity it will be make a very goodly city also it be wall round with a brick wall be very warlike build with flanker and turret scour every way I have be tell by some that it be first build by the chiness in many place it be fall to decay for want of repair at the very end of this town be the China town a narrow river part they which run cross the end of the China town up to the king court and so through the middle of the great town and do ebb and flow so that at a high water both galley and junct of great burden may go up to the middle of the great town this China town be for the most part build of Brick every house square and flat overhead the China town some of they have board and small Timbers or s^lit cane over-crosse on which be lay brick and sand to defend they from fire over these brick warehouse be set a shed be build up with great cane and thatch and some be build up with small timber but the great number with cane only of late year since we come thither many man of wealth have build their house to the top all fire free of the which sort of house at our first come there be no more but the sabindar house and the rich china merchant house which nevertheless by mean of their window and shed ro^nd about they have be consume with fire in this town stand the english and dutch house which be build in the same manner the dutch and english house only they be very much big and high than ordinary house and the dutchman of late though with great cost and trouble have build one of their house up to the top all of brick fire free as they suppose the king of this place be absolute the king and his power punishment of adultery and since the depose and death of the late emperor of Damacke be hold the principal king of all that island he use always martial law upon any offender who he be dispose to punish if any private man wife or wi^es be take with dishonesty so that they have good proof of it they cause they present to be put to death both the woman and the man that be take in adultery with she and for their slave they may execute they for any small fault to every wife that a be a freeman marry costly wife he must keep ten women-slave which they as ordinary use as their wife and some of they keep for every wife forty slave for so they keep ten they may have as many more as they will but they may have but three wife only the javan be general exceed proud although extreme poor javans proud and poor by reason that not one among a hundred of they will work the gentleman of this land be bring to be poor by the number of slave that they keep which eat fast than their pepper or Rice grow the Chinois do both plant dr^sse and gather the pepper Chinois frugal and also sow their rice live as slave under they but they suck away all the wealth of the land by reason that the javan be so idle and a javan be so proud that he will not endure one to ^t a inch in height above he if he be but of the like call they be a people that do very much thirst after blood yet they will seldom fight face to face one with another or with any other nation but do altogether seek revenge of their enemy cowardly albeit they be for the most part man of a goodly stature their law for murder be to pay a fine to the king punishment of murder and that but a small sum but evermore the friend of the party murder will be revenge on the murderer or his kindred so that the more they kill one another the more fine have their King their ordinary weapon which they wear be call a ^rise it be about two foot in length their weapon and fight the bla^e be wave and crooked to and fro indenture like and withal exceed sharp most of they have the temper of their mettle poison so that not one among five hundred that be wound with they in the body escape with his life the handle of these weapon be either of horn or wood curious carve in the the likeness of a devil which many of they do worship in their war their fight be altogether with pike dart and target of late some few of they have learned to use their piece but very untoward the apparel of the be^ter sort be a tuck on their head and about their loin a fair pintadoe all the rest of their body naked sometime they will wear a close coat their apparel somewhat like a mandilion of velvet chamblet cloth or some other kind of silk but it be but seldom and upon some extraordinary occasion the common sort wear on their head a flat cap of velvet taffeta or c^llico-cloath the which be cut in many piece and seam with a fair stitch to make they sit flat and compass about their loin they wear a kind of callico-cloth which be make at Clyn in manner of a silk girdle but at the least one yard broad be of two colour also there come from thence many sort of white colour which they themselves do both die paint and gilled according to the fashion of that country likewise they can wear a kin^ of stripe stuff both of Cotten and rind of tree but by mean of their laziness there be very little of that wear their head and head-tire the man for the most part have very thick curl hair on their head in which they take great pride and often will go bareheaded to show their hair the woman go all bareheaded some of they have their hair tuck up like a carthorse tail but the better sort do tuck it up like our ride gelding tail about their loin they wear the same stuff which I have before mention always have a fair girdle or Pintado of their country fashion throw over on their shoulder which hang down loose behind they their religion the principal of they be most religious but they very seldom go to church they do acknowledge Christ to be a great prophet who they call Naby Isa and some of they do keep of Mahomet priest in their house but the common people have very little knowledge in any religion only they say there be a god which make heaven and earth and they also he be good they say and will not hurt they but the devil be naught and will do they hurt wherefore many of they for want of knowledge do pray to he the devil pray to only for fear lest he shall hurt they and sure if there be man of learning which be perfect in their language to instruct they a number of they will be draw to the true faith of Christ and also will be bring to civility for many which I have reason with concern the law of christian have like all well except only their plurality of woman for they be all very lascivious give bribe both man and woman the better sort which be in authority be great taker of bribe and all the javan in general be bad paymaster when they be trust notwithstanding their law for debt be so strict law for debt that the creditor may take his debtor his wife child slave and all that he have and sell they for his debt thievish people likewise they be all much give to steal from the high to the low and sure in time past they have be * * so l. Vertomannus idleness man-eater before that traffic be have with they by the Chynasses which as I have hear some of they say be not above one hundred year since they delight much in ease and music and for the most part they spend the day sit across legged like a tailor whitle of a stick whereby many of they become very good carver to carve their Crise handle and that be all the work that most of they endeavour to do they be very great eater but the gentleman allow their slave nothing but rice sod in water with some root and herb and they have a certain herb call bettaile which they usual have carry with they wheresoever they go in box or wrap up in a cloth like a sugarloaf and also a nut call pinange which be both in operation very hot and they eat they continual to warm they within and keep they from the flux they do likewise take much tobacco and also opium javans dull the javan themselves be very dull and blockish to manage any affair of a commonwealth whereby all stranger go beyond they that come into their land and many of the country of Clyn which come thither to dwell do grow very rich and rise to great office and dignity among they as their sabandar their laytamougon and other especial the chinese who like jew live crooch under they but rob they of their wealth and send it for China Chinois crafty the chinese be very crafty people in trade use all kind of cozen and deceit which may possible be devise they have no pride in they nor will refuse any labour except they turn javans as many of they do when they have do a murder or some other villainy than they be every whit as proud religion of the Chinois and as lazy as the javan for their religion they be of diverse sect but the most of they be atheist and many of they hold opinion that when they die if they be good man they shall be bear again to great riches and be make governor and if they be wicked man than they shall be turn into some ugly beast as a frog or a toad they burn sacrifice every new moon mumble prayer over they with a kind of sing voice and as they sing they thing a little bell which at the end of every prayer they ring out as fast as they can this ceremony they also use when any among they of account lie a die the manner of their sacrifice be this they furnish their altar with goat hen duck and diverse sort of fruit the which be sometime dress to eat and sometime raw and then be dress afterward and eat all that they burn be only paper paint and cut out in curious work and value by they at a certain price I have many time ask they to who they burn their sacrifice and they have answer i to God but the goserats and turk * * this seem to be the malice of one idolater to another which be there say they burn it to the devil if they do so they be ashamed to confess it they be many of they well see in astronomy and keep a good account of their month and year they observe no sabbath nor one day better than other except when they lie the foundation of a house or begin some other great work which day they ever after observe as a holy day when any of they that be wealthy die in Bantam their body be burn to ash funeral rite which ash they put close in jar and carry it to China to their friend I have see when some of they have lie a die they have set up seven odour burn four of they be great and burn light and they be set upon a cane which lie cross upon two crotche about six foot from the ground and three set on the ground right under they be very small and burn dim I have demand the meaning of it many time but I can never have other answer but that it be the fashion of China and sure many such like thing they do not know why or wherefore but only that it have be a fashion among they they delight very much in play and sing play but they have the worst voice that one shall hear any people have the which play or interlude they hold as service to their god in the begin of which they often use to burn a sacrifice the priest many time kneel down and kiss the ground three time one present after another these play be make common when they think their junck or ship be set forth from China likewise when they be arrive at Bantam and also when they set out from Bantam towards China these play sometime begin at noon and end not till the next day morning be most common in the open street have stage set up for the purpose moreover they have among they some soothsayer which sometime rage and run up and down the street like mad man soothsayer have sword draw in their hand tar their hair and throw themselves against the ground when they be in this frantic take they affirm and other chyneses do believe that they can tell what shall come to pass after whether they be possess with the devil or no who reveal something to they I know not but many chyneses use they when they send a juncke of any voyage to know whether they shall speed well or no and by their report it have fall out according as these soothsayer have tell they the chyneses be apparel in long gown wear kirtle under they hang something low than their gown they be sure the most effeminate and cowardly people that live effeminateness on their head they wear a cawl some of they be make of silk and some of hair the hair of their head be very long which they bind up on a knot right on the crown of their head their nobility and governor wear hood of sundry fashion some be one half like a hat and the other like a french-hood other be of network with a high crown and no brim feature of body these people be tall and strong of body have all very small black eye and very few of they have any hair on their face they will steal and do any kind of villainy to get wealth their manner at Bantam be to buy women-slave for they bring no woman out of China by who they have many child and when they return to their own country not mind to come to Bantam again they sell their woman but their child they carry with they as for their good they take a order to send some at every ship for if they die in Bantam all the good they have there be the king and if once they cut their hair hair cut they may never return to their country again but their child may always provide that they never cut their hair @. 2 a true and brief discourse of many danger by fire and other perfidious treachery of the javan after our ship be lade and all thing set in as good order as it can be upon the one and twentieth of February 1602. our general take his leave of the shore depart the english leave at Bantam mr. starkey leave behind he to be resident in Bantam nine person over who he appoint m. William starkie to be chief commander likewise he leave 13 more which he appoint to go in our pinnace for Banda of which he be appoint for chief commander over the rest Thomas Tudd Thomas keith Thomas tudde merchant and for master of the say pinnace one Thomas keith the general at his departure leave order that this pinnace shall be send away with all speed wherefore have take in to the quantity of fifty six chest and fardel of good upon the six of march at night she set sail but by reason of contrary wind after she have spend near two month beat up and down in the sea she be force to return again to Bantam also at our general departure he leave we two house full of good and likewise some good lie in the Dutchman house but we be too few in number to keep one well have not God of his great mercy preserve we it be not unknown to all that be there the quarrel betwixt the javan and we before our ship depart who seek all the mean they can to be revenge insomuch javan go about to fire the english house that present after the departure of our pinnace they begin to practice the fire of our principal house with fiery dart and arrow in the night and not content with that but in the day time if we have bring out any quantity of good to air we shall be sure to have the town fire to windward not far from we and if these fire arrow have not by God providence be espy by some of our own house as they be it be think of we all that that house and good have be all consume as may plain appear at the top when we come to repair it but as the malice of the rascal sort of people begin now to appear and continue for the space of two year against we so God mercy begin to show itself unto we and continue to the last day as this discouse will plain show hereafter his name be bless for it so soon as we have dispatch away our pinnace we begin to lay the foundation of our house the house build which be seventy two foot long and thirty six foot broad but by reason there be at that time a new protector choose we be put to some trouble and cost before we can be permit to go through with it also we air all our prize good and m. starkey cause the leather of most of the pack to be strip off by who counsel it be I know not but these good do not keep their colour nothing so well as the rest do as we find afterward the town fire and some of our good burn the one and twenty of march by reason of a China captain that shoot a piece the town be set on fire in which fire be many house full of good consume among other the dutch house be burn to the ground wherein we have lie sixty five fardel of good beside some pepper also we have some pepper lie in a chinaes house which for the most part be burn and spoil so that we lose one hundred and ninety sack clear beside the damage the rest receive our loss by this fire be great but we praise God it be no more consider how near the fire come to both our house and how unfit they be at that time for such a danger especial one where the fire come within three yard of it insomuch that the jamme of the window be so hot that a man can hardly s^ffer his hand to touch they and yet the old and dry thatch take not fire to the great admiration of all people that be there of many nation there be gather about this house all the villain in the country so that all that night we that keep that house dare take no rest for fear they will throw some firebrand upon it in the evening some of we stand in the door there come javan who we know to be notorious thief wicked people and bold thief and ask we how many we be that lie in that house we demand again what they have to do to ask and if they will know they shall come at midnight and see at which answer they depart very much discontent but such be their boldness there that in the day time they will come and look before our face how our door be hang and what fasten they have within and many time we be inform by some that wish we well that if we do not keep good watch that there be a crew that mean to enter sudden upon we and to cut our throat in so much that we be but four at that house what with overwatching and what with the disease that reign much in that country which be looseness of the body we be grow to very great weakness and two of we never recover it the nineteen of April 1603. come into the road nine sail of hollander over who be general Wyborne Van Warwick nine sail of hollander who shott after send two of they for China two for the moluccoe two lade at Bantam one go to jortan also he dispatch a pinnace to Achen to will certain ship that go from thence by captain Spilbergs direction to Zeilon to win a small fort from the portugal to come to Bantam in the mean time he with one ship stay until their arrival we be very much behold to this general for wine bread and many other necessary Van Warwick kindness and courtesy receive of he he will often tell we how sir Richard Luson relieve he when he be likely to perish in the sea for the which he will say he be find to be kind to englishman wheresoever he meet they and to speak truth there be nothing in his ship for the comfort of sick man but we may command it as if it have be our own also he in his own person do very much reverence the queen majesty of England when he talk of Her but there be some of base sort in his fleet that do use very unreverent specche of she to some of the country people the five and twenty of April die Thomas Morgan our second factor here who have be sickly a long time death of t. Morgan also master starkey begin to grow very weak the eight and twenty day come in our pinnace which be send for Banda have lose one of her factor William chase and the rest but weak and sickly about this time there come certain of the king officer and forbid we to go forward with our house the reason whereof as I do judge be because the new protector have not as yet receive a bribe new protector perfidious and the Sabyndar and he be at that time not friend he can do we little pleasure wherefore we complain to cay Tomongone gobay the admiral who indeed be the father of all stranger in that place he present make a great feast and invite all the principal of the court at which feast he begin to discourse of our cause tell they what a shame it be that the king and they will not keep their word to the english general and merchant and that rather than he will break his word he will go dwell in a small cottage himself and we shall have his house but after much ado he make they grant that we shall go forward with our house the which in short time after be finish our principal merchant fear pepper will be dear by reason of the flemish ship that be there present and the rest that be to come buy up as much pepper as he can and because our house be not as yet ready he disburse his money before the pepper be weigh and by reason the fleming be not curious in receive their pepper when we come to weigh we we be force to receive it as they do or else we shall have neither money nor pepper so that we have in that parcel much foul and bad pepper master starkeys death upon the last of june master starkey end his day who burial general Warwick cause to be honour with a company of shot and pike the colour trail upon the ground according to the order of soldier burial the four of i^ly the great market on the east-side of the river be by villainy of certain signan who think to get some spoil of the chine good set on fire in which fire some Chinois that be indebt to we lose all that they be worth fire so that we escape not without some loss by it the seventeen of july decease Thomas Dobson m. dobsons death another fire one of the factour leave for Banda the seven and twenty day the town be burn again on the east-side the river the five of August at ten a clock at night there come to our house captain Spilberge captain John Powlson and some other dutch captain who tell we they have that day be with the protector about some business who ask they if they will take our part if he shall do any violence to we to the which they answer as they say that we and they be near neighbour wherefore they may not see we wrong they say more that he straight charge they that whatsoever he shall do unto we that they shall not be offend nor aid we any way from thence I go present to the protector and give he a small present and also thanks for his man which four or five day before he have send to help we in our build the present he receive but I perceive by his countenance he be angry he tell i that that day he have much business with the king but the next morning he will send for i for that he have to speak with i the same day the admiral send his son to he to know what his meaning be to use such threaten speech of we but he deny they in the morning follow he send for i when I come he ask i what they be that have tell i he mean to harm we I tell he the hollander he ask again whether they be slave or captain I tell he they be captain he bid i I shall show his scrivana those captain he say more that if any javan or chine have do it he will have send for he and cut his throat before we then he begin to find fault with we because we do not come to he when we have any suit but go always to the Sabinda^ or the admiral I answer again that he be but new come into his place and that we have as yet no acquaintance with he but hereafter I will come to he then he promise i he will do we all the friendship he can but it be but dissimulation to borrow money of we also the fleming about this time spread a rumour through their own fleet that the king will force we to lend he five thousand rial of eight otherwise he will cause our house to be pluck down again the which be false for neither the king nor the protector have at that time send to we for any nor do in four month after the seventeen of August captain Spilberge have vent all his commodity which he share in our prize and lade his ship and his pinnace with pepper depart thence have in his company two ship more of Warwick Fleet. the nineteen of August we bring out certain pack of good to air wherefore a javan be slave to one of the principal of the country throw some firework upon a thatch house a little to windward of we javan treachery we espy it pursue he and take he and carry he to cay Tomongone the admiral who put he in iron within a hour after there come more of his fellow who will have take he away perforce wherefore the admiral man and they fall by the ear and many be hurt on both side so soon as the admiral man have beat they away he send he to the king but because his master be one of the king friend he be not put to death although by the law of the country he shall have die neither do we great seek it because his master be our very good friend also likewise if a javan do offend he must be punish with death for if they inflict any less punishment they be so wicked and bloody a people that they will be cowardly revenge not only of stranger but of their own master so that if any slave do offend his master he do quite forgive he or else he die for it but they be very obedient and will seldom offend their master because they be for the most part as wicked as themselves the two and twenty of August at night there be certain javan get into a great yard hard by our house who when we be sing of a psalm which we do use to do when we set our watch these rogue throw stone at our window as if they will have beat down our house and some of the stone come in at the window and miss we very narrow but we take some of they which yet upon submission we spare about this time there grow a quarrel between the fleming and the Chinois quarrel betwixt Chinois and hollander hollanders drunken disorder and some be slay and hurt on both side this grow by the misbehaviour of the fleming which in that place do carry themselves very rude and disorder in that abundant manner that they be a shame and infamy to Christendom and christian I do not condemn they all but the vulgar sort who when they be ashore and their drink in their commander can bear no rule over they they get the worst before this quarrel be end but not by the Chinois nor by manhood of the javan only some that be slave to some turncoat Chinois will steal behind the fleming in the evening and cowardly stab they one day they be very importunate for one of their man which be slay the protector demand of they when they come to any country to trade whether they bring law^s with they or whether they be govern by the law of the country they be in to the which they answer that when they be aboard their ship they be govern by their own law but when they be ashore punishment for Murth^^ they be under the law of our country they be in well say the protector than I will tell you the law of the country which be this if one kill a slave he must pay twenty rial of eight if a freeman fifty rial if a gentlem^n a hundred rial the fleming request to have that under his own hand the which they have and it be all the mend they have for kill of their man if they will have take fifty rial of eight they may have have it lampoon cruel enmity to java about the five of September here come a juncke full of man from the island of lampon which stand in the straits of Sunda and be enemy to the javan and all other that be dweller in Bantam these be so like the javan that the one be not know from the other also there be many javan consort with they these man have their juncke ride in a creek hard by the town and be in all point like unto the javan will bold come into the town and not only in the evening and night come into house and cut off the people head but at noon day in so much that for the space of a month we can take little rest forth grievous cry of the people one day while we be sit at dinner they come and take a woman be our next neighbour and muffle she so with a sack that she can not cry and so carry she into a tuft of bush in our backside and there cut her throat and mean to have cut off her head if they have have time her husband miss she and look out may see they carry she who cry out and we rise from dinner and pursue they but it be too late to save her life also they be very swift of foot so that we can come near none of they and for any thing that we know they may be among we for after the javan be come we can not know they it be think of some that they lay hide in the bush till the come of the javan and then steal out and put themselves among they there be some java woman that will cut off their husband head in the night perfidious javan and sell they to these people they do linger much about our house and sure if we have not keep good watch they will have attempt the cut of our throat if not for our head for our good but after awhile many of they be know and be take be execute which be man of very goodly stature the reason they do make these hard adventure cruelty reward be their king give they a woman for every stranger head they bring he wherefore many time they will dig up such as be new bury at Bantam and cut off their head and so cozen their King also at this time some credible man that wish we well of who the admiral be one bid we have a special care of our good watch because some of the principal of the land in birth though not in wealth nor office treachery intend and prevent which have many slave but little to maintain they have lay a plot to have slay we in the night and to have make spoil of our good which they take to be ten time more than be and after to have give it out the lampoon have do it whereupon we be force to have light burn all night round about our house otherwise in the dark night they be so black as they be may have enter sudden upon we before we shall descry they for all the upper work of our house by reason of the heat be open and they be build with cane and likewise the fence round about the house which be but a weak building and may quick be bear down these heathen devil come forth two or three time think to have execute their bloody pretence but God will not suffer they for so soon as they come within sight of our light and may hear our drum sound at the end of every watch their hear^s fail they so that they dare not give the attempt for they suppose we be ready not only with our small shot but with our murderer to give they entertainment and to speak truth they shall have find it so indeed after they have wait long and can never find opportunity they fall out among themselves and so be disperse diverse other make bold but vain attempt and therefore now fall to work with the Chinois who house at this time be full of our good which they have buy in so much that everynight for a long time we have such grievous cry out and we look every hour when we shall be assault dare take no rest in the night many Chinois about we be slay and sure if we have not defend they with our shot many more will have be slay for the sing of a bullet be as terrible to a javan as the cry of the hound be in the ear of the hare for they will not abide if once they hear it but these continual alarm and grievous outcry of man woman and child grow so rife in our ear the misery of the English that our man in their sleep will dream they be pursue the javan and sudden will leap out of their bed and catch their weapon his next fellow hear the doleful noise he make will bustle up and in their sleep have wound one another before those that have the watch can come to part they and if they shall have set their weapon further from they they will not have be ready if we shall have have occasion the which we look for every minute and be but few of we I take my turn to watch as long as any in which I have stand many time more in fear of my own man then of any other and when I have hear they bussel have catch up a target for fear they will have serve i as they do their fellow terror of the word fire but all this fear be nothing to we in comparison of that which I will now speak of which be fire o this word fire have it it be speak near i either in english mallaye javane or China although I have be sound asleep yet I shall have leap out of my bed the which I have do sometime when our man in their watch have but whisper one to another of fire in so much that I be force to warn they not to talk of fire in the night except they have great occasion and not only myself but my fellow Thomas Tudd and Gabriel Towerson after our watch have be out and we heavy asleep so that our man many time sound a drum at our chamber door we have never bewray they yet present after they have but whisper of fire we all have run out of our chamber I speak not this that any that may be send thither hereafter shall be discourage for than we be stranger and now we have many friend there and the country be grow to much better civility and as the young king grow in age will more and more because their government will be better the town five time burn in three month in three month space the town on the east-side the river be burn five time but God be praise the wind always favour we and although the javan many time fire it on our side yet it please God still to preserve we so that by reason it blow but little wind it be quench before it come to hurt we @. 3 difference betwixt the hollander still themselves English the javan and other thing remarkable about this time also there be much fall out between the fleming and the country people by mean of the rude behaviour of the fleming and many of they be stab in the evening and at that time the common people know not we from the fleming for both they and we be call by the name of englishman by reason of their usurp our name at their first come thither to trade wherein they do our nation much wrong for we be ever ashamed of their behaviour and as we pass along the street we may hear the people in the market rail and exclaim on the english man although they mean the hollander wherefore hollander call themselves English in the indies and so disgrace we Novemb. 17. solemnize and thereby a difference make betwixt we we fear some of our man may be slay in stead of they we begin to think how we may make ourselves know from the hollander and now the seventeen of November draw near the which we hold to be our coronation day for at that time nor the year follow we know no other we all suit ourselves in new apparel of silk and make we all scarf of white and red taffeta be our country colour also we make a flag with the red cross through the middle and because we that be the merchant will be know from our man we edge our scarf with a deep fringe of gold and that be our difference our day be come we set up our banner of saint George upon the top of our house and with our drum and shot we march up and down within our own ground be but fourteen in number wherefore we can march but single one after another and so ply our shot and cast ourselves in ring and Esses the sabindar and diverse of the chief of the land hear our piece come to see we and to inquire the cause of our triumph we tell they that that day seven and forty year our queen be crown wherefore all english man in what country soever they be do triumph on that day he great commend we for have our prince in remembrance in so far a country many other do ask we why the english man at the other house do not so we tell they that they be no english man but hollander and that they have no king but their land be rule by governor some will reply again and say they name themselves to be english man at first and therefore they take they to be english man but we will tell they again they be of another country near England and speak another language and that if they do talk with they now they shall hear they be of another nation the multitude of the people do admire to see so few of we deliver so much shoot for the javan and chinees be no good shot in the after noon I cause our man to walk abroad the town and the market whereby the people may take notice of they and the red and white scarf and hatband make such a show that the inhabitant of those part have never see the like so that ever after that day we be know from the hollander and many time the child in the street will run after we cry oran engree oran Hollanda jahad which be the english man be good the hollander be naught general Warwick go for Patanea and from thence to China the six day of December come in two ship which some six month before he have send thither who come under the island of mackow find a carrack there ride at a anchor be full lade with raw silk musk and diverse other costly ware ready to depart a Carri^^ take and at that time her man be almost all ashore so that they take she without any resistance or very little they lade their two ship and the rest they set a fire so that there be by their own report twice so much burn as they bring away come back they meet with a great juncke of Zion with who they fight and kill threescore and four man they have some slay and hurt also but when they have take she and know she to be of Zion they let she go again because they have or short mean to send factor there the captain of the juncke be slay who they say when they hale he will not tell they of whence he be and when they bid he strike answer that he will not for never a sail that swim in the Sea the Fleming not know musk sell great store to certain of japan which they meet with at sea for little or nothing after they have spend some forty day in Bantam and their mariner some wicked and some vain consume their pillage which be great upon the seventeen of january they set sail from thence be four ship in company there one have lade at Bantam and one that some two month before come from China and have spend four year out of their country of which time they have be fourteen month at Cachinchina where they at their first come be betray Cachinchina and their captain take prisoner who they make kneel on their knee four and twenty hour have their neck bare and one stand with a sharp sword ready to have strike off their head when the word shall be give they bear they down to be man of war and spy and no merchant these dutchman be papist wherefore in the end the Portugal friar save their life and afterward they be kind use but their ransom cost they dear about this time the protector send to i diverse time to lend he two thousand piece of eight and if not two thousand a thousand but I put he of tell he we be leave there with good but no money also that the people of the country ought we much the which we can not get in likewise that as yet we have buy but little pepper wherefore we must buy all we can to get lade against we expect our ship the fleming that come in so rich from mackow have so bribe he that now he begin to harken to they concern the build of a fair house the six of February we lose one of our company Robert wallis and many more of our man be secke and lame danger by heat of pepper which come by the heat of the pepper in mill and shut it so that ever after we be force to hire chine to do that work and our own man to oversee they only the sixteenth of February come in a great ship of Zeilan from Pattany but five or six day before her come she send in a small slup or pinnace will their factor to buy up all the pepper they can Chinois dishonesty which make we think that general Warwick with all his ship be come to lade there wherefore we buy up all that we find to be good and merchantable for the chinees spoil much with water and dirt because the fleming refuse none and it be of a certain the chinees buy one of another and sell it to the fleming again at the same price they buy it and yet they will gain ten rial of eight in a hundred sack by put in water and dirt for be it never so bad they know their chapman and blow which way the wind will they have ship to come thither either from the east or from the west in so much that one will have think they mean to carry away the pepper grow on the tree mountain and all the people there hear our country be cold have ask we if we beat pepper in our mortar a ^^st of our buy so much pepper that we plaster our wales with to make our house warm this ship have take much good purchase but they swear those englishman they have with they and also charge they upon loss of their wage they shall tell we nothing which we take very unkind there be at this time three house of fleming and all lay for several account and buy up pepper every one so much as they can get the five of march the protector send to i in the king name to borrow a thousand rial of eight Englishmen with the hollander wherefore I be force to lend they five hundred or else they will have fall out with i the which the fleming will have be glad to have see about this time there come in a juncke from with certain fleming in it who steal a-away with their good a juncke from jor. because have a long time be besiege by the portugal of malacco so that they of the town can hardly look out they say the portugal offer the king of peace upon condition he wo^ld deliver those fleming that be there into their hand or kill they himself to the which the king answer that he will first lose his kingdom in the begin of this month of march and to make a end of this old and wonderful year 1603. we have two great fire on the other side of the water which do much spoil two great fire but God be thank the wind always favour we and now to begin the new year 1604. my pen afford to speak of little else but murder theft 1604. war fire and treason and first to begin with a tragedy we have a malato of Pegu in our house which our ship bring from Achen and in the great ship that come late from Pattania there be one of his country man who on Sunday be the eight of April have get a bottle of wine and bring it ashore to make merry with our Molato in the afternoon they walk abroad meet with the provost of their ship who bid their Molato get he aboard but he answer he will not yet whereupon the provost strike he our Molato see his countryman misuse and be some what tickle in the head with wine which he do seldom use to drink danger by a Molato think he will revenge his countryman quarrel wherefore he present come home and the evening be come he take a rapier and a target and with his cryse at his back go forth and because at that time there be much quarrel and brabble between the javan and the fleming I charge our man that if they be send out in the evening about any business they shall take their weapon with they for fear some javan that know they not might do they a mischief in the dark we think the cook have send he into the market for herb or something which he want mistrust nothing also there go out with he a slave of the sabindar needs must he go who ^he devil (@) this story be long I have cut of^ le^t (@) so irk ^ome quarrel cause both (@) javans and hollander the prolixity may cause a three from the reader which be bear and bring up among the spaniard at the manely they meeting with the provost and the other Molato together our Molato begin to quarrel with the provost and present out with his cryse and stab he then fear his countryman will bewray he stab he also and will have slay he that go out with he have he not run through a great ditch and so get from he then meet with a poor javan and be nu^led in blood stab he likewise there manner be that when a javan of any account be put to death although there be a common executioner yet the near of kin do execute his office and it be hold the great favour they can do they the protector will have twenty rial of eight for the javan which be slay and the hollander his life and according they come with a guard of shot the sixteenth of April to his execution which the executioner perform with quick dispatch the same evening their vice-admiral have one ship more in company set sail for Holland the fourteen day Thomas Tudd Thomas Tudd die the company chief factor leave there for Banda who have be a long time sick depart his life so that of seven factor leave there for this place and Banda we be now but two live and we have lose in all since the departure of our ship eight man beside the malato that be execute and we be now ten live and one boy the twenty day die jasper Gensbery who be admiral of the two ship that be betray at Cachinchina the two and twenty of April come in a great juncke from China difficulty in sail which be think to be cast away because she tarry so late for they use to come in February and March but by reason of her come cashis keep all the year at a very cheap rate which be a great hindrance to we in the sale of our prize good for when cashis be cheap and rial dear we can not vent a piece of stuff at half the value we do at our first come again the Chinois this year send all the rial they can get for China wherefore we be force to give they credit or else we must lose the principal time of the year for our sale pepper the fleming have leave none but what be in our hand and the sabindar who will not sell for any reasonable price also our good now begin to grow old and the colour of many sort begin to vade for the warehouse in that place be so hot and moist that although man take never so much pain in air and turn their ware yet they will spoil any sort of cloth which shall lie long in they @. 4 treacherous undermine with other occurrent a chine bear but now turn javan who be our next neighbour and keep a victual house and brew aracke which be a kind of hot drink that be use in most of those part of the world in stead of wine have two outhouse where his guest do use to sit and in the one he use to brew which join to our pale on the south side of our house but now he begin another trade and become a Ingenor have get eight firebrand of hell more to he only of purpose to set our house a fire vault (@) to convey away the english good these nine deep worker dig a well in one of these house from the bottom of which well they bring a mine quite under the foundation of our house but when they come up to the plank of our Warehouse they be at a stand but before they can make this mine they be force to dig a very deep well in their yard to draw away the water which do abound in this mine and because we shall mistrust nothing they plant tobacco and many other herb hard by that well and will every day be water of they also we may hear they boil of water every day but because they be brewer and have many tubb to wash and to fill we mistrust nothing of that ensue when they come to these plank afore-named they dare not cut they always for some of we be walk over they both night and day after they have wait two month and can never find opportunity to cut the board they begin to cast their cerberous head together how they shall get in but the devil set they wrong to work for if they have continue still until they have come but across the warehouse opposite against they they have find thirty thousand rial of eight bury in jarres for fear of fire great danger and also that room be not board at all so they may have come into the Warehouse and have what they seek for well one of these wicked consortship be a smith and bring up always to work in fire tell his fellow he will work out the plank with fire so that we shall never hear nor see he and upon the eight and twenty of May about ten of the clock at night they put to a candle and burn a round hole through the board so soon as the fire come through the mat of our pack take fire which present spread and begin to burn all this while we know nothing nor can perceive nothing by reason of the closeness of the Warehouse for all the window be plaster up for fear of fire overhead after the f^rst watch be out wherein I be one myself the second watch smell a strong funcke of f^re for it be by that time much increase but they know not where it shall be and search every room and corner one remember a rat hole at last behind his trunk where he may plain perceive the smoke to steam up out of the hole then present he come into my Cham^^^ and tell i our cloth Warehouse be a fire I hear this word fire although I be fast asleep yet it be no need to bid i rise neither be I long a slip on my clothes but present run down and open the door whereat come out such a strong smoke that have almost strangle we this smoke by reason it have no vent be so thick that we can not perceive where abouts the fire be and at that time we have two great jar of powder stand in the Warehouse which cause we great to fear be blow up yet set all fear aside we pluck all thing off that lie on they which feel in our hand very hot the powder we get out and carry it into our backside than we search bold for the fire and find it we light candle but the thickness of the smoke put they out than we tie twelve great wax candle together and light they all which continue alight we pluck out pack so fast as we can but by reason of the heat and smoke which choke we be so few as we be can do little good upon it wherefore we let in the Chinois then come in as well those that have do it as other hope to get some spoil when I see that these damn Chinois will do we little good but rather harm I be almost in despair and have at that time a thousand pound in gold Hymskerke which I have receive of general Hymskerke for pepper in my chest above stair I run up think to fetch it and to throw it into a pond on our backside but when I come to my chamber door my mind alter and I think I will go see once again what may be do and come through our hall I chance to cast my eye into our dine room which be right over the place where the fire be where there be Chinois that have remove the table and be break up the brick of the ceiling among which be our unkind neighbour which be the principal actor I bid they leave and g^t they down the which they will not until I begin to let fly among they when I have drive they down I go down after they and desire some merchant that stand by with who we have deal that they will urge the rest of the Chinois to help we pluck out pack promise they shall be well pay for their pain it please God to put so much good in their mind which I think never have any before nor since so that they fall to work of all hand and present the room be clear out of which come fifty and odd pack whereof sixteen be on a light fire thus by their help the fire be quench which they know and therefore will not work any more and the next day be pay for their work beside what they steal discovery of knavery we wonder much how this fire shall come suspect the portugal have hire malaye to do it but a certain chine a bricklayer which wrought at the dutch house in the morning tell a Fleming that have be long in the country that certain Chinois have do it which now be flee and if we look well in the room we shall find the manner how it be do the Dutchman tell a english surgeon what he have hear and will he to come and tell we and he himself because he be perfect in the language will go and inquire after they the english surgeon come to i and desire i he may see the room where the fire be I present call for a candle and show he the room he go to one corner find a little ^ound hole which be burn through one plank of the floor whereat I put down a long stick which I have in my hand but can feel no ground then I call for a axe and as soft as we can we wrinch up the plank where under be a way that the great chest or pack in our house may have go down which when I see as secret as I can I call three of our man and go to the house from whence the mine come have our weapon I set one in the door javan take and charge he he shall let none come out whatsoever he be and myself with the other two go in where in one room we find three man there be two more in another room who hear we flee out at a back door which we know not of before we see they those three after two or three blow give we bring away one be a dweller in the house but the other two we can prove nothing against they I lay they fast in iron and present I send master Towerson to the protector to certify he how the case stand and to de^re he they may be seek out and have justice do upon they which he promise shall be do but be very slack in performance hollander kindness the dutch merchant hear we have take some and doubt the chynois will rise against we come very kind with their weapon and swear they will live and die in our quarrel when we have lay out those good that have receive some water to air than we examine this party that dwell in the house who tell we the name of six that be flee but he will not contesse that he know any thing of it also he say the other two know nothing of the matter neither can he tell we as he say whether the rest be flee then fear he with a hot iron but not touch he he confess the whole manner of all and that he do help he say those two outhouse be build for that purpose at the first although they put they to other use because we shall not mistrust they and more that the i be make two month before in which time many night before they have be in the i strive to get into our house but can not we torture he because when we have lay down the iron he deny all execution of a China thief but be torture make a second confession the next morning I send he to execution as he go out of our gate the javan who do much rejoice when they see a Chynese go to execution as also the chynois do when they see a javan go to his death revile he but he will answer again say the englishman be rich and the Chynois be poor therefore why shall they not steal from the english if they can the next day the admiral take another of they and send he to i who know there be but one way with he and therefore resolve with himself not to confess any thing to we he be find hide in a privy and this be he that put the fire to our house he be a goldsmith and confess to the admiral he have clip many ryalls and also coin some counterfeit some thing he confess to he concern our matter but not much but he will tell we nothing wherefore because of his sullenness and that it be he that f^red we I cause he to be burn under the nail of his thumb finger and toe with sharp hot iron and the nail to be tear off and because he never blinsh at that cruel torture we think that his hand and leg have be numb with tie wherefore we burn he in the hand arm shoulder and neck but all be one with he then we burn he quite through the hand and with rasphe of iron tear out the flesh and sinew after that I cause they to knock the edge of his shinbone with hot fear iron a dissolute resolution then I cause cold screw of iron to be screw into the bone of his arm and sudden to be snatch out after that all the bone of his finger and toe to be break with pincer yet for all this he never shed tear no nor once turn his head aside nor stir hand nor foot but when we demand any question he will put his tongue between his tooth and strike his chin upon his knee to bite it off when all the extremity we can use be but in vain I cause he to be put fast in iron again where the amit or aunt which do great abound there get into his wound and torment he worse than we have do as we may well see by his gesture the king officer desire i he may be shoot to death I tell they that be too good a death for such a villain and say more that in our country if a gentleman or a soldier have commit a iact worthy of death than he be shoot to death and yet he be befriend too but they do hold it to be the cruel and base death that be wherefore they be very importunate in the evening we lead he into the field and make he fast to a stake the first shoot carry away a piece of his arm bone and all execution the next shot strike he through the breast up near to the shoulder than he hold down his head look upon the wound the three shot that be make one of our man have cut a b^llet in three part which stroke upon his breast in a triangle whereat he fall down as low as the stake will give he leave but between our man and the fleming they shoot he almost all to piece before they leave he now in this time the admiral and the Sabyndar send we a guard of man every night for fear the Chynois will rise against we but we fear it not yet we keep four of their man to be witness that whatsoever we do if they shall rise be but in our own defence the other two I set free another of they I obtain by a bribe who confess his associate viz. Vniete the chief Sawman his partner that dwell in the house with he hynt Omigpayo which be short after cryse for lie with a woman himself boyhy irrow and lackow which be flee to jackatra the which irrow and lackow I have never hear of before I make all the mean I can to get they but I can not except I will have be at exceed great charge and there be other that belong to some javan which be great man and get into their house we can not get they some of they do offer they to s^ll to we and we do beat the price as one will do about a ox or a calf but they hold they so dear that I dare not deal with they I proffer they as much for every one as they may buy they another slave in their room and some benefit but they be so fit instrument for their purpose be practise in all villainy that they will not part with they without a great sum for all the javan and chyny from the high to the low be all villain all the people ^aught and have not one spark of grace in they and if it be not for the sabindar the admiral and one or two more which be clyn-man bear there be no live for a christian among they without a fort or very strong house all of brick or stone this boyhoy we torture not because of his confession but cryse he among all other of the devil instrument here upon earth there be one of the king blood a noble villain call Panggran man delicke who keep one of those nine villain in his house one day he come to our house to buy cloth we desire he he will deliver this f^llow into our hand promise he that we will cause our general to give he thanks and tell he how good it will be for the country to root out such villain as they be he answer again that we shall tell they so that have the government of the country in their hand or care for the good of the country for he do not some three or four day he come to our house again and will have have i give he credit for six or seven hundred rial of eight in cloth but because he be a man not to be trust I excuse the matter say that I look every day for our ship and that I can deliver no good but I must have pepper present whereby I may have lade ready after he have be very earnest and see he can not prevail he go out very angry and be at our gate he look back upon our house and say it be pity but it shall be burn again also he will have have a chynese that we have some deal with to have help to some chynois that dwell near we to undertake the fire of our house again he be a man general hate of all for cruelty that he have do the Chynois tell we what he say wherefore I will present have go to the court to have complain of he but many wish i not to do so miserable government for they say he be a desperate villain and care neither for king nor protector but if we bring he to that open shame he will do we a mischief whatsoever come of it and I see it for the king and the governor have send to he often time to deliver we that fellow he have but he care not for they short after we have many shrewd attempt to have fire our house for the town be fire in three place at one instant in the night a little to windward of our house often treachery a woman steal and twice another night but God bless our industry and preserve we among all these sorrowful and troublesome discourse it happen that a certain Chynois which dwell hard under our pale do steal away another chyny wife and be hardly pursue by her husband they have no mean to shift she away but to put she over the pale into our ground and at that time we have new shoot much pepper into our warehouse which be so extreme hot the heat of pepper in those part that we be force to keep the door open night and day have always a regard to it in the night this be a fit place for she to hide she in get behind the door so far as she can stand for heat and her husband will have seek all java and china before he will or dare come thither to seek in the night after our watch be set one of our company go into our backside the which place we do very much frequent night and day but as he be come back and be a little star light he see the woman stand in the pepper house door who come forth to take breath for she have be better to have be in the stove so long he present swear a woman I run down and cause she to be search and examine present a merry jest she tell we that her husband will have beat she wherefore she be force to climb over our pale and to hide herself it be a ordinary thing for the chine to beat their wife especial she be a cuchinchyne woman which have no friend in town for the javan will hardly suffer they to beat their woman wherefore now have search and secure every place I think it will prove but some such jest. the next morning her husband come who fall down on his marie-bone desire i to be good unto he for I have so late torture some chine he think I will torture he but in my conscience he need no more plague or punishment then such a wife wherefore I present dismiss they both the protector a little before have give we all the house and ground which join to our pale and belong to those chynois which undermine our house but although it be give yet I think there be never Englishman pay so dear for so little ground in any country in the world the house be rot but the ground do we great pleasure we buy also a house of a pangran or gentleman which come so near our pepper-house door that it be very troublesome to we when we shall carry in or out our pepper wherefore I buy that house with the ground so that now we have a very spacious yard the nine of September the protector send a proclamation that no chine shall weigh any pepper to the stranger mean the english and the hollander the which proclamation be procure by the hollander and we know it very well for the same day they dine with we and at dinner they tell we the protector owe they ten thousand sack of pepper but I tell they that be not so the old queen for they will never be such fool to trust he so much the next morning I go to the old woman who command the protector and all the rest and indeed be call queen of the land by the sabindar and diverse other although she be not of the king blood but only for her wisdom be hold in such estimation among they of all sort that she rule as if she be sole queen of that country after we have make our grief know to she she present send for the protector will we to talk with he before she when he come I demand of he for what cause he have forbid we to trade he answer he must buy ten thousand sack of pepper for the king I tell he again that the fleming themselves tell i that the pepper he will buy be for they and that he owe they ten thousand sack many shift he use but the queen our constant friend say he shall not hurt we for the hollander when they see they can get no trade with the people for pepper than they deliver the protector money and wrought with he as I have before rehearse and if we have have but ten thousand rial of eight more than we have the fleming shall have get little pepper that year in Bantam it be most certain they be very much hate there and what they do or procure be for fear of their ship wherein they do abound in all those part the twelve of September the protector send rial up and down among those that be dealer in pepper in the king name some to serve he a hundred sack some fifty sack some ten some five as it be a beg and indeed he take it up at the king price which be 1/^ a rial in a sack less than we pay the chine with much grudge serve he a while after he set a tax upon they to serve he so much more then the chine rail upon the protector and the hollander both and many of they will not receive their money but the officer will throw it down in their house and take their name the fifteen of September by mean of a old trot which be make of candle the town be set on fire the which consume all the upper work of our three house the town fire to our exceed great danger cost and trouble the sabindar come to we in the tumult also the admiral who have charge of the court in the king and governor absence then in progress send we a great train of his principal man likewise one of the king uncle come to we with a great number and also the rich china with a very great crew all these come to see that no body shall offer we any violence for they know well we have enemy of great force but not for our sake but for our good now we be lay open to all our enemy for our fence for the most part be burn to the ground and we have not a place to dress our victual in yet as good fortune be we have one little shed in the middle of our yard which be our court of guard that escape where we encamp by night the dutch house escape dutch enemy in trade otherwise friend though but narrow wherefore we borrow some of their man for it be to be note that though we be mortal enemy in our trade yet in all other matter we be friend and will have live and die one for the other also the admiral and sabindar send we man every night so that we with our drum shot and pike live a soldier life until our fence be make up and afterward too for this be but to show we the way and our fence be no soon up but we look every hour when it shall be burn down or bear down by those that will have have the cut of our throat the pangran mandelicko in the end of September fall to rob of junck one of which be of lade with rice man and woman with a great crew of villain his slave he seize on the juncke in the night and carry away all the rice with the man and woman as his prisoner the which be the next way to keep away all other junck which use to bring victual to the town whereby to starve they all for that land be not able to serve one quarter of the people that be in it the king and his protector send to he Anarchy worse than tyranny many tyrant worse than one command he to deliver the people and good which he have take the which he will not but present fortify himself also the rest of the Pangranes that be of the king blood and his but be all traitor to the king maintain he so that the king officer dare not meddle with he the protector Sabindar and admiral send to we to take heed to ourselves the rebel grow every day strong and strong and all the people in the country and also stranger begin to be in great fear I be force to borrow some small ordnance of china merchant which be our friend and with chain and bush to fortify ourselves and our man be beside every day a make of chain-shot langrall-shot and crosse-barre-shot dangerous rebel all trade of merchandise be lay aside neither do any in the town look after buy and sell and every day we shall have the rebel espyal will come into our yard who will be very inquisitive what and wherefore those be which our man be all so hard at work upon we will plain tell they that we look every night for such a man come wherefore we make provision for his entertainment about the twenty of October come in the king of jacatra king of jacatra with a crew of fifteen hundred fight man beside straggler and have a thousand more come after he challenge the rebel and likewise the Pangranes to fight with he and his company only he have indeed a a great quarrel against they all for but a little before they seek mean to put he out of his kingdom but the rebel keep their fortification and will not come out the six and twenty of October the king of jacatra and the admiral send for we to know if there be no mean to fire they a reasonable distance off out of the reach of their Baces of which they have a great number we tell they if there have be a ship in the road it may easy have be do but for we to do it we think we shall hardly find thing wherewithal the admiral ask i what thing we will have I tell he camphire saltpetre and brimstone as for some thing we have already the admiral say he will help we to all these and desire we we will help they also he have a long bow and arrow fit for such a purpose but I think a musket have be better we be mind to have cause the king ordnance to have be plant and to have shoot red hot bullet among they which I think will have make perilous work both with they and their thatch house and fortification make of cane the principal rebel have fight all the mean he can to fire we now we mean very to see if we can fire he but whether it be for fear of the king of jacatra or hear we be about such a matter the Pangranes and the rebel both come to a agreement within two day after the which agreement be this agreement that the principal rebel shall within six day depart out of the king of Bantams dominion have with he only thirty of his household the which he do for the space of ten day we look every hour both night and day when the king force and the Pangranes will join battle for they be both ready slave cause of not fight but the javan be very loath to fight if they can choose the reason they say be their wealth lie altogether in slave so that if there slave be kill they be beggar wherefore they have always rather come to a set-feast than a pitch battle the queen renown after her death the seventeen day of November which we take to be our coronation day and have all our piece and chamber lie lade since the trouble we invite the fleming to dinner in the middle of dinner we drink a health to our queen and also shoot off all our ordnance there resort to this town of Bantam a number of many nation the which diverse of they be leiger fame of the English these people have hear much fame of the english nation in time past before ever they see any of we have a especial eye to our carriage and behaviour and we be grow a common admiration among they all that we be so few shall carry such a port as we do never put up the least wrong that be offer by either javan or chinees but always do justice ourselves and when the protector do wrong we himself it be know that we do not spare to tell he of it sound and in such sort that he want very much of his will it be well know also english resolution admire that at the first come of our ship the javan offer we much wrong in purloin our good but so many as we take be either slay wound or sound beat the javan think we dare not do so when our ship be go wherefore they do practice to steal both day and night but they find it all one the which they do admire at for it be most certain and I have hear many stranger speak it that have be present when we have beat some javan that they never know or hear of any nation but we that be leiger there that dare once strike a javan in Bantam and it be a common talk among all stranger and other how we stand at defiance with those that hate we for our good and how little we care for they likewise how we never offer any wrong to the mean in the town and also how we be general belove of all the better sort hollander hate they will say it be not so with the fleming nor with no other nation and all the while I be there I never hear that ever the fleming give a javan so much as a box on the ear but many time foul of the chinees who will very seldom make any resistance yet it be of truth they be mortal hate aswell of all sort of javan as chinees now every day they look for their ship and have little pepper nor know not where to buy any for the chinees will sell they none so long as we will give as much as they and more than that for when all our rial be lay out some of they sell we pepper to be pay when our ship come not know when they will come nor we neither at that time but as we guess if they will have go to the fleming they may have have ready money and great thanks they therefore buy what they can by retail in the market send it to a chinese house by boat in the evening Chino^^ fraud but the charge consume the gain about this present time the emperor of Damack who not many year before for tyranny have be depose by the king teereabouts go by sea from Bantam to another town upon the coast be by one of his son stab in his bed sleep the chinese will mingle usual their pepper in the night if you leave it with they or put in dust or transport it and we shall be sure to find that which we have not like at one man yesterday now in another man house a good distance off and the next night after at another house as who shall say it be another parcel and the old Warehouse where it lie first shall be shut or a parcel of better pepper in it first news of q. eliz. death in November and the beginning of December we be busy both in building and get in and make clean of pepper the fourteen of December come in a dutch pinnace who tell we of the death of our late queen and of the great plague and sickness that have be over all Christendom which strike more terror to our mind than all the trouble we have pass but they can tell we no news of our ship which cause we much to doubt only they tell we the king of scot be crown and that our land be in peace which be exceed great comfort unto we also they tell we of the peace that be likely to be betwixt England and Spain in all the dutch fleet and because we hear of no letter for we in the pinnace I make haste and go aboard the dutch admiral to bid he welcome also to inquire for letter the which we find in their vice-admiral the two and twenty of December by mean of some of our friend principal miner take Vniete that be the principal that undermine our house be descry and take have be long in the mountain and for want of food be force to repair to certain house near the town from whence he be bring to the rich chinas house so soon as I hear of he I send master Tewerson to the protector to certify he of it and withal to tell he we will short execute he for since the time that this mischief happen I never go out of sight of our house myself but once until our ship come in the which once be when the protector cross we so that then I be constrain and my fear be so great that I think all will be burn before I shall come back again likewise three time every week I use to search all the chinees house round about we for fear of more undermine @. v. general Middleton arrival the sickness and death of many quarrel betwixt we and the hollander begin by captain severson a Dutchman and the king of Bantams circumcision and pompous triumph the same day towards evening we descry our ship come into the road English ship ^ome and their weakness to all our extraordinary great joy but when we come aboard of our admiral and see their weakness also hear of the weakness of the other three ship it grieve we much know that Bantam be not a place to recover man that be sick Bantam unhealthful Henry Middleton general but rather to kill man that come thither in health at my first come aboard I find our general captain Henry Middleton very sickly and weak to who I make relation in brief what trouble we have pass also I certify he nevertheless we have lade ready for two ship which be some content unto his mind very much grieve for the weakness of his man they have hardly fifty sound man in their four ship and of the sick man a number die also of those that come thither in health many never go out of the Road. the four and twenty day our vice-admiral captain Coulthurst come a shore with some other merchant on which day we execute this villain which we have late take captain colthrust have now slay the four principal and one more be kill for steal of a woman at my come away there remain four alive of which two be at jacatra one with Mandelicko the traitor and one with cay Sanapatty lama which we can not as then come by the same day our vice-admiral be accompany with we there resident before and also some other of the new merchant go to the court to certify the king letter from king james. that our general have letter from the king of England with a present for he and more to tell he our general be weary have be long upon the sea and so soon as he be a little refresh he will come himself to see he and also to deliver the letter and the present the five and twenty be Christmas day we dine aboard our general but I shall have speak before of a counsel that be hol^en on Sunday be the three and twenty day wherein it be think of all that the dragon dragon send to the and the ascension be fit to go for the for diverse reason which need not here be rehearse and the Hector and Susan to lade pepper and to be dispatch home and the same week after we be busy in get of fresh victual herb fruit and flower for the recovery of our man man sick of the scorbute which be most pitiful pay with the scurvy the one and thirty day our general come on shore and be accompany withal the merchant that be in health and diverse other he go to the court and deliver the king letter and present the which be as follow one fair basin and ewer present to the King two fair stand cup all parcell-gilt one gild spoon and six musket with their furniture the which be kind receive a day or two after our general spend in visit our chief friend as the sabindar the admiral the rich Chynois and also give they present who very thankful receive they after this we fall all to work both ashore and aboard to pack up and take in good for the but after our man be a little recover of the scurvy flux succeed the scorbute the flux take they so that we continue still very weak in man in so much that it be unpossible in man judgement that ever we shall be able to accomplish our business in that manner on Monday be the seven of january the dutch fleet be nine tall ship beside pinnace and slupe set sail for Amboyna and the so that we rest very doubtful a long time whether our ship shall get any lade in those part that year by reason of their number of ship which be go before we neither can our ship possible go soon by mean of our weakness the ten of january the ship that be find home begin to take in pepper but they be so oppress with sickness that they can make no dispatch the eighteen day much sickness our ship have take in all the good which we think meet for those part set sail for the land of Banda have their man for the most part extreme weak and sick the ascension send to Banda but how they spend their time until their return to Bantam I must refer to their own report present after the departure of these ship the protector send unto we to agree about custom the which we have think we have know since our first ship depart but he ask many duty which we never hear of before and because I will not grant to pay they he command the porter they shall carry no pepper wherefore to prevent that this shall not be a hindrance to we in lade our ship for we have hindrance enough beside I be force to agree with he to pay in hand according to that rate as our ship pay before and to let the full agreement rest until the return of our general and he think he do we great kindness herein death of many it please God to take away the two master of these two ship which we be now a lade Samuel Spencer master of the Hector and habbakuck pery master of the Susan also William smith the principal master mate of the Hector and soon after captain Sty^es with many other of their principal man with a number of their ordinary sailor so that we be not only constrain to hire man to do they all the ease we can there but likewise to hire so many as we can get of goosserates and Chynois to help bring home our ship to our exceed great cost and charge with much turmoil we get they both lade by the sixteenth of February but it be the four of march before they can make their ship ready to set sail the four of march the hector and Susan set sail for England have sixty three person in the Hector of all sort Hector and susan^ent ^ent for England english and other but many of her own man be sick the Susan so near as I can learn have forty seven of all sort also many englishman sick I pray God send we good newe^ of she William crane be master of the Hector and richard hacknesse master of the Susan a Holland ship the six of May come in a ship from Holland who have come all along by the coast of Goa and meet there with two ship more of Holland which be find out for Cambaya they three have take four Portugal ship wherein they find great riches only one of they be lade with great horse which they set on fire and consume both ship and horse this ship come out of Holland in june 1604. but they can certify we of no further news than our own ship have do captain Syverson first caus^ of breach betwixt hollander and English their captain name be Cornelius Syverson who be a very proud boor and have neither wit manner honesty nor humanity present after who come in the fleming withdraw their familiarity which they be wont to hold with we and that as we think by general Warwick charge to they but now I will leave this contemner of courtesy and hater of our nation with his rascal crew which he bring with he and speak somewhat of the manner and order of the king circumcision and of the trumphe that be hold there every day for the space of a month and more before his go to church whereby all the better sort of that country have be busy from the time of the come in of the china junck which be in February and March until the four and twenty of june circumcision of the king of Bantam about make preparation there be a great pageant make the forepart of which be in likeness of a huge devil upon this pageant be set three chair of state the middlemost be for the king which be place high than the other by some two foot on either of his hand be place the son of Pangran Goban who be heir apparent to the crown if the king shall die without issue this pageant be place on a green before the court gate and rail in round about the manner of their country be that when any king come new to the crown or at the circumcision of their king all that be of ability must give the king a present the which they must present in open manner with the great show they be able to make and those that be not able to do it of themselves do join a company of they together and so perform it both stranger and other about the five and twenty of june these show begin and continue all that month and the next except certain rainy day the protector begin himself the first day and every noble man and other have their day not as they be in birth but in readiness and sometime two or three company in a day because the javan be no good shot the protector borrow shoot both of we and the fleming when they come to set forth there be a great strife whether shall go fore-most they contemn our paucity and we their sordidness our man be in neat apparel with scarf and colour hatband they in thr^mbed greasy cap tar coat and their shirt if they have any hang betwixt their leg we go therefore in the rearward refuse to follow next after the fleming every morning the king guard which be both shot and pike be place without the rail round about the pageant be common in number about three hundred man but some principal day of show there be upward of six hundred the which be place in file according to our martial discipline the difference betwixt we and javan in military matter but in our march we do much differ for whereas we common march three five seven or nine they never go but one and so follow one another so close as they can bear their pike right upright as for shot they have not be use unto their drum be huge pan make of a mettle call Tombaga which make a most hellish sound they have also their colour and company suitable but their standard and ancient be not like we their ancient staff be very high bend compass at the top like the end of a long bow but the colour on it be har^ly a yard in breadth hang down from the top with a long the first day be the great day of show there be certain fort make of cane and other trash set up before the king pageant wherein be certain javan place to defend they and other company be appoint to assault they and many time the assailant will fire they but still when the javan be at it in jest with their pike our man and the fleming be at it in earnest with their shot and be force to march apart the protector perceive it send to they desire both party to be quiet whereupon they be quiet for that day the next time we see their merchant which be that evening I ask one of they if he think Holland now be able to wage war with England that there shall be such equality between their man and we to strive who shall go foremost and likewise we tell they all that if Englishmen have not once go before their nation may have go behind all nation of Christendom long ago but they will answer that time and season do change dutch ingratitude and pride in many (@) this business of the dutch as the fault be not I hope Nationall but Per^onall I have mollify t^e author style and leave out some harsh censure ^eat^ Pacifi^^ the king triumphal pomp the shot music targeteer and dart tree beast and fowl and without doubt the great multitude of they here do hold themselves able to withstand any nation in the world but I can say nothing of the opinion of their state at home and of the wise sort now a word or two in what manner the king be bring out every day and what show be present before he always a little afore the show come the king be bring out upon a man shoulder bestride his neck and the man hold his leg before he and have many rich ty^ asole carry over and round about he his principal guard come out before he and be place within the rail round about the pageant after the king come out a number of the principal of the land which give their attendance upon the king as it shall seem they have their day and time appoint they the show that be bring come in in this manner first a crew of shot be lead by some gentleman-slave after follow the pike in the middle of which be carry their colour and also their music which be ten or twelve pan of Tombaga carry upon a coulstaffe between two these be tuneable and every one a note above another and always two go by they which be skilful in their country music and play on they have thing in their hand of purpose to strike they also they have another kind of music which go both afore and after but these pan be the principal after the pike follow a crew of targeteer with dart than be bring in many sort of tree with their fruit grow upon they than follow many sort of beast and fowl both alive and also artificial make that except one have be near they be not to be discern from those that be alive after these follow a crew attire like masker which before the king do dance vault dancer and tumbler and show many strange kind of tumble trick of these there be both man and woman after all these follow sometime two hundred sometime three hundred woman all carry present only at every ten woman there go a old motherly woman soldier to keep they in order which carry nothing these present be of Rice and cash present the which be lay in frame make of split cane curious set out for show with paint and gild paper but the present itself be not common worth above twelve penny or thereabouts after they follow the rich present which be common a fair Tuck and some fair cloth of their country fashion be curious wrought and guild or embroider with gold for the king own wear the which be carry also by woman have two pike bear upright before they also every present which be for the king wear have a rich Tierasoll bear over it last of all follow the heir to that party which send the present which be their young son young son heir if they have any be very rich attire after their country manner with many jewel about their arm and middle of gold diamond ruby and other stone have also rich tierasole bear over they and a number of man and woman attend on they after he have do his obeisance to the king he sit down upon a Mat be lay upon the ground which be their order in general the present be all bear by the king pageant into the court where there be some officer appoint to receive they after all which pass one within the king pageant speak out of the devil mouth and command silence in the king name then begin the chief of the revel and music and now and then the shot discharge a volley revel also the pikeman and targeteer with dart do show all their feat of arm their shot be very unskilful but the pike and target be very expert and always when they come to charge their enemy they come towards he dance because his adversary shall have no steady aim to throw his dart or make a thrust at he likewise among some of these show there come juncke sail artificial make be lade with cash and Rice juncke and junca^cs also in these be signification of historical matter of former time both of the old testament and of chronicle matter of the country and king of java all these invention the javan have be teach in former time by the chinees or at least the most part of they history for they themselves be but blockhead and some they have learn by goossarat turk and other nation which come thither to trade we bring a very fair pomegranate tree be full of fruit grow on it both ripe half ripe some young and some b^dded this tree we dig up by the root english present which we set in a frame be make or Ratanes or carrack rush somewhat like a b^rds cage but very wide at the root of this tree we place earth and upon that green turf coney rarity in java so that it stand as if it have be still grow upon these turf we put three siluer-hayred coney which our vice-admiral have give i and at the top and round about upon the bough we with small thread make fast a number of small bird which will ever be chirp likewise we have four very furious serpent which the chinees there can make artificial upon these we hang the cloth which be for the king own wear which be five piece curious wrought and guild after their fashion some other piece of Stuffe there be also for the king to bestow upon some of his follower more we give he a fair peternell damask and a case of pistol damask with very fair case several belong to they the which have great silk string with tassel of Gold now we have no woman to carry these thing wherefore we borrow thirty of the pretty boy we can get and also two proper tall javan to bear pike before they master Towerson have a very pretty boy a chinees son who father be a little before slay by thief this youth we attire as gallant as the king who we send to present these thing and to make a speech to the king signify to he that if our number have be equal to our good will we will have present his majesty with a far better show the king and diverse other about he take great delight in the coney also our man carry some firework with they firework which be very rare matter to the young king and his playfellow but the woman cry out for fear they will set the court a fire hollander vanity the fleming give a present which they can easy brag off small matter they do not spare to brag very much of their king mean grave Maurice who they call in all these part at every word Raia Hollanda much quarrel arise betwixt our man and they the fleming in drink still beginning and bra^ing and usual get the worst I have much to do to restrain our man which yet be necessary consider we have a great charge of good the charge of which lie upon i also we be but bad house and in a dangerous country likewise if we give they blow it be likely a number of they will come upon we we be but few can not defend ourselves without shed of blood the which will require revenge they be above a hundred man in the house ship and flyboat which no doubt will have come upon we have such a occasion and we but thirteen in a straw-house king of jacatras pomp and homage the eighteen of july the king of jacatra come in to present his show before the king of Bantam also to give his present and to do his homage the which be perform the three and twenty of july in this manner in the morning early the king of Bantams guard which be on this day a extraordinary number be place in file their pike set upright in the ground and their shot lie in order and every man sit by his arm be clothe in red coat about eight of clock myself with some other of our merchant and man go to see this show and take up our stand near the king pageant the king guard will often bid we sit down but we will answer they must first bring we a form for indeed there be no nation suffer to stand in the king or any great man presence if they be near they we and the fleming be command by the officer to sit down as well as the rest but we be too stout know they have no such commission to stoop under their yoke stand a token of honour sit of submission contrary to our custom but for other nation they will bang they if they refuse although the ground and place where they shall sit be never so dirty but the javan who can endure to have any stand over they will remove a good distance from we and many of the king guard forsake their weapon and will go sit afar off neither can they endure that one shall lay his hand on their head the which be not for any point of religion as some will affirm but only of mere pride many time when I have come into a chinees house where javan have set in the floor I sit down on a chest as our order be they have all start up and run out at door the chinees will tell we if any other nation shall do so but we or the hollander they will stab they but they dare not meddle with we but now to my former matter about nine a clock the king be bring out in the same manner as I before have mention some two hour after the king of jacatra come have a guard of some hundred person about he so soon as ever he come in sight the king guard all rise up and every man prove his weapon the which we have never see before when any show come in so that it shall seem that there be great fear not that the king of jacatra will offer any violence but there be a number of other petty king who have great troop of man many petty king the which king be his mortal enemy wherefore fear they may rise against he we plain perceive the king of Bantams guard have their charge to be ready to defend the king of jacatra if such a matter shall happen when he come near the innermost file of the king guard he can not pass to the king but he must needs go through a rank of these petty king cowardly sta^s who he know do most deadly hate he wherefore fear the cowardly stab which be use among that nation he begin to look very ghastly and wild on it although he be as stout a man as any be in all those part pass they he will not but sit down upon a leather that be lay on the ground the which every gentleman have carry after he for that purpose so soon as he be set he send to the king to know if it be his pleasure he shall come unto he whereupon the king send two of the principal nobleman about he to conduct he to his presence and after the king of jacatra have do his obeisance the young king embrace he and welcome he according to the country order after this the king of jacatra sit down in a place appoint for he all this while there be some other pretty show present about twelve a clock come his show and present the soldier come in order as I have before declare king of jaca^raes present be about three hundred in number than follow so many woman with cash and strange fowl both alive and artificial and likewise many strange beast among which be one furious beast call by they a Matchan this beast be somewhat big than a lion and very princely to behold if they be at liberty they be spot white and red have many black streak which come down from the reins of his back under his belly I have see one of they jump at the least eighteen foot by many man estimation for his prey Matchan a fierce wild beast they do kill many people near the town of Bantam and many time the king and all the country go a hunt of they not only in the day time but in the night this Matchan which I now speak of be in a great cage of wood which be place upon truck of old carriage and be draw in with buffel he lay for all the world like a traitor upon a hurdle there be draw in like manner a huge giant which by our estimation may be some thirty foot in height also a devil come in in like order a huge giant and a devil a garden and fish pond more there be draw in a garden have many sort of herb and flower in it in the middle of which garden be a fishpond wherein be diverse sort of small fish and all sort of fish which they do know in those part be bring in either alive or artificial make among these thing come in many masker masker and tumbler vawter tumbler very strange and saluagious attire which do dance and show many strange feat before the King there be draw in likewise a very fair bedstead whereon be a fair quilt bed also eleven bolster and pillow of silk embroider with gold at the end the post of the bedstead be very curious carve and gild with a fair canopy wrought with gold a number of other pretty toy be bring in and present last of all come in his young son ride on a chariot but it be draw with buffel a chariot draw by buffle horse few and not use to draw which i think be very unseemly indeed they have but few horse the which be small nag I never see any of they put to draw but only to ride on and to run at tilt after the Barbary fashion as I have hear some Barbary merchant say which exercise they use every Saturday towards evening except in their time of Lent which be a little before we the second day after this show be present be Friday and their sabbath the king be carry on his pageant to church where he be circumcise king of Bantam circumcise his pageant be bear by many man it be report to i by the king nurse four hundred but I think she lie for i think there can not stand so many under it the four and twenty of july our general come into the road from Ternata the general return from Ternata so soon as we discern the ship and know she to be the dragon I take a praw and go aboard to bid he welcome who declare to i the danger they have pass and also of the unkind deal which he have of the hollander albeit he save some of their life nevertheless he tell i he have though with great pain and turmoil get a good quantity of clove towards his lade the which be good news to we wherefore we give God hearty thanks for all especial that he have bring he thither again in safety not doubt but within short time we shall be able to furnish he with the rest of his lade the eight and twenty day come in the great encusen of Holland from ternate also the same day the king of jacatra come to see our general @. 5 further quarrel betwixt the english and dutch with other accident the first of August in the afternoon our general and all the rest of the merchant be very busy in the Warehouse take a inventary of the remainder of prize-good and all other good English wound by the dutch. there be word bring that the fleming have wound two of our man the which we see come bleed in at the gate our general command every man to get he weapon with all speed and to lay they over the pate sound the which present be perform himself can find no weapon ready wherefore he take up a bar of iron but find that too heavy he come into the street only with a small cudgel the fleming be bang home to their own gate one be run quite through the body what become of he we can not certain tell yet some say he escape it two more lose their arm the merchant with diverse other of their house come with shot the flemish merchant come to our general but hear that their man begin they answer dutchmen satisfy with their fellow reward that they have but their desert and after they have drink a cup of wine they kind take their leave of our general and all the rest of the merchant and so depart news be present carry to the court how the fleming and we be by the ear and that there be two slay some about the king ask whether they be english or fleming which be slay answer be ma^e that they be Fleming they say it be no matter if they be all slay in this broil I thank God we have no man hurt but two the which be do before the complaint come neither have they any great harm one have a slash over the hand the other a stab under the ^ide with a knife which be not very deep this be the first time but it be not long but we be at pell-mell again and again where the fleming speed as they do now the eleven of August come in two ship from Cambaya ship from Cambaia the ascension from Banda who have take great wealth from the portugal the same day come in one ship from ternate the sixteenth day come in the ascension from Banda the eight of September the dutch merchant invite our general and all his merchant and master to a feast where there be great cheer and also great friendship be make between we the fifteen day of September two dutch ship set sail for Holland one be a small ship which have lade pepper at Bantam the other have take in some clove at ternate the rest of her lade be of prize-good which be take out of the ship which come from Cambaya new Dutch Fray the one and twenty day come in the dutch admiral from Banda the two and twenty day our general send some of his merchant to the dutch house to bid he welcome on which day a drunken Fleming cause a new fray which begin with our surgeon and after part be take on both side and some of the dutch wound again about one a clock the same afternoon our general sit upon a bench at our gate talk with a Portugal which sit by he who sometime have be of good reputation there come one of their drunken swad another drunken quarrel of a Dutchman and sit down between our general and this Portugal our general see the rudeness of this unmannerly Fleming give he a box on the ear and thrust he away present diverse of his consort come about our gate draw their knife and sable and begin to swagger we take the but-end of pike and halberd and faggot-stickes rack house where hot drink be sold. drive they into a racke-house who shut the door upon we we break it open and knock some of they down bring they away as prisoner to our general so many of the fleming as come by in peace our general cause to go into our yard where they be in safety and those that will not bear it off with head and shoulder so soon as we have beat they well that take the racke-house there come another troop of they down the street to take their part with who we meet and after a few brabble word past we lay on such load that they be force to give ground and to betake they to their heel some of they be beat down in the street dutchmen chastise and the bloody design thence intend and many have their pate pitiful break other be force to run through a great miry ditch to escape from we they be chase in at their own gate the master of their admiral have occasion this fray and go from ship to ship to bid they go weapon on shore and kill the englishman they meet with and when some go to go aboard the dutch ship on business some englishman of their fleet with weep eye call to they that they shall not come for strait order be give to kill as many englishman as they can either aboard or on shore and will they to certify our general of it wherefore the fleming have no cause hereafter to complain but to say we deal kind with they for the truth be it lay in our hand that day to have slay a great number of they the which have be do if our general have but give the word these fray be great admire at of all nation in that place that we shall dare to bandy blow with the fleming they have seven very tall ship in the road and we but two there be not one of our man have any harm m. Sarys only master Sarys merchant who receive a cut on the forefinger with a sable at the latter end of this fray the dutch general come to our house with a great guard of captain dutch general satisfy merchant and diverse other who our general be in like manner accompany meet in the street and bring he into our house after the begin of the matter be declare to the dutch admiral he like well of that we have do some of the captain about he say we complain but their man bear away the blow as may appear by their bloody pate and shoulder the dutch admiral answer it be no matter for he see plain the fault be in their man wherefore he will take order henceforward that so many of they shall not come ashore at once after much talk have pass and a banquet of sweet meat end the dutch admiral kind take his leave of our general and all the rest of the merchant both english and dutch shake hand one with another there be certain javan which belong unto two of the principal man of that land next unto the king javan thief who have steal nine musket and calliver out of the ascension gunner room short after two of they come to steal more their take be take by our people with the manner our general send i aboard to examine they and to bring they ashore they first tell i they belong to great man which be our very good friend but I mistrust they do dissemble with i bid they confess the truth and they shall find some favour than they confess true who slave they be and say the piece be forth come after they come ashore our general send the king and the protector word of it and desire he may have his piece again the protector send to the master of these two slave for they but they love the piece better than their man say they have no piece but what they have buy with their money yet they send to our general to desire he to defer their execution for a day or two the which be grant but because their master be no great good willer to the king the protector in the king name send the executioner to put they to death with a guard of pike their execution when they come to the place of execution our general take pity of they will have give they their life but the hangman say their life be in the king hand and not in our general wherefore because the king have send he he will execute they which the two thief very patient suffer as the manner of all that nation be when they be find to it they do hold it the great glory that can be to die resolute without any show of fear and sure so they do in as careless a manner as it be possible for flesh and blood the experience of which I have see by diverse both man and woman one will think these man shall be good soldier but it be not so this valour be but when there be no remedy against the people of those part of the world they be reasonable tall man but they will not meddle with christian except they have some exceed great advantage of number or other mean the six and twenty of September by mean of a javan shoot off a piece the town set on fire the town be set on fire but by reason we have good help of our mariner who be many of they ashore at that time our house be preserve but the dutch house be to leeward dutch house burn although they have never so much help can not be save but the upper work of one of their principal house which do join to their great house be burn and all their outhouse wherein lie cable hawser pickle pork and diverse other thing whereby they sustain great loss some that have serve there five year lose all that they have get in those part not long after this the town on our side the way the town twice fire be twice fire by the javan in the night which put we to great trouble in carry and recarry our thing but by labour of our mariner and the chynee it be quench the three of October our general make a feast which be for his farewell whereunto he invite the dutch admiral with all the rest of his captain master and merchant where we be all exceed merry and great friendship be make between we the four of October our general be accompany with diverse merchant and other preparation to dep^rt go to the court to take his leave of the king and his noble the six of October be Sunday about ten a clock our general with all that be find home go aboard who go by the dutch house go in and take his leave of the dutch admiral and the rest of his merchant also there go aboard with he master Gabriel Towerson m. Towerson who be to stay for agent there and some other merchant who after dinner some go ashore and some stay until the next day about three a clock we weigh anchor and with some ordnance bid the town and dutch ship farewell about eleven or twelve a clock at night we come to a anchor under a island where the next day we take in wood which our general have send our man before hand to cut ready the seven day towards evening we weigh anchor again and set sail master Towerson and some other of the merchant than take their leave to go ashore who we commit to the protection of the almighty and ourselves to the courtesy of the sea desire God to bless both they and we and if it be his will to send we a happy meeting again in England chap. v. the second voyage set forth by the company into the east-indies sir Henry Middleton be general wherein be employ four ship the red dragon admiral the Hector vice-admiral the ascension with the Susan write by Thomas clayborne in a large discourse a brief extract whereof be here deliver the second day of April 1604. be Monday about twelve of the clock we have sight of the lizard the three and twenty day west south-west to the westward two and twenty league latitude fifteen degree and five minute and this day we fall with the westermost part of s. jago the isle of s. jago maio. be west by north six league and at five of the clock we stand to the eastward for maio the wind at north. the four and twenty day we fall with maio and stand to the southward of the island and come to anchor at fifteen fathom one point north-west and by north and the other east southeast the five and twenty day we land and lose one of our merchant they land in maio. who be take by the people of the island the six and twenty day in the morning we land a hundred man to see if we can get our merchant again but can not come near any of the people of the island so we leave he behind we and this night about nine of the clock we set sail the wind at north. the sixteenth day of May latitude 00. fifteen minute and this day we pass the equinoctial the thirteen of july in the forenoon we have sight of cape Bona esperanza be of we fifteen league the seventeen day we come to anchor in the road of Saldania they come to a anchor in the road of Saldania m. Cole drown have sixty man sick of the scurvy but God be praise they all recover health before we wen^ from hence Saldania be in latitude thirty three degree fifty six minute or thirty four degree here m. Cole be drown be master of the Hector our vice-admiral and here we stay five week want a day the twenty day of August be Monday we weigh and set sail out of the road of Saldania the wind southerly and we stand to the westward Bantam the three and twenty of December be Sunday we come to anchor in Bantam roade where we find six holland ship and three or four Pinnasses the eighteen day of january we set sail out of Bantam road with the dragon and the ascension Amboyno the Moluccas but they part at Amboyna the general go with the dragon to the Moluccas and the ascension whereof m. colthrust be captain for Banda and the Hector and the Susan lade pepper at Bantam and set sail from thence about the middle of February the twenty day of February the ascension arrive at Banda and anchor in four fathom and a half Banda Nero Banda be in 4. degree 40. minute a high burn hill in Gun^^nappi by which be the chief place in those land from the south-part of Amboyna to Banda the course be east by south to the southward thirty league the latitude of Banda be four degree forty minute and the go in be to the westward there be a very high hill that burn continual and that hill you must leave on the larbordside and the other great island on your starboard side the go in be very narrow and you can see it till you come within half a mile but fear not to stand with the island that the high hill be on while you come within two cable length of it for so you must do and then you shall have about twenty fathom and then stand along still by that island about a cable length from it if the wind will give you leave and then you shall find shallow water eight seven six fathom and in the very narrow of all you shall have five fathom and so that depth until you come into the Road. by God help a man may go in without any danger keep near unto the aforenamed island it be somewhat shallow on the starboard side in the narrow of the go in but that will show itself Puloway Pulorin there be two small land one call Puloway and the other Pulorin and they lie about three league to the westward of the go in there be no danger about they but may be very well perceive you may leave those land on which side you please either at your go in or come out about the middle of march here we find the wind to be variable and so continue till the middle of April the monsons and than it continue and stand between the east and southeast four month to our knowledge but it do use to continue five month as the people of the country say and likewise five month between the west and north-west and the other two month variable here in the dark moon it be give much to gusty weather and much rain here we stay one and twenty week they stay in Banda 21. week and six day in the which time we have eleven man die and most of the flux the one and twenty day of july 1605. be sunday we set sail from Banda the wind at east southeast and we stand to the westward the two and twenty day we fall with the south-end of Burro the wind at east southeast the seven and twenty day we fall with Deselem and then we come about the south-end of the island leave seven land on our larboard side we stand close by the wind to the northward fair by the main island of Deselem to clear ourselves of a small island and a shall that lie off the south-west part of Deselem and leave this island and all the other shold on our larboord-side we stand north north-west along the west side of Deselem while we come in six degree and ten minute then we steer west eighteen league and fall with the point shall that lie off the south-west end of celebe celebe and the very souther-most part of that shall lie in six degree and be clear of that we stand to the westward Bantam the sixteenth day of August we come to anchor in Bantam road they return from Bantam for England note a sink island the six day of October be Sunday we set sail out of Bantam road with the dragon and the ascension the fifteen day of November latitude thirty one degree forty eight minute the wind north north-west thick foggy weather this day about ten of the clock in the morning we come within a ship length of a rock or sink island the water show upon it very brown and muddy and in some place very blue and be a ship breadth or two to the northward of it we see the water by the ship side very black and thick as though it have be earth or gross sand boil up from it the variation in this place be one and twenty degree from north to west decrease the variation 21. degree from north to west decrease sight of land the sixteenth of December west nine league latitude thirty four degree and twenty minute this day in the morning we have sight of the land of Ethiopia distant from we some twelve league the six and twenty day latitude thirty four degree thirty minute now be in the latitude the cape of Bona Esperansa and in the sight of cape Bona Esperansa and within one league of it we steer north-west and north north-west and north and as the land lie about the cape Saldania road the seven and twenty day we come to anchor in Saldania road where we find our admiral and the Hector which ship the dragon our admiral meet withal seven day before drive up and down the sea about four league of the cape Bona Esperansa 53. man dead out of the Hector with ten man in she all the rest of her man be dead which be in number three and fifty which die since she come out of Bantam which time be nine month be in great distress she lose company of the Susan three month after she come out of Bantam road which ship the Susan be never hear of since here we come to anchor in seven fathom the Susan utter lose have the low point go in north-west by west and the sugarloaf south-west @ a point to the westward the point of the breach of Pengwin island north-west by north and the hill between the sugarloaf and the low point west south-west the peak of the hill to the eastward of the table south by east the sixteenth day of january in the morning we set sail from Saldania ride and go to the northward of Pengwin island between that and the main when we have the island south from we about one mile and a half we sound and have ground twenty fathom white coral and whistle of shell when we be clear of the island we stand off west by south and west south-west while we bring the island southeast by east of we now be about six of the clock in the afternoon we have sight of the Hector come out to the southward of the island for we leave she at anchor when we weigh now the wind be at south we stand all night to the westward close by a wind in the morning follow we have lose sight of the Hector and then we steer away northwest with a low sail while noon be the seventeen day think to get sight of the Hector but we can not the first day of February west to the southward sixteen league of latitude sixteen degree and twenty minute this day about one of the clock in the afternoon we have sight of saint Helena bear west to the northward from we about twelve or thirteen league the second day west and west by south four league then have the island west from we about eight or nine league the wind at southeast we lie off and on to the eastward of the island most part of the night and in the morning follow we stand to the northward of the island this day about twelve of the clock we come to anchor in the road of saint Helena Helena our land anchor lie in seventeen fathom our ship rid in twenty fathom blackish grave sand we have one point north-east of we and one sharp hill like a sugarloaf with a cross on the top of it that bare north-east by east the church in the valley southeast in this valley there be many tree likewise the high-land southeast up from the church and all the valley beside be full of tree the other point of the land south-west to the westward we moor southeast and northwest our anchor in the off lay in one and twenty fathom the Hector the three day at night be Monday we have sight of the Hector come about the south end of the island but can not fetch into the road yet stand to the northward as near as she can lie the wind at east the four and five day our boat go out to help to get she into the road but they can not the six day at night be a little wind we tow she in with our boat into thirty five fathom one mile and a half from the shore bear from we south-west by west distant about two league seven degree forty five minute of variation the eleven day we set sail from saint Helena the wind at east north-east and we steer northwest this northwest part of the island lie in the latitude of sixteen degree and in seven degree forty five minute of variation note this that the church that bare southeast of we when we be in the road stand in the bottom of the five valley from that point that bare north-east of we we come to anchor in the down on the six of may 1606. where we ride eight day for a fair wind chap. 5 a journal of the three voyage to the east India set out by the company of the merchant trade in those part in which voyage be employ three ship viz the dragon the Hector and the * * the consent hold no consent with the dragon and Hector who voyage you shall ha^e by itself this journal of captain keeling and that of captain Hawkins write at sea-leasure very voluminous in a hundred sheet of paper I have be bold to so to shorten as to express only the most necessary observation for sea or land affaires consent and in they the number of three hundred and ten person or thereabouts write by WILLIAM keeling chief commander thereof @ i. their diaster and put back for Sierra leona and what happen till they depart from Saldania APrill the first 1607. the dragon and Hector be fall as low as the down and after their departure from thence their hope be by diverse disaster so fall down and cross that after they have pass the line in the begin of june pierce four or five degree of southerly latitude they be enforce by gust calm raines sickness and other marine inconvenience to return northward and miss the i will of Fernando de Loronha certain of nothing but uncertainty which much amaze they the general on july the thirty have consult with taverner the master and hear his answer that they must be drive to return for England the whole company expect no other all which to recite will at once both becalm and bestorme the reader they consult for their best course wherein you shall have it in his own word we have some speech of Sierra leona ay have former read well of the place send for the * * m. hackluit book of voyage be of great profit this save the company as sir th. Smith affirm to i 20000. pound which they have be endamage if they have return home which necessity have constrain if that book have not give light conclusion to seek Sierra leona many flower a sign of land current sight of land book and show it my master who as myself take good like to the place whereupon my company beginning to be grievous disease we without hope to get Fernando de Loranha water be our special want and a water place so nigh I call a counsel and after dinner propound what be fit for we to do they be general of opinion that we have no reason to stand to the south any long for many reason and demand their opinion concern a place of water churchward savage and taverner opined mayo the fit how much without reason I leave to judgement earm Pokham Mollineux and my master hold Sierra leona fit and myself the author thereof for many cause wherefore we conclude to seek for Sierra leona i acquaint my company with our determination to their great comfort this morning the four of August we see many flower a sign of land and this evening we have ground from twenty eight to sixteen fathom Ozy but no sight of land i hoist out my schiffe and send she to ride near we to prove the set of the current she find by the log-line the current to set southeast by east two mile a watch howbeit the schiffe ride wind-road we steer all this morning east and east by south and have from thirty to twenty and ten fathom water no sight of land and the great depth be ozy the least a gross yellow sandy ground about nine of the clock we espy the land be a round plot of mean altitude bear north-east from we about eight league we be at noon in the latitude of seven degree and fifty six minute and have steer all day east sometime north sometime southerly one point as our water deepn or shoal for we have oftentimes ten fathom upward and at the next cast seven fathom under pity ground and when we find shoal water as we bear up northerly we deepn instant a persuasion that we borrow upon the shoal of saint Anna alias madera bomba I allow since yesterday at noon fourteen league east and five league west wind at south and south by west and south by east in the afternoon we have nine ten eleven and twelve fathom water the first land prove Ilha Verde be a very round land and a notable mark for whosoever be find for the place Ilha Verde a very round land from the southwards about seven in the evening we anchor in twenty fathom water hard sand have steer six league or more north-east and north north-east the south part of Ilha Verde bear east of we and the cape of Sierra leona be a low point north by east about eight league from we but the say land over the say cape be very high land and may be see in a clear fifteen league off about six in the morning we make sail for the road and have no less than sixteen the rock fifteen ten or nine fathom till we be north and south with the rock which lie to the westward of the cape of Sierra leona about 1. 1 mile and one mile from the near shore within half a mile thereof we have then seven fathom very good shoal between we and the rock and soon after we have pass the rock we have twenty fathom water and shoald to eighteen sixteen twelve and ten fathom all the way into the road a sand on the north shore borrow very near the south shore for there be a sand lie off the north shore about two mile or a league from the south shore whereon the sea break we ride in ten fathom water good ground the point of Sierra leona bear west northerly Sierra leona the north point of the bay north westerly and the foresay breach or sand north north-east note that come in when we be north and south with the rock it bear with the south point for Sierra leona be the north point of the south land make the bay note or river and Ilha Verde north by west and south by east this afternoon be anchor we espy man to weave we ashore I send my boat which leave two hostage bring four negro who promise refresh my schiffe sound between we and the foresay breach and find fair shold have two fathom water within two boat length of the breach note that all the observation of the variation a special note variation since our come from two degree of north latitude to this place prove erroneous for to each distance have reference to any meridian easterly thereof there must be add thirty league and from such as be refer to Meridian westerly must be substract thirty league for it appear by our fall with the land that the ship be so much more westerly than we suppose ourselves myself notwithstanding the say error be as much if not more westerly than any of our mariner good admonition howbeit I wish every man to trust to his own experience for instrument may deceive even the most skilful the seven there come negro of better semblance aboard with my boat for who as for all other we be fain to leave one of my man for two of they in hostage who make sign that I shall send some of my man up into the country and that they will stay aboard in hostage I send Edward buckbury and my servant William Cotterell with a present viz. one course shirt three foot of a bar of iron a few glass bead and two knife they return towards night and bring i from the say captain one small ear of gold value at seven eight or nine shilling sterling and because it be late the hostage will not go ashore but lay aboard all night without pawn for they I send my boat and fetch five ton of fresh water both very good and easy to come by a good water place the eleven I go ashore a fish where the people bring their woman unto we but fear we will carry they away I give some trifle we buy good store of lemon two hundred for a penny knife wind at east the twelve I go but take little fish wind from northwest to south rainy weather the thirteen it rain without intermission we get fish enough for a meal I buy a elephant tooth of sixty three pound English for five yard blue calico and seven or eight pound of iron in bar the fourteen I keep aboard all day rainy the fifteen I go and take within one hour and a half six thousand fish take in a hour a half weather six thousand small and good fish cavallos after noon with captain Hawkins and a convenient guard I go ashore and to the village where we buy two or three thousand lemon we esteem it a fair day wherein we have three hour dry over head the sixteenth I license our weekly worker to recreate themselves with i ashore where in our large walk we find not pass four or five acre of ground sow with Rice the superficies of the ground be general a hard rock this only day hitherto we have fair weather the seventeen it be all day fair weather I appoint make of limon-water the twenty John Rogers return and bring i a present of a piece of gold in form of a half moon value at five six or seven shilling sterling he report the people to be peaceable the chief without state the land two league up and the chief village eight mile from the land the two and twenty we go ashore where we make six or seven barricoe full of limon-water I open the company firkin of knife ^o buy limb withal limon-water the seven of September in the afternoon we go all together a shore to see if we can shoot a elephant a elephant shoot we shoot seven or eight bullet into he and make he bleed exceed as appear by his track but be near night we be constrain aboard without effect our purpose on he the best road the best road and water place be the four bay to the eastward of the point Sierra leona it flow near west south-west within where we ride and the water high upon a springtide at the least twelve foot after noon the wind come at west south-west and we anchor in ten fathom water Ilha Verde bear from we southeast @ south and the point of Sierra leona north-east by east @ easterly about three league from we where we find the flood to set north-east by north a strong tide I have at no time observe the sun in the road howbeit I have sundry time purpose the same both aboard and ashore but the master make the road by his observation in eight degree and thirty six minute of north latitude latitude of Sierra leona 8.36 north. the variation 1. degr. 50. min. and the point of Sierra leona bare near west about a league or four mile off the master also make the variation to be one degree fifty minute north-easting but my instrument be out of order and I have no time to mend it the fourteen in the morning we weigh the wind all easterly but about eight it calm and we drive to the north again after with the ebb drive to the south-west by south towards night the flood be come we anchor in 25. 1 fathom water the point of Sierra leona bear north-east by east about seven league of we we have not have less than ten fathom water all day they find a current set north by west on the sixteenth day Saldania the seventeen of December about two in the afternoon we see the land the table at Saldania very plain and stand in to make it till three than I cause the master to steer east southeast and southeast by east to put about the cape what time sick and whole desire to put into Saldania whereupon we bear up for Saldania and about noon we get into the road anchor in 5. 1 fathom water the west point bear west northwest the island north northwest the sugarloafe and the sugar-lofe south-west penguin island the westermost cape land and Pengwin island bare south by west etc. there be a breach south of the island about a mile distant between the island and shore be seven mile distance the sugarloaf and the i will bear south by east and north by west from the west point of the bay half a mile off be a flat the westermost south land and point of the sugarloaf bear south south-west and north north-east there be another breach which lie east southeast from the island half a league off as soon as I be anchor I send a shore find the people very bold but dear I find ashore these word engrave upon a rock the arrival of the consent at Saldania july 24. 1607. 102. sheep 12. bullock 2. calf they buy for 200. iron hoop 450. sheep 46. cow 19 steeve 9 calf and one bull. viz. the four and twenty of july 1607. captain David Middleton in the consent the one and twenty I go ashore where we buy a hundred and two sheep twelve bullock and two calf whereof I allow the Hector a proportionable share and this continue diverse day in which they buy much cattle @. 2 their departure from Saldania and what happen after till the ship part company the first of january 1607. by sun rise we be both under sail and by six in the evening we be ten league west southerly from the south point of the Bay the nineteen we ship much water at the helm port and at the hole abaft in my gallery sea ship about two after midnight which wet some of our bale of cloth latitude thirty five degree twenty two minute I allow thirteen league south southeast wind east north-east and north-east six league drift south and three league north-east wind all westerly our too great quantity of kintledge good make our ship to labour marvellous dragon laboursome wherein the company must have special care another voyage the twenty I air and dry our cloth also oil the company piece and blade i strengthen the case of calico etc. I allow thirty league north-east as we steer wind at south-west and south land this afternoon contrary to expectation and to the admiration of all our mariner we see the land bear north north-west about twelve league off we in the latitude of thirty four degree and sure but that I have many dear experiment of the strength of the westerly current in my last voyage I shall likewise admire albeit I be more westerly than any by reason I doubt current for cause before note be by reckon a hundred league more easterly then then the sight of land approve we the two and twenty latitude thirty four degree four minute I allow thirty three league east by north northerly wind south and south south-west but by this reckon the ship shall have be in thirty three degree twelve minute and we find she fifty more south cause by the current whereby it be evident note that such as depend upon their dead reckon and judgement without respect have to the current must needs make intolerable error I bring the ship to her latitude upon a south line in her distance easterly I must acknowledge that in judgement the current must be of great power here abouts the land fall away sudden north-east and south-west and we open the gut and I presume that as we come more easterly past the middle of the gut we shall find the current force diminish the twenty five latitude thirty four degree fifty one minute judgement allow for three 1/^ watch nine league north-east by east wind south-west and for two watch five league south wind all easterly and east north-east yet note how we be continual carry to the south contrary to reasonable judgement the six and twenty latitude thirty five degree twenty eight minute I allow thirteen league south southeast wind at east north-east so I do not find that the current use such violence as before except we shall be carry by the stream as much westerly of the south as I allow she easterly thereof which will raise or depress the pole in the same proportion but herein our variation be well observe will resolve we the seventeen of February we see the land bear east about eight league from we and as I deem in the latitude of twenty four degree twenty minute we stand in till after six a clock at what time be within four league of the shore we flat the Hector be too near a stern for we to stay where we tack we have no ground at eighty or ninety fathom no great marvel for it be low smooth land about noon we be thwart of two small land seem to make a good road wherefore not know our latitude we stand off till we can observe it be nigh noon note two land we can have no ground at sixty fathom within two mile of the shore the eighteen latitude twenty three degree thirty seven minute wherefore we stand in again suppose this to be the place we seek but come near the shore and have send both schiffe a head they find but six fathom water for which anchor we anchor in seven @ fathom water sandy ground about one in the afternoon the two land and breach bear south westerly a mile from we there be a inlet about three league from we east northerly which the master suppose to be s. Augustine and we purpose to search the same I call a council a counsel variation 15.30 where we resolve to make some small stay at s. Augustine variation in this place be fifteen degree and thirty minute variation again observe this morning be fifteen degree twenty six minute 15.26 but I be fain to observe over the land half a degree high otherwise I shall have make somewhat more variation and to these two observation I repose great trust it flow east tide the nineteen we weigh this morning and in the weigh break one of our anchor through defect therein and sure the matter deserve much blame anchor brake but I refer i for the particular to a certificate which I purpose to make thereabouts we steer for the abovementioned seem harbour or bay and find from whence we weigh from ten twelve to twenty fathom and come near the point in the height of the bay we have no ground at a hundred fathom till we come very far into the bay our schiffe be before we and have ground and then we have from thirty to eight fathom and further in deep water we anchor in eighteen fathom and lay another anchor in forty fathom the south shore be the deep water the other be by the come down of river make shallow the twenty we have seventy fathom water at the ship the ground oaze the land bear west by south and north of we and to the north be certain shold and a breach s. Augustine bear north-west of we so that we be but five point of the compass open to wind but the road be very pity ground and deep water and there run a strong stream down the river continual captain Hawkins come aboard i who with both our schiffe strong I send a shore myself be ^ll at ease towards night he return aboard without have see any people but their fresh track in diverse place they leave some bead and trifle in a boat which they find to allure the natural he affirm little likelihood of refresh here but my fisher from the other side tell i of beast bone good store and bone have have flesh George Euans one of the Hector company be shrewd bite with a alegarta I will all speed in fill our water and in the mean time purpose to seek for refresh George Euans bite by a alegarta tide people it flow here near east and high much water the one and twenty we espy four natural I send to present they bead etc. they promise by sign store of cattle the morrow the two and twenty see people I go a shore where we find a subtle people natural their body strong and well frame their privity only careless cover with cloth make of the rind of tree we buy one calf one sheep and one lamb but they will not deal save for silver by any mean after noon I row up the river aswell to look for the best water as otherwise the water be very shallow and brackish nine beast cost 10. shilling sterling ox with bunch on their shoulder people circumcise a beautiful beast note anchor lose three beast cost two shilling 3. penny spider the four and twenty I go a shore see one man there where we buy three kine two steer and four calf they cost we nineteen shilling sterling beside a few bead the cattle be far better flesh than those of Saldania with bunch of flesh on their shoulder like those of the camel save that they stand more forward the people be circumcise as some affirm to have see here we find the beautiful beast water by the ship side at a high water very fresh and at a low water very salt contrary to sense also fresh water at high water on one side of the ship and very salt on the other side the ship tide road the five and twenty in a gust at north-west our ship drive and the cable break and we lose the anchor we buy one calf and one sheep and one lamb great tail which cost two shilling three penny I find certain spider who web be perfect good and strong as silk note that all along the low land from east to west a ledge of rock lie 1/^ a mile from the shore whereon the sea break continual between which and the shore be two fathom water near to good for land and marvellous full of fish fit to hail a net in note the eight and twenty in the morning betimes we be under sail to put to sea there lie a breach four mile from the north point of the bay south southeast note that the ridge of land like a roof or barn be about five mile to the northward of the midst of the Bay I conceit this bay of s. Augustine to be unfit for any ship to expect refresh s. Augustine unfit to refresh it be to be have but in small quantity the place very untoward for ride the water deep the ground pity and foul as appear by the cut of our cable the twelve of march latitude fifteen degree fifty minute we found sundry time in the afternoon and have no ground at ninety fathom and before eight we have ground at twenty danger twenty eight seventeen and sixteen fathom all within ^/^ a cable length then we instant tack off and have nineteen and twenty four and the three cast no ground at forty fathom the ground be small shinglestone like bean and we about five or six mile from the shore a untoward place to fall with in a dark night this afternoon we have a fresh gale at east by north whereby we have get somewhat north by the land the thirteen latitude fifteen degree forty five minute yesterday afternoon we get somewhat to the north have a fresh gale at east by north. it have be calm from midnight till eleven this forenoon and we have drive south as appear by the land we be at noon within three league of the shore the fourteen latitude fifteen degree forty two minute so that we be get north but three league and judgement will have allow at least fifteen league north north-east so it seem that the current run swift and I doubt set more south than south-west for this morning though it be hazy we be not far from the shore see the land all along and now be much clear we can hardly see it the fifteen latitude fifteen degree forty minute I can allow in judgement no less than twenty league north by east yet see by observation we be go to the southwind at south to south-west a fair gale note we can see the land yet be but ten league from it I know not what course to take to get out of this current for if we put off and the current hold it may endanger we of and keep the shore God know what danger there be and where such a gale stem not the stream it be indiscretion to continue the main power of the current lessen opinion of the cause of the current the seventeen latitude fourteen degree fifty seven minute so we have get twenty five league north. judgement will allow twelve league north north-east northerly and she have run nine by observation so that the main power of the current be lessen my master opine that the moon season have peculiar domination over these current cause their force till three or four day after the full but I rather think that the deep bay between cape Corientes and Mosambique cause a indraught or eddy of some stream come either from the north-east or more easterly in at the north-east of s. Laurence and so along the land to the cape Corientes their sail alongst the island and truck at tamara with other occurrent I have leave ou^ as be more full know by late experience le^uing Abbadelcuria they be force to ride in Delisa a road on the north of Soco^o^a ti^l the monson free they at which time captain keeling set sail for Ba^tam and captain Hawkins in the Hector for surat as shall after follow or else the stream which be affirm to set from s. Laurence northwest meet with the land of Mosambique may by the say fall away of the land be draw that way which supposition if it be true than we commit a error in fall with the land before we have get near north than Mosambique point which trend far into the sea and whence the norther land lie away north and south next hand and the souther land south-west by etc. for if we have not fall too much westerly and bring the say cape too nigh our meridian we shall not have feel this stream at all @. 3 instruction learn at Delisa of the moor and guserates touch the monsons and while they ride there their come to Priaman and Bantam the moor of this place affirm that in some year piece of ambergris be find poiz twenty kintal of such bulk huge quantity of amber-gre^se note that many man may shelter themselves under the side thereof without be see this be upon the coast of Mombasa Pata Brava etc. be indeed all one long coast. they of this place make yearly voyage to the isle of Comora to buy slave note of Como^a land and report the people to be very treacherous have at time kill fifty person by treason and therefore they trade aboard they affirm that there be eight hollander upon Pemba who have be there three or four year whereof two be turn moor eight hollander upon Pemba whereof two be moores the monson they reckon this monson of south wind to begin yearly the first of May and the extremity thereof to continue one hundred day the most wind which they report to be wonderful be in june and july for the ten of August it begin to be less wind and soon after come the north wind with much rain for three or four month more at what time they make the most aloe upon the i will and be only the juice of put into goat skin and so dry aloe how make the three and twenty I send a shore to weigh certain aloe and receive aboard 1250. pound which cost for the company account 250. dollar and so at other time we buy in all 1833. pound neat the chief send to borrow five hundred rial of eight 1250. pound aloe present aloe 575. pound mon^on which I refuse to lend I present he with two yard of Carsey gallant colour and a knife of i I send again a shore and receive 575. pound more aloe cost 115. dollar the four and twenty I understand more that the west wind begin this year the last of April and do each year come eleven day late than the year before so that in thirty three year they begin again the same day of the same month which I conceit not to be truth that the easter monson will come this year the thirteen of October and continue till April forcible and then fair weather while may. that the west monson return both monsons fall each year eleven day late than other neither have they more than two monsons yearly that their year call neyroose begin with the first of the east monsons that as the west monson blow here all south so do the east monson all north. that after the twenty five of September ship can depart from the red sea to the eastward that Chau Dabul and rageepuree be good and safe port and rich trade town upon the coast of India that at Saada ilbookee auzoane Mootoo four of the isle of Comora there be abundance of cheap rice and the people good Inghezeegee and malale two more of the same land isle of Comora have small store of rice and the people very treacherous at the first whereof they report that sixteen year since a english ship lose many man treacherous which sure be sir james Lancaster that this day of May the six and twenty be the two hundred and four and twenty of their account of neyrooze no rain on the coast of Arabia the loss of m. james Lanc^ster in captain Raymond voyage till the 70 day of this monson the three hundred and five of neyroose the best time to go for suratt to put hence I say and that in ten or twelve day they get thither Burrom Mekella and Cayxem be good harborough for both monsons on the coast of Arabia but no place for merchandize Burrom Makella and Caixem good port Xael that Xael or Xaer have no harbour nor road for any time but will vent iron and lead a Turk be Aga and that they send by land for such commodity to Caixem a day journey to the west ward but there be no go thither at this time that in both monsons there be a continual extreme sea-gate upon the coast of Arabia the current also there as the wind that there be no ride at the entrance of suratt to have any shelter of the west shore for the west monsons aswell by reason of ill anchor ground as chief the extremity of tide which by their report overset ship not a ground this road of Delisa be a very good place for the west monson but which be strange two mile either east or west from the road it do continual blow so much wind note that no ship can ride it neither can I give any reason for it except the distance betwixt we and the high mountain cause it for there be much low land betwixt we and they june the four and twenty we set sail to depart the three and twenty of july we see a island and about noon two more we leave two to the north and one to the south latitude of four degree and two minute a island 4. degree 2. minute southerly note of isle to sea-bord of Priaman south of the equinoctial the north of these isle be great and high land full of tree between the two southermost of these three land ten league distant there lie a breach d^^g^rous about half way between they to avoid which we steer within two league of the^^^d^lemost island very good passage the breach be then to the south about three league from we it lie very dangerous for man find through by night not have knowledge thereof we can discern no unlikelihood of a passage between the two northermost also but it be not a league broad the southermost i will be the big of the two southermost isle the west part of the north and the east point of the southermost bear north and south ten league distant the breach lie from the easter end of the northermost of the say two south land southeast half the channel over note the six and twenty we be half way between Priaman at Tecu about three league from the shore where I note viz. the two hummocke of tecu with the high land over they bear north and by west and south by east @ a point easterly there lie a shoal four mile from the shore bear south and north with the high land of tecu we have forty five fathom water 2. 1 league from the shore we then bear north-east by east from the road of Priaman there be a island about four league from the say road north-east and south-west the three land of Priaman isle of Priaman Priaman lie south southeast and north northwest be distant each from other about a mile afternoon we get into Priaman roade and I salute the town with five piece of ordnance the governor send i a goat I present the governor with three yard of stammel-cloath one blue calico one piece stock one barrel and two sword-blade the governor send i a goat present the messenger speak good portuguze to who I present one blue calico there come another of Achen with who I have good conversation in arabic by who I have great hope of good trade the nine and twenty I go ashore betimes shoot seven piece of ordnance and come to the governors house I go ashore where with much ado we barganed for pepper he present i with a buffalo and appoint i to make price of pepper with sundry chief man where be set down among sixty person they first propound that I must weigh such pepper as I buy of they in the town whereabout we have much speech I desire to weigh upon the island but they will weigh in the town they demand fifty dollar the Bahar for pepper which much displease i for the Achen man have will i to offer but sixteen dollar howbeit there be craft in daub for he be a merchant craftin daub will have engross much pepper before I shall have buy and after will have sell it i at his own price after much time and many word we accord at 22 ^/^ dollar the Bahar beside six cento custom I refuse to pay two other custom or rather exaction the one of a hundred and sixty dollar the other not much less whereto with much ado I consent and write be draw between we the last night a man speak portuguse lay aboard i who in the behalf of the late governors wife by he title queen desire my aid in take the town offer i the one half thereof to who not unacquainted with the fineness of moor I refuse to intermeddle treacherous offer of a more it not be answerable to my prince and this morning send he ashore I sell cloth to Nakhada for a hundred fifty nine mass of Gold the town and bound of Priaman yield not yearly above five hundred bahar of pepper but with part near adjoin as Passaman Tecu beroose and the mountain over the town be make two thousand five hundred bahar yearly note of Priaman which quantity will lade two good ship and may be buy very good cheap if a factory have mean to buy all the year but their harvest be only in August and September and be fetch away by they of Achen and java only the guserats not be permit to trade there by the king of Achen his express commandment good counsel so that a ship touch at suratt and buy especial blue calico white calico blue stripe and chequer stuff and some small and fine pintatoe leave a factory shall lay the best foundation for gain against another year that ever I have hear off I say against another year for that I see not how ship can go to Cambaya and come hither time enough in one year and in such case the king of Achen his letter must be procure for our safe proceed in these part the eighteen of September in the morning we make sail the lord prosper we the nineteen at noon we be west northwest from the point to the south of Priaman ten league we steer to the eastward of Ilha de Tristeza the twenty before day we see a island a head and steer east southeast to go clear of it we go to the eastward of it four league the i will sumatra be seven league from we note the one and twenty I allow six and twenty league southeast by south we be within six or seven league of sumatra and west from we about four league be another great jand so that navigation upon this coast be careful to be perform for we find no such isle projection note latitude three degree twenty minute I allow eighteen league south southeast wind northerly we be nine or ten league from sumatra have see another small island to sea-boord of we island three or four league off the first of October 1608. latitude five degree and thirty minute I prick by the land be twelve league from we and have go fast to the south then by reckon the second we see land in the morning which we make for the salt island but it prove a round hummock upon sumatra we have make almost no way note salt i will in the straight of sanda yet be at noon in five degree and fifty five minute by help to the south the three we see the salt i will bearing north-east by north some four or five league from it it lie in latitude six degree six minute we be when we first see the island within four league or less of the south land whether land which I think or java it bear from we east southeast wind all night fresh at west and northwest note the south land be isle and lie the wester part with the salt island or round and high island of the straits mouth south-west by south etc. note the near of the south land be the westermost of they be six league distant from the salt island the salt island lie half sea over and the distance betwixt sumatra and the souther land be twelve or fourteen league the salt island with the point include the whole bay wherein be Bantam road lie east north-east and west south-west which I shall have set first the salt island with the high south land of sumatra it be a round Hummock and with the northwest point of java to the eastward of the four land which I former call the south land bear east southeast and west northwest the hummocke of sumatra and point of java be about twenty league distant this evening we have the salt island four league north from we the four in the morning we be within five or six league of the point include Bantams whole bay east north-east from we there be before we come to the say point two rock full of tree bear each with other north and south four mile distant between which then we steer the southermost lie very near java and the northermost half way and more between the point of Bantam and another low ragged island which with other two to the northward of it bear with the northermost rock west south-west and east southeast between which land we do not know of any passage note that that ragged island make the straight and we come to the south thereof we get into the road of Bantam where we find six holland ship we arrive at Bantam whereof two be almost lade with clove and two be to be lade with pepper I find thirteen English alive whereof four be merchant I receive a letter from captain David Middleton the six I pay vncte and tegin the two Chineses their wage and release they the twenty I call my merchant counsel and resolution to send the pinnace for Banda and have former resolve to return with the dragon for England upon special consideration I now question concern the employment of our pinnace not yet finish where we conclude that brown and sidall shall go in she for Banda John Hearne John Saris and Richard savage to remain at Bantam also that so soon as the pinnace can return from Banda John Saris shall go in she to Suquedana upon borneo the fifteen of November I send for jaques lermite and discover unto they a purpose in the javan to cut their throat whereof I understand very particular the two and twenty the ambassador of siam come to visit i and dine with i he affirm that a thousand clothes red will vent in his country in two day vent of red english cloth in siam and great quantity yearly they clothe their elephant and horse therewith gold be there abundant and worth as he report three time the weight in silver be good Gold there be also precious stone in quantity and cheap and that their king will account it the king of Holland one of their great happiness to have commerce with so great a king as his majesty of England with who as he understand the king of Holland be not comparable the eight and twenty I take leave of the king the governor the admiral the old sabandare jura Bassa tanyong and of the hollander with purpose to be aboard the morrow the nine and twenty I go aboard for altogether the second of December within night our merchant come aboard king present bring a letter from the king of Bantam to his majesty of England and two Picolls of Canton in present unto he the twelve we espy a sail which prove the Hector Hector m. Will Hawkins captain of the Hector leave at surat year we get out of the straits she have no captain he remain at suratt I understand that the portugal have take eighteen english whereof diverse of our factor and good to the value of nine thousand dollar the fourteen we get into Bantam ride again force to a long voyage or loss of reputation the sixteenth there come a small Fleming from Amsterdam with news of peace news of peace betwixt s^a^ne and the netherlander between Spain France and the Netherlands and that his come be to desist from their purpose to malacca I appoint master molineux and Pockham for England the rest with i for the maluccoe the seventeen I remove to the Hector and the master shift ship the one and twenty I speed master Towerson with all thing will his departure with all speed dragon set sail for England the three and twenty the dragon make sail from Bantam the lord prosper she @ 4 their voyage to Banda observation by the way action there the first of january 1608. about one in the morning we weigh and with a gale of the shore get about the east point east north-east from where we ride three league a dangerous shoal thence to another point southeast easterly three league between the two point lie a shoal have little water a great length to prevent which it be good to steer half way between java and the isle Tonda which be five league distant to the eastward of the second point close aboard the shore lie the isle Tanara and be not see of such as come far off it lie so near the shore from the second to the three point bear east southeast be four league and 1. @ mile off that point north by west lie the isle Lackee betwixt which and the point be but 1. @ fathom water by report we ride all night have the i will east a league off six fathom water the four we weigh and steer within @ a league of Lackee have seven or eight fathom water the island Lackee with the west point include jacatra lie east southeast four league distant there lie a dangerous sand of the west point of jacatra so it be good to bor^ow of the island lie opposite unto the say point the eight I go to jacatra and anchor far out the king send his sabandare to desire powder and match jacatra present and I present he thirty pound of powder and a roll of match I buy of they a Portugal boy which the hollander have give unto the king who will by no mean forsake christianity he cost i forty fi^e dollar the point as we ride bear northwest and east by north four league distant the town and high of the eastermost hill south by east and the west hill south by west from we we have see since we come from Bantam thirty or forty land the ten in the afternoon we weigh and get under sail there lie a sink island even with the water about two league west by north from the east point of jacatra we leave it on our larbord go between it and the easter island the two point make jacatra bay bear east southeast and west northwest four league distant the eastermost island lie in a straight line between both point the eleven we be at noon ten league north-east from the east point of jacatra the twelve we be at noon south-west by south two league from a island have make east by south thirty league way and there be a shoal south and north with the say island three league from java call the i will lie ten league from java but not so far easterly as be project the say island bear with the high hill we see upon java north by west there be a point of java which with the same and the former island bear south by west westerly the fifteen we be near Madura contrary to my expectation I suppose that the i will of java be not so long as it be project Madura or else we have find a set to the eastward a round i will and the high easter land of java bear with we south south-west half west about six league from we the i will within three league of we another i will be with we northwest five league from we I prick according to the land and do overleap thirty league the sixteenth I allow sixteen league east north-east the seventeen I allow sixteen league east by north. at noon we be two league southeast by south from a island which trend east by north two league long no mention hereof in platts a island not mention the eighteen at noon we be near the isle * * or Nuiasira Nossaseres it be north by west a league of we it trend northwest and southeast two or three league long in latitude five degree thirty minute I allow thirty six league east north-east we see another flat island to the north thereof the nineteen I allow eighteen league east wind westerly the twenty we yet see no land albeit the ship have run more ground since we make Nossaseres then the distance project between they the three isle of this evening we see three isle to the north of we four or five league or more they be low land and lay a good length east and west all small land we found thwart of they and have but nineteen fathom water the one and twenty this forenoon we see the land of celebe celebe and esteem the distance betwixt it and our be yesternoone nine and twenty league as we steer east and I deem the isle we see yesterday the easter of they to be three and twenty league from celebe but we can not fetch macassar by any mean the wind fresh northerly and northwest we anchor in twelve fathom water the south point of celebe bear east by south six league from we note that the fall with celebe note by reckon nine and twenty league before we come to it be cause by make error in the east end of java for whereas I overleaped thirty league there as by the fifteen I be ashore here before we have his length nine and twenty league wherefore I opine that the ordinary distance between Bantam and celebe be two hundred thirty five league be near the truth also the distance between Bantam and Celebe^ be 235. league that between celebe and Nossaseres be seventy six league or else that the isle we see the eighteen be not as we suppose Nossaseres we break our cable and lose our anchor the three and twenty from the point where we ride to another point that be east by south ten league thence to another low point east by north northerly eight league and one league east of the say east point be the notable round land to another low point be six league east and thence to another point three league north-east by east but this distance be to the eastward of the straits we hale it all night under the notable round land it be four league east north-east from we the high south land of celebe and the west point of Desolam bear north northwest ten or twelve league distant the west end of Desolam and the low east point of celebe which be the narrow of the straits bear south by west twelve or fourteen league off the coast of Desolam be near south-west the east end of Desolam with the isle make the straight and the east land of celebe the straight of Desolam in sight lie all in a right line south and north near the four and twenty this morning we see and can possible be more than twenty league east north-east from the straits of celebe we be at one afternoon north-east by north eight league from the west point thereof it be a very high and round hill the rest high but thick land the wester part of what we see lie southeast by south and the easter part southeast by east eight league long at the least the five and twenty we have do little but be still under the island and see land to the north whether celebe or what I know not the seven and twenty this morning we be north and south with land lie twelve league east southeast from the east-side of come near it the wester part prove two land lie east north-east etc. the great island lie east by north five league make three or four headland button there lie a round island south from the say headland eight league distant from the easter point to another north-east @ north three league thence to another north-east six league thence to another north-east by north three league from the last point save one southeast by east eight league lie a shoal six league long as it bear the eight and twenty Ticabessa from the say point north-east eight league lie the island Ticabessa whereof we have fight and from the say point north-east by north fourteen league lie the east or north-east point or part of button towards night come a caracoll with forty or fifty man aboard i send from the king of button among which be the king uncle and s^nne who know sidall and spalding the one and thirty in the morning we be five league north-east northerly from the point near Ticabessa and within three league of the north part of Ticabessa Ticabessa which be two or three Iles. at noon we be six league southeast from the east point of button whereby we have more way since then the ship can have run the three latitude four degree twenty five minute February 160^ I allow twenty four league east north-east wind northwest and north north-west but we be set southerly the four in the morning about eight we see Burro the east point whereof be north-east by east seven league off and the west north by west nine league off I allow twelve league north-east wind westerly the five take advice what to do all man opine fit to go for Banda wind not serve for the we conclude to go thither from the last easter point of Burro counsel to another four league east and west the i will bloy lie south and north from the eastermost end of Burro bloy Amb^yno four or five league we see Amboyno from Burro east by north twelve league and lie ten league long east to the eastward whereof lie other isle east and west of good quantity the six we see the high land of Banda and be in my opinion twenty five league distant from the easter part of Amboyno east by south @ southerly the seven Pulorin with the little round i will to the north bear south by east five league distant Puloway with Pulorin east southeast P^loway Pulorin a chore in the road of and west northwest three league off the eight we get into the road or harbour of Banda where the people and hollanders come to welcome i there be a small island lie to the north of pulorins east end Puloway and the entrance of the harbour west notherly three league distant the two point of the sound bear north @ east etc. one @ mile distant he that be find in must borrow on the north side close under the high Hill we ride in six @ fathom water the sound entrance be west south-west one mile of we one mile north and the low point of the round hill west one mile the hope be put to the east and come pilote in the morrow our king Letter^ and present to the nine I go a shore and deliver his majesty letter to together with a present be the best gild cup with a cover the best head-piece and gorget and one of m. buck piece which cost twenty five dollar it be receive with the most state that have be know but they will bethink themselves for our house till to morrow the hollander shoot five chamber at my land and five at my go aboard i diet with they they report that the east monson blow eight month monson and begin betwixt the first and ten of may. the eleven we agree for the build of our house Vrtatan the one and twenty I go to Vrtatan to have conference with the people where I promise to be at Lantor the Sunday follow the five and twenty in the afternoon I be call and go to Lantor where I deliver the king letter Lantor our king letter the hollander s^ie no^e of the hollander the small gild cup with a cover the fair gild target one piece stock and a barrel which they receive respective China as the hollander spy come aboard i in the night to counsel i to speed where the dutch have a factory let no man look for better measure large gift be better regard then good deal the thirteen they of Lantor demand serepinang one hundred and forty rial of eight and I require leave to sell my cloth as I may with a public price make the priest be send from the state to demand payment of Rooba Rooba before we trade which I deny except upon condition the whole country will bind themselves to lade i with mace and nut within four month at one hundred dollar he take time to * * ^e char^ be chary I answer that perceive they defer time till the hollander arrival which be now in suspense the monsons be almost spend and already some east wind come in I will not give past ninety rial wherewith he take his leave have as ^^ooth a outside as rough in mind three hollander loss of 74. hollander the sixteenth there come in three tall hollander without anchor shoot thirty sixteen and nine piece of excellent ordnance two of these ship come from tarenate have lose Paul van carden their admiral with seventy four man take by the Spaniard who will hearken to no other ransom for he except the fort of Machian by he former take may be resign the dutch offer fifty thousand dollar for he the seventeen the hollander visit i by Sr brewer the eighteen the hollander of the two least ship come to visit i and sup with i note second but a Englishman report that they mean to surprise we ere a month expire the nineteeth the state send again for Rooba Rooba which I refuse to pay so they send again to tell i that now they be together but except I will exceed one hundred dollar I shall save my labour and not trouble myself I send they word again that though I lade not a grain I will not give above one hundred they send soon after to call i where after long dispute accord for spice with the Bandanesse^ we accord at one hundred dollar Rooba Rooba three hundred and eighty dollar and serepinang fifty dollar beside Pissalin a duty to the four sabandares of four piece Sarassa or malaian pintadoe we receive a beam and weight the Cattee poise ninety nine dollerss and in the haberdepoize Cattee Banda five pound thirteen @ ounce so our rial be too light the twenty this day we begin to weigh and the hollander come ashore make price at one hundred with four hundred Rooba Rooba fifty serepinang and four clothes we pay the hollander underhand price else we must have be idle the three and twenty I make a secret accord with the chief of Puloway to send a factory thither accord with Puloway and be constrain to lend they three hundred rial and give serapinang one hundred rial with four malaian pintadoe the four and twenty the dutch hear of my accord with Puloway seek to prevent i the nine and twenty there come six great ship hollander into the road who I salute with nine piece six hollander answer with three beside two small Pinnasses April the first 1609. the first of April receive by the hope from Puloway 225. @ cattee mace and 1307. @ c. nut which mace all buy by he I mark with b. for distinction the four I go aboard to cure my eye which by the heat of nut watch etc. be very sore a english hou^e two hollander note I leave the house and good with Augustine spalding there arrive from the two small hollander note that now the (...) morning blow hard easterly the nine the dutch admiral Peter williamson varhoef go ashore to Vrtatan the fleet shoot forty piece of ordnance his ship but five he deliver a letter from count Maurice without present whereof when the people demand answer be make that they have one but it be not yet accord what it shall be this I understand the ten the sabandar at my request send for the same letter which be in portuguse I peruse and find it only a authoricall instrument bind the prince and state to conform what their admiral and counsel shall accord with other state it be write in paper seal under the content and leave open for all the eleven we begin to bring our nut aboard thereto constrain by the dutch their meaning be to go ashore within a day or two so that we can neither select the best nor let they lie long enough in sweat the twelve this night after the first watch the state send four man to request my company ashore instant which I refuse to do till morning the thirteen I go betimes ashore where the sabandar of come to visit i and then after much talk my (@) the (@) I propound as I have sundry time former do the formal deliver of Bandan to the use and in the name of his majesty of England our sovereign before the hollander do land or begin their purpose Fort. they seem to like well thereof and conclude to be chary thereabouts and give i answer to day but I doubt their inconstancy the fifteen day the dutch go ashore twenty boat one thousand and two hundred man the natural flee the eighteen I go ashore and send for some hollander of note to speak with i to who I make know many wrong I have receive since their come in wish redress and affirm that though we be not at present strong enough to right ourselves yet his majesty of England our sovereign will not permit his subject to sustain any damage by their mean without special and sound satisfaction I affirm that notwithstanding wrong receive note I can not choose but christianly advertise they that the people purpose to poison their water and to that end warn i not to drink thereof he thank i and have be with their admiral request i from he to have patience concern rice till he have have counsel therein necessity have no Law the twenty I go ashore to fetch the rice in part of Daton Putee his debt to the company but the hollander have dishonest take the same notwithstanding the admiral promise that I shall have it thence I go among the javan to have buy some rice who general affirm that the hollander have straight charge they not to sell i any note neither dare they though I offer five dollar the coyoung more than the dutch pay at my come home I find he that the admiral have former send unto i who I request to tell his admiral that I esteem his so take my rice a great wrong and that if he be a gentleman he will not permit his base people to abuse i as I walk among they whereto be answer that he be a weaver I reprehend the reporter be a Englishman serve they who affirm that his own people speak so of he general thence I take my praw and go to Labatacca where I find such small do as be not fit to keep people thereabouts wherefore I appoint they to come away in the Skiffe which I will send for they and their good to day the two and twenty I go to where the dutch do we much wrong even in our yard whereof have sundry time complain without redress be argument the hollander much wrong we dutch fort begin that it proceed by order from the chief the four and twenty they begin their fort. the five and twenty a dutch pinnace from Puloway will give i no news of Browne there I manage my Skiffe and go to Puloway where I find little spice the people desire i to stay at air Putee promise to lade i offer to enact among they the penalty of death to such as will sell one Cattee of spice to the hollander I seem to distrust their word have once beforce deceive i whereupon they offer to pass writing and oath I question the bring of it aboard which they refuse fear the dutch. I offer to send one Englishman in each praw and to run the hazard if the dutch take it but they will not hazard their people the six and twenty in the morning put into my boat four suckle of mace 4. and many nut with three chief to consider what to do by the way the chief affirm that if we will not deal with they their spice shall rot upon the tree and they will all die ere they will deal with the hollander but they be wicked and faithless moor neither know I what to do Forby go for the I must loose two thousand dollar owe here and trade there uncertain and stay two month more here will prevent go to the at last we agree the nine and twenty the chief be convent after many protest they make i a writing to deal with i only for all their spice at Puloway and Puloron and at air Putee ay^e Putee and not to sell or part with the hollander one Cattee thereof the hollander offer twelve thousand dollar among the country to make their peace and drive we hence which they refuse and desire i often and earnest not to conceit ill in that they permit the dutch to come ashore note and sell their cloth be upon a special consideration to i immaterial may the four 1609. the four of may 1609. I go to Puloway where I find the hollander offer cloth at ^/3. our price I find a thousand cattee nut and two hundred cattee mace which they of Pulorin have sell we not weigh to the hollander one Cattee the quarrel betwixt the dutch and bandess grow partly out of the levity of these and partly out of the insolency of those which exercise fortification in stead of merchandise and spa^e^ no^ the liberty of the live or sepulcher of the dead hence murder and hostility see my P^lg l. 5. c. 16. @. ^ note shoot with a trunk note dutch admiral murder note english courtesy to the hollander but how repay since the world have see the eight the dutch there send to request the conveyance of a letter and a sick man aboard they which I promise but my nut be ready to lade Nakhada Goa come to i from the chief to entreat i not to carry their man or letter but stay also myself which I refuse and fit hence whereof he have inform they send i word again by he that if I go they will make purchase of whatsoever I leave behind and account we enemy whereupon I stay the nine the people send and require i not to depart these four day as I be go to bed there come a command upon our life that we shall not stir out of door and present thereupon I hear that the dutch be upon their knee to the people I arm myself and go out among they where I find the dutch overcome with fear and demand the cause of come aboard so late they answer that one of they be shoot into the leg with a trunk as he sleep in their house which cause they to seek my help and be intercept by the way I go home with they and leave three English with two of they in their house I bring two dutch home with i the ten in the morning I cause the good of the dutch at their earnest request to be bring home to my house whereat the country seem offend with i there be counsel take and resolution to kill the dutch but Nakhada Goa preserve their life the dutch be command by the people not to stir out of door upon pain of their life their good and money register this evening many prawe and man go hence the twelve at night there return a praw with news that they have slay the dutch admiral with all his chief follower and counsel the thirteen I have much ado to keep the dutch from be slay by those of Campon Awrat who sabandar be slay by the dutch. the fourteen two dutch Pinnasses arrive and the country will fain have get they ashore whereof my people by order advise they they of Campon Awrat come all arm to have slay the dutch which with much entreaty and danger I prevent about noon I send away my schiffe with letter of and for the dutch. this night we have much ado to preserve the dutch alive with careful watch the fifteen my schiffe return with letter from and for the dutch. the sixteenth the state consult and resolve that with i the dutch shall be safe but will not permit they aboard their ship I come aboard and bring letter from and to the dutch and at the harbours mouth be hail by five dutch shallop and other boates. note the twenty in the evening Simon Hoen vice-admiral come aboard i give i many thanks for kindness show to the dutch at Puloway I shoot seven part gun the five and twenty I man my praw and go to Labatacca where they desire a man or two ledger our house sell to buy their spice which I promise they the hollander pull down my house and satisfy i for the same one hundred and fifty dollar beside forty of the board when I be go to bed van bergell and Samuel king come from the vide-admiral to let i know that they have counsel concern my trade at Labatacca and conclude to permit my quiet trade there except at such time as they shall come to surprise the same also they request i not to take offence if their boat lay i aboard to search what aid I do to their enemy which I take in ill part and in prevention of which inconvenience I propound unto they that if they will pay i such debt as and cumber owe i amount to twelve or thirteen hundred dollar I will trade at Puloway and Pulorin only whereof they promise i answer to morrow the six and twenty van bergell bring i word that I may trade at Labatacca the seven and twenty I send Matthew porter with a Cargason to Labatacca the one and thirty I go to Labatacca to forward business about supper time van bergell and Samuel king come aboard i desire private speech with i from their vice-admiral and go into my cabbine after many italian-like compliment they deliver i a note from their vice-admiral permit we trade but prohibit victual and munition to be carry to the people which they hold for enemy and request that their boat may pass by they to be search to that end which else shall be do by force * * I have leave out fear the tediousness this and other letter on both side threaten confiscation on of ship and good I answer that I will follow my trade wherein if he wrong i it will be too heavy for he to answer that I have a remainder of the rice with I former acquaint he which I will sell except they take a unanswerable course therein that for munition I have in the ship not past twenty handgunne belong to sundry poor man the sale whereof I neither can nor will prevent except they will buy they which I will cause to be reasonable sold. concern my subjection to their search I answer to have rather my estate and life hazard here than my hitherto unspotted reputation at my come home nay I shall therein become a traitor unto my sovereign wherewith my conceit be never stain the second of june I send the vice-admiral and council a few line in answer thereof june 1609 by Augustine spalding seek all way of peace the three I receive a note from the dutch whereby they will continue their search by all mean offer to buy the handgunne but not permit the rice to be carry whereto instant by their messenger I answer as follow the vice-admiral m. Simon jahnson Hoen etc. of the dutch fleet may please to know that to the end to take away all cause of quarrel from they to we my reply and show the world our honest cause and their wilfulness whereas they will not permit my rice to be carry to Puloway I will likewise therein consent to they upon condition that they shall revoke their purpose search and to the end they shall have some security for the performance I will p^sse my yet unfalsify word or if that through your incredulity be not sufficient my oath unto your deputy or yourselves general at pleasure to the same effect but if herein you will not through desire of quarrel with the english consent unto my reasonable request then be please to know that I will send it at what price or hazard soever concern our munition I write nothing your purpose to buy the same be prevention to your own doubt which I pray let be do speedy for your own satisfaction thus I commit you to the almighty who prosper your honest proceed as I wish to my own from aboard the Hector in Banda this three of june 1609. william keeling towards night they send i again their last resolution they have call four counsel thereabouts hold their determination for the search whereupon consider their purpose dutch resolution and that the least breach will prove total wherein sixty two man against a thousand or more can not perform much to the hazard of ship and good or at least not permission to lade their fort command all I yield as upon constraint to the search the five I go with my last rice to Puloway the hollander have first send aboard and search to our great discontent notwithstanding which the ship at Lantor weave we and call we aboard I refuse they say they will shoot but I neither go aboard nor they shoot the fourteen I go to Labatacca where I buy some spice and put away some cloth the four and twenty I go to cumber whence I stow eleven suckle Mace the five and twenty I go to Lantor to recover some debt make by sidall which be deny the six and twenty I send my great boat for Puloway I go to Labatacca whence I stow two suckle Mace the seven and twenty my boat return with spice from Puloway the javan begin to have conference with the hollander the nine and twenty I go to cumber whence I stow fourteen suckle Mace the first of i^ly 1609. I go to cumber to account with debtor the second july 1609. the hollander with all the strength they can make leave the ship and fort weak man go and take Labatacca where as they say they kill twenty or sixteen person Labatacca take by the hollander and burn the town bring away pot and pan I be very persuade that forty man will have do as much as they do with more than ten time so many the four I send to cumber and one of my guserates counsel i to go no more for they distrust my intelligence with the dutch. the sixteenth before day the hollander with their whole power go to the eastward and have burn certain boat and return to take Salomo be there at much stri^e about land not who shall land soon but who may stay long aboard by which repulse the Dutch and other their default they be repulse with the loss of six man beside many hurt among who the governor m. jacob de bitter be report to have behave himself worthy there afterward Matthew porter and other desire to go a shore which I permit by who one sen^ i word that the hollander mean to take i and wish i to look well to my ship and self the cause as he say be this they report that the two last night we make sign a shore and be by the people answer of the hollander provision to land whereof God know that I know nor hear not the seventeen the dutch send van bergell and Samuel king aboard i request to know when I hope to be go wherein I can not satisfy they Puloway delay i as it do they offer to make good all my debt if I will be go speedy which I refuse affirm that the company wo^ld not feel so small a loss also note that I can not answer it at home have stay till now that lade be ready we have some speech concern the suppose sign which we shall make to the country against they wherein I make just protest to the contrary they affirm we to have make sign two night together and say that many deposition be take thereupon a sign of their purpose to quarrel with we also that one of my man yesterday be in their fort demand why we make sign to the country shall answer that we have reason so to do the country be so much indebt unto we and the dutch hinder we what they can which imposture I have no patience long to hearken unto but pawn my hand that they can not prove any thing first or last wish they to take their course howbeit that I may utter prevent all cause of mistrust in they of we even in the whole world opinion I offer to go ride in laboan where I may neither know their stir nor can make sign to hurt they the eighteen in the afternoon the dutch send many of their chief aboard i who at first demand kind whether I continue in my former determination of lade here whereto I answer yea whereupon they desire i to take some course to go hence in friendship I answer that now spice be ready I hope to get hence within twenty day lade and in friendship many reason pass between we but when they see my purpose they deliver i a note from their vice-admiral and council wherein be forge as many untruth as line the copy whereof follow the dutch their note fraught with as many untruth as so few line may well contain show their ingrate affection for all christ^an help by our nation perform unto they etc. together with their selfe worthless overween the general master William keeling may please to know that it have be by our deputy proffer unto he that if he think good to transport over to we the debt remain among the bandanese and then in friendship withdraw from the road with his ship which himself heretofore have partly make mention of to some of we we be resolve to deal with he in that behalf and albeit this reasonable proffer to eschew quarrel be by we to he motion yet have the general aforesaid deny to accept the same notwithstanding we have sufficient occasion enough with good reason to command he with his say ship to withdraw from forth this road and out of our fleet also without the command of the artillery of the fortress of nassau and that the foresaid general may understand the reason which move we to the same we have at large remonstrate the same as follow the eight of April 1609. the worshipful admiral Peter williamson Var hoef be anchor with his fleet in the land of Banda and there understand of the merchant of the unite east India company how they be through the inhabitant of Banda daily constrain and molest and also sometime dispossess of their clothes and merchandize which they hold for themselves at such rate as they please satisfy for they as and when they think good the building of this fort how it be like of the inhabitant the premise declare beside they profane their burial ground to that purpose a odious abomination to the band^neses and how unlikely be it that they will admit a fort to captivate their liberty and that near their mesgid to profane their religion their practice since may awaken the reader observation the two and twenty of May 1609. the admiral and council of the hollander slay and so remain indebt so much as their debt unto the general east India company amount unto above twenty thousand rial of eight without intention to recontent the same and further that our leiger concern their life have ever live in very doubtful estate fear least daily they will untimely practise their end as appear few year past they have murder our merchant and forcible take other some and after their custom make heathen of they wherefore the admiral aforesaid be move by all friendly mean to make a castle or fortress whereby our leiger and merchandize may rest in better safety both against the Portugal and against all other our enemy which by most of the chief orancayas be condescend unto and thereupon have we proceed to the build of a fortress upon the island Neyra which fortress be about half finish the admiral Hoen abovesaid have procure a convention of the chief orancayas and council of the i will of Banda to meet with he and other of his council at Ratoo and there to have enter in treaty of a friendly accord and contract together to which effect the say admiral appoint the fiscal or justice of the fleet beside other of good account as hostage to continue at keyacke that thereby they the rather or with less fear may come to the admiral aforesaid and his council thus the admiral with diverse of his council together with a company of his soldier the two and twenty of May 1609. come to Ratoo the nominate place of convention their be a bandanese approach unto he out of the wood who tell the admiral that the orancayas and other chief of the isle be near there in the wood but be so timorous of the soldier that the admiral have with he as they fear to come unto he and therefore pray he and his counsel to come unto they the admiral understand the report pass towards they together with his say council and leave his soldier at their appoint place and be enter among they he find the wood replenish with arm blackmoor bandanese and orancayas who instant encircle they and without much conference between they pass be by they treacherous and villainous massacre and give every of our chief no less than twenty wound this stratagem thus perform they present assault the company of soldier intend to have serve they with the like sauce but they partly in fear and doubt of some treachery arm themselves and stand in their defence and encounter one another so as in fine they betake themselves to their best refuge with loss of some of their chief and so flee unto Cayack and there have murder the fiscal or justice aforesaid with the rest of the hostage beside diverse other of our people who be walk into the wood to gather Cocus nut insomuch as at that time be murder about forty of we by the bandaness contrary to their oath and promise all which provoke we to execute and practice all revenge possible towards the inhuman treacherous bandaness which occasion prick we forward to prosecute this present bloody war against they then follow many presumption of his assistance of the bandaness by english powder and munition by sign etc. which I omit they conclude on those supposition we by virtue of our commission and patent of his princely excellency command the foresay general to withdraw with his ship from forth our road out of our fleet and without the command of the artillery of the of nassau within the time of five day after the date hereof and in that we have conquer by force of arm the island so do we also pretend and hold the road thereabouts depend as the road of Labatacca etc. to be under our command and will not permit any the time that we war with the bandaness to anchor there thus by we ordain past and absolute resolve upon by the vice-admiral and residue of the council in the ship of Hollandia upon the road of Banda the eight and twenty of july 1609. july eighteen 1609. Simon johnson Hoen jacob de bitter Hen: van bergell John Cornelisson wijst Will jacobson Simon martens rufger Tomassen Marlahen 1609. Peter Bahuec. 1609. will Secret whereto I brief answer by word that I can not answer my so go hence lade being now ready to my country and that unless I be otherwise command then by word I will ride here till I be lade which will be within five and twenty day at the uttermost they affirm that this their signification to i be answer whereto I apply that oftentimes rash man threaten to kill which they dare not for life perform I shoot five part piece the nineteen I send away my schiffe for Puloway to know of ride there van bergell come aboard to search the boat I will he to tell the vice-admiral that I will leave a factory at Puloway in case of constraint and without constraint I will not hence the twenty about one this morning my schiffe return from Puloway without note of our debt or inventory of good the principal cause of my writing he only affirm that the people be willing to pay their debt if we co^ld stay fifteen or twenty day also offer we their best road at Puloway the dutch and we come to some accord for the time of our stay and for our debt the monson also invite we thereto and the trade which already we have the first of August 1609. peace general publish betwixt the dutch and country the first of August 1609. be a uncomfortable argument of the puloy^^s break with we the dutch send i a letter of credit for the receipt of my deb leave at Banda payable at Bantam the hollander this evening peace between the hollander and the bandaness shoot a hundred and fifty piece of ordnance for joy of peace upon the governor earnest entreaty I go to see the dutch fort who square may be foot have thirty piece of ordnance in whereof eight very good brass demicanon the four I send my boat to fetch away good wherein come a servant of Nakhada by who I understand that the Pulowans be resolve to let i have no more spice except some little to shadow their wrong unto we wherefore I send the boat again for Browne ^ be fair by the town shoot five piece the better to procure my people thence perfidy of the islander they not perceive that we take any displeasure at their ill deal I send again for Browne which boat stay long I shoot two several warn piece whereupon m. Browne come aboard i but not spalding affirm that they will not let he come before I come ashore wherefore I stand again to the eastward and come somewhat near the town the king of macassar come aboard i to redeem his pawn and bring spalding and the three Dutch aboard i the king of macassar come aboard more thanks to the love of his good pawn than their honesty the ten I weigh a half hundred by our ordinary Banda beam and it weigh nine ^/^ cattee whereby the Cattee appear to weigh five pound fourteen 1/^ ounce haberdepoize Banda weight I weigh also the single Cattee which make five pound fourteen @ ounce haberdepoize the eleven we anchor near macassar upon celebe I be very desirous to go thither hope upon report to find clove there for Cloth macassar upon celebe the twelve I send my schiffe arm to inquire of the place who return hear that macassar be yet 1/^ a day sail to the north and that three month since a ship of Holland lose before macassar there be a dutch ship lo^t in sight of the town upon which dangerous report we give over the search of macassar the one and twenty we anchor in jaccatra where we find the Banda and Enquisen two dutch ship have be eight day there who bring our people in the hope and their good from Amboyno the six and twenty come near the point we meet a praw with Ralph Hearne send by master John Saris to i who have ready three thousand four hundred eighty one bag of pepper they arrive in the road at Bantam we get betimes into the road and John Saris come aboard i in a dutch Boat the thirteen upon the king request I send five and twenty arm man to make he pastime which he will in honour of his have the last night make conquest of his wine virginity the three and twenty have take in there four thousand and nine hundred bag of pepper I question the leave of a factory where to we accord factory at Bantam the seven and twenty I appoint the factory at Bantam viz: Augustine spalding factor at fifty pound sterling a year Francis Kellie chirurgeon forty five shilling a month John parsons thirty shilling a month Robert Neale twenty nine shilling a month Augustine adwell four and twenty shilling a month etheldred twenty shilling a month William Driver twenty shilling a month William Wilson two and twenty shilling a month William Lamwell sixteen shilling a month Philip badnedg sixteen shilling a month Francisco Domingo twelve shilling a month juan Seraon ten shilling a month Adrian master towerson boy ten shilling a month I also hire six person to go with we for England and make all possible speed the nine and twenty we end with the governor about our custom with much ado the thirty we deliver the company business from Saris to spalding give he special charge of the dutch insolency and hate towards we and therefore to have little to do with they October 1609. the second of October 1609. I go and take my leave of the governor and desire his favour to our factor which he promise in seem hearty the three betimes I come aboard for adieu have visit all my friend the first of November 1609. about the distance six hundred and fifty from Bantam we be in five and twenty degree so^th latitude have four and twenty degree variation and four and twenty day run it storm the nine and twenty we have all day a hard gale of wind which towards night prove a storm at west south-west from the northward and put we to try with our main course continue all night and the next day wherein as sundry other time before we have find a report of Linschot to be true note that general all easterly wind come about to the northward if it prove rain present the wind come about to the west south-west and there blow variation thirteen degree we be in two and thirty @ south when the storm take we and have about thirteen degree variation and upward December the eight 1609. donatall the eight of December 1609 we ^ell betimes in the morning with Terra donatall some six league of we the wester part where the variation be about eight 1/^ degree we be at noon under thirty one degree and seven and twenty minute of latitude we stand south southeast wind at south-west under l^w sail we meet a Hollander and understand by they that the Erasmus a ship of the fleet which make homeward at my arrival with the dragon at Bantam be very leaky at sea and the rest of the fleet so leave she steer for the island mauritius and there unlade the say Erasmus leave the good there with five and twenty person to guard the same till it may be send for the rest of her company be now in this ship the latitude and description of the i will mauritius that upon mauritius be two haven the one call the northwest lie under twenty degree somewhat less the other the southeast in twenty degree and fifteen minute all kind of refreshment be there to be ha^^ as fish turtle manatee in great abundance fowl infinite and goat new by they bring thither in some reasonable numbe^ hog also and the place very healthful the island be between thirty and forty league in circuit and the variation there be one and twenty degree the north-westing they come from Bantam in May be a month get mauritius stay there four month and a half and have be six week thence whereof seventeen day with contrary wind cape Das Agul^as the two and twenty we be in latitude thirty five degree twenty eight minute and within seven league of the cape Agulhas which rise like two isle we be southeast of it but come more thwart like three land two bay north make three perspicuous point low and seem round we sound about seven in the evening and have seventy seven fathom water oazy ground be south of the shore about five league the most and as I guess new get to the westward of the flat shoald I observe the sun set and find small variation have eight and twenty 1/^ degree south of the west Azimoth our latitude be about five and thirty degree and six and twenty minute note a man find home upon this coast find no weather for observation either for latitude or variation may bold and safe keep himself in sixty fathom water and shelly ground and when he find oazy be very near cape Da^ Aghulas and when he lose ground at one hundred and twenty fathom line he may resolve that he have pass the say cape provide he be within the latitude of thirty six degree the three and twenty we steer all night west by north and west northwest a fresh gale easterly and in the morning see the land all along about eight or ten league from we high land about noon we be near cape buona Speranza have run betwixt cape D'aghulas and it in seventeen hour we get within three league of the sugar-loaf cape buona Speranza and stand off and on all night the eight and twenty I receive by the dutch boat six sheep the fa^test that ever I see from the island the tail of one of they be eight and twenty inch broad and weigh five and thirty pound weight I receive of the dutch a main topsail whereof we have extreme want and deliver they a note to the company to receive twelve pound twelve shilling for the same beside main top sail buy their promise to we for other want be very honest and christian-like we take fat sheep leave on Pengwin island and set leave in their room^ I leave a note also there of my come and the state of my company as other have do before the ten of january in the morning we be under sail homeward note january the ten 1609. set sail that all the time we have be here the wind have be westerly and southerly and the two former time that I be here at the same season it blow storm easterly the twenty we pass the southern tropic about noon south Tropic the dutch come and sup with i shoot three part piece the thirty before day we see s. Helena Helena have steer sixty six league west in that latitude we ride on the northwest part thereof a mile from the shore northwest from the chapel in two and twenty fathom sandy ground the island may lie true two hundred and seventy or two hundred and eighty league to the westward from the land of Aethyopia we be fain to steer close in under the high-land to get ground the bank be steep too and without no anchor the nine of February we weigh and make sail homeward February 9 set sail from s. Helena Ascention we leave the dutch to our christian grief have receive aboard here for refresh nineteen goat nine hog and thirteen pig the sixteenth we see the i will Ascention seven or eight league west south-west from we the eight and twenty in the morning the wind be westerly and reasonable fair weather we steer with the dutch who have make a be upon his mizzen mast-head for we he tell we that he have but eight or nine man stand the rest sick and six and forty dead a grievous chastisement unto they and to we a never sufficient acknowledge mercy that they who offer to spare i ten or twenty man or more upon occasion shall so general decay and we lose no one nay every one in good health towards night at my company earnest suit consider our leak with many other just cause on our part beside our want of mean to aid they though we shall accompany they they have without any our speech or motion to the like end desire we to acquaint such dutch as we shall meet with their distress that they may take the best course for their aid we make sail and leave they not without sensible and christian grief for our want of mean to help they latitude forty five degree and six minute the first of May 1610. we have very fair weather wind south-west may 1610. latitude forty nine degree and thirteen minute the second betimes in the morning the wind come at south and blow a hard storm which put we into our fore-course towards night we speak with a lubecker who tell we that Silley bare east by north thirty eight dutch mile which be fifty league from we and the weather be fair we make sail I tell they of the distress dutch. the nine in the morning beachy be north north-east three league from we the ten about sunset we anchor in the down chap. 7 captain WILLIAM Hawkins his relation of the occurrent which happen in the time of his residence in India in the county of the great mogoll and of his departure from thence write to the company @. i. his barbarous usage at surat by Mocrebchan the portugal and jesuit treachery against he at my arrival * * captain keeling and he have keep company together all the voyage before relate and not needful to be repeat to the road of D^lisa in Socatora whence on june the 24. captain keeling depart in the dragon as you have hear the other in the Hector for surat the mean while build a pinnace on the four of August have receive from the general a duplicate of the commission under the great seal he come on shore the 28. of August 1608. Chanchana Mocrebchan unto the bar of surat be the four and twenty of August 1608. I present send unto surat Francis buck merchant with two other to make know unto the governor that the king of England have send i as his ambassador unto his king with his letter and present I receive the governors answer both by they and three of his servant send i from surat that he and what the country afford be at my command and that I shall be very welcome if I will vouchsafe to come on shore I go accompany with my merchant and other in the best manner I can befit for the honour of my king and country at my come on shore after their barbarous manner I be kind receive and multitude of people follow i all desirous to see a new come people much nominate but never come in their part as I be near the governor house word be bring i that he be not well but I think rather drink with affion or opinion be a age man so I go unto the chief customer which be the only man that seafaring cause belong unto for the government of surat belong unto two great nobleman the one be viceroy of Decan name Chanchana the other viceroy of Cambaya and surat name Mocreb chan but in surat he have no command save only over the king custom who be the only man I be to deal withal after many compliment do with this chief customer I tell he that my come be to establish and settle a factory in surat and that I have a letter for his king from his majesty of England tend to the same purpose who be desirous to have league and amity with his king in that kind that his subject may free go and come sell and buy as the custom of all nation be and that my ship be lade with the commodity of our land which by intelligence of former traveller be vendible for these part his answer be that he will dispatch a footman for Cambaya unto the nobleman his master for of himself he can do nothing without his order so take my leave I depart to my lodging appoint for i which be at the customhouse in the morning I go to visit the governor and after a present give he with great gravity and outward show of kindness he entertain i bid i most hearty welcome and that the country be at my command after compliment do and enter into the main affair of my business acquaint he wherefore my come be for these part he answer i that these my affair do not concern he because they be seafaring cause which do belong unto Mocrebchan unto who he promise i to dispatch a footman unto Cambaya and will write in my behalf both for the unlade of my ship as also concern a factory in the mean while he appoint i to lodge in a merchant house that understand the turkish be at that time my trouch-man the captain of that ship which Sr Edward Michelborne take the captain of the ship that sir Edward Michelborne take it be twenty day ere the answer come by reason of the great water and rain that man can not pass in this time the merchant many of they very friendly feast i when it be fair weather that I can get out of door for there fall a great rain continue almost the time the messenger be absent who at the end of twenty day bring answer from Mocrebchan excessive rain with licence to land my good and buy and sell for this present voyage but for a future trade and settle of a factory he can not do it without the king commandment which he think will be effect if I will take the pain of two month travel to deliver my king letter and further he write unto his chief customer that all whatsoever I bring shall be keep in the customhouse till his brother Sheck Abder Rachim come who shall make all the haste that possible can be for to choose such good as be fit for the king these excuse of take good of all man for the king be for their own pri^ate gain upon this answer I make all the have I can in ease our ship of her heavy burden of lead and iron which of necessity must be land the good be land and keep in the customer power till the come of this great man perceive the time precious and my ship not able long to stay I think it convenient to send for three chest of money and with that to buy commodity of the same sort that be vendible at Priaman and Bantam which the guzerats carry yearly thither make great benefit thereof I begin to buy against the will of all the merchant in the town who grumble be very much and complain unto the governor and customer of the leave that be grant i in buy those commodity which will cut their own throat at Priaman and Bantam they not suspect that I will buy commodity for those part but only for England at the end of this business this great man come who give i licence to ship it before the ship of which I call a council which be the merchant I have and those that I think fit for the business I pretend demand every one opinion according to his place what shall be think convenient for the delivery of his majesty letter and the establish of a trade so general it be agree and conclude that for the effect of these weighty affair it neither will nor can be accomplish by any but by myself by reason of my experience in my former travel and language as also I be know to all to be the man that be send as ambassador about these affair after it be conclude and I content to stay I make what haste I can in dispatch away the ship and to ship the good this do I call master Marlowe and all the company that be on shore before i acquaint they with my pretence and how they shall receive for their commander master Marlowe will they that they obey and reverence he in that kind as they do i this do I bring they to the water side and see they embark themselves I bid they farewell the next day go about my affair to the great man brother I meet with some ten or twelve of our man of the better sort of they very much fright tell i the heavy news as I think that ever come unto i our two bark take by the portugal and thirty man in they this not fight be upbraid to our man by the indian with much disgrace sincere ^overed with interest your ^^^f^ghts with th^ portugal the intolerable pride of the Portugal captain of the take of the bark by a Portugal frigate or two and all good and man take only they escape I demand in what manner they be take and whether they do not fight their answer be no m. Marlowe will not suffer they for that the portugal be our friend and buck on the other side go to the Portugal without a pawn and there he betray we for he never come unto we after indeed Bucke go upon the oath and faithf^ll promise of the captain but be never suffer to return I present send a letter unto the captain Maior that he release my man and good for that we be Englishmen and that our king have peace and amity together and that we be send unto the mogul country by our king and with his letter unto the mogul for his subject to trade in his country and with his majesty commission for the government of his subject and I make no question but in deliver back his majesty subject and good that it will be well take at his king hand if the contrary it will be a mean of breach at the receipt of my letter the proud rascal brave so much as the messenger tell i most vil^ly abuse his majesty term he king of fisherman and of a island of no import and a fart for his commission scorn to send i any answer it be my chance the next day to meet with a captain of one of the Portugal frigate who come about business send by the captain Maior the business as I understand be that the governor shall send i as prisoner unto he for that we be hollanders I understand what he be take occasion to speak with he of the abuse offer the king of England and his subject his answer be that these sea belong unto the king of Portugal and none ought to come here without his licence I tell he that the king of England licence be as good as the king of Spain and as free for his subject as for the king of Spain and he that say the contrary be a traitor and a villain and so tell your great captain that in abuse the king of England he be a base villain and a traitor to his king and that I will maintain it with my sword if he dare come on shore I send he a challenge the moor perceive I be much move cause the Portugal to depart this Portugal some two hour after come to my house promise i that he will procure the liberty of my man and good so that I will be liberal unto he the prisoner send for Goa I entertain he kind and promise he much but before he depart the town my man and good be send for Goa I have my good ready some five day before I can be clear and have leave for they will not let they be ship unt^ll this great man come which be the three of October the three of October the ship depart leave m. William Hawkins and his servant in the country the perfidy and treason of mocrebchan and the jesuite Peniero and two day after the ship set sail I remain with one merchant William Finch who be sick the great part of his time and not able to stir abroad to do any business the rest be two servant a cook and my boy these be the company I have to defend ourselves from so many enemy which lie daily lurk to destroy we aim at i for the stop of my passage to the great mogul but God preserve i and in spite of they all I take heart and resolution to go forward on my travel after the departure of the ship I understand that my good and man be betray unto the Portugal by mocrebchan and his follower for it be a plot lay by the jesuite and mocrebchan to protract time till the frigate come to the bar and then to dispatch i for till then this dog mocrebchan his brother come not and the come of these frigate be in such secrecy that till they have take we we hear no news of they after the departure of my ship I be so misuse that it be unsufferable but so long as my ship be at the bar I be flatter withal but howsoever well use or ill it be not for i to take think for any thing although remain in a heathen country environ with so many enemy who daily do nothing else but plot to murder i and cozen i of my good as hereafter you shall understand first misuse by mocrebchan as to have possession of my good take what he please and leave what he please give i such a price as his own barbarous conscience afford that from thirty five will give but eighteen not regard his brother bill who have full authority from he and how difficult it be to get money from his chief servant after the time expire as it be best know to we who take the pain in receive a small part thereof before his come to surat and after his come I be bar of all although he outward dissemble and flatter with i almost for three month feed i with fair promise of payment and other kindness in the mean time he come to my house three time sweep i clean of all thing that be good so that when he see that I have no more good thing leave he likewise by little and little degrade i of his good look almost all this time William Finch be extreme sick of the flux but thanks be to God recover past all hope I on the other side can not peep out of door for fear of the portugal who in troop lay lurk in byway to give i assault to murder i this be at the time that the armada be there the first plot lay against i be I be invite by Hogio Nazam to the fraught of his ship for Mocha the first plot of the portugal to kill i as the custom be they make at the fraught of their ship great feast for all the principal of the town it be my good hap at that time a great captain belong to the viceroy of guzerat resident in Amadavar be send about affair unto surat be likewise invite to this feast which be keep at the water side and near unto it the portugal have two frigate of their armada which come to receive their tribute of the ship that be to depart as also refreshment out of these frigate there come three gallant fellow to the tent where I be and some forty follower portugal scatter themselves along the sea side ready to give a assault when the word shall be give these three gallant that come to the tent arm with coat of buff down to the knee their rapier and pistol by their side demand for the english captain upon the hear of which I arise present and tell they that I be the man and perceive a alteration in they I lay hand on my weapon the captain Mogol perceive treason towards i both he and his follower draw their weapon and if the portugal have not be the swift both they and their scatter crew in retire to their frigate have come short home the second plot another time they come to assault i in my house with a friar some thirty or forty of they the friar come be to animate the soldier and to give they absolution but I be always wa^y have a strong house with good door many troop at other time lay lurk for i and i in the street in that kind that I be force to go to the governor to complain that I be not able to go about my business for the portugal come arm into the city to murder i padre Peneiro a jesuite a pattern of jesuitical sanctity how frank will the jesuite have be to judas beyond those priest which g^ue but thirty piece for the price of blood and those but of two shilling six penny the piece whereas this jesuite offer forty thousand royal who can deny they royal merchant at four shilling six penny the piece jesuite policy just jesuitism which be not a custom at other time for any portugal to come arm as now they do he present send word to the portugal that if they come into the city arm again at their own peril be it at mocrebchan his come with a jesuite name padre Pineiro in his company who proffer mocrebchan forty thousand rial of eight to send i to daman as I understand by certain advice give i by Ally and Ally pommory I go to visit he give he a present beside the present his brother have and for a time as I have above write I have many kind outward show of he till the time that I demand my money after that his dissemble be past and he tell i plain that he will not give i twenty but will deliver i back my cloth upon which deal I dissemble as well as I can with he entreat leave for agra to the king tell he that William Finch be the man that I leave as my chief in this place and in what kind soever his pleasure be to deal with i he be the man to receive either money or ware upon which answer he give i his licence and letter to the king promise i forty horseman to go with i which he do not accomplish after licence receive the father put into mocrebchan his head that it be not good to let i pass for that I will complain of he unto the King this he plot with mocrebchan to overthrow my journey which he can not do because I come from a king but he say that he will not let i have any force to go with i and what else he will have he to do either with my Trenchman and coachman to poison or murder i if one shall fail the other to do it this invention be put into mocrebchans head by the father but God for his mercy sake afterward discover these plot and the counsel of this jesuite take not place before the plot of this the jesuite and I fall out in the presence of mocrebchan for vile speech make by he of our king and nation to be vassal unto the king of Portugal which word I can not brook in so much that if I can have have my will the father have never speak more but I be prevent @. 2 his journey to the mogoll at agra and entertayment at Court now find William finch in good health new recover I leave all thing touch the trade of merchandize in his power give he my remembrance and order what he shall do in my absence so I begin to take up soldier to conduct i he set forward on his journey from suratt^oward ^oward agra be deny of Mocrebchan beside shot and bowman that I hire for my better safety I go to one of Chanchanna his captain to let i have forty or fifty horseman to conduct i to Chanchanna be then viceroy of Decan resident in Bramport who do to his power all that I demand give i valiant horseman pattan a people very much fear in these part for if I have not do it I have be overthrow another dangerous Pio^ of the portugal (@) province for the portugal of Dama^ have wrought with a ancient friend of they a Raga who be absolute lord of a province between daman guzerat and Decan call cru to be ready with two hundred horseman to stay my passage but I go so strong and well provide that they dare not encounter with we so likewise that time I escape then at Dayta another province or princedom Dayt^ another province my coachman be drink with certain of his kindred discover the treason that he be to work against i which be that he be hire to murder i he be overhear by some of my soldier who at that present come and tell i and how it shall be do in the morning follow when we begin our travel for we use to travel two hour before day upon which notice they use to travel two hour before day I call the coachman unto i examine he and his friend before the captain of the horseman I have with i who can not deny but he will never confess who hire he although he be very much beat curse his fortune that he can not effect it for he be to do it the next morning so I send he prisoner unto the governor of suratt but afterward by my broker or truchman the jesuite bloody plot discover m. Hawkins depart from suratt the first of February 1608. I understand that both he and the coachman be hire by Mocrebchan but by the father persuasion the one to poison i and the other to murder i but the truchman receive nothing till he have do the deed which he never mean to do for in that kind he be always true unto i thus God preserve i this be five day after my departure from suratt and my departure from suratt be the first of February 1608. so follow on my travel for Bramport some two day beyond Dayta the pattan leave i but to be conduct by another Pattan captain governor of that lordship by who I be most kind entertain his name be Sherchan be sometime a prisoner unto the Portugal and have the Portugal language perfect be glad to do i any service for that I be of the nation that be enemy unto the Portugal himself in person with forty horseman go two day ioureney with i till he have free i from the dangerous place at which time he meet with a troop of outlaw and take some four alive and slay and hurt eight the rest escape this man very kind write his letter for i to have his house at Bramport which be a great courtesy otherwise I can not tell where to lodge myself the town be so full of soldier for than begin the war with the decans the eighteen of the say month thanks be to God I come in safety to Bramport and the next day I go to the court to visit Chanchanna his arrival at Bramport be then lord general and viceroy of Decan give he a present who kind take it and after three hour conference with he he make i a great feast and be rise from the table invest i with two cloak one of fine woollen and another of cloth of gold give i his most kind letter of favour to the king which avail much that do he embrace i and so we depart the language that we speak be turkish which he speak very well I remain in Bramport unto the second of march he stay in Bramport till the second of March his arrival at agra the sixteenth of April 1609. till than I can not end my business of money that I bring by exchange stay likewise for a have take new soldier I follow my voyage or journey to agra where after much labour toil and many danger I arrive in safety the sixteenth of April 1609. be in the city and seek out for a house in a very secret manner notice be give the king that I be come but not to be find he present charge both horseman and footman in many troop not to leave before I be find command his knight marshal to accompany i wieh great state to the court as a ambassador of a king ought to be which he do with a great train make such extraordinary haste that I admire much for I can scarce obtain time to apparel myself in my best attire in fine I be bring before the king I come with a slight present he c^me before the King have nothing but cloth and that not esteem for what I have for the king mocrebchan take from i wherewith I acquaint his majesty after salutation do with a most kind and smile countenance he bid i most hearty welcome upon which speech I do my obeisance and duty again have his majesty letter in my hand he call i to come near unto he stretch down his hand from the seat royal where he sit in great majesty something high for to be see of the people receive very kind the letter of i view the letter a pretty while both the seal and the manner of the make of it up he call for a old jesuite that be there present to read it in the mean space while the jesuite be read it he speak unto i in the kind manner that can be demand of i the content of the letter which I tell he upon which notice present grant and promise i by God that all what the king have there write he will grant and allow withal his heart and more if his majesty will require it the jesuite likewise tell he the effect of the letter but discommend the style say jesuitical charity it be base pen write without my answer be unto the king and if it shall please your majesty these people be our enemy how can this letter be ill write when my king demand favour of your majesty he say it be true the mogoll skilful in the turkish tongue perceive I have the turkish tongue which himself well understand he command i to follow he unto his chamber of presence be then rise from that place of open audience desire to have further conference with i in which place I stay some two hour till the king come forth from his woman then call i unto he the first thing that he speak be that he understand that Mocrebchan have not deal well with i bid i be of good cheer for he will remedy all it shall seem that mocrebchans enemy have acquaint the king with all his proceed spy upon every nobleman for indeed the king have spy upon every nobleman I answer most humble that I be certain all matter will go well on my side so long as his majesty protect i upon which speech he present send away a post for suratt with his command to Mocrebchan write unto he very earnest in our behalf conjure he to be none of his friend if he do not deal well with the english in that kind as their desire be this be dispatch and send by the same messenger I send my letter to William Finch wish he to go with this command to Mocrebchan at the receipt of which he wonder that I come safe to agra and be not murder or poison by the way of which speech William Finch advertise i afterward it grow late and have have some small conference with the king at that time he command that I shall daily be bring into his presence and give a captain name Houshaber chan charge that I shall lodge at his house till a house be find convenient for i and when I need any thing of the king that he shall be my solicitor according to command I resort to the court where I have daily conference with the King both night and day his delight be very much to talk with i both of the affair of England and other country as also many demand of the west indies whereof he have notice long before be in doubt if there be any such place till he have speak with i who have be in the country many day and week be past and I now in great favour with the king to the grief of all my enemy m. Will Hawkins have be in the west Indi^s espy my time I demand for his commandment or commission with capitulation for the establish of our factory to be in my own power his answer be whether I will remain with he in his court I reply till ship come then my desire be to go home with the answer of his majesty letter he reply again that his meaning be a long time for he mean to send a ambassador to the king of England at the come of the next ship and that I shall stay with he until some other be send from my king to remain in my place say this thy stay will be high for the benefit of thy nation and that he will give i good maintenance and my be here in his presence will be the cause to right all wrong that shall be offer unto my nation and further what I shall see beneficial for they upon my petition make he will grant swear by his father soul that if I will remain with he he will grant i article for our factory to my heart desire and will never go from his word I reply again that I will consider of it thus daily entice i to stay with he allege as be above write and that I shall do service both to my natural king and he and likewise he will allow i by the year three thousand and two hundred pound sterling for my first the king stipendiary wage and honourable pension to his noble and so yearly he promise i to augment my live till I come to a thousand horse so my first shall be four hundred horse for the nobility of India have their title by the number of their horse that be to say from forty to twelve thousand which pay belong to prince and his son I trust upon his promise and see it be beneficial both to my nation and myself be dispossess of that benefit which I shall have reap if I have go to Bantam and that after half a dozen year your worship will send another man of sort in my place in the mean time I shall feather my nest and do you service and further perceive great injury offer we by reason the king be so far from the port for all which cause above specify I do not think it amiss to yield unto his request then because my name be something hard for his pronunciation he call i by the name of English Chan that be to say english lord but in Persia it be the title for a duke and this go currant throughout the country now your worship shall understand that I be now in the high of my favour the jesuite and portugal sleep not but by all mean seek my overthrow and to say the truth the principal mahometans near the king jesuitical Christianity envy much that a Christian shall be so nigh unto he the jesuite Peniero be with Mocrebchan and the jesuite here I think do little regard their mass and church matter for study how to overthrow my affair advice be go to Goa by the jesuite here I mean in agra and to padre Peneiro at surat or Cambaya he work with Mocrebchan to be the portugal assistance the practice of the portugal against ou^ trade and the viceroy send he a great present together with many toy unto the king with his letter these present and many more promise wrought so much with Mocrebchan that he write his petition unto the king send it together with the present advertise the king that the suffer of the english in his land will be the cause of the loss of his own country near the seacoast as suratt Cambaya and such like and that in any case he entertain i not for that his ancient friend the portugal murmur high at it and that the fame be spread among the portugal lie a great stratag^me that I be general of ten thousand horseman ready to give the assault upon di^ when our ship come the viceroy letter likewise be in this kind the king answer be that he have but one English^man in his court and he they need not to fear the king answer for he have not pretend any such matter for I will have give he live near the sea part but he refuse it take it near i here this be the king answer upon which answer the portugal be like mad dog labour to work my passage out of the World so I tell the king what danger I have pass and the present danger wherein I be my boy Stephen gravener Nicholas Vfflet instant depart this world my man Nicholas Vfflet extreme sick and this be all my english company myself begin to fall down too the king present call the jesuite and tell they that if I die by any extraordinary casualty that they shall all rue for it this past the king be very earnest with i to take a white maiden out of his palace who will give she all thing necessary with slave and he will promise i she shall turn christian and by this mean my meat and drink shall be look unto by they and I shall live without fear in regard she be a Moor I refuse but if so be there can be a christian find I will accept it at which my speech I little think a christian daughter can be find so the king call to memory one Mubarique Shakstone his daughter who be a christian armenian Shakstone a armenian Chr^stian Ekbery Padasha and o^ the race of the most ancient christian who be a captain and in great favour with ekber Padasha this king father this captain die sudden and without will worth a mass of money and all rob by his brother and kindred and debt that can be recover leave the child but only a few jewel I see she be of so honest a descent have pass my word to the king can not withstand my fortune wherefore I take she and for want of a minister he take a christian gentlewoman to wife shee come over with he for England but he die by the way she be after marry to m. Towerson the pinn^sse of the ascension cast away near sura^t the king commission in the favour of the english under his great seal with golden letter the ascension cast away the great part of the king noble be Mah^metans some of the ascension company and m. Alexander Sharp^ their general come to agra before christian witness I marry she the priest be my man Nicholas which I think have be lawful till I meet with a preacher that come with sir Henry Middleton and he show i the error I be new marry again so ever after I live content and without fear she be willing to go where I go and live as I live after these matter end news come hither that the ascension be to come by the man of her pinnace that be cast away near suratt upon which news I present go to the king and tell he crave his licence together with his commission for the settle of our trade which the king be willing to do limit i a time to return and be with he again but the king chief abdal hassan a man envious to all christian tell the king that my go will be the occasion of war and thus harm may happen unto a great man who be send for Goa to buy toy for the King upon which speech the king pleasure be I shall stay and send away his commission to my chief factor at surat and present give order that it shall be most effectual write in fine under his great seal with golden letter his commission be write so firm for our good and so free as heart can wish this I obtain present and send it to William Finch before it come there news come that the ascension be cast away and her man save but not suffer to come into the city of surat of that likewise I tell the king who seem to be very much discontent with that great captain Mocreb chan my enemy and give i another commandment for their good usage and mean to be wrought to save the good if it be possible these two commandment come almost together to the great joy of William Finch and the rest admire much at these thing and now continue these great favour with the king be continual in his sight for the one half of four and twenty hour serve he day and night I want not the great part of his noble that be Mahumetans to be my enemy for it go against their heart that a Christian shall be so great and near the king and the more because the king have promise to make his brother child christian which two year after my come he perform command they to be make christian a while after come some of the ascension company unto i who I can have wish of better behaviour a thing pry into by the King in all this time I can not get my debt of Mocrebchan till at length he be send for up to the king to answer for many fault and tyrannical injustice which he do to all people in those part many a man be undo by he who petition to the king for Iustice now this dog to make his peace send many bribe to the king son and nobleman that be near the king who labour in his behalf after news come that Mocrebchan be approach near the king present send to attach all his good which be in that abundance that the king be two month in view of they every day allot a certain quantity to be bring before i and what he think fit for his own turn he keep and the rest deliver again to Mocrebchan in the view of these good there come those piece and costlet and head-piece with other present that he take from i for the king of my own not suffer i to bring they myself at the sight whereof I be so bold to tell the king what be i after the king have view these good a very great complaint be make by a banian how that Mocrebchan have take his daughter say she be for the king which be his excuse deflower she himself and afterward give she to a Brammen belong to Mocrebchan the man who give notice of this child protest she to pass all that ever he see for beauty the matter be examine and the offence do by Mocrebchan find to be true he be commit to prison in the power of a great nobleman and commandment be give that the Brammene his privy member shall be cut off before this happen to Mocrebchan I go to visit he diverse time who make i very fair promise that he will deal very kind with i and be my friend and that I shall have my right now be in this disgrace his friend daily solicit for he at length get he clear with commandment that he pay every man his right and that no more complaint be make of he if he love his life so Mocrebchan by the king command pay every one his due except i who he will not pay but deliver i my cloth whereof I be desirous and to make if it be possible by fair mean a end with he but he put i off the more delay time till his departure which be short after for the king have restore he his old place again and he be to go for Goa about a fair ballast ruby and other rare thing promise the King @. 3 the mogul inconstancy and captain Hawkins departure with Sr Henry MIDDLETON to the red-sea thence to Bantam and after for England all my go and send to Mocrebchan for my money or cloth be in vain I be abuse so base by he that I be force to demand justice of the king who command that the money be bring before he but for all the king command he do as he list and do what I can he cut i off twelve thousand and five hundred Mamadies for the great man in this kingdom be his friend and many other hold on his side murmur to the king the suffering of english to come into his country for that we be a nation that if we once set foot we will take his country from he the king call i to make answer to that they say I answer his majesty that if any such matter be I will answer it with my life and that we be not so base a nation as these my enemy report all this be because I demand my due and yet can get it at this time those that be near favourite and near unto the king who I daily visit and keep in withal speak in my behalf and the king hold on my side command that no more such wrong be offer i so I think to use my best in the recovery of this intrete the head that he will be mean that I receive not so great a loss he answer i in a threaten manner that if I do open my mouth any more he will make i to pay a hundred thousand Mamadies which the king have lose in his custom by entertain i and no man dare adventure by reason of the Portugal so by this mean I be force to hold my tongue for I know this money be swallow by both these dog now Mocrebchan be command in public that by such a day he be ready to depart for guzerat and so for Goa and then come and take his leave as the custom be in this mean time three of the principal merchant of surat be send for by the king commandment and come to the court about affair wherein the king or his have employ they be then present there when Mocrebchan be take his leave this be a plot lay both by the portugal Mocrebchan and the for some six day before a letter come unto the king from the Portugal viceroy with a present of many rare thing a letter from the viceroy of the East-India to the mogul against the English the content of this letter be how high the king of Portugal take in ill part the entertain of the english he be of a ancient amity with other compliment and withal how that a merchant be there arrive with a very fair ballast ruby weigh three hundred and fifty of which stone the pattern be send upon this news Mocrebchan be to be hasten away at who come to take his leave together with padre Pineiro that be to go with he the above name merchant of surat be then there present a speech of Mocreb chan to the king against the English Mocrebchan begin to make his speech to the king say that this and many other thing he hope to obtain of the Portugal so that the english be disannul say more that it will redound to great loss unto his majesty and subject if he do further suffer the english to come into his part upon which speech he call the merchant before the king to declare what loss it will be for that they best know they affirm that they be like to be all undo because of the english nor hereafter any toy can come into this country because the Portugal be so strong at sea and will not suffer they to go in or out of their port and all their excuse be for suffer the English these speech now and former and lucre of this stone and promise by the father of rare thing be the cause the king overthrow my affair say let the english come no more present give mocrebchan his commandment to deliver the viceroy to that effect that he will never suffer the english to come any more into his port the king commandment upon false information against the English I now see that it boot i not to meddle upon a sudden or to make any petition unto the king till a pretty while after the departure of mocrebchan and see my enemy be so many although they have eat of i many present when I see my time I make petition unto the King in this space I find a toy to give as the order be for there be no man that come to make petition who come emptie-handed upon which petition make he he present grant my request none make petition to the king without some present command his to make i another commandment in as ample manner as my former and command that no man shall open his mouth to the contrary for it be his pleasure that the english shall come into his port so this time again I be a float of this alteration at that instant the jesuite have notice for there be no matter pass in the mogul court in secret but it be know half a hour after give a small matter to the writer of that day for there be nothing that pass but it be write and writer appoint by turn so that the father nor I can pass any business but when we will we have notice so the jesuite present send away the most speedy messenger that can be get with his letter to padre Pineiro and mocrebchan advertise they of all that have pass at the receipt of which they consult among themselves not to go forward on their voyage for Goa till I be overthrow again wherefore mocrebchan write his petition unto the king and letter unto his friend the head how it stand not with the king honour to send he if he perform not what he promise the Portugal and that his voyage will be overthrow if he do not call in the commandment he have give the Englishman upon the receive and read of this the king go again from his word esteem a few toy which the father have promise he more than his honour now be desirous to see the full issue of this I go to Hogi^ jahan lord general of the king palace the second man in place in the kingdom entreat he that he will stand my friend he very kind present go unto the king tell he that I be very heavy and discontent that Abdall hassan will not deliver i my commandment which his majesty have grant i the king answer he I be present and very near he say it be true that the commandment be seal and ready to be deliver he but upon letter receive from mocrebchan and better consideration by i have on these my affair in my port in guzerat I think it fit not to let he have it thus be I toss and tumble in the kind of a rich merchant adventure all he have in one bottom and by casualty of storm or pirate lose it all at once so that on the other side concern my live I be so cross that many time this Abdall hassan his answer will be unto i I know well enough you stand not in such need for your master bear your charge and the king know not what he do in give to you from who he shall receive my answer be that it be the king pleasure and none of my request and see it be his majesty gift I have no reason to loose it so that from time to time he bid i have patience and he will find out a good live for i thus be I dally withal by this my enemy in so much that in all the time I serve in court I can not get a live that will yield any thing give i my live still in place where outlaw reign only once at lahor by a especial commandment from the king but I be soon deprive of it and all that I receive from the beginning be not full three hundred pound a great part whereof be spend upon charge of man send to the lordship when that I see that the live which the king absolute give i be take from i I be then past all hope for before at the news of the arrival of ship I have great hope that the king will perform former grant in hope of rare thing that shall come from England but when I make arse or petition unto the king concern my live he turn i over to abdal hassan who not only deny i my live but also give order that I be suffer no more to enter within the red rail the red rail a place of honour which be a place of honour where all my time I be place very near unto the king in which place there be but five man in the kingdom before i now perceive that all my affair be overthrow I determine with the council of of those that be near i to resolve whereto to trust either to be well in or well out upon this resolution I have my petition make ready by which I make know unto the king how Abdall hassan have deal with i have himself eat what his majesty give i and how that my charge of so long time be by his majesty desire to stay in his court upon the faithful promise he make i be so much that it will be my utter overthrow therefore I beseech his majesty that he will consider my cause either to establish i as former or give i leave to depart his answer be that he give i leave command his safe conduct to be make i to pass free without molestation throughout his kingdom when this commandment be ma^e as the custom be I come to do my obeisance and to take my leave entreat for a answer of my king letter Abdall hassan come unto i from the king in a disdainful manner utter deny i say that it be not the custom of so great a monarch to write in the kind of a letter unto a petty prince or governor I answer he that the king know more of the mightiness of the king of England then to be a petty governor well this be my answer together with my leave take I go home to my house study with all my endeavour to get all my good and debt together and to buy commodity with those money that be remain use all the speed I can to clear myself of the country stay only for Nicholas Vfflet to come from lahor with a remainder of Indic^ Will Finch determine to return over-land for England that be in William finch power who determine to go over land be past all hope for ever embark ourselves at surat which course I also will willing have take but that as it be well know for some cause I can not travel through Turkey and especial with a woman so I be force to curry favour with the jesuite to get i a safe conduct or from the viceroy to go for Goa and so to Portugal and from thence to England think as the opinion of other be that the viceroy give his secure royal there will be no danger for i but when my wife mother and kindred see that I be to carry she away suspect that they shall never see she any more they do so distaste i in these my travel that I be force to yield unto they that my wife go no further then Goa because it be India and that they can go and come and visit she and that if at any time I mean to go for Portugal or any otherwhere that I leave she that portion that the custom of Portugal be to leave to their wife when they die unto which I be force to yield to give they content to prevent all mischief but know that if my wife will go with i all will be of no effect I effect with the jesuite to send for two secure the one concern my quiet be and ftee liberty of conscience in Goa and to be as a Portugal in all trade and commerce in Goa this be to show my wife parent the other be a absolute grant for free passage into Portugal and so for England with my wife and good without any disturbance of any of my wife friend and what agreement I make with they to be void and of none effect but I shall stay or go when I please with free liberty of conscience for myself this last I shall receive at Cambaya which at my departure for our ship be not yet come but be to come with the carravan of frigate this and much more the father will have do for i only to rid i out of the country for be clear of i they shall much more quiet sleep about this time I have notice of the come of thre^ english ship that be arrive at Mocha and without fail their determination be to come for surat Nicholas bangham at the time of the year have this advertisement by Nicholas bangham from Bramport who depart from i some six week before both for the recovery of certain debt as also with my letter to our ship if it be possible to send it advertise they of my proceed in this time of my dispatch news come of mocrebchans return from Goa with many gallant and rare thing which he bring for the King but that ballast ruby be not for his turn say it be false or at the least make his excuse for fear that if he shall give the Portugal his price and when it come into the king power it shall be value much less which overplus he shall be force to pay as he have do in former time for other thing he leave it behind he and beside I understand that mocrebchan have not his full content as he expect of the portugal and likewise at this instant the my enemy be thrust out of his place for many complaint make of he by nobleman that be at great charge and in debt and can not receive their living in place that be good but in barren and rebellious place and that he make a benefit of the good place himself and rob they all for these complaint and other he have much ado to escape with life be put out of his place and send to the war of De^a^ now one Gaibbeig be the king chief treasurer a man that in outward show make much of i and be always willing to pleasure i when I have occasion to use he be make chief and his daughter marry with the king be his chief queen or Paramor this vizier son and myself be great friend he have be often at my house and be now exalt to high dignity by the King perceive this alteration and be certify of the come of ship by certain advice sundry way know the custom of these moor that without gift and bribe nothing will either go forward or be accomplish I send my broker to seek out for jewel fit for the king s^ster and new paramour and likewise for this new and his son now after they have my gift they begin on all s^des to solicit my cause at which time news come to agra by banians of Diu how that of Diu three english ship be see and three day after other news come three english sh^ps at the bar of surat that they be at the bar of surat upon which news the great ask i what toy I have for the king I show he a ruby ring that I have get at the sight of which he bid i make ready to go with he at court time and he will make my petition to the king and tell i that the king be already win so once more come before his greatness and my petition be read he present grant i the establish of our factory and that the english come and free trade for surat will the that with all expedition my commandment be make upon which grant the make sign unto i to make obeisance which I do according to the custom but now what follow a great nobleman and near favourite of the king be the dear friend that Mocrebchan and likewise Abdall Hassa^ have bring up together from their childhood and page together unto the king begin to make a speech unto the king say that the grant of this will be the utter overthrow of his sea coast and people as his majesty have be inform by petition from diverse of his subject and beside that it stand not with his majesty honour to contradict that which he have grant to his ancient friend the portugal and whosoever labour for the english know not what he do if know he be not his majesty friend upon the speech of this nobleman my business once again be quite overthrow and all my time and present lose the king answer that for my nation he will not grant trade at the sea port for the inconvenience that diverse time have be scan upon but for myself if I will remain in his service he will command that what he have allow i shall be give i to my content which I deny unless the english shall come unto his port according to promise and as for my particular maintenance my king will not see i want then desire again answer of the king letter he consult a while with his vizier and then send i his denial so I take my leave and depart from agra he depart from agra the second of November 1611. the second of November 1611. being of a thousand thought what course I be best to take for I still have a doubt of the portugal that for lucre of my good they will poison i again on the otherside it be dangerous by reason of the war to travel through Decan unto Masulipatan by land by reason of the turk I can not go and to stay I will not among these faithless infidel I arrive at Cambaya the last of December 1611. where I have certain news of the english ship that be at surat immediate I send a footman unto the ship with my letter with certain advice affirm for a tru^h by the father of Cambaya unto i that the viceroy have in a readiness prepare to depart from Goa four great ship with certain galley and frigate for to come upon they and treason plot against sir Henry Middleton person of which news I be wish by the father to advise sir Henry a feign policy of the jesuite which I find afterward to be but their policy to put he in fear and so to depart and withal I wish they to be well advise and as for i my shift be to go home by the way of the portugal for so I have promise my wife and her brother who at that present be with i and to delude he and the father till I have notice for certain that I may free get aboard without fear which I be assure to know at the return of my letter in the mean time I do all that I can to dispatch her brother away who within two day after depart for agra not suspect that I have any in^ent for the ship Nicholas Vfflet now depart from i to survey the way be two day journey on his way meet with captain William sharpeigh master Fraine and Hugh greet send by sir Henry to Cambaya unto i which be no small joy unto i so understand of the place which be miraculous find out by sir Henry Middleton and never know to any of the country I admire and give God thanks for if this place have not be find it have be impossible for i to have get aboard with my good wherefore make all the haste that I can in dispatch myself away I depart from Cambaya he come aboard the english Fleet. they depart with the english fleet from surat to Dabull a Portugal ship take 1612. they arrive at the mouth of the red Sea the fleet of m. John Saris. they arrive at tecoo in sumatra they arrive at Bantam December 1612. the eighteen of january 1611. and come unto the ship the six and twenty of the say month where I be most kind receive by sir Henry Middleton from this place we depart the eleven of February 1611. and arrive at Dabul the sixteenth of the same in which place we take a Portugal ship and frigate out of which we take some quantity of good and from thence we depart the five of march 1611. for the red sea with a intent to revenge we of the wrong offer we both by turk and mogul at which place we arrive the three of April 1612. here we ^ound three english ship their general be captain John Saris. have dispatch ou^ business in the red sea we set sail from thence the sixteenth of August 1612. and arrive in tecu in sumatra the nineteen of October 1612. and have end our business there we depart in the night the twenty of Novemb. 1612. and come on ground the same night three league off upon a bed of coral in three fathom water or thereabouts and by the great mercy of God we escape but be force to return back again to stop her leak the good be take out and some damage receive now her leak be somewhat stop and her good in not lose a hour of time we depart from thence the eight of December 1612. and arrive at Bantam the one and twenty of the same where sir Henry Midleton not find the trade sufficient to go home that year be force to stay and she have end account with he as himself like best I take my good and ship they in the Solomon which come for our voyage for save of a great freight but I can not be admit to go in she myself captain Saris I thank he accommodate i in the Thomas and it be agree that the Solomon and we shall keep company together from thence we set sail on the thirty of january 1612. and arrive in Saldania roade the one and twenty of April 1613. and come near some two hundred league from the cape we have much foul weather and contrary wind here we find four sail of hollander that depart Bantam a month before we there be great kindness betwixt we especial to i in regard that they have hear much of my great estate in India by a agent of they that be li^ger at Masulipatan the epedition arrive in Saldania many advice of the author touch fort indian factory etc. I have omit as not so fit every eye their departure from Salda^ia some eight day after the expedition come in and bring i a letter from your worship and deliver it unto i two day after their arrival the wind come fair we deparee from Saldania the one and twenty of May 1613. @ 4 a brief discourse of the strength wealth and government with some custom of the great mogul which I have both see and gather by his chief officer and overseer of all his estate first I begin with his prince duke marquess earl viscount baron knight esquire gentleman and yeoman as christian prince use their degree by title so they have their degree and title by their number of horse unless it be those that the king most favour who he honour with the title of Chan and Immirza none have the title of sultan but his son Chan in the persian language be as much as a duke Immirza be the title for the king brother child they that be of the fame of twelve thousand horseman belong to the king and his mother and elder son Vzbek and one more who be of the blood royal of Vzbeck name Chan Azam duke be nine thousand fame marquis five thousand fame earl three thousand viscount two thousand baron a thousand knight four hundred esquire a hundred gentleman fifty yeoman from twenty downward all they that have these number of horseman be call mansibdar mansibdar or man of live or lordship of these there be three thousand that be to say four be of twelve thousand horse apiece and they be the king his mother sultan prince and Chan Azam of nine thousand horseman there be three that be to say sultan these Ragas be gentile the king three son Chanchanna and Kelich chan. of five thousand there be eighteen name Hasuff Chan Chan Ichan Abdula Chan Raga mang ray Durga Raga surse Ramadas Rechwa Raga Emirel Vmera m^habet Chan Chan Dowran Sedris Chan Hogio bey Mirza Mirza Cazi ettebar Chan Dekenny jelam cully Chan sheik Ferid of three thousand there be two and twenty to wit Chan Imirza Ereg Imirza darab Hogio jahan Hogio Abdal hassan Mirza Gaysbey Mirza Shemchadin Mirza Chadulla Seffer Chan kazmy Chan Mirza chin Kelich Saif Chan lalla Bersingdia Mirza zeady Mirza Ally ec^erchuly Terbiat Chan Mirza Laschary Mirza Charucogly Mirza Rustem Ally Merdon Badur Tasbey Chan thirty six thousand officer and stipendary of the Court the Rupia be two shilling sterling some say two shilling and three penny some two shilling and six penny Abulbey the rest be from two thousand downwards till you come to twenty horse two thousand nine hundred and fifty of horseman that receive pay monthly from six horse to one there be five thousand these be call haddy of such officer and man as belong to the court and camp there be thirty six thousand to say porter gunner waterman lackey horse-keeper elephant-keeper small shot frass or tent man cook light bearer gardiners keeper of all kind of beast all these be pay monthly out of the king treasury who wage be from ten to three Rupias all his captain be to maintain at a seven-night warning from twelve thousand to twenty horse all horseman three leek which be three hundred thousand horseman which of the income of their lordship allow they they must maintain the king yearly income of his crown land be fifty Crou of Rupias every Crou be a hundred leek and every leck be a hundred thousand Candahar the compass of his country be two year travel with Carravan to say from Candahar to agra from soughtare in Bengala to agra from Cabul to agra from Decan to agra from surat to agra from tatta in sinde to agra agra be in a manner in the heart of all his kingdom his empire be divide into five great kingdom the first name pengab whereof lahor be the chief seat the second be Bengala the chief seat Sonargham the three be the chief seat be Vgam the four be Decan the chief seat Bramport the five be guzerat the chief seat be Amadavar the chief city or seat royal of the king of India be call del where he be establish king and there all the rite touch his coronation be perform there be six especial castle to say agra Guallier neruer ratamboore Hassier Roughtaz in every one of these castle he have his treasure keep in all his empire there be three arch-enemy or rebel which with all his force can be call in to say Amberry Chapu in Decan in guzerat the son of muzafer that be king his name be Bahador of Raga Rahana his son be five to say sultan Coussero sultan sultan sultan Shariar and sultan bath he have two young daughter and three hundred wife whereof four be chief as queen to say the first name padasha Ba^u daughter to kaime Chan the second be call noore Mahal the daughter of Gais Beijge the three be the daughter of Seinchan the four be the daughter of hakim Hamaun who be brother to his father ecber Padasha his treasure be as follow the first be his several coin of Gold of seraffins Ecberi which be ten Rupias a piece there be sixty leek a tole be a Rupia challany of silver and ten of these toll be the value of one of gold of another sort of coin of a thousand a piece there be twenty thousand piece of another sort of half the value there be ten thousand piece of another sort of gold of twenty toll a piece there be thirty thousand piece of another sort of ten toll a piece there be five and twenty thousand piece of another sort of five toll which be this king stamp of these there be fifty thousand piece of silver as follow of Rupias Ecbery thirteen Crou every be a hundred leek and every leck a hundred thousand Rupias be one thousand three hundred leek of another sort of coin of Selim Shakstone this king of a hundred toll a piece there be fifty thousand piece of fifty toll a piece there be one lecke of thirty toll a piece there be forty thousand piece of twenty toll a piece there be thirty thousand piece of ten toll a piece there be twenty thousand piece of five toll a piece there be five and twenty thousand piece of a certain money that be call Savoy which be a tole @ of these there be two leek of jagary whereof five make six toll there be one lecke more shall have be coin of this stamp but the contrary be command here follow of his jewel of all sort of Diamantes 1 @ Battman these be rough of all sort and size great and small but no less than 2. @ carat the Battman be fifty five pound weight which make eighty two pound @ weight English of ballast ruby little and great good and bad there be single two thousand piece of pearl of all sort there be twelve battman eshime a precious stone come from Cathaya of ruby of all sort there be two battman of emerald of all sort five battman of eshime which stone come from Cathaia one Battman of stone of eman which be a red stone there be five thousand piece of all other sort as coral topass etc. there be a infinite number here follow of the jewel wrought in Gold of sword of Almain blade with the hilt and scabbard set with diverse sort of rich stone of the rich sort there be two thousand and two hundred of two sort of poniard there be two thousand of saddle drum which they use in their hawk of these there be very rich one of gold set with stone five hundred of brooch for their head whereinto their feather be put these be very rich and of they there be two thousand of saddle of gold and silver set with stone there be one thousand of teuke there be five and twenty this be a great lance cover with gold and the Fluke set with stone and these in stead of their colour be carry when the king go to the war of these there be five and twenty of kittasole of state for to shadow he there be twenty none in his empire dare in any sort have any of these carry for his shadow but himself of these I say there be twenty of chair of estate there be five to say three of silver and two of gold and of other sort of chair there be a hundred of silver and gold in all a hundred and five of rich glass there be two hundred of vase for wine very fair and rich set with jewel there be a hundred of drink cup five hundred but fifty very rich that be to say make of one piece of ballast ruby and also of emerods of Eshim of turkish stone and of other sort of stone of chain of pearl and chain of all sort of precious stone eshin stone of cathay and ring with jewel of rich diamond ballast ruby ruby and old emerods there be a infinite number which only the keeper thereof know of all sort of plate as dish cup basin pot beaker of silver wrought there be two thousand battman of gold wrought there be one thousand battman here follow of all sort of beast of horse there be twelve thousand whereof there be of persian horse four thousand or Kasimir of Turkey horse six thousand and of kismire two thousand all be twelve thousand of elephant there be twelve thousand whereof five thousand be tooth elephant and seven thousand of she once and young one which be twelve thousand of camel there be two thousand of ox for the cart and all other service there be ten thousand of moil there be one thousand of deer like buck for game and sport there be three thousand of ounce for game there be four hundred of dog for hunt as greyhound and other there be four hundred of lion tame there be a hundred of buffalaes there be five hundred of all sort of hawk there be four thousand of pigeon for sport of fly there be ten thousand of all sort of sing bird there be four thousand of armour of all sort at a hour warning in a readiness to arm five and twenty thousand man his daily expense for his own person that be to say for feed of his cattle of all sort and among they some few elephant royal and all other expense particular as apparel victual and other petty expense for his house amount to fifty thousand Rupias a day the expense da^ly for his woman by the day be thirty thousand all this write concern his treasure expense and monthly pay be in his court or castle of agra and every one of the castle above nominate have their several treasure especial lahor which be not mention the custom of this mogoll emperor be to take possession of his nobleman treasure when they die and to bestow on his child what he please but common he deal well with they the mogoll heir to every man possess they with their father land divide it among they and unto the elder son he have a very great respect who in time receive the full title of his father there be in my time a great indian lord or prince a gentile name Raga Gaginat upon who good the king seize after his death Raga Gaginat his wealth he be find beside jewel and other treasure to have sixty maune in gold and every Maune be five and fifty pound weight also his custom be that of all sort of treasure except coin to say of all sort of beast and all other thing of value a small quantity be daily bring before he all thing be several divide into three hundred and sixty part daily survey of the king wealth so that he daily fee a certain number to say of elephant horse camel dromedary moil ox and all other as also a certain quantity of jewel and so it continue all the year long for what be bring he to day be not see again till that day twelve month he have three hundred elephant royal which be elephant whereon himself ride and when they be bring before he elephant royal they come with great jollity have some twenty or thirty man before they with small streamer the elephant cloth or cover be very rich either of cloth of gold or rich velvet he have follow he his she elephant his whelp or whelp and four or five young one as page which will be in number some six some seven and some eight or nine these elephant and other cattle be disperse among his noble and man of sort to oversee they the king allow they for their expense a certain quantity but some of they will eat a great deal more than their allowance come unto these elephant royal eat ten Rupias every day in sugar butter graine and sugar cane these elephant be the goodly and fair of all the rest and tame withal so manage that I see with my eye when the king command one of his young son name shariar a child of seven year of age to go to the elephant to be take up by he with his snout who do so deliver he to his keeper that command he with his hook and have do this unto the king son he afterward do the like to many other child when these elephant be show if they who have the charge of they bring they lean then be they check and in disgrace unless their excuse be the better and so it be with all thing else in that kind that every man strive to bring his quantity in good like although he spend of his own when he ride on progress or hunt the compass of his tent may be as much as the compass of London and more the king tent as large in compass as London and I may say that of all sort of people that follow the camp there be two hundred thousand for he be provide as for a city this king be think to be the great emperor of the east for wealth land and force of man as also for horse elephant camel and dromedary as for elephant of his own and of his noble forty thousand elephant there be forty thousand of which the one half be train elephant for the war and these elephant of all beast be the most understanding I think good here to set down this one thing which be report to i for a certainty although it seem very strange a elephant have iourny very hard be on his travel be misuse by his commander and one day find the fellow asleep by he but out of his reach have green cane bring he to eat split the end of one of they with his tooth and take the other end of the cane with his snout reach it towards the head of the fellow who be fast asleep and his turban fall from his head the use of India be to wear their hair long like woman he take hold with the cane on his hair wreathe it therein and withal hale he unto he until he bring he within the compass of his snout he then present kill he many other strange thing be do by elephant he have also infinite number of dromedary which be very swift to come with great speed to give assault to any city as this king father do dromedary swiftness from agra to Amadavar in nine day so that the enemy think he have be in agra when he be at Amadavar and he come from agra thither in nine day upon these dromedary with twelve thousand choice man chan-channa be then his general the day be appoint for the battle on a sudden news come of the king arrival which strike such a present fear into the guzerats that at that time they be overthrow and conquer this king have diminish his chief captain which be rasboote or gentile and natural indian and have prefer the mahometans weak spirit man void of resolution in such sort that what this man father call ecber Padasha get of the decans this king Selimsha begin to loose he have a few good captain yet remain Selim rebellion who his father high esteem although they be out of favour with he because that upon his rebellion against his father they will not assist he consider his intent be naught for he mean to have shorten his father day and before his time to have come to the crown and to that purpose be in attabase the regal seat of a kingdom call porub he arise with eighty thousand horse intend to take agra and to have possession of the treasury his father be then at the war of Decan who understand of his son pretence leave his conquer there and make haste to come home to save his own before the king departure to the war he give order to his son to go with his force upon Aranna that great rebel in * * or rabanne who come to parley with this rebel he tell the prince that there be nothing to be get by he but blow and it be better for he now his father be at Decan to go upon agra and possess himself of his father treasure and make himself king for there be no man able to resist he the prince follow his counsel and will have prosecute it but his father haste before upon notice give prevent his purpose at who arrival at agra he present send unto his son that he make choice either to come and fall at his foot and be at his mercy to do with he as he please or to fit himself for the battle and fight it out he well consider the valour of his father think it meet to submit himself and stand to his father mercy who after affront show he and imprisonment be soon release and pardon by reason of many friend his mother sister and other this Selim Padasha be in his rebellion his father dispossess he and proclaim heir apparent his elder son Cossero be elder son to Selimsha sultan Cossero proclaim for his own son young brother to Selim be all dead in Decan and guzerat yet short after his father die who in his deathbed have mercy on Selim possess he again but Cossero who be proclaim heir apparent stomach his father and rise with great troop yet be not able to endure after the loss of many thousand man on both side but be take and remain still in prison in the king palace yet blind as all man report and be so command to be blind by his father so since that time be now eight year after he be not blind and be since as you shall see in sir tho. roe relation deliver out of prison he have command to put all his son confederate to death with sundry kind of death some to be hang some spit some to have their head chap off and some to be tear by elephant since which time he have reign in quiet but ill belove of the great part of his subject who stand great in fear of he his custom be every year to be out two month on hunt as be before specify when he mean to begin his journey if come forth of his palace he get up on a horse it be a sign that he go for the war but if he get up upon a elephant or Palankine it will be but a hunt voyage myself in the time that I be one of his courtier have see many cruel deed do by he five time a week he command his brave elephant to fight before he cruel execution and in the time of their fight either come or go out many time man be kill or dangerous hurt by these elephant but if any be grievous hurt which may very well escape yet neverlesse that man be cast into the river himself command it say dispatch he for as long as he live he will do nothing else but curse i and therefore it be better that he die present I have see many in this kind again he delight to see man execute himself and tear in piece with elephant he put to death in my time his secretary only upon suspicion that chan-channa shall write unto the Decan king who be send for and examine about this matter deny it whereupon the king not have patience arise from his seat and with his sword give he his deadly wound and afterward deliver he to be tear by elephant severity likewise it happen to one who be a great friend of i a chief man have under his charge the king wardrobe and all woollen cloth and all sort of mercery and his China dish that a fair China dish which cost ninety Rupias or forty five rial of eight be break in this my friend time by a mischance when the king be in his progress be pack among other thing on a camel which fall and break all the whole parcel this nobleman know how dear the king love this dish above the rest present send one of his trusty servant to china-machina china-machina over land to seek for another hope that before he shall remember that dish he will return with another like unto it but his evil luck be contrary for the king two year after remember this dish and his man be not yet come now when the king hear that the dish be break he be in a great rage command he to be bring before he and to be beat by two man with two great whip make of cord and after that he have receive one hundred and twenty of these lash he command his porter who be appoint for that purpose to beat he with their small cudgel till a great many of they be break at the least twenty man be beat of he till the poor man be think to be dead and then he be hale out by the heel and command to prison the next day the king demand whether he be live answer be make that he be whereupon he command he to be carry unto perpetual prison but the king son be his friend free he of that and obtain of his father that he may be send home to his own house and th^re be cure so after two month he be reasonable well recover and come before the king who present command he to depart the court and never come again before he until he have find such a like dish china-machina and that he travel for china-machina to seek it the king allow he five thousand Rupias towards his charge and beside return one four part of his live that he have before to maintain he in his travel he be depart and fourteen month on his travel be not yet come home but news come of he that the king of Persia have the like dish and for pity sake have send it he who at my departure be on his way homeward likewise in my time it happen that a Pattan a man of good stature come to one of the king son name sultan to entreat he to bestow somewhat on he by petition deliver to one of the prince chief man sultan at the delivery whereof the prince cause he to come near and demand of he whether he will serve he he answer no for he think that the prince will not grant he so much as he will ask the prince see he to be a pretty fellow and mean apparel smile demand what will content he he tell he plain that he will neither serve his father nor he under a thousand a day which be 100 pound sterling proud demand the prince ask he what be in he that he demand so much he reply make trial of i with all sort of weapon either on horseback or on foot and for my sufficient command in the war if I do not perform as much as I speak let i die for it the hour be come for the prince to go to his father he give over his talk command the man to be forth come at night the king custom be to drink the prince perceive his father to be merry tell he of this man so the king command he to be bring before he now while he be send for a wild lion be bring in a very great one strong chain and lead by a dozen man and keeper and while the king be view this lion the Pattan come in at who sight the prince present remember his father the king demand of this Pattan whence he be and of what parentage and what valour be in he that he shall demand so much wage his answer be that the king shall make trial of he that I will say the king go wrestle and buffet with this Lyon the pattan answer be cruel command that this be a wild beast and to go bare upon he without weapon will be no trial of his manhood the king not regard his speech command he to buckle with the lion who do so wrestle and buffet with the lion a pretty while and then the lion be loose from his keeper but not from his chain get the poor man within his claw and tear his body in many part and with his paw tear the one half of his face so that this valiant man be kill by this wild beast the king not yet content but desirous to see more sport send for ten man that be of his horseman in pay be that night on the watch for it be the custom of all those that receive pay or live from the king to watch once a week none except bloody experiment if they be well and in the city these man one after another be to buffet with the lion who be all grievous wound and it cost three of they their life the king continue three month in this vain when he be in his humour for who pleasure sake many man lose their life and many be grievous wound so that ever after until my come away some fifteen young lion be make tame and play one with another before the king frisk between man leg and no man hurt in a long time likewise he can abide that any man shall have any precious stone of value for it be death if he know it not at that present time jewel and gem and that he have the refusal thereof his jeweller a bannian name Herranand have buy a diamond of three mettegal which cost one hundred thousand Rupias which be not so close do but news come to the king Herranand likewise be befriend be present acquaint therewith who before the king send for he come unto he and challenge the king that he have often promise he that he will come to his house the king answer that it be true Herranand therefore reply that now be the time costly entertainment for that he have a fair present to bestow upon his majesty for that he have buy a stone of such a weight the king smile and say thy luck be good to prevent i so preparation be make and to the bannians house he go by this mean the king have engross all fair stone that no man can buy from five carat upward without his leave for he have the refusal of all and give not by a three part so much as their value there be a diamant cutter of my acquaintance that be send for to cut a diamant of three mettegal and a half who demand a small foul diamant to make powder wherewith to cut the other diamant a inestimable rich coffer of diamond they bring he a chest as he say of three span long and a span and half broad and a span and half deep full of diamond of all size and sort yet can he find never any one for his purpose but one of five which be not very foul neither he be exceed rich in diamond and all other precious stone and usual wear every day a fair diamant of great price and that which he wear this day till his time be come about to wear it again he wear not the same that be to say all his fair jewel be divide into a certain quantity or proportion to wear every day he also wear a chain of pearl very fair and great and another chain of emerald and ballast ruby he have another jewel that come round about his turban full of fair diamond and ruby it be not much to be wonder that he be so rich in jewel and in gold and silver cause of so great wealth when he have heap together the treasure and jewel of so many king as his forefather have conquer who likewise be a long time in gather they together and all come to his hand again all the money and jewel which his noble heap together when they die come all unto he who give what he list to the nobleman wife and child and this be do to all they that receive pay or live from the King India be rich in silver for all nation bring coin and carry away commodity for the same and this coin be bury in India and go not out so it be think that once in twenty year it come into the king power all the land in his monarchy be at his dispose who give and take at his pleasure if I have land at lahor those land which be let pay to the king two three of the profit and of those which he give in fee one three remain to the King in all the world be not more fertile land then in some great part of his dominion punishment of coward a chief city call Pattana he call rebel as the mogul do those that refuse subjection though perhaps some of they be free king as this ra^ane or Ranna suppose the true successor of P^^us who Alexander conquer he be now bring or buy rather as they say peaceable to acknowledge tribute to the mogul be send unto the war at Decan another have the land and I be to receive i in Decan or thereabouts near the place where I be whether it be in the war or that I be send about any other business for any other country and man be to look well unto their do for if they be find tardy in never so little a matter they be in danger of lose their land and if complaint of injustice which they do be make unto the king it be well if they escape with loss of their land he be very severe in such cause and with all severity punish those captain who suffer outlaw to give assault unto their city without resist in my time there be some eight captain who have their live upon ^he border of Bengala in a chief city call Pattana which be suffer to be take by outlaw and they all flee but that city be again restore by a great captain who be commander of a country near thereabouts who take all those captain that flee and send they to the king to use punishment upon they at his pleasure so they be bring before the king in chain and be present command to be shave both head and beard and to wear woman apparel ride upon ass with their face backward and so carry about the city this be do they be bring before the king again and there whip and send to perpetual prison and this punishment be inflict upon they in my sight he be severe enough but all help not for his poor riat or clown complain of injustice do they and cry for justice at the king hand they come to a certain place where a long rope be fasten unto two pillar near unto the place where the king sit in Iustice this rope be hang full of bell plate with gold so that the rope be shake the bell be hear by the king who send to know the cause and do his justice according at his first come to the crown he be more severe than now he be which be the cause that the country be so full of outlaw and thief that almost a man can stir out of door throughout all his dominion without great force for they be all become rebel there be one great ragane betwixt agra and Amadanar who command as much land as a good kingdom and all the force the mogul have can bring he in for his force be upon the mountain he be twenty thousand strong in horse and fifty thousand strong in foot and many of these rebel be in all his dominion but this be one of the great there be many rise at Candahar Cabul Moldun and sinde and in the kingdom of Boloch Bengala likewise Decan and guzerat be full so that a man can travel no way for outlaw their government be in such a barbarous kind and cruel exact upon the clown which cause they to be so headstrong the fault be in the chief for a man can continue half a year in his live but it be take from he and give unto another or else the king take it for himself if it be rich ground and likely to yield much make exchange for a worse place or as he be befriend of the by this mean he rack the poor to get from they what he can who still think every hour to be put out of his place but there be many who continue a long time in one place and if they remain but six year their wealth which they gain be infinite if it be a thing of any sort the custom be they be allow so much live to maintain that port which the king have give they that be to say they be allow twenty Rupias of every horse by the month and two Rupias by the month for every horse fame for the maintenance of their table as thus a captain that have five thousand horse to maintain in the war have likewise of fame other five thousand which he be not to maintain in the war but only for his table allow upon every horse by the month two Rupias and the other five thousand twenty Rupias by the month and this be the pay which the great part of they be allow now here I mean to speak a little of his manner and custom in the Court first in the morning about the break of day the great mogul his devotion some suppose he author of a new sect he be at his bead with his face turn to the westward the manner of his pray when he be in agra be in a private fair room upon a goodly jet stone have only a persian lambskin under he have also some eight chain of bead every one of they contain four hundred the bead be of rich pearl ballast ruby diamond ruby emerald aloe Eshem and coral at the upper end of this jet stone the picture of our lady and Christ be place grave in stone so he turn over his bead and say three thousand two hundred word according to the number of his bead and then his prayer be end after he have do he show himself to the people receive their salame or good morrow unto who multitude resort every morning for this purpose this do he sleep two hour more the great mogul spend his time and then dine and pass his time with his woman and at noon he show himself to the people again sit till three of the clock view and see his pastime and sport make by man and fight of many sort of beast every day sundry kind of pastime then at three of the clock all the noble in general that be in agra and be well resort unto the court the king come forth in open audience sit in his seat-royal and every man stand in his degree before he the red rail his chief sort of the noble stand within a red rail and the rest without they be all place by his lieutenant general this red rail be three step high than the place where the rest stand and within this red rail I be place among the chief of all the rest be place by officer and they likewise be within a other very spacious place rail and without that rail stand all sort of horseman and soldier that belong unto his captain and all other comer at these rail there be many door keep by many porter who have white rod to keep man in order in the midst of the place right before the king stand one of his sheriff together with his master hangman who be accompany with forty hangman wear on their head a certain quilt cap different from all other with a hatchet on their shoulder and other with all sort of whip be there ready to do what the king command the king hear all cause in this place and stay some two hour every day these king of India sit daily in justice every day and on the tuesday do their execution then he depart towards his p^^uate place of prayer his prayer be end four or five sort of very well dress and roast meat be bring he of which as he please he eat a bit to stay his stomach drink once of his strong drink then he come forth into a private room where none can come but such as himself nominate for two year together I be one of his attendant here captain Hawkins two year together near about the great mogul in this place he drink other five cup-fuls which be the portion that the physician allot he this do he eat opium and then he arise and be in the height of his drink he lay he down to sleep every man depart to his own home and after he have sleep two hour they awake he and bring his supper to he at which time he be not able to feed himself but it be thrust into his mouth by other and this be about one of the clock and then he sleep the rest of the night now in the space of these six cup he do many idle thing and whatsoever he do either without or within drunken or sober he have writer who by turn set down every thing in write which he do so that there be nothing pass in his life time which be not note no not so much as his go to the necessary and how often he lie with his woman and with who and all this be do unto this end that when he die these writing of all his action and speech the mogul make his brother child christian this christianity be since disclaim and be then but a trick rather of sensuality than of devotion or state which be worthy to be set down may be record in the chronicle at my be with he he make his brother child christian the do whereof be not for any zeal he have to christianity as the father and all christian think but upon the prophecy of certain learned gentile who tell he that the son of his body shall be disinherit and the child of his brother shall reign and therefore he do it to make these child hateful to all moor as christian be odious in their sight and that they be once christian when any such matter shall happen they shall find no subject but God be omnipotent and can turn the make of these christian unto a good end if it be his pleasure this king among his child have one call sultan shariar of seven year of age and his father on a day be to go some whether to solace himself demand of he whether he will go with he the child answer that if it please his highness he will either go or stay as the pleasure of his father be but because his answer be not that withal his heart he will wait upon his majesty he be very well buffet by the king and that in such sort that no child in the world but will have cry which this child do not wherefore his father demand why he cry not he answer that his nurse tell he that it be the great shame in the world for prince to cry when they be beat and ever since they nurture i in this kind say he I never cry and nothing shall make i cry to the death upon which speech his father be more vex strike he again and cause a bodkin to be bring he which he thrust through his cheek but all this will not make he cry although he bleed very much which be admire of all that the father shall do this unto his child and that he be so stou^ that he will not cry there be great hope of this child to exceed all the rest this emperor keep many feast in the year^ but two feast especial may be nominate two feast the one call the no^^ous which be in honour of the new-year day this feast continue eighteen day and the wealth and riches be wonderful that be to be see in the deck and set forth of every man room or place where he lodge when it be his turn to watch for every nobleman have his place appoint he in the palace in the midst of that spacious place I speak of there be a rich yent pitch but so rich a exceed rich tent. that I think the like can be find in the world this tent be curious wrought and have many Seminans join round about it of most curious wrought velvet embroider with gold and many of they be of cloth of gold and silver these Seminans be shadow to keep the sun from the compass of this tent. I may say it be at the least two acre of ground but so rich spread with silk and gold carpet and hang in the principal place rich as rich velvet embroider with gold pearl and precious stone can make it within it five chair of estate be place most rich to behold where at his pleasure the king sit there be likewise private room make for his queen most rich where they sit and see all but be not see so round about this tent the compass of all may be some five acre of ground every principal nobleman make his room and deck it likewise every man according to his ability strive who may adorn his room rich the king where he do affect come to his nobleman room and be most sumptuous feast there and at his departure be present with the rare jewel and toy that they can find but because he will not receive any thing at that time as a present he command his treasurer to pay what his praiser value they to be worth which be value at half the price every one and all of his noble provide toy and rare thing to give he at this feast so common at this feast every man his estate be augment two day of this feast the better sort of the woman come to take the pleasure thereof and this feast begin at the begin of the moon of March the other feast be some four month after which be call the feast of his birthday the feast of his birthday this day every man strive who may be the rich in apparel and jewel after many sport and pastime perform in his palace he go to his mother house with all the better sort of his noble where every man present a jewel unto his mother according to his estate after the banquet be end the king go into a very fair room where a balance of beat gold be hang with one scale empty for he to sit in the other scale be fill with diverse thing that be to say silver gold diverse sort of grain a little and so of every kind of mettle a little and with all sort of precious stone some in fine he weigh himself with these thing which the next day be give to the poor and all may be value to be worth * * see hereof sir thom. roe ten thousand pound this day before he go unto his mother house every man bring he his present which be think to be ten time more worth then that which he give to the poor this do every man depart unto his home his custom be that when you petition he for any thing you must not come empty hand but give he some toy or other whether you write or no by the gift you give he he know that you will demand some thing of he so after enquiry be make if he see it convenient he grant it the custom of the indian be to burn their dead as you have read in other author and at their burn many of their wife will burn with they voluntary burn of woman with their dead husband because they will be register in their book for famous and most modest and love wife who leave all worldly affair content themselves to live no long than their husband I have see many proper woman bring before the king who by his commandment none may burn without his leave and sight of they I mean those of agra when any of these come he do persuade they with many promise of gift and live if they will live but in my time no persuasion can prevail but burn they will the king see that all will not serve give his leave for she to be carry to the fire where she burn herself alive with her dead husband likewise his custom be when any great nobleman have be absent from he two or three year if they come in favour and have perform well he receive they in manner and form follow first the nobleman stay at the gate of the palace till the and lieutenant general and knight Martial come to accompany he unto the king favourable entertainment of the then he be bring to the gate of the outermost rail whereof I have speak before where he stand in the view of the king in the midst between these two noble then he touch the ground with his hand and also with his head very grave and do thus three time this do he kneel down touch the ground with his forehead which be once do he be carry forward towards the king and in the midway he be make to do this reverence again then he come to the door of the red rail do the like reverence the three time and have thus do he come within the red rail and do it once more upon the carpet then the king command he to come up the stair or ladder of seven step that he may embrace he where the king most love embrace he before all the people whereby they shall take notice that he be in the king favour the king have do this he than come down and be place by the lieutenant general according to his degree now if he come in disgrace through exclamation make against he he have none of these honour from the king but be place in his place till he come to his trial this king be very much adore of the heathen commonalty insomuch that they will spread their body all upon the ground rub the earth with their face on both side they use many other foppery and superstition which I omit leave they for other traveller which shall come from thence hereafter after I have write this there come into my memory another feast solemnize at his father funeral funeral feast or obit for his father which be keep at his sepulchre where likewise himself with all his posterity mean to be bury upon this day there be great store of victual dress and much money give to the poor this sepulchre may be count one of the rare monument of the world it have be this fourteen year a building and it be think it will not be finish these seven year more in end gate and wall and other needful thing for the beautify and set of it forth the least that work there daily be three thousand people but thus much I will say sumptuous sepulchre that one of our workman will dispatch more than three of they the sepulchre be some @ of a mile about make square it have seven height build every height narrow than the other till you come to the top where his hearse be at the outermost gate before you come to the sepulchre there be a most stately palace building the compass of the wall join to this gate of the sepulchre and guard be within may be at the least three mile this sepulchre be some four mile distant from the city of agra chap. 8 the voyage of Mr DAVID MIDDLETON in the consent a ship of one hundred and fifteen tun which fall forth from Tilburie hope on the twelve of march 1606. the 16. of july 1607. we anchor in the road of Saldania all our man in good health only Peter Lambert the day before fall off the top-most head whereof he die the one and twenty the captain and master go to Pengwin island three league distant from the road where we see such abundance of seal and pengwin that it be admirable for you may drive five hundred pengwin together in a flock and thousand of seal together upon the shore the island be not above some three mile long and some two mile broad but in my opinion there be not a island in the world more frequent with fowl and seales then this island it have pengwin wild-goose duck drake and pelican and diverse other fowl and after some pleasure take there we return again unto our ship have buy some cattle and end all our business and our man well refresh we weigh anchor the nine and twenty day about four of the clock in the morning with very little wind and come out of the road of Saldania our man in very good health and loath to depart without the company of our admiral and vice-admiral but we be not certain of their arrival there which make we make so little stay so direct our course for s. Laurence we leave Saldania the thirty day calm all day till three of the clock in the afternoon and then we have a fresh gale at south-west and we steer away half a watch south and by west and two watch and a half southeast and at ten of the clock at night the cape Bona Esperansa bare north of we and all that night blow very much wind and the sea much grow and the ship come betwixt twelve of the clock at night and twelve of the clock next day be the one and thirty of july nine and twenty league all this day a very pleasant gale sometime rain we come four league from the cape August 1. 1607 cape agullis north fifty five fathom the first of August we have very fair weather sometime a gale and sometime calm continue so all day and we steer away two watch southeast and by east and three watch at east and by south the wind variable sometime at south and sometime at south by east dark weather and she run some one and twenty league than we be in five and thirty degree and twenty two minute of height the seven and twenty of August the wind at northwest and we steer away east and by south and at two of the clock we see the land of s. Laurence or Madagascar by estimation some six league off and then we steer away north and by west and at noon we observe and make the ship to be in twenty four degree and forty minute the variation at night sixteen degree and twenty three minute the thirty at five of the clock in the afternoon we anchor in the bay of s. Augustine in six fathom and a half great gravel and we be enforce to go to lee-ward bay of s. Augustine be to the roome-ward of the road before we can get in by reason of a great breach that lie off the bay and then come in close upon a tack and have in come in seven six and a half and five fathom all the way and come very fair by the breach and rid in the road with two land in the wind of we and the breach both the one and thirty day our captain with m. davis go in our long boat to view the land and I myself as we go sound close aboard the breach and have six fathom one of the land be very small as it be a bank of sand and nothing on it the other be about a mile in length and half a mile in breadth and nothing upon it but some small store of wood. the first of September 1607. we weigh anchor from our first place and come within two mile of the mouth of the river and rid in five fathom and a half very fast ground for where we ride before it be very foul ground so that we break one of our cable in the weigh I judge it to be some three league from our first place where we have urey foul ground the seven day have end all our business be provide of wood and water and all thing else we weigh anchor in the morning about five of the clock a mark on shore most like a barn or a long house with the wind at east and by north a pleasant gale and we steer away come out west and west and by north till we be clear of the breach and we bring to sea with we four goat three sheep and a young heifer here we find great plenty of victual both sheep and beef for little value this day we observe some three mile from the island before the bay of s. Augustine and we make it to be in twenty three degree and forty eight minute of latitude and after we be clear of the breach which lie to the northward of the island we steer away south Southwest and south and by west sometime with very fair weather the wind at southeast and by east a pleasant gale the eleven a fresh gale at southeast and southeast and by east and we stand into the shore till midnight and then we see a great breach right a head hard by we but we hear the rut before we see it God be praise and so we tackd and stand off again present and at noon observe and make the ship to be in twenty five degree and twenty two minute of latitude the twelve of November in the morning we see a island and stand to make it and find it to be Ingana and come to the north-side of it the island be in length five league or thereabot it lie east and by south and west and by north the easter end be the high land and the wester end be full of tree it lie in latitude in five degree and a half and the variation be four degree and thirteen minute so after we have make it have the wind at west northwest we steer away for the main of sumatra east and by south and east southeast a pleasant gale but very much rain so the thirteen day in the morning Novemb. 13. 1607. we see the main land of sumatra some four league from we the fourteen we anchor in Bantam roade about four of the clock in the afternoon be Saturday where we find the merchant in very good health and all thing in good order the next day our captain go on shore and speak with m. Towerson concern the ship business and agree to have our iron and lead a shore which we bring with we which be effect with some roomage and have fit our ship in good order and take in merchandise and our merchant for the with leave take of the merchant we set sail from Bantam ride the six of December 1607. with little wind and come out of the road decemb. 6. 1607. and anchor that night in sight of the high land of Bantam the next day weigh in the morning and sail with a prosperous wind still continue fair pass many land and sink ground some night we sail and othersome lay a hull rain thunder and lightning be no strange thing to we in those part but one comfort we have that God give we a fair wind wherewith we sail merry on our intend voyage in the begin of januarie they arrive at the the rest of this month be spend in entertainment and compliment betwixt we and the spaniard as likewise with the moluccan prince so be the whole month of February also the reason be the spaniard dare not admit we trade till the camp master have give leave and he in those broil betwixt he and the hollander except we will do or seem to do some piece of service at least accompany their ship for great show which our captain absolute refuse be against his commission excuse himself mean while they have privy trade with the people by night and be jovial and frolic by day with the spaniard which both give and receive kind welcome in the begin of march they be permit open trade but this within few day be countermand and we command to be go and thus they spend the time till march the fourteen when they weigh anchor and set sail some trade they have also in the way this part of the journal be long and I have omit it as elsewhere in those thing which I think may be tedious the three and twenty 1608. we enter the straits of Bangaya whereunto have enter march 23. 1608. straits of Bangaya our captain determine to send off his long boat to seek for water for here he purpose to store himself therewith while he be thus determine there come a praw off from the island with all the speed he can make who come unto we and speak with we of who we demand whether there be any fresh water in that island who make answer that if our captain please he will bring we to very good water whereupon we stand over for the east shore and anchor about one of the clock in the afternoon in sixty fathom of water where there run a most cruel current then after we come to anchor fit our long boat with cask we go with the indian to fetch water where while they be fit the boat he sell some fresh fish for China dish very cheap so at night our man come aboard and bring very good water but have a wearisome rowth of it be five mile distant from the place where we anchor the four and twenty in the morning we go again for a other boat lade of water and this morning by day break there come of the country people above one hundred prawe man and woman and bring we fish both dry fish and fresh fish very good of both kind great plenty and very cheap they bring we also hog great and small which they sell we for course white cloth and hen and cock in abundance at the like price some for China dish and some for cloth they bring we also fruit as Cassathoe root and diverse other fruit and stay aboard we all day that sometime we be not able to stir up and down the ship for they in the afternoon the king send our captain some and Irea to drink which be a kind of water call by that name our captain give the messenger great thanks in his king behalf and to requite his kindness send he a rich Pintado then he depart and all the rest and about ten of the clock at night we weigh anchor and in the weigh we break both our starboard anchor flook then sail away with very little wind at length man our long boat and tow our ship all night for if we have not tow she in this calm we have be drive to lee-ward more than we shall have get again in three day without a fresh gale of wind the current run so strong there the nineteen of April the king of Buttone send one of his brother again to know whether our captain be willing he shall come aboard king of Buttone for he be very desirous to see both he and our ship because he have hear much of englishman but never see any our captain send he word that he shall think himself much grace if he come present the king come off in his Caricoll row at least with a hundred oar have in she beside about four hundred man with arm^s well appoint to fight and six brass piece and in her company five caricol more which have at the least a thousand man in they so our captain send according to his demand a pledge for he one Francis Kelly which be our surgeon then he come aboard our captain who kind entertain he and entreat he to take part of a banquet of sweet meat which he kind accept and after the banquet end our captain demand what he have to sell who reply he have pearl and Turtell shell and some cloth which they make themselves which as we think be make of Cotton strip then our captain entreat to see some of his pearl who say he have none there for he come but upon pleasure not think to have meet with any ship but if it please he to go with his ship to Buttone which be some night and a day sail thence he shall see great store of pearl and any thing that he have to sell. and because say he the place be unknown to you I will send you a pilot which shall bring you thither our captain and factor consider of his speech think best to accept of his kind offer in regard it be nothing out of the way to Bantam and bestow upon he a musket a sword and a Pintado thank he for his kindness that he will vouchsafe to come aboard his ship to who the king make answer that he have not any now worth the give to bestow upon our captain but promise to requite his kindness before his departure and in the mean time entreat our captain to accept of two piece of their cloth who receive they with many thanks about three of the clock in the afternoon he take his leave of our captain promise present to send we a pilot to carry we to the town of Buttone then we bring the cable to the capstoll and weigh and the pilot come aboard and at night the king send a caricoll unto we to see if we want any thing and to bear we company to Buttone by who he send our captain a goat then we stand away for Buttone with a small gale but at night it be calm and the tide against we and we come to a anchor in two and twenty fathom of water because we will not drive to lee-ward and in the morning weigh again and stand for the town of Buttone the one and twenty about ten of the clock our purser who have be send ashore the day before come aboard again the king of and bring with he hen and and tell we that the indian have carry he unto a king who when he come unto he be very glad to see he because he be the first Englishman that ever he have see at his first come to his house he find he drink and carouse with his noble and round about where he sit all hang about with diverse man head which he before have conquer so after some little sta^ he take his leave and come to the caracoll again and lay all night aboard she this night we anchor in twenty fathom of water the place not half a mile broad the two and twenty in the morning it be very little wind yet we weigh and our long boat tow we through the straits see the tide be with we and she go a head amain so about eleven of the clock we come in sight of the town of Buttone and come to anchor in five and twenty fathom of water some mile and a half from the town where we stay the king come but he come not that might here we send our boat ashore and buy fresh fish for our company the three and twenty about one of the clock in the afternoon the king come up under our stern and with he some forty caracol and row round about we very gallant set forth with his colour and pendant and after this they row towards the town and our captain entertain he with a volley of small shot and all his ordnance and after cause his long boat to be man then accompany with m. siddall and his follower go a shore to the town of Buttone the king likewise entertain our captain with his small shot they go on shore to Buttone and his ordnance affirm that his heart be now at rest see he have see the english nation promise to do our captain all the kindness that in he lay whereat our captain give he humble thanks and for that time take his leave and come aboard and in the morning weigh and stand further into the road and anchor in seven and twenty fathom of water some half a mile from the shore the four and twenty in the morning there come aboard our ship a nokeyday which have a juncke in the road lade with clove which come from Amboyna with who our factor m. siddall talk this javan promise our captain if so he please he shall have all his clove the king entreat our captain to take part of his dinner and to bear with the homely fashion of their country for come into the room where they sit their meat be serve in in great charger make of a kind of wood close cover with clothes thus their meat be set before they the king our captain and m. siddall dine together where we have great cheer and our drink be jera very pleasant and sweet in taste and the king be very merry and after dinner he have some talk concern the clove which we shall have and promise the next day to come aboard himself or send some one of his attendant to see a muster of all his cloth then our captain give he great thanks and take his leave and come aboard the five and twenty the king uncle come aboard of we to see our ship where our captain kind entertain he and after he come the king brother and stay dinner with our captain and after take his leave we still expect the king come but he come not himself but send his son and the pilot and they have a view of the cloth and like it very well the six and twenty the king and his son come aboard and dine with our captain and have great cheer and the king be very merry and much desire dance whereupon some of our man dance before he who be well please both at their dance and music at night the king uncle send our captain four fat hog the seven and twenty there be another king of a island thereby which come in his caracoll and his wife with he who view our ship but we can not entreat he to come aboard our ship be lade to the full with clove buy in this place of the javan the ship full lade with clove our captain buy some slave of the king and as we be busy this night one of they steal out of our captain cabin door and leap into the sea and swim ashore and be never hear of then our captain the next morning send Augustine spalding our jurabassa to certify the king of his escape and in what manner who present make restitution for it and give he another and then take leave of the king come aboard may the second we proceed for our intend and wish port of Bantam and give the town of Buttone three piece of ordnance for a farewell the three we have sight of the straits of celebe and stand into it with all the sail we can make but can not get so near before night approach may the two and twenty we anchor in the road of Bantam we find not one christian ship there but four China juncke which come from China as their use be with taffeta dammaske satin and diverse other merchandise july the fifteen 1608. the captain and merchant have end all their business take their leaf after who departure we present set sail out of the road of Bantam now find homeward to our native country England after our long and tedious voyage and to avoid the reader like long and tedious voyage the rest of this voyage homeward be omit and in steed thereof we have set down a table of the journal of this ship from the lizard to Bantam as it be set forth by John davis chap. 9 a brief narration of the four voyage to the east-indies with the two good ship the ascension be admiral and the union vice-admiral under the command of ALEXANDER SHARPEY general and richard rowles lieutenant general with the discovery of the redde-sea in the ascension @. i. relation of the say voyage write by THOMAS JONES in a unfortunate hour the fourteen day of march in the year of our lord 1607. with the two tall ship the ascension and the union we weigh anchor at Woolwich the six of may 1608. have spend some day in refresh our man at maio we direct our course for the pass of the equinoctial and so for the cape of Bona Speranza southeast and by south and south southeast the equinoctial we pass very speedy and then you have the general wind that blow continual between the southeast and southeast and by east so that the further you sail to the southward you shall find the wind to easter the more as between the equinoctial and the tropic of Capricorn Palma a carack the eleven day of june in the latitude of six and twenty degree be under the tropic we meet with a carrack that be find for India her name be the nave Palma this carrack be cast away afterward upon the coast of Soffala within twelve league of mosambike the capt. hereof come home in a carack the captain of which say ship come passenger home in the same carrack that I come out of India in be admiral of the fleet of four sail so according to the custom of the sea have spend some compliment in friendly manner we depart from he to follow our voyage the thirteen of july we come to a anchor in the bay of Saldania and stay there unto the five and twenty of September the bay of Saldania in build of a pinnace at which time the westerly monsons have do blow and then the wind blow more between the south and the southeast the five and twenty of September we come out of the bay and the six and twenty of the same month we be encounter with a mighty storm at the south southeast which blow so vehement that we split our fore-corse that night and lose the company of our consort the union and our pinnace call the good hope which we have build at the foresay cape and never hear of they afterward only the pinnace except which come to we to aden in the red-sea thus with contrary wind have before neglect our season of time we beat up and down the sea in follow our voyage unto the eighteen day of November before we can get the great island of s. Laurence but there we beat two day to get about cape s. Roman but can no^ this alter their mind that they bear up for the island of Comora Comora which stand betwixt the island of s. Laurence and the main in the southerly latitude of eleven degree the six and twenty day of October we come to a anchor on the westerside of the island in six and thirty fathom water here we be use of the king and people with all the kindness that may be but can get no fresh water yet have marvelous good refresh of limb and some hen and Coco nut which be a great comfort unto we the last day of the say month we weigh anchor and depart from the island of Comora and direct our course for the island of zanzibar mind there to relieve our want of water but through the default of our master we over-shot the island of zanzibar and fall with the island of Pemba have almost run ashore in the night before we do see it the wind be by the east north-east we cast about and stand off till day think it to be the island zanzibar when it be day we find a place on the southside of the island have a ledge of rock to the eastward of we here we ride in seven or eight fathom water be the seven day of December the latitude of the place be six degree to the southward be the south-west end of the island the eight of the say month I go ashore to seek for water of which we can not fill above six tun a day we ply our business with great recourse of the people and familiarity with we but all be in treachery have almost do our business and only lack some four or five ton of water to fill be the eighteen day I go ashore to fill those empty cask with water where against my come they have lay a ambush of some two hundred man which break out upon we yet praise be God treacherous people we do escape their hand only my servant John Harington except who they take and murder most cruel I not be able to rescue he also they wound a servant of John Elmors be one of our master mate but the youth recover of his wound be eleven in number also a little before they do put their treachery in practice one of the chief of they come unto i desire i to send one of our man with he to fetch a present for our general which I grant but the fellow never come again the youngman that go be bear in Greenwich his name be Edward churchman who afterward die in Mombasa of a bloudy-fluxe as I be credible inform of the portugal also while we make our abode at Pemba the portugal be about to man a flemish hulk which have winter in Mombasa to come to take our ship but hear of the force of our ship they alter their mind the people of this island o^ Pemba be very cowardly people and dare do nothing of themselves without the incite of the portugal we depart from thence the nineteen day of the say month determine to beat up between Pemba and the main of Melinda Melinda in hope to find the current the strong but that night to our great dismay we come aground upon the coast of Melinda but at that very instant the wind do lander so that with the back of our sail a stern our ship go off to our no little comfort so that night we stand to the eastward till day our ship praise be God have receive no harm at all when it be day we see certain showld that lie off the easter end of Pemba that we can not weather then we cast about and stand to the northward but in the end we have sight of three bark of moor which in their language they call pangay which we give chase unto with our ship and boats three pangay take and in the end fetch they up they strike sail without any resistance and with our boat we fetch they all aboard our ship who be in number fifty man or thereabouts these moor have think to have betray our ship as afterward do appear for the chief of they be in the cabin with our master and our chief merchant william revet and myself w revet stab he with his long knife which he have hide privy about he do stab our master Philip grove so sore that we have think he will not have live but contrary to the moor expectation I end his day in the place the rest of the moor likewise that be within the ship do at that very instant put their tragedy in practice in stab of our preacher and one of our merchant but praise be God in a small time we vanquish they all revenge so that there do not escape above five or six at the most to carry news of their fellow be a just revenge for our former wrong for when they do put this wickedness in practice we have not aboard our ship above fifteen or sixteen man at the most all the rest be employ in our boates. afterward I be credible inform by the portugal of the great lamentation which be make for these moor because they be of the chief gentleman of all the coast of Melinda and of the blood royal now after the spoil of these bark we determine to stay no long on the north side of Pemba so we put out of the west-end of the island again determine to beat up for the island of Socotora but the wind hang between the east and east southeast and find small help of the current do altogether frustrate our determination then we determine to stand off to the southward some two hundred or three hundred league think to find the wind at east southeast but here likewise we be frustrate of our hope for in the off we find the wind to hang at the east north-east and at the north-east and by east that we lie beat in the sea from the twenty day of December unto the six and twenty day of january and then it be our good hap to meet with certain land which we name the desolate land the desolate land not desolate of Coco nut and other provision because there be not any inhabitant upon they these land be at the least some twelve or thirteen in number and aught very diligent to be seek of they that shall travail hereafter because of the good refresh that be upon they water be there in great abundance also great store of Coco nut great store of fresh fish and likewise store of turtle-dove which be so tame that one man may take with his hand twenty dozen in a day also great store of palmeto-tree so that these land seem to we a earthly paradise have refresh ourselves at the aforesaid land we determine to follow our voyage but still be cross with contrary wind until the thirty day of march and then begin the westerly monsons than we get the island of Socotora but have espy a sail which be find for the red sea we give chase and in the end fetch they up be find for aden be glad of his company we consort with he and determine to go both in company together this ship do belong to Diu but he tell we that he do belong to surat tell we certain news of captain Hawkins and of his be at surat whereof we be very glad thus we hold on our determine course until the eight of April at which time we come to a anchor in the road of aden against the city aden this city of aden be under the dominion of the great Turk and be the key of all Arabia the same day we come thither the captain of the castle come aboard of we with twelve soldier to guard our general ashore where when he come he be receive with all the honour that may be not suffer he once scant to tread on the ground but mount he upon a fair arabian horse and so in triumph he be carry to the governor of the town where after kind entertainment the governor understanding that he have letter from the king majesty of England to the bashaw of Zenan our king letter to the basna of Zenan or Sinan their pinnace come also to aden John luffken murder who abode be fifteen day journey up into the country from aden whither they be send we remain in the road of aden until the ten day of May and then our pinnace the good hope which we have lose before at the cape of Bona esperanza come to we have endure great misery and they have murder most shameful their master John luffken because they say he will not put in with the shore to relieve they be then at the eastern end of saint Laurence but the chief cause be for his provision and the next day they put in with the shore and come to a anchor where they get both water and other provision but here they leave my servant Edward hill behind they Edward hill leave on land in s. Laurence who as they say go to cut wood can not be hear off the party that do the murder so soon as they come to we have their reward according to their desert be both execute aboard the pinnace where they do the murder who name be Thomas clerk who be his mate and Francis Driver gunner of the say pinnace thus we remain at aden until the fifteen of the say month and then our general and master determine to go for the city of Moka which stand up high in the red sea some forty league or thereabouts but at our departure from aden the governor do detain two of our merchant who name be John jordan and Philip glassecocke and certain cloth and so send they up altogether to the bassa John jordan and Philip glascocke go up to Zenan where when they come they be use most kind the bassa demand of they whether they have bring the great Turk his letter with they they answer he no whereupon he tell they he can not give they any leave to settle a factory but for the cloth which you have here I will take this for a present because your ship be the first of the english nation that ever come into these part and see you be come I give you leave to sell your good and buy what you will and so to depart at your pleasure custom free because of the cloth which I detain in my hand thus with much trouble because the westerly monson begin to come in they pass the straits of the red Sea and then the current run out of the red sea in the end we pass the straits be not above one mile and a half broad at the most the eleven of june we come to anchor in the road of Moka where we be most kind entertain and the same day our general go ashore where he be most love receive this city of Moka be the chief staple for all indian trade they arrive at Moka or Moha for all the good that be bring to cairo and to Alexandria come from thence we stay in this road of Moka in trim of our pinnace until the six and twenty day of july and then our general and master determine to follow their voyage for Cambaya sore against the mind of the company be the chief officer of the ship that night through the head-strongnesse of our master we lose two anchor the seven day of August we come to the island of Socotora where we have so much wind at south and south southeast that we be hardly able with our ship to keep the shore which our pinnace not be able to do be blow off have not above two or three day victual in she at the most while we lie at this island of Sacotora to get in a boat lade of water and two or three boat of stone for ballast we have such forcible gale of wind that we break two more of our best anchor have lose as be aforesaid two before in the red sea so vehement do those south-west wind blow at that island in that time of the year we now have but two left to supply our use withal we stay at the island of Socotora until the twenty day of August and then we weigh and direct our course for Cambaya septemb 1609 diu. the second day of September we fall with the coast of Diu some eight league to the eastward of Diu we steer alongst the shore some seven league more to the eastward and then come to a anchor a head-land the three day we send our Skiffe ashore where the people resort unto we have certain conference with they as also buy of they sheep and other thing they understanding that we be find for surat one of they come aboard desire of our general passage to surat as also certify our general that the way be very dangerous offer he for seven piece of eight to fetch a pilot which shall conduct the ship safe to the port. but be rule in most thing by our master he not regard the word of the aforesaid Moor or bannian the four day we weigh anchor about three of the clock in the afternoon at the last quarter ebb if we have take the first quarter flood we shall sure have have water over all those shall so that night we run on the shall and stroke our rudder off they run upon the shall of Cambaya and the next day be the five day of September we lose our ship also that night we forsake our ship and betake we to our two boat be a thing most miraculous that so many man shall be save in two such small boat we be at the least eighteen league from the shore thus be this tall ship lose to the great hindrance of the worshipful company and to the utter undo of all we the poor mariner be altogether overthrow with all the treasure and good both of the merchant and the poor company be so far from our native country Ascention lose we remain upon the sea in our boat until the six day about four of the clock in the afternoon and then we discover land which we make unto with all the mean we can possible endeavour the best we can to fall with the river of surat but note how the lord do preserve we have as I say before deliver we from the danger of the sea he will not now suffer we to fall into the hand of our enemy I mean the portugal who lie at that time at the bar of surat God merciful deliverance with five sail of frigate to take our boat at our come ashore for they have intelligence of our ship come before for contrary to our mind we fall with the river of Gandevee some five league to the southward of the bar of surat Gandeuce where we be kind entertain of the governor of the town here we hear likewise of the come of our pinnace into the same river and of she fetch away by the portugal but all the man have forsake she and be go to surat by land the governor of this town of Gandeuce be a Bannyan and one of those kind of people the town of Gandeuce that observe the law of Pythagoras they hold it a great sin to eat of any thing that have life or breath but live of that which the earth natural afford of itself they likewise honour the cow and have she in great estimation among they and also observe the ancient custom of burn of their dead it have likewise in old time be a great custom among they for the woman so soon as their husband be dead to burn themselves alive with he but now of late year they have learn more wit and do not use it so common yet those woman that do it not have their hair cut and ever after be hold for no honest woman for that they will not accompany their husband into the other world as they say the seven day we depart out of this town to travel for surat which may be some forty mile or thereabouts and the nine day come thither where William Finch keep the factory meet we but captain Hawkins be go up to the king to agra agra this city of agra be from surat some thirty day journey there the king be resident and keep his court. here at surat our general with our company stay till the latter end of September and then himself with the rest of our company go from surat and take their journey up for the city of agra so to travel by the way of Persia for England but I hold no fit course for i determine with myself to take some other course for the get into my country while I be in many determination it please God of his goodness to send a father of the order of saint Paul be a Portugal who be come from Cambaya to surat by land with who I come acquaint he promise i that if I will commit myself into his hand he will send i home into my country or at the leastwise into Portugal which promise he do accomplish most faithful in company of this father myself and three more of our company Richard mellis who die in the carrack in the way homeward find John Elmor and one Robert fox depart from surat the seven day of October and come into the strong town and fortress of daman daman Cha where once again I see our pinnace the good hope that we have build at the cape of Bona esperanza from daman we come to Chau from thence to Goa the eighteen day of November Goa our lady of pity the nine day of january we be embark in a carrack call our lady of pity be the admiral of the fleet of four sail and so depart the coast of India the eight and twenty day of january we pass the equinoctial upon the coast of India and the one and twenty of march we fall with the land in thirty three degree and a half some five league eastward of cape Agulas cape Agulas where we lie with contrary wind until the second of April and then we be encounter with a mighty storm at the west south-west which blow so vehement that we be force to bear up six hour before the sea and then it please God to send we fair weather the four day of April we fall with land again in thirty four degree and forty minute then we lie drive to and again in the sea with contrary wind and in sight of the shore so that we be twice within three or four league of the cape of Bona esperanza yet can not possible get about thus we lie drive to and again in the sea and in sight of the shore until the nineteen day of April they double the cape of Bona esperanza and then it please God that we double the foresay cape of Bona esperanza to our no little comfort be in great despair before and fear our winter at Mosambique which be a common thing among the portugal the seven and twenty of April we pail the tropic of Capricorn and the nine day of may we come to a anchor at the island of saint Helena which stand in fifteen degree of southerly latitude where we stay until the fifteen of the say month in water and then we weigh and direct our course for the pass of the equinoctial and the second of june we pass the same the six and twenty of the say month we pass the tropic of cancer with the wind at north-east which the portugal call the general wind and the sixteenth of july we pass by the westerly land by judgement of the pilot in the carrack be in the latitude of forty degree and odd minute to the north-ward we not see any land since our departure from saint Helena so praise be God the three day of August we make the land of Portugal the three of August they arrive at Lisbon 1610. be not above two league of the rock to our no little comfort and the same day we come to a anchor in the road of caskalle i the same day embark myself in a boat and go ashore and so escape the hand of the portugal I remain in Lisbon secret until the thirteen day of the say month and then I embark myself in a ship of London with master steed which be thither find and the same day we weigh anchor in the bay of wayer there be a boat full of portugal to have take the ship and so to have carry we ashore have have intelligence of our departure but we set sail put forth to sea and escape the danger and praise be God arrive at our long desire home the seventeen day of September 1610. it be two year and six month since our departure out of England @. 2 the report of WILLIAM NICOLS a mariner in the ascension which travel from Bramport by land to Masulipatan write from his mouth at Bantam by HENRY moris sept. 12. 1612. the former and great part be the same in substance with that of t. JONES and therefore omit the company depart from our general not able to provide for they and leave the rest to stay by he be very sick some go to one place and some to another and some back again for surat the company divide themselves and I myself be one of they that be willing to take the best course for myself that I can I tell they I will travel god-willing to Masulipatan for I know there be a holland factory there as I have hear at surat before we come from thence I can not find any Christian to travel over land with i and inquire at Bramport if there be any that will travel to Masulipatan I meet with company which be travel that way but it be such company that few englishman will travel with they for they be three jew but necessity have no law after I have agree to travel with they I think if I travel with any money the dog will cut my throat w. Nichols travel to Masulipatan so I make away with all my money and attire myself in the habit of a Turk and take my journey with those dog without any penny of money in my purse and travel with they four month have nothing to eat but only such food as the jew give i and many time when I be hungry they will give i no meat so that I be enforce to eat such meat as they give their camel and no better and glad I can get it nay sometime I be infor to be in fee with the camel keeper to give i a little in this miserable case I travel with these dog four month sometime they will say come let we cut this dog throat and afterward open his belly for he have eat his gold then will have cut my throat but the three be a honest dog for he will not consent unto it so with many a weary journey and hungry belly he arrive at Masulipatan and be kind entreat at the hollander house after a long and dangerous travel we come safe unto Masulipatan where I present discharge myself from these cruel dog and come unto the dutch house where the captain use i very kind and give i clothes and meat and drink five month before any ship come there at length there come three ship to Masulipatan the one call the hay the other the sun and the three be a frigate which they have take in the straits of malacca and the sun and the frigate be find for Bantam I entreat the master to grant i passage and I will labour for my passage who tell i very kind that he will not only give i passage but will also give i wage for the which I give he great thanks and so come aboard not long after we set sail from thence and come to Bantam the six day of September he arrive at Bantam the 6. of sept. 1610. 1610. being Thursday and come present to the english house with joyful heart 1610. in my travel with the three jew overland these fair town I pass which I bear in mind for I can neither write nor read first after I come from Bramport I come to jevaport from thence to huidare from thence to golacaude and so to Masulipatania @. 3 the unhappy voyage of the vice-admiral the union outward find till she arrive at Priaman reporee by a letter which master SAMVE^ Bradshaw send from Priaman by Humphrey BIDULPHE the eleven day of march 1609. write by the say henry moris at Bantam sept. the fourteen 1610. you have already hear of the passage of the two ship the ascension and the union from England to the cape Bona esperanza but after their departure out of the road of Saldania and of their lose one another in double of the cape as yet you have not hear therefore I think good to make some relation thereof as well as of the other and that true as from other man report I have hear and thus it be after they have lose one another by stormy weather in double of the cape the union in that storm spring her mainmast and in the midst of the storm they be enforce to fish it again by reason whereof they lose the company of their admiral and at last be without hope either to meet with ship or pinnace thereabouts consider that the storm continue they shape their course for the bay of s. Augustine be upon Madagascar they arrive at the b^y of s. Augustine in Madagascar where be arrive they go ashore and have good refresh and stay there twenty day be in good hope to have meet our admiral and the pinnace there but all their hope be frustrate then be out of all hope to have their company they set sail from thence and direct their course for zanzibar in hope to meet their general there where be arrive they go on shore and at first be kind entertain but at their next go ashore they lay in ambush the treachery of the people of zanzibar and as soon as they land sally out upon they and kill the purser present and one mariner and take one of their merchant prisoner yet by great chance they get off their boat and come aboard the name of they that be slay be Richard kenn Purser the mariner name I have forget but the merchant name that be take prisoner be Richard Wicham they put to sea about the month of February 1608. with the wind at north-east and northerly just against they as they shall go for Socotora now after they have spend much time at sea and little or nothing in the way and the most part of the man very much trouble with the scurvy the captain purpose and according bare up the helm for the north part of s. laurance they bear back again for s. Laurence determine to go for the bay of Antongil but they fall on the west side of the island intend to recover their almost-lost man there and spend the unprofitable monson upon which end of s. laurance they fall into a exceed great bay the great bay of Canquomorra or B^am^r^ which afterward they understand to be call by the country people Canquomorra a country very fruitful and pleasant to behold the very first view thereof give great content to all their man in general who no soon arrive in the bay but within short time have conference with the country people and at first they proffer they great kindness but after it prove to the contrary whereupon master rowles the captain and master Richard Reu chief merchant and jeffrey Carlel with three other which be attendant upon the captain adventure to go ashore unto the king and that make they the more venturous because diverse time before all the merchant have be ashore at the king palace in their Skiffe and long boat and speak with the king who proffer they great kindness and come aboard again as safe as if they have be in their own native country of England Samuel Bradshaw the captain and six other betray Samuel Bradshaw have be often employ about business unto the king yet it please God at this time the captain have some other occasion of business for he and so stay he aboard a happy turn for he for they no soon come ashore but they be betray by the country people but by the great providence of the almighty the boat escape and present come aboard and inform they of all that happen where they no soon have make know unto they this doleful news but present they see such abundance of prawe and great boat abundance of prawe and great boates. come out of the river unto they that it be admirable to behold the master speak unto the gunner to make the ordnance ready which be soon effect this fleet of infidel come row up unto their ship as though present they will have board they but by the diligence of the gunner and his mate he make they retire six boat of the enemy destroy by sink of some half dozen of their boat and they retire back again as fast as if they have be sheep chase by the wolf but before we make such massacre among they they come up in the face of our ordnance and we think very they will have take we all for the fight continue at least two hour very dangerous till we plague they so with our ordnance and then a fight for two house he account himself happy that first can clear himself and we continual send after they as far as the ordnance will reach after they be go from we in this first attempt we stay in the bay some fourteen day be in good hope to recover our lose man again they stay 14 day long in this Bay in which time we lose seven man more through a sudden disease which daunt we more than the malice of those infidel the man which die be they that wrought so lusty about the ordnance in the fight that within two day they be all throw overboard these cross come together and no hope to recover our lose man they think it folly to make any long stay there and therefore present make haste away and be not thorough water they think good to spend a little time in another place thereby but before they can dispatch they attempt against they the second time with a great multitude of boat and many of they great vessel a second attempt m^de by the enemy and so thick pester with man that it be wonderful but they like their first entertainment so well that they care not for come too near they the second time but go all on shore and place themselves to look upon the Ship then present perceive what their intend purpose be and fear some mischief in the night they weigh and stand in for the shore where all the infidel sit and give they a whole broad side for a farewell which fall among the thick of they and in their sight make such lane among they that they soon forsake their place and get out of their sight with as much speed as may be they depart from s. Laurence from thence they tack and stand off at sea leave behind they fourteen man seven betray and seven that di^d w^th sickness then be clear from those infidel they direct their course for Socotora but by some negligence for want of hull in betimes the wind take they short that they can not fetch it they fall upon the coast of Arabia but they fall more to the eastward upon the coast of Arabia which be about the four of june and the winter monson be come they can not nor dare go for Camba^a moreover upon that coast they can not find any good place to harbour themselves in until the winter be pass wherefore keep within sight of the coast four day sometime be in danger of the shore they think it but folly to neglect the time any long and therefore resolve upon some course to be take for the best performance of the voyage so the master call the best and most principal man in the ship and such as be best experience in those affair they present conclude altogether to go for Achen and be in hope there to meet with some guzurat to barter their english commodity with they they arrive at Achen in sumatra the hollander opposition direct their course for that place they arrive there the seven and twenty of july and within seven day after their arrival they have admittance to the king with a present that be give which they be enforce to do somewhat large because the hollander seek to cross they a^d debar they from trade their aspire mind can not have any to trade into India but themselves therefore after master Bradshaw have be with the king and spend some time with they at Achen he fall to trade with the guzurat for some of their commodity for our english cloth and lead in truck for Baftas black and white which be guzurat cloth which they sell in those part after they have stay there some small time and truck with the guzurat for some commodity they take their leave and set sail from thence and come unto Priaman Priaman and have trade there in short space to their heart content and although fortune have cross they all the voyage yet God at length bring they unto a pleasant port to make some trade and benefit of their voyage here they stay and take in pepper and at length lade their ship and may l^ng before if there have not be a mutiny among the company for the sailor will do as please themselves but master Bradshaw use they with such fair word that at length they get that they come for here Griffin Mauris the master die Griffin Mauris the master die tec^o they in the union return from Suma^ra for England all business be end master Bradshaw send Humphrey biddulph unto Bantam and Silvester smith to bear he company with some remainder of good which they can not sell at Priaman nor at Tecco not long after that he have take his leave of they they shape their course for Bantam in a China junke he present set sail for England in the month of February 1609. the lamentable success of the say ship and voyage appear by the letter follow in Morlaix the first of march 1611. brother hide this day be come to our hand a letter from Odwen write by one William bagget a Irishman dwell in the same town advise we of most lamentable news of a ship of London call the union which be upon this coast about two league from the say Odwen which the man of the town perceive send out two boat unto she and when they come there they find that it be a ship come from the East-India rich lade with pepper and other good have in she but only faure man alive of which four man one be a indian and other three dead in the ship which the four live man through feebleness be not able to cast overboard nor be scarce able to speak so the man of the two boat have bring the ship into the road of Odwen and as this irishman write they of the town have unlade the most part of the good and have direct his letter to some english merchant in this place to repair thither with all expedition to see the order of the ship and good as belong to the east-indian company this letter be confirm by one other letter write in french by the bailiff of kimper and direct to one of this town which I have see and therefore we think it good to send three cop^es of this irishmans letter by three several bark to the end that the merchant may be advertise and give order that their good and ship may be in safety for it be to be doubt that the rude people will make a wrack of she I think it not amiss therefore that they send to the court of France to procure the king authority for I fear there will be much trouble about the matter in the mean time myself with George robbins will ride down to see in what state all thing be and do the best we can in the merchant behalf t^ll they send some one with procuration good and ample for the follow of this business as in their discretion shall see i fit the ship be report to be of three or four hundred ton and have three deck I doubt we shall find she shrewd rifle when we shall come there the importunate writing both of the Irishman and the bailiff of kimper have cause we to take this journey and we do it the rather in consideration of the company presume that they will consider our charge because we have both emplore friend and procure money in the place to satisfy such as have take pain in save of the ship and good if need be notwithstanding I will wish that they send some with expedition by way of Roven with other provision of money f^r that this be no place of exchange as you know where money may be have at all time I have rather give fifty pound then take this journey at this time because I have much good upon my hand as I partly write to you in my last the master name of the ship be Edmund white the master mate Thomas Duckmanton and the other Samuel smith and the indian they be in very pitiful take and in great want of money neither can they be master of their good therefore let they send man of good experience about this business and thus be in some have ready to take horse I commit you to the lord protection rest your assure friend always to command BERNARD neglect no time in make this know to the company direct to master Thomas hide merchant in London February 1610. touch the union at Andierne the eight day of February I come over the pole-head of Bourdeaux and the eleven of the same I lose my foremast my botsprit and my ruther the same night I put into Olderyearne the thirteen day the frenchman bring the union of London upon the rock the foureteen day I go aboard the union with my boat and the frenchman have be aboard four day the same time I bring Samuel smith on shore Thomas Duttoncon and the master Edmond white the fifteen day I get William bagget my merchant to write i a letter to Morles the eighteen day the letter be send and I pay two crown for the carriage the twenty the indian die and the same day I bury he the one and twenty day the master die and I bury he the two and twenty come master Roberts and master couper the six and twenty master couper and master Roberts go to Morles again the four day of march William Coarey the host of master couper and master Roberts the five I go aboard with my boat and William Coarey at low water I go into the ship hold at low water and I bring a example of the worst pepper the six day I come from olde-yearne the eight I come to Morles the seventeen come master hide to Morles the one and twenty I come from Morles the two and twenty at night I come into the i will of wight the four and twenty I come to Hampton the eight and twenty day I come to London your love friend WILLIAM WOTTON they save after the spoil of the briton almost two hundred ton of pepper some Benjamin and some China silk which they buy at Techou in sumatra out of a ship of China they touch outward find at Saldania where they stay long in set up a shallop or pinnace they lose master rowles in s. Laurence they lose more man at zanzibar they lade pepper at Achen Priaman Passeman and Tecou there they buy silk of a ship of China in their return they meet with sir Henry Middleton have thirty six man in reasonable good state aboard then they deliver unto he certain chest of silver they miss the i will of s. Helena most of their man die on this side cape Verde ten English and four guzarat be take out of she by a bark of b^stol and a scot. there land in the road of anderne and other matter be before set down the ship after the pepper good be take out and dry be find by master simonson a skilful shipwright send thither of purpose to save it if it may be utter unserviceable the ordnance anchor and other furniture be save Thomas Duckmanton the master mate Robert Wilson of Detford bullock the surgeon jacob peterson and five englishman more remain alive of seventy five that go out of England three or four guzarat also come home alive @ 4 the voyage of m. joseph Salbancke through India Persia part of Turkey the persian-gulfe and Arabia 1609. write unto sir Thomas Smith be the first town where after the wrack and descension of the ascension we * * Robert covert be his companion to bagdat and have write a treatise of this whole voyage which b^eing print I hau^ omit Sabay arrive have a very fair haven and great store of ship whereof some be of five hundred ton burden from thence we journey to sobay a village that consist altogether of spinner and weaver and there be much calico cotton cloth make from thence we come to surat which have be a city of great trade and have great store of ship surat those of the great burden be lade not at the town but be carry over the bar with their ballast only and there be lade at a high water they have sixteen foot over the bar from surat we travel towards agra the principal city of the grand mogul and come first to Nabon Nabon Daytaot a city great store of drug pin^adoes and calico where sugar grow in great abundance and cotton-wool and all manner of graine here all kind of victual be very cheap then to a city call Daytaot where be sell great store of drug pintado and calico-lawne afterward we come to Netherberi where be a market of all brazen ware shirt of mail sword and buckler lance armour for horse also cotton-wools cotton yarn pintado sash and all manner of drug in this place cloth will be very vendible because course cloth be there exceed dear from thence we proceed to a village call saylot where be store of sugar and fruit of all sort saylot a village sandise a garrison town the river tynd. Bramport a great city in 28. degree a good vent for cloth Caddor and Sawbon a great city call cannow good sale of english clothes they pass the great river Ganges 15. day travel agra we depart thence to sadise a garrison town here the river tind run down to surat from sadise we come to the great city Bramport govern by can Canow this city stand in eight and twenty degree where musket snaphanse pistol petronel and sword be very saleable woollen cloth in this place will prove a great commodity as also cloth of gold and silver velvet broad clothes and bay because there be there so many gallant from thence we come to caddor and so to Sawbon then we travail to a great city name cannow where be much trade for cloth sword sash piece and armour beside colour for dyer of all sort here our clothes will sell well for it bear somewhat to the northward and be very cold in january February and March about a day journey from this place we pass over the great river Ganges which run into the gulf of Bengala issue out of the northwest and run direct east into the say gulf from hence we set forward towards agra and spend eleven day travel through a pleasant country and abound with several kind of indian commodity and so arrive at agra agra be a very great city and populous build with stone have fair and large street with a fair river run by it which fall into the gulf of Bengala it have a fair castle and a strong entrench round about with a ditch hither be great refort of merchant from Persia and out of India and very much merchandise of silk and clothes and of precious stone both ruby diamond and pearl the diamond be find in diverse place as in Bisnagar in Deli and here at agra but ruby saphire and spinel be find in Pegu. in this city without all question our rich silk and velvet but especial our clothes of light colour will sell very well fatipore a city as great as London be a place of great trade be not above twelve mile from fatipore a city as great as London and very populous beside lahor and many other important city in this kingdom at agra we abide thirteen day and then set forward towards Hispaon in Persia by the way of they depart from agra for persia. biamy 2. day journey from agra what indigo be and the make thereof be but two month journey leave the way by lahor which be four month journey from agra to Biamy we spend two day travel Biamy be the chief place for indigo in all the east India where be twelve indigo mill it grow on small bush and bear a seed like a cabbage seed be cut down it lie on heap for half a year to rot and then by ox it be tread out from the stalk and afterward be ground very fine and then boil in fornace and so sort out into several sort the best indigo be there worth eight penny a pound from biamy we spend eight day journey to Merta pass by many town and village in some of they there be store of course indigo Merta or in other calico and store of cotton-wools also we pass over the fair river Paddar which run to guzerat and fall into the sea to the eastward of the persian gulf the river Paddar run unto guzerat in Merta there be three basars or market every week where be sell great store of indigo cotton-wool yarn and Cotton clothes from Merta or we travel five and twenty day through these three chief town Reuree Buckar and Suker Reuree be a town consist of husbandman and painful people who deal also in merchandise Reuree as Cotton cloth indigo and other commodity and be a peaceable people to deal withal Buckar stand towards lahor where we receive kind entertainment of the governor sword-blade be very good chaffer in this town Buckar a city myself have experience who may have have ten pound sterling for my sword the blade be but worth a noble in England close by this city of Buckar run the river Damiadee the river Damiadee fall into the river of sinde which within eight day journey run into the river of sinned which fall into the ocean sea between the country of gnadel and guzerate on this river pass bark of forty or fifty ton by mean whereof there be traffic unto diverse part of India Suckar be situate on a island in the middle of the river and consist most of weaver and dyer Suckar which serve the country round about at Suckar we stay four and twenty day for a safe convoy to Candahar Candahar and pass to Candahar in twenty day through many desert and wood and with no small difficulty Candahar be a city of importance which be frequent with merchant out of Turkey Persia and the part of India and be govern by a viceroy here we abide twelve day and from hence set forward towards Hispahan in Persia and travel five day till we come to grease i first town in the country of Persia grease the first town of Persia the river Sab^a divide the mogo and persian dominion Vea a village the city of Parra jesd a city Pahanaunis Godana Gora a fair town Hispahan the chief city of persia. commodity to be buy at Hispahan pass over the river Sabaa which divide the mogul and the persian here we pay a custom for our camel grease be a frontier town where the persian have a garrison of a thousand soldier from grease we spend eight day to the city Parra pass through a vast country sometime pass by village one of most note be call Vea for the store of felt and carpet make there and for the plenty of date and all sort of fruit Parra be a city of great traffic but especial for raw silk here we rest two and twenty day only for a from Parra we spend eighteen day to jesd a city of Persia pass through a very desolate country not far from this town be Pahanaunis where be make great store of raw silk as also at Godana four day journey off from jesd we spend seventeen day to Hispahan pass by Gora a fair town where be store of raw silk quilt silke-carpet and turkesh and so we arrive at Hispahan Haspahan be one of the great city in Persia where the king sometime keep his residency the people be industrious and curious in all science but especial in weave girdle and sash in make of velvet satin dammask very good ormuzine and persian carpet of a wonderful fineness here you may buy all manner of drug and spice and turkese with store of pearl diamond and ruby as also all sort of silk as well wrought as raw here may be plant a profitable trade if our ship with safety may lade in the persian gulf where fifty in the hundred may be gain from Ormus to Hispaan and that in eighty day travel whereof I be thorough inform by diverse prisoner and merchant of the great town of julpha commodity for persia. these commodity be to be carry from England into Persia tin copper brasil as also carsy for the common people broad clothes for the merchant and better sort of people black clothes for woman garment good chamlet and velvet die in grain with purple colour and fine red cloth of gold and tissue velvet embroider with gold fine Holland cloth for the king and sultan dag and pistol complete harness target of steel shirt of mail stone bow brass and iron ordnance the colour of cloth must be scarlet violet in grain fine red blacks brown blue London russet tawny lion colour fair lively Green all which will be vent at Haspahan Cashan Casbin and Tauris and other city in persia. I be persuade that Hispahan will vent a thousand clothes yearly at Hispahan I abide thirteen day and spend a month journey to bagdat which be a city about two english mile in compass seat on Tigris nevertheless it be very populous and of great traffic of stranger be the way to Persia Turkey and Arabia here I embark myself for Balsara and be twenty eight day in pass down the river but it be to be do in eighteen or less if the water be high many land be in this river which I omit to speak of Balsara be a city near unto the persian gulf a mile and a half in circuit all the building castle and wall be make of brick dry in the sun Balsara the Turk have here five hundred janissary beside other soldier continual in garrison but his chief strength be of his galy which be twenty five or thirty in number very fair and furnish with goodly ordnance to this port of Balsara come monthly diverse ship of forty or fifty ton from Ormus lade with all sort of indian merchandize also there be great store of wheat Rice and date Catiffa in Arabia the i will of where the best pearl be C^lara or shiriff din. John white a english merchant poison lima a port town in ^he mouth of ^he per^^an gul^e or soar a ^oast town in the entrance persian Gulf^ (...) or Mus^a^ f^^her (@) a english (...) mascate in Arabia grow thereabouts with which they serve and all the country Ormus and many part of India from Balsara I pass by sea to Catiffa on the coast of Arabia govern by a Turk but a rebel against the grand signior where be great plenty of sundry sort of fruit as date and other and from thence we sail by many land but among the rest to that famous island Baharem six day sail from Balsara and in the midway to Ormus where they fish for pearl four month in the year to wit in june july August September and here be the best pearl which be round and orient from the i will of Baharem we sail to Calara on the coast of Arabia and so pass by land with camel to shiriff din with a purpose to have go to aman where one John white a Englishman which refuse my company be poison to have give some intelligence to sir Henry Middleton of our hard usage before in those part but hear that he be traterous take in Moha in the mouth of the red sea and carry in chain up to the basha of Sin^^ into the main land of Arabia I return to lima another town on the persian gulf and there embark myself to have pass to Socotora a island near the mouth of the red sea b^t I be take by pirate and so be drive to land at Snar or soar a coast town not far ^^om Lima. at Snar certain portugal who bark be there cast away inform the governor that I be a spy and pray he to deliver i up into their hand who have obtain their request carry i to Azibo and so to mascate or muscat a island where they have a small garrison of some forty man beside their galley as also one church and two friar and here I have abide for ever if one father Drury a english jesuite which I find there have not procure my liberty from thence I be convey in chain to Ormus cross the mouth of the persian gulf Ormus be a island in circuit about thirty mile and be the dry island in all the world for there be nothing grow in it but salt Ormus for their water wood victual and other necessary come out of Persia which be about twelve mile from thence the portugal have a strong castle here which stand near unto the sea where there be a captain set by the king of Spain have under he a convenient number of soldier whereof some part remain in the castle and some in the town in this town be merchant of many nation and many moor and gentile here be very great trade of all sort of spice drug silk cloth of silk fine tapestry of Persia great store of pearl as also horse of Persia which serve for all India and all ship which pass from hence to Goa wherein be horse pay no custom in Goa but if they bring no horse than they pay eight in the hundred for their good from Ormus they send i prisoner to Goa and we sail first to Sinde which lie between the country of guadel and guzerate he be at sinde which be a excellent place for our trade the best indigo the safety of sinde from the portugal a good vent of all sort of Cloth have a great river call Damiade fall into it which river come from lahor and so to Bucher and Suchar in these place be the best indigo sold. you may transport all the good which the country do afford by water to Sinde where your ship may ride as safe as in the river of Thames the portugal have no fort in this river the place by report of the governor who give i a pass at my first be there to be a pledge that whensoever I shall return with these and these good I shall be well entertain do vent cloth of all sort in reasonable quantity both fine and course be all light colour tin lead iron and elephant tooth and spice of all sort especial pepper and clove the commodity that the country do afford in great plenty and cheap price be fine calico of many sort pintadoe q^ilts carpet and other silk in great plenty many of these stuff be very good for the trade at Banta^ and the beside there be great store of opium which be a very good commodity in Bantam and those part and many other drug fit for our country the people be of a good disposition and desirous of trade victual be very good cheap as ten hen for ten penny a good sheep a shilling on the shore the portugal be subject to the country people and if they do not behave themselves well they be severe punish pass this coast of sinde we arrive at din in the kingdom of Cambaya and it be the strong town that the portugal have in these part din. it be but little but well store with merchandise for here they lade many great ship with diverse commodity for Ormus and for the straight of Mecca and other place and these be ship of moor and christian the moor pass by passport from the portugal from Diu we sail for Goa which be the principal city which the portugal have in those part Goa and it be govern by a viceroy it stand in a island which may be thirty mile about replenish with orchard and garden palm tree and some village here be merchant of many nation chap. x. the voyage of m. DAVID MIDLETON to java and Banda extract out of a letter write by himself to the company this be the five voyage set forth by they @. i. their affair at Bantam Botun Bengaia we set sail in the down the four and twenty of April 1609. in the expedition of London April 24. 1609. they arrive at Saldania they arrive at Bantam and get sight of forteventure and the Lansarot the nineteen of May and with such wind as blow some fair some fowl we arrive at Saldania the ten of August and water and make haste and set sail the eighteen of the same we proceed for Bantam and arrive there the seven of December miss captain keeling very narrow that we have not sight of he for he pass we in the night by the alteration of state their debt be almost desperate nor will this governor suffer they as before themselves to imprison debtor and distrain he also exact unreasonable sum for rent whereas the ground have be give and the house build at the company charge else we shall have sure see he as for our business I make all the dispatch that may be both by day and night to get the iron a shore and will not stay to set up my pinnace and leave m. Hensworth in the house and be drive to give a great many of gift more than be requisite if the state of the country have be as in former time and leave Edward neetle and three more of my company with master hemsworth as his desire be be in a strange place and know none in the house so I take such commodity as I think most vendible in those place whereunto I be to go and what hope be of make a voyage I trust captain keeling have long since make manifest yet for all this I must try their courtesy the eighteeth of December I take my leave of master hemsworth who be very loath to stay behind i but I persuade he to be of good courage and doubt nothing see I be to take master spalding with i for his language and have no body to leave in the house but himself and tell he that if the governor send for he m. Augustine spalding go with he to the Maluccas he depart for the Maluccas the straight of Desolam the i will of Botun he must tell he plain that I have leave express order in any hand not to yield to any of his former demand yet he may take what he will for he must deliver he nothing then I set sail that evening for the Maluccas as I suppose and the wind favour we the seven and twenty of the same we pass the straits of Desolam and be through they lay becalm ten day which be no small grief to i in much heat under the line be doubtful of the westerly monson which if it shall fail i will be the overthrow of my voyage the eight of january we come before the town of Botun and send to know some news and there the king be go to the war and very few people in the town so I anchor not but we through the straits the same day the next day we see a great company of Caeracolles which we imagine to be the king of botunes army which prove so indeed the king send a small prow when we draw near unto he to see what we be I send he word who I be and it prove little wind and want water I demand whether there be any near hand so the people show i where there be great store of good water then I stand with the place and the king and all his caricolle come under sail after i and come to a anchor fair by we and send one aboard in his own name to bid i welcome and desire i to send master spalding with the messenger to come and speak with he to hear some news the king desire be that I will ride all night and in the morning he will come and see the ship and i it prove calm so we ride still and the next day the king come aboard and I make he and all his noble a banquet and give the king a gift worthy such a person a banquet make to the king of Botun and all his noble commodity provide by the king of Botun and a gale come fit to be under sail then the king weep and say I may think he but a dissembler see he have no merchandise for i for four month before my come he have his house burn to the ground where he have provide of every thing somewhat both nut and mace and clove and great store of Saunder wood a whole house full and a great Warehouse full of the cloth of his country which be very vendible in most part of the land thereabouts and all the loss which former he receive grieve he not half so much as when I tell he that I come and have cause the ship to be fit of purpose to come and buy his commodity that he shall provide for i he further say that I have keep my promise and swear by the head of Mahomet so will he have do if God have not lay that cross of fire upon he have sundry of his wife and woman burn but now he be abroad at war with his force he can not tell the issue of it and as the case stand with he he can not spare any of his people to make any provision for i and say that if I have not come by the night afore he have be in the field against another king his enemy who town he show i and request to shoot at it as I go by I say I be a stranger and know he not and to procure myself enemy I have no reason but if the other king shall come and offer he or any of his subject wrong while I be there I will do my best to send they away which speech of i give the king great content so the king take his leave and we set sail present the four and twenty of january we arrive at the island of Bangaia the i will of Bangaia the hollander fortify hateful to the people the manner of a Hollander where the king and most of his people be flee for fear of some enemy and certain I can not learn the truth there be a Hollander there that tell i that the king be flee for fear of the king of Makasar who as he think will force the king to turn Moor for he be a gentile but I rather think they flee for fear of the hollander who will have build a For^ there but when they perceive the people be flee they leave it uneffected this one Hollander bear such a sway that never a man leave upon the island dare displease he he have as many woman as he please two house full of the choice of the country daughter and many man and woman slave and be a pleasant companion and will dance and sing all day long near-hand naked as their manner be and win the heart of the people and will be drink two day together among the people of the island and be of himself and have live long in the country and will not be command by any Hollander and dwell over against if the governor of will speak with he he must send two of his merchant to be keep in pawn till his return he take up the king duty of Tarnata in all the land thereabouts and serve his own turn and send the king what he may spare here we have good refresh for my people be I praise God in better estate then when I set sail from England the goo^ health of h^r people and have not have a man sick to that present there I sheathe my long boat which we tow for fear of the worm that will have spoil she and after set sail the nine and twenty of january come to sea we find the wind right as we shall go so strive all we may to get to wind-ward but can not the stream carry we direct south and run so swift that we lose fifteen league in two day then I be fain to alter my detetmination for go for the and bear up the helm to go for Banda and may go with a down sheate @. 2 occurrent at banna contest with the dutch trade at Puloway and many peril the five of February we get sight of the land of Banda and make all the sail we can Banda to get near before night and draw near I send my Skiffe to hear some news of some of the country people who send i word that the hollander will not suffer any sail to come into the road but they will take all he bring if it be such thing as they stand in need of and make payment at their own pleasure but if any juncke come and bring commodity very vendible for the country people injury of hollander they be not permit to have any speech with any of the country but the Hollander will bring they to the backside of the castle within musket shoot of their ordnance that one must not set his foot ashore but they will send a bullet at he they have fifteen great juncke which they keep in that manner what hope be there to make a voyage there see they deal so with all fifteen great juncke detain by the hollander that come into the road and banish captain keeling not permit he to stay to gather in his debt but give he bill to receive his money at Bantam as I hope from his own mouth your worship have hear at large yet for all this I stand into the road with flag and ensign and at each yard arm a pendant in as comely a manner as we can devise there come a small pinnace of thirty ton send from the governor of the castle think it have be one of their country ship but come near we stand into the road before i after they have hale we I can have no other speech with they as soon as I come thwart of lautor I salute the town with ordnance and come to a anchor within shot of their ship then present a dutch boat come aboard we from the governor to have i come into the road and come ashore to he and show he my commission I make answer I be but new come and to show my commission to the governor or to make any man acquaint with those business which belong to the make of my voyage I will not they further ask whether I be a merchant or a man of war I answer I will pay for what I take then they threan i who tell they I be there and will ride there do as they shall please I hope I shall defend myself so they return to the castle in a great rage the hollander no soon go but great store of the man of lautor come aboard i kindness of the bandanese to the English and bid i welcome then I understand the whole estate of the country and the country will be willing to deal with i if I can procure leave of the hollander for they be now friend but pulaway and Polatronu be at warn with they now know well that in trouble water it be good fish there be one of Pulaway among they I have private conference with he and give he money in his purse to certify they of the island that I will give they money or commodity for all their spice and that the hollander and I be like to be enemy and let they not doubt but that I will get their spice aboard one way or other in the mean season there come another boat from the vice-admiral and the same boat from the castle with express commandment from the governor to i to come in be dinner time I cause they to stay dinner and after dinner tell they that I will ride there and stand to the danger of the road for I know full well that our nation be friend in Europe and for we to be enemy among the heathen people it be not good be christian whereupon they tell i plain I must not ride there and if I do they will fetch i in perforce I say I will ride there till I find the inconvenience of the road as by their speech it be foul ground then will I come into the best of the harbour for neither of our prince give any such authority to any of their subject but that every man may ride and go at their own peril they say that the country be they then may I the more bold say I ride here for we be friend so they depart in displeasure this evening I be about to land ordnance upon the side of a hill where we ride and begin to fit the ship to fight with they that shall molest i and send out some to see what ground there be round about the ship and it be all rock so by no mean the ship can ride there so we leave our pretence of land ordnance in the morning I send my Skiffe with master spalding and the principal of the ship with a letter to the governor and bid they say nothing more than I have write and make no long stay but bring a answer present for we ride very bad the copy of which letter hereafter follow may it please you worship with patience to consider that whereas you have diverse enemy and few friend in this place I be a Christian if your worship stand in need of any thing that I have I pray you make bold to demand it and I will be as ready to perform it to my power for whereas there be amity between our prince at home I shall be unwilling that we their subject shall be at enmity here further forasmuch as you command i to come under the command of the castle I hope I have that privilege that both prince allow their subject to come and go at their own pleasure and stand to the danger of the road at their own peril and whereas you demand to see my commission I be a gentleman and willing to show it upon equal term for if you will meet i secure as I will do you appoint our meeting on the water in our boat equal man or in any other convenient place where I may be as near my force as you be to you and whereas it be report that a contract be to be make with the inhabitant of Lantor and your worship my desire be that you will use i as a indian for my money then shall I think myself much behold to your worship and be more willing to deal with you then with they furthermore forasmuch as you be at enmity with the land of Puloway and Polaron my desire be to be resolve whether I may have their spice without your hindrance thus desire your answer to these particular and the same to be return by these bearer I bid you farewell from aboard my ship this seven of February 1609. you in friendship DAVID MIDDLETON all my company come to the castle be bring to the governor where they sit in council so they deliver my letter which be open read they will send i no answer but by word of mouth yet detain my letter they have determine by counsel have three great ship of one thousand ton a piece and three Pinnasses of thirty ton a piece that one of the ship be unserviceable call the great sun shall clap i aboard uncharitable purpose of the dutch. and there set herself a fire and have for the same purpose swear sundry person to come and make she fast with chain and have put into she thirty barrel of powder for the same intent which be man out of the castle with all the ship and boat to take up the man when she shall fire the great horn shall come and ride within musket-shot and batter upon we and the frigate round about we to keep we do on all side my folk see their speed they make to warp out the great sun make small stay but come away and tell i what preparation be make to have we I think it fit to go and speak with the governor myself and before we will try it by battle to see what he will say to myself and so take my commission with i I come to the castle and be meet at my land by the governor and all the principal man that be in the castle and ship and be bring through a guard of small shot of three hundred soldier who give i three volley of shot and the castle seven piece of ordnance for my welcome so we come to the governors chamber where for we two there be chair set the rest have form and after many salutation and compliment of welcome to the castle I begin and say I understand by my company which be with they before my come that they will not be persuade but that I be a pirate and have no commission and that it shall appear to the contrary I come myself and bring my commission with i to manifest that I be no such person but have the king majesty broad seal to my commission and call to my man for it and show it they read the first line unto they and lap it up again then they say that they will see it all I say they shall not while I live the commission be i commission show you all apparent see and the great seal at my commission and myself nominate therein and if they will see more it be not my commission they shall expect it we will have be go aboard but be will to stay awhile so there pass word between we some sharp and some sweet but at the length they begin to be more mild and call for a cup of wine than the company rise all up drink a cup of wine and go to walk and view the castle the office whereof be very neat and very well furnish with armour and great store of munition take my time I put in practice to see what money will do which often make wiseman blind that so I may attain unto my lade by large proffer I offer one thousand pound to be sure to have my lade the might of money and to give my chain from about my neck to one to procure it offer to pay more than they pay for their spice have set this matter abroach know the ship to ride in danger I tell the governor now they apparent see I be no man of war I will bring in my ship he reply with the residue that all the friendship they can do i I shall find they willing to pleasure i therein it draw late I take my leave to go aboard at what time the governor cause all the ordnance in the castle to be shoot off and as I pass by the ship they and the frigate shoot off till I come aboard the next day be the eight of February I bring my ship into the road and rid between their ship and the castle and give they all my ordnance and be answer from the castle and ship and frigate with great store as soon as we come to a anchor the governor with all the chief of the castle and ship come aboard of i so I entreat they to dinner to such as we can provide which they very kind accept and after dinner the main point which be my lade I can not by gift nor any mean I may devise have any grant to buy one pound of spice and have prove sundry mean to induce they to hear reason the governor tell i plain he dare not give i leave to deal for any spice under pain of loss of his head I see no good to be do in ride at a anchor among they determine to take in water and take my fortune but they will not suffer my boat to go ashore for water but they will send a man with we to see that we have no conference with any of the country people after I have water aboard I send master spalding to show the governor that I will be go and that I have send he to acquaint he therewith for myself will not come out of the ship dutch scrupulosity the governor marvel whither I will go the wind be westerly master spalding say he know not so I warp till I can get sea-room to set sail the governor send three Pinnasses to go out with i and one come in a boat aboard we send from the governor to command i that I shall not come near any of those land I send he word I will not be at his command for I be find to Puloway as soon as possible I can and bid he send his ship to send i away for I will quick send the frigate further from i he go aboard one of the frigate and I cause our man to get up their small shot and fit themselves to fight with their ship which be fit and their sail bring to the yard of purpose I call all my company to know their mind and tell they plain that if they will stand by i I mean to set up my rest his purpose for Puloway to make my voyage at those land let the Hollander do what he can and promise they if any man be maim he shall have maintenance during his life which if it please God I will have perform and further promise that if they will fight it out to give frank among they those thing that be i own which be in the ship so with one consent we be all willing to try what force the Hollander will send out to drive we away the Pinnasses see my folk to bring up their small shot think it will be small to their ease to guard i any long and therefore bear up for the harbour while we be a warp out the admiral have be twice aboard the Pinnasses and the vice-admiral and the lieutenant governor of the castle also what they do there I know not english resolution it fall calm and the wind westerly and a great stream set to the east north-east and we drive a great pace so I man my boat and send master spalding away with money and my pursers mate and five more to go and certify they of the land of pulaway that we have part enemy with the hollander and that I have send he to know their mind whether they will sell i their spice and I will give they money for it and will have come myself but will fain see the ship in some place where she may ride and then I will come either in the ship or in a pinnace that I have within board to set up while my boat be absent there come two prawe from Lantor to know why I go away I tell they the stream set the ship away I will fain have go to Pulaway if the stream have not hinder i and have send a factor thither to buy spice they say they be glad that I go not away for altogether then I pray they to tell they of Lantor that I will give they money or commodity for all their spice which they have if they will sell it i before the Hollander that come to take their country from they one of they say that he will go to the island and see my people and then he will show they of Lantor at master spaldings come ashore the country flock about he and bid he welcome but will make no price with he till I come myself m. spaldings welcome but will deliver spice upon a account till God shall send i thither to go through with they myself I bid master spalding hire i a pilot if he can to harbour my ship near hand who speak to the country for one and they hire he a co^ple to who the country give twenty rial and I must give they as much so master spalding send they aboard and write to i to send he more money and cloth the i will of ceran which I do the same night and bear up the helm for ceran and come to a place call Gelagula be thirty league from Banda a reasonable good road and as soon as possible we can we take a house and bring our pinnace ashore to set up have have she within board thus long and can never have time to set she up because the time of the year do so fast slip away and the monson be at a end labour all that night to get she dispatch be fit I name she the hope-well the seven and twenty of march we make all thing ready to set sail to the island of Pulaway the hope-well and arrive there the one and thiti of the same in the night and can not lade any spice till I have agree with the country people the country ask many duty and great gift but in fine I agree to pay as captain keeling pay after the chief have what they look for for every one must have somewhat that all must not know and a man must ever be give for they never cease beg and it be not for a man ease to deny they any reasonable matter especial as the case stand with i after we have agree we lade the hope-well with mace and send she away she be but nine tun can carry but little of such commodity which fill present wherefore I be drive to look out for more help to get over the spice so I hire a great praw and be to build she they lade spice which we lade with nut and send to the ship and there build she high and make she one of five and twenty tun but she make but one voyage and then we hear no news of she in three month still expect her come to Pulaway a long time the hope-well make two voyage can bring i no news of she so that I very think she have be sink for I come in company with she in the hope-well myself and have a great storm be perfect persuade that the sea have eat she up and give she for lose have twelve of the lusty man in the ship in she it be no small grief to i to see the time of the year to wear away and can not get my lade over to the ship nor dare bring the ship over for there be no ride for she and she pass the island oft all hope be pass for six month I make enquitie for other vessel and hear of a junck that belong to Lantor but she be old and lay near the hollander ship I go and buy she and get such help as I can to trim she the want of my twelve man put i to much trouble if I have have they with i all the while it have be a great shorten to our voyage for most of our man be down upon sore leg and as soon as one be any thing well he must into the hope-well and another poor lame man take his room have some three time well and down again thus I be drive to my wit end not know which way to turn i be every hour in danger of the Hollander to come and take the island who as by intelligence from time to time we hear seek sundry mean to make i away by offer large money for rogue to effect it either by poison or otherwise but I praise God I have some friend upon the island who give i secret warning of such man or to be aware of such men-slave for they will do i some mischief and come for the purpose whereupon I be fain to get all the land to draw to a head sore leg and fit their caracol and keep the hollander Pinnasses from come aboard so the Pinnasses dare not stir and the islander land secret upon Nero and cut off sundry of the hollander that they dare not stir out of the castle except they be many and well fit these islander build a fort upon the side of a hill from whence they shoot into the castle treacherous offer which trouble the Hollander much so we be sure that the Pinnasses can not come out as in former time to cut we off as oftentimes they have attempt make nine voyage in she myself and never can spare above seven man to go in she and but five at Puloway the rest in a manner lame and sick in a most villainous country where all thing be so dear that one shall eat and not to be have but at some time which be a great grief unto we all with such foul weather of reins continual which be like to have make a end of we all the junke which I have buy at Lantor I be fain to get away untrimmed for the hollander send i one of their ship see man at work upon she when they have fit she to batter she to piece so that night she weigh I get the help of two town to launch she and be to carry she a great way upon ruler this we do by night and get she out of sight by day and bring she to Puloway and be fain to buy sail for she and all thing else for she have nothing belong unto she but the bare Hull I set the country carpenter a-work which do her little good as prove afterward and have send to the ship by the hope-well that they shall bring over some rig for the junke and that master davis shall come and carry she over fit she as well as I can with those silly carpenter which the place afford the hope-well stay three week and we never hear any word what be become of she be doubtful whether any mischance have befall she and we may stay long before they aboard can hire any to come over the hollander have so seize they that they have take carry of victual to the bandaness be reasonable fair weather have the ship Skiffe at Puloway I determine to go over myself and make some shift m. John davis and not to let the time pass do nothing for I can not hire man to carry over the juncke if I will have lade she with silver so I put it in practice see the hope-well come not and not have a sound man with i that can stand on his leg I hire three black and put to sea be out of sight of land there arise a grievous storm that I be fain to spoon afore the sea to save our life yet God be praise we get sight of the land of ceran and keep she right afore the sea clean from our ship and come near the shore the sea aloft do break the i will of ceran sea-perill and take away all hope of come safe ashore night be at hand we strive all we may to keep she upon the sea till day the storm increase that no remedy but we must hazard all to put into the breach over a ledge of rock which we do and no man dare forsake the boat for be beat to piece against the rock so the next day we set she ashore be brimful and have all thing that we have wash overboard we lay hand on the boat and get she out of the suff of the sea and give God thanks for preserve we from so apparent danger be extreme foul weather with much rain we can not tell what to do the black come and tell we that we must go to sea present the country of the cannibal or man-eater if we mean to save our life I ask one of they the reason who say it be the cannibal country and if they get sight of we they will kill we and eat we and nothing will ransom a man if they take he and all christian that they get they roast they alive for wrong that the portugal have do they and therefore if we will not go to sea they will go hide themselves for the canbal will be at the water side as soon as they can look about to descry if they can discover any fisherman or passenger that by stealth pass by in the night we hear this and the moon begin to show the wind to dull and a tide of flood with we we get a head a good reasonable pace and by day we be clear of their watch and keep the shore close aboard we espy a hul of a bark come and row near it and know it to be the diligence so we come and hail she the diligence and there be a couple of englishman in she who tell i that the same night that we have the storm in the Skiffe she chap to a anchor there and the cable burst and she drive ashore and that m. Herniman be go to the town to get man to have she up and save she I land myself to go to the governor of the town to come and bring some help to save she the sand be full of people which come of purpose to have pillage she and I will they to make a shot now and then which stay they from come near they and come to the town m. Herniman be go by land to the ship I offer the governor money to have help to save she who say he will gather the country together within two or three day but I tell he that if it blow she will be lose within a hour inhumanity of the islander one of Puloway be there who know the bark and be earnest with the governor to save she plain tell i that he gape only to have she bulge that he may have the plank to build he a praw then perceive there be no help but must come from the ship I hire guide to follow master Herniman and take one of my own man to keep i company and so proceed by land be twelve mile from the ship be half way we come to a great water which we must swim over my man can not swim so I send my clothes back all but a scarlet Mandilian which these black must carry over for i who tell i the river be full of aligatd and if I see any I must fight with he else he will kill i and for that purpose do carry a great knife in his mouth danger of crododile I be weary not have sleep in two night take the water before the indian know they will be over before i the river be broad and a swift current which the great rain that have fall have make the indian will have have i turn back but be the better half way I be very unwilling be in the water one of the indian that carry my mandilion have get a great cane which I know not of and strike i on the side perilous mistake who feel the stroke suspect it have be a dive under water where the current get such hold on i that before I can come up I be in the sea and there the sea throw i against the beech and bruise my back and shoulder till the time that he come and give i the end of the cane whereof I get hold and he pull i out near hand drown be toss with the sea that every suff wash i into the sea again I praise God I escape this danger and get aboard after I have rest myself a reasonable space to the amazement of all my company so that night I send all that be able to crawl to save the bark which God be praise they do with much toil of so small help the country will not let any man lay his hand to save she expect we will forsake she that they may enjoy she the next day after my come aboard the Hopewell arrive with her lade of spice who tell i the arrival of the Hopewell they have be drive to the east-ward of Banda thirty league in a most cruel storm which continue long and cause they to have a long passage to get to the wind-ward but arrive the next day after I go from Puloway in the boat and lade present and m. davis be take in of his lade make all dispatch that may be with a poor lame crew the whole be absent as your worship have hear about the diligence we present unlade she and that night set sail in she myself to see if I can come before m. davis come from thence for they tell i the juncke be very leaky and I desire to have the hope-well come in her company whatsoever shall befall for she have never a nail in she but such as we ourselves put into she and have none there of our own we cause the simple smith that the country a ford to make some iron pin for nail they can make none and in most needful place we bestow they as for myself in the Hopewell strive to attain to Puloway I be put by it by the stream in a mighty storm the more the wind the strong the current be put to lee-ward we be long before we can fetch the ship and be fain to seek to the ceran shore or else have be quite blow away have make many voyage and still fall to lee-ward of the ship I cause m. davis to search the land for some harbour that when those provision that we can make to get over the good shall come over they may come from Puloway to the ship direct and not to bolt it up to windward when she be deep lade which be empty have discharge her burden may better ply it to wind-ward for be light she will feel her oar which be effect fear of the hollander cause of cruel handle in my long stay from Puloway and the land of Banda they have intelligence that the ship have weigh anchor and be persuade that I be go in the ship for fear of the hollander who be determine to come and look i out and surprise i whereupon the country people will not deal with my people any more nor sell they victual and begin to abuse they and rail upon they and say that I be go in the ship and leave they in the country as the hollander do and will come with a fleet as they have do and take their country from they then they be determine to seize upon the house and take the people and keep they prisoner upon a high rock and send for the sabandar that by whole consent they may come and take possession of all the good when the sabandar be come m. spalding go unto he to show he of the hard usage of the islander who begin to take thing out of the house by force he say they will be sure we shall not do as the hollander have do and be determine to lay they fast for the ship be go and our meaning be not good all that master spalding can do will not persuade they but they be leave of purpose the next day be in counsel in the church they resolve to send the man up prisoner to the rock then there come one and tell they that I be in sight in the Hopewell whereupon they break up their devilish determmation at my come a shore m. spalding tell i of their hard usage of they and what fear they be in the chief of all the land sit before our door to stay my come I go unto they and ask the reason why they deal so with my people in my absence they tell i plain that if I have not come myself they will have take the good and keep the man safe so I tell they the reason of the remove of the ship and say further no marvel that the holander build a castle to defend themselves when I be in friendship with they and leave man among they with commodity that the country stand in need of and make the holander my enemy which be their enemy and seek all the mean that in i lay to do all the land good as they all very well know shall receive such hard measure at their hand they say plain I must not blame they to be jealous of christian for many year portugal and hollander distasteful the portugal and holander have do as I have do but in the end they see apparent they will have their country from they yet now I be come myself they hope I will not think the worse of they so we become good friend and buy spice apace and have buy my whole ship lade have a overplus of stock leave I think I can not do your worship better service then in lay out your money and therefore make shift to send the ship lade away and lade thirty ton more in a juncke and buy another juncke of forty ton and spice to lade she which be not then launch but man at work upon she and leave m. spalding to come in she and m. Chapman for master a very honest and sufficient man with twelve person in the whole @ 3 his departure for Bantam escape from the hollander and return home after this I come and take my leave of all the country in most love manner and give they diverse gift for a farewell entreat they to help master spalding if he shall stand in need of they for I be go he must rely upon they so with many promise of all kindness I take my leave both of master spalding and of his company and all the island leave master Chapman for master in the new juncke I be fain to carry over the Hopewell myself and set sail the seven of September from Puloway with the juncke Middleton in my company have stay long in the country than ever any Englishman do arrive at the ship the ten and there I hear that the ship be not full lade for there be seven ton of the nut spoil he depart from Puloway the seven of September that come last from Puloway and lose there I lade the ship out of the hopewel and the juncke and turn off the hopewel which have do we very good service and bring a hundred ton of good aboard be so wormeaten that we pump always in she be but half inch plank and never can stay or have any time to sheathe she after the ship be whole lade we set sail from keeling bay the same day have never a topsail over head for I have cause master davis to remove the ship from whence I leave she to another bay seven league to the westward where I say I will come with the Hopewell and the juncke where I find they keeling bay now the ship in remove have her topsail blow from the yard have be at the yard ever since we come into the country for fear of treason and the hollander who will seek our overthrow the juncke go better than we have no topsail I send for the master of she aboard and write a letter to Bantam by they and request they to make all the speed they can thither and I hope I shall come after they and overtake they when I can make my topsail which we ply night and day and make master Musgrave his mate we in the ship have our topsail finish do overtake the juncke the sixteenth of the same and come up to they they can not keep we company except we shall take in our topsail and to press the juncke with a sail they dare not I call unto they and bid they bear such sail that they do not wrong she for fear a leak shall break upon they and come to Bantam for i to keep by they can do they small pleasure for we have long business at our come to Bantam to trim the ship for England so we take leave of they and bear ahead and the nine of October arrive in Bantam roade they arrive at Bantam the nine of October where master hemsworth and Edward neetle be both dead within a short space after my go away from Bantam so that all the good I leave at Bantam be yet there and not a yard of cloth sell to the chinese at our come to Bantam be very weak for most part of the company have sore leg I be drive that all man that have any sore or be sickly shall remain aboard by the surgeon and manure the juncke with all my choice man be all in perfect health there come a small ship that have heene at China and at japan Tarnata Makian Coramandell Patane and jor and come to Amboyna and so to Banda to seek for lade but can get none so be fain to go for Bantam to lade pepper this ship when she come to Banda come near the island of Puloway and let fly all her ordnance and a shot come through another man house through two suckle of mace in our house and strike the pursers mate upon the shin yet break not his leg but go into a chest of fine pintado and spoil many the poor man lie long upon it six month at the least not able to stand the hollander see we to pass by they at Banda day by day with spice who after my come buy not one pound I wrought such mean to procure my lade first be stark mad have two great ship half lade before I come into the country wherefore they determine to come with their ship and Pinnasses hollander envy and injury frustrate and take the island and all the spice that I have there know I have store buy and fit such a time as that they may easy have do it the bandaneses be flesh with the slaughter of some of the straggle hollander which they have murder take all the able man to give assault to the hollander castle and determine to fire their ship at a anchor and burn the old sun close to the castle gate all able man be go to the war and not pass forty man leave beside woman and child the two great ship and three Pinnasses come out under sail with three boat a piece at their sterne and the frigate two prowess a piece to land man they choose such a time that they may have come ashore and take every man one in their arm and carry they quite away for there be no weapon leave in the island but what we have but it please God to deal better with we for be come out of the harbour they can not get in again it prove calm and the tide of ebb being spring tide do set the ship to the southwards of the island and the Pinnasses must follow the ship for fear the caricol will have have they two day they do what they can to come back so they be force to proceed for Bantam to lade pepper be long becalm by the way to Bantam they descry a ship right to leeward of they which they think can not be any sail but we wherefore it be agree by counsel that they shall come and fight with i and take i and all the spice from i and what their determination be to have do with the ship and company I can not learn it prove to be the of Holland a great ship that be find to Banda to look for lade and have be at the moluccoe but can not get one pound of spice so those two ship tell he that they come from thence with half their lade so all three come to Bantam to lade pepper thus the lord keep i out of their hand fight Holland ship there come eight ship to Bantam for pepper and must stay a year for it so the ship that must stay a year for their lade take in plank and provision of building and be send with they to Banda and Tarna^a for their castle and to make flanker to make themselves strong and be send away after I come to Bantam my lame company be very wea^e fall sick and my gunner and one of my quarter master die and three more present after they the carpenter fit the ship and the westerly monson come there be no hope of the juncke come till May master davis be sick and very hardly escape with life master clayborne weak and sick master Thomas clayborne and myself not well with grief to see in what poor estate we be make all speed that we may to be go from that contagious country hope that if we be out at sea my people will mend now see the juncke come not which if but one of they have come Succadania I will have remain in the country and fit she to go for Succadania a place where the hollander have make great voyage but see they come not I think I shall do your worship as good service to come home in the ship if it shall please God to take master davis and master clayborne away to bring home the ship and therefore set up my rest to come home four sail of hollander woman to inhabit three day before we set sail from Bantam four sail of a new fleet of hollander come in which bring in great store of woman to inhabit those place which they have conquer and be nine in the whole and five remain behind those that come into the road be very weak so that the other ship company that be in the road be fain to fetch they in one by one that same day come a Slupe from Tarnata send with letter to Amboyno and so to Bantam with news dutch admiral slay three ship of the hollander take and one burn at manilia Paulus Vancarles take that the hollander have lose their admiral which go to manilia for his head be shoot off and the ship take and two more and another that will not yield set himself a fire so they lose three ship by fight and one burn be all great ship of one thousand ton a piece Fo^re day before these news come from manilia a general of the hollander which come into the indies four year pass call Paulus Vancarles who have be take by the spaniard at Tarnata by spanish galley within four month after I come from thence the last voyage remain a prisoner in the master of the camp house at Tarnata and all his company be chain in the galley these prisoner the hollander will have ransom with money offer a very great ransom which the Spaniard will not accept but will have they deliver up the fort and be go so they will set their general and the rest at liberty or otherwise not the hollander will by no mean withdraw their force so the general remain prisoner a year and a quarter and then be release by the new governor that come from manilia Paulus take the second time and send to manilia to take the government of the moluccoe who be intercept and take by two ship of the hollander which release their general with exchange of man for man this general be the second time take by the spanish galley after a long fight and present send prisoner to the manilia have leave Richard wooddy for chief in the house and order for master spalding when God shall send he to Bantam to determine a voyage to in borneo for diamond I take my leave of they of Bantam he depart from Bantam Sa^danha and set sail the the sixteenth of November and have a very good passage to the road of Saldanha where I come to a anchor the one and twentiteh of january and take in water and make all dispatch that I can for England and find that my brother sir Henry Middleton have be there and come in the four and twenty of july and depart the ten of August and there I find the copy of a letter which my brother have write to your worship and send home by a Hollander the next day that he come into the road which if you have not receive you may apparent see that they will detain all your worship letter and you shall have the copy thus have I at large certify your worship of all matter in ample manner which I think no less than my duty to do have make relation of all those place from whence I come and I praise God I have aboard one hundred thirty nine ton six Cathayes one quartern two pound of nutmeg and six hundred two and twenty suckette of mace which make thirty six ton fifteen Cathayes one quartern one and twenty pound and have leave in the juncke with master her^^man four and twenty ton seven Cathayes two quarterne and eight pound which co^^ with the charge 25071. @ rial of which sum I have disburse five hundred of my own for spice which lie most upon the orlope and be in bond unto your worship shall remain until I know your pleasure whether I shall enjoy it chap. 11 the six voyage set forth by the east-indian company in three ship the trade increase of one thousand ton and in she the general sir HENRY MIDDLETON admiral the peppercorn of two hundred and fifty vice-admiral the captain NICHOLAS DOUNTON and the darling of ninety the bark Samuel follow as a victualler of burden one hundred and eighty write by sir h. MIDDLETON @. i. the proceed of his voyage till he come to Moha in the red Sea the first of may 1610. we come to a anchor in the road of cape Verde cape Verde under a island where we find a Frenchman of deep that be set up a small pinnace upon the island the second the carpenter of all the ship go in hand with my main mast pull off the fish we find the mast exceed bad and above the upper deck some three foot wr^ng more then half asunder have we meet with any foul weather it must needs have go by the board I send one of my carpenter aland to the main to search for tree who return that night and bring i word that he have see some which will serve our turn the three we begin to unlade the Samuel and send carpenter aland to cut down tree have leave of the Alcayda who come aboard and dine with i the Samuel I give he a piece of Rouen cloth which I buy of the Frenchman and other trifle the fifteen we make a end of water all our cask be full we stow all our boat this night and fit to be go the next morning the commendation of cape Verde they arrive in the road of Saldanha this place of cape Verde be the best place I know for our outward find ship for that the road be excellent good fit for dispatch of any business and fresh fish to be have in great plenty beside it be not any thing out of the way I call a counsel of captain Dounton and the master what course be best to hold till we come to the line so it be conclude south south-west for sixty league and then south southeast till we grow near the line and then to hale over easterly we dismiss the Samuel the four and twenty of july we come into the road of Saldanha and salute the dutch admiral with five piece of ordnance and he return the like there be also other two Holland ship which come to make train oil of seal they have make three hundred pipe * * m. femell in a letter which I have write from thence mention two french ship in like employment whi^h he suspect to lie in wait ^or distress ship from the (@) this day I go aland and find out the name of captain keeling and other find home in january 1609. and also my brother David name find out in August the nine 1609. and also a letter bury under ground according to agreement make between he and i in England it be so consume with the damp of the air that I can not read any part thereof the six and twenty we set up a tent for my sick man and then we have they all a land to air our ship from this day till the day of our departure not any thing happen worth the write the six of September latitude twenty three degree thirty minute the wind all southerly a good gale the bay of s. Augustine in s. Laurence this day after dinner we see land and before night we come to a anchor in s. Augustine bay where we find the union distress for lack of victual the seven day I go in my pinnace aland to see if I can get any fresh victual but we can not get any we get wood and water aboard and so return to our ship the ten we steer alongst the land with a good gale of wind at southeast make account we shall have go at least twenty six league but we go but twenty two league by reason the current set to the southward her course north two and twenty league the eleven we steer from noon till night north north-east along the land which be north 1/^ a point easterly way and till midnight north northwest from midnight till day north by west and so till noon north all her true way north northwest 1/^ a point north twenty seven league we have a great current against we for I make account we shall have go five and thirty league I observe and the latitude be one and twenty degree five minute wind east southeast the twelve we steer between the north north-east and north by east her true way north westerly @ of a point latitude nineteen degree forty eight minute she run twenty seven league the current we find this last four and twenty hour set to the northward the wind variable the thirteen we steer with little wind and calm for the most part north by east her true way north @ part west the wind as the day before she go fifteen league more than I will have give she so that I find the current set to the northward by my observation latitude nineteen degree ten minute the twenty at noon her latitude eleven degree ten minute the wind vere easterly with calm variation twelve degree forty minute this afternoon we see land be the isle of Queriba which be dangerous low land environ with rock and shoal the isle Qu^riba in 11. degree ten minute near the coast of Africa the first of October 1610. we steer north-east her way north-east by north @ north twenty seven league the wind for the most part southeast the second we steer north-east her way north-east by north @ north fifty seven league note the current have carry we these eight and forty hour to the northward more than by reckon we can give she by twenty eight league which we find true by our latitude which be three degree thirty minute south latitude variation twelve degree twenty four minute wind south and southeast the three we steer north-east by east her true way north-east @ north forty one league which be twelve league carry by the current to the north-ward for I shall have give she but nine and twenty league latitude two degree south the wind variable between the south and southeast the four we steer north-east by east her true way north-east @ point northerly forty five league whereof fourteen league carry with the current south latitude fourteen minute variation thirteen degree wind variable between the southeast and south we cross the line this afternoon we cross the aequinoctial the five we steer twelve hour north-east by east and twelve hour east north-east her true way north-east little northerly forty seven league she have be carry to the north by the current at the least twenty league latitude north one degree thirty minute the wind for the most part south southeast with sometime almost calm the six we steer east by north and east north-east her true way north-east by east little easterly thirty eight league help by the current to the northward eighteen league latitude two degree thirty minute the wind south southeast variation fourteen degree two minute the seven we steer east by north her true way east north-east 1/^ point northerly eight and twenty league latitude three degree five minute wind all southerly variation fifteen degree by the current ten league the eight we steer east north-east her true way north-east by east 1/^ point northerly forty league latitude four degree twenty seven minute the wind south-west variation sixteen degree four minute the nine we steer north-east by east her true way north-east @ a point northerly twenty seven league latitude five degree three and twenty minute wind south-west variation sixteen degree four minute they lose the north current the ten calm latitude in five degree one and twenty minute here we lose the current that set to the northward and be carry to the southward two mile variation seventeen degree ten minute the eleven calm latitude five degree twenty minute lose one mile the twelve calm latitude five degree lose by be carry to the southward twenty mile the thirteen we steer two watch north-east and four watch north north-east her true way as I guest north north-east by reason the current countervail the variation she run seventeen league latitude five degree fifty five minute the wind west by north variation nineteen degree ten minute the fourteen we steer north her way allow her variation which be nineteen degree forty minute shall be one point @ to the westward but the variation daily rise show we be carry to the eastward by the current more than the variation come unto a current she go this day forty league the wind west south-west latitude seven degree fifteen minute her true way north-east carry to the east ten league the fifteen we steer north our latitude eight degree fifty five minute her true way north-east forty five league her way shall have be north by west westerly by the variation but the current have carry she to the eastward of her course seventeen league the variation nineteen degree five minute the wind west south-west the sixteenth we steer away north her way by the current north by east thirty six league carry contrary to the variation five league to the eastward as I imagine the wind south south-west variation nineteen degree eight minute the seventeen we steer north and run nineteen league in the morning early we do see the six league off bear north by west of we the wind at south-west variation eighteen degree fifty five minute the eighteen at night we come to a anchor in a sandy bay the i will of Caco^ora in the i will of Zacotora who latitude be twelve degree twenty five minute in the evening we go on land with our Sayne and get great store of fish wind east the one and twenty we weigh for to ply for the road of Tamerin Tamerin the chief town of the island but we find the wind at the east and east by south which be right as we shall go so that we can not get the place till the five and twenty day the latitude of Tamarin be twelve degree thirty minute the variation be nineteen degree eighteen minute the town stand at the foot of high ragged hill the cast away of the ascension the road be all open between the east by north and west northwest we anchor in ten fathom water good ground the five and twenty in the afternoon I send m. well accompany ashore with a present to the king which be a vest of cloth a piece of plate and a sword blade he promise all kindness the six and twenty I go on shore with the chief merchant with i and a good guard of arm man I be conduct to the king house the king entertaine^h sir Henry Middleton where at his chamber door he come and entertain i he bring i into his chamber where be set in a chair by he there pass many compliment which I omit I inquire concern the trade of the red sea and he commend it high say the people of aden and Moha be good people and will be glad of trade with we and that the ascension have sell all her good there at good rate and come so light to this place that they take in good store of ballast this news give i good content I demand leave to set up my pinnace upon his island but he will not grant it in this road but if I will return and do it at the place where we first anchor he be content he fear if we stay in this road of Tamerin to set she up we will fear all man for come thither he have send all his aloe to to his father king of that part of Arabia foelix in Arabia Chushem or Caixem his chief city be call Chushem where he be resiednt I ask he leave to wood and water for the one which be water he give i free leave but for wood I must pay very dear if I will have any say withal that all other nation which come thither pay for their water but of i he will not demand any thing he confirm the loss of the ascension and her pinnace which be no little grief to i to hear I demand if they have leave any write behind they he answer i he have one but his servant have lose it I be very earnest to have see it but it can not be find he animate i to go for the red sea but dissuade i from seek trade in the country of for that he doubt his father will not permit we I and all my people dine with the king which be do I take my leave and go aboard the seven of November we steer west by south and west south-west alongst the land we see about ten of the clock a high land which we imagine to be the high land of aden it rise like abbadelcuria and may be see a great way off aden in the evening about six of the clock we come to a anchor before the town in twenty fathom water sandy ground the town stand at the foot of a mountain in a vale and make a fair show it be environ with a stone wall and fort and bulwark in many place but how they be appooint we know not this night there come a small boat from the town to view we but come not aboard the wind east southeast we stand in stand over we be carry to the eastward with the current at least twenty league contrary to our expectation who rather think the current will have set to the westward the eight come a small boat of the town aboard with three arabian in she they say they be send by the lieutenant of the town to know what nation we be and wherefore we come thither send we word by they if we be Englishmen we be hearty welcome and that the year before captain Sharpeigh have be there and from thence go to M^ha where he make sale of all his good I demand of one of they the name of the bassa captain Sharpeigh have be at aden and Mo^a in the year 1609. and whether he be a good man he answer his name be jeffer bassa and that the bassa that last be be very ^ad this a little better but all the turk in general stark naught I ask if Moha be a good place of trade they answer that there be one man in Moha that will buy all our good I send my pinnace a land and John Williams one of my factor in she who speak the arabic language at their come a shore they be kind entertain the nine in the morning I send my pinnace ashore for a pilot for Moha in the mean while the boat be ashore we bring ourselves loose and under sail they return without a pilot and will not let we have any without three of our chief merchant to be leave for pledge they entreat i not to depart with all our ship but to leave one for that port and that they will buy all the good in she we be desirous of trade upon good consideration think fit to leave the peppercorn there and the other two to go for Moha whereupon we do what we can to get the road again but can not be carry to lee-ward with the current we anchor to the southward of the town I send m. Fowler and John Williams aland to tell they I mind to leave one of the ship there to trade so that they will let i have a pilot. they seem very glad that one of the ship shall tarry and promise i a pilot the next day the trade and the darling set sail for Moha the twelve I see no hope of any pilot to be have which have be often promise but not perform dispatch my business with the peppercorn and about noon I and the darling set sail for Moha the wind east southeast we steer alongst the land sometime west south-west and west by north in twenty eight and thirty fathom we see a small sail go before we this coast be high land which we follow till we have lose sight of she by night this coast be highland with many headland the thirteen we hale on our course alongst the land all this night steer between the west by north the Headland on the coast of Arabia go into the red Sea the north straight of the red Sea Babelmandel or the bab. and most by south her true way west the next day betimes we see the headland go into the red sea rise like a island about eleven of the clock we be thwart of the entrance be but three mile broad on the north side be a ragged land like a island and on the other side be a flat low island call Babelmandel upon the south of the island there seem to be a broad channel or entrance after we have pass this straight of Babelmandel upon the north shore in a sandy bay be a village to which place I send my pinnace for a pilot they stay not long but return with a couple of arab who take upon they to be very skilful our depth in the straits be between eight and eleven fathom water between the straight and aden be thirty league we steer alongst the land north by west and north northwest between eighteen and twenty fathom deep about four of the clock we descry the town of Moha Moha the ship bring on ground and about five a clock in luff in be much wind we split our main top sail and put abroad our mizzen it split likewise our pilot bring our ship a ground upon a bank of sand the wind blow hard and the sea somewhat high which make we all doubt her come off this night come a boat aboard of we from the town with a Turk in she a proper man send by the governor of the town to know what we be and wherefore we come thither I tell he we be english merchant that come to seek trade he answer if we be Englishmen we be hearty welcome and shall not fail of that we look for for Alexander Sharpeigh have sell all his good there Alexander sharpeigh and we may do the like and for the ground of the ship he make nothing of it say it be ordinary for great ship of India to come a ground and yet never hear that any of they sustain any harm thereby he make haste to go ashore to certify the aga what we be with promise in the morning to return with boat to lighten our ship this man as I afterward understand be call lord of the sea for that his office be to go aboard all ship that come thither the lord of the sea there and to see lighter send aboard to discharge the ship and to search that they steal no custom for which office he have diverse duty which be his only maintenance the fourteen in the morning early he return with three or four turk more in his company whereof two of they speak italian they bring i a small present from the aga which commendation and offer of any thing the country can afford i with hearty welcome to his port say we shall have as good and free trade as we have in Stambola Aleppo or any part of the turk dominion Stambola be Constantinople the extreme dissimulation of the turk with many other compliment there come with they four or five lighter in which we put any thing that come first to hand to lighten the ship master Femell go aland in one of they before I be aware thereof carry all he have in the ship with he we send all our money elephant tooth and all our shot aboard the darling we lay out our anchor to pass and in the evening prove if we can heave she off but can not make she stir which be no small grief to i the fifteen we do what we can to lighten our ship send some good aland and some aboard the darling I have a letter from master Femell wherein he certify i of kind entertainment by the aga and that he have agree for custom to pay five pound the hundred for all we shall sell and that we can not sell to be return aboard custom free likewise the aga send i a letter under his hand and seal proffer himself and any thing the country afford to be at my dispose with many other compliment about five a clock we begin to heave at our cap-staynes and by God great mercy she go off to all our comfort the nineteen come two boat from the shore send by master Femell for iron which I cause they to fetch from the darling I write to master femell not to send for any more good aland for that I will see sale of those he have already before I will depart with any more I receive a letter from master Femell if that I mind to have trade I must come aland according to the custom of the place otherwise they will not be persuade but that we be man of war likewise the Aga send our interpreter to i to entreat i to come aland if I be a merchant and friend to the great Turk and hope for trade allege that captain Sharpeigh and all the indian captain do the like the twenty I go aland I be receive at the water side by diverse chief man and with music bring to the house where be assemble all the chief man of the town my entertainment by the aga and the rest be with extraordinary great kindness I be seat close to the aga all man else stand where he hold i with compliment many time bid i welcome offer himself and the country to be at my service I deliver his majesty letter with a present to the Basba which I desire may be send he up with all speed likewise I give the aga a present which he take very kind tell i I and my people shall have as good and peaceable trade as any of our nation have in any part of the turk dominion and that if any man in the town offer i or any of my people wrong he will see they severe punish he cause i to stand up and one of his chief man put upon my back a vest of crimson silk and silver say I need not to doubt of any evil for that be the senior protection after some few compliment I take my leave I be mount upon a gallane horse with rich furniture a great man lead my horse and so in my new coat with the music of the town converge to the english house where I stay dinner the english house in Moha and present after go aboard much he entreat my stay on shore which I yield to for build my pinnace the day follow be also force by foul weather @. 2 turkish treachery at Moha and aden with the English one day pass not but I have some small present or other send i by the aga the turk fast with commendation from he to know if I lack any thing on the eight and twenty day twice he send i commendation will i to be merry and when their time of fast be do which be almost expire he will have i ride abroad with he to his garden and other place of pleasure to make merry this afternoon come master pemberton aland for Coco nut I cause he to stay supper with i which be do he take his leave to go aboard but the turk will not permit he say it be too late but in the morning he shall go as timely as he will I send to entreat that he may go but it will not be grant all this time we suspect no harm but think it be overmuch curiosity in the officer who we think have do it without order of which the next day I think to have complain to the aga. the sun be set according to my wont order I cause stool to be set at the door where myself master Femell and master pemberton sit to take the fresh air suspect nothing of the present ensue harm that do befall we about eight of the clock come a janisary from the aga to deliver some message to i but we can not understand he for lack of a interpreter I send my man to look for one of my company that speak the turkish tongue my interpreter present come by who I understand the effect of the janissary message which be that the Aga have send i commendation will i to be merry for that he have receive good news from the bassa and as he be about to say somewhat else my man return in great fear tell we we be all betray for that the turk and my people be by the ear at the back of the house the Turk that sit by the treason of the turk Novemb. 28. 1610. sir h. Middleton strike down dead be desirous to know what be the matter which we tell he he present rise up and will my man to show he where they be diverse of my company run after they to see what be the matter and I myself run after they call upon they as loud as I can to return back and make good our house but while I be thus speak I be strike upon the head down to the ground by one which come behind i I remain as dead till such time as they have find my hand behind i and so straight that the extreme pain thereof bring i to my memory assoon as they see i stir they lift i upon my foot and lead i between two of they to the where I find diverse of my company in like take as I be myself by the way the soldier pillage i and take from i such money as I have about i and three gold ring whereof one be my seal the other have seven diamond which be of good worth and the three a gimmal ring when all of we that escape with life in this bloody massacre be bring together then begin they to put we in iron sir h. Middleton and seven more chain by the neck myself with seven more be chain by the neck all together other some their foot other their hand this be do they leave two soldier to guard we the rest depart these soldier have compassion of we and ease we of our band for the most of we have our hand so straight find behind we that the blood be ready to burst out at our finger end with pain unsufferable but we be find to endure it after I have receive this ease of my hand and arm though still overcharge with grief of heart not only for my own necessity and these with i but also for the safety of the ship which I great doubt know the covetous turk will leave no villainy nor treason unattempted for the surprise of they we begin to reason among ourselves what shall be the reason or cause of this their villainous usage of we and withal I demand how it begin and if any of our company be slay I be certify by those of my company that do see it and hardly escape themselves eight of our man be slay that Francis Slanny John Lanslot and six more be slay and that fourteen of our company there present be grievous wound and that our house be round begird with arm soldier who at the instant I be strike down sally out upon we use their merciless cruelty towards we that have not wherewithal to defend ourselves much less to offend they now have go through their first pretence of mischief not be satisfy with christian blood they aim at our ship and good for about ten of the clock they arm three great boat with one hundred and fifty soldier in they to take the darling who ride somewhat near the shore the darling board by the turk the boat put from the shore altogether the turk take off their white tuck because they will be think to be christian and all joint board she and enter most of their man it be so sudden that three of the darling man be slay before they can get down the rest be take they to their close fight now it please God in mercy to look upon we and not to suffer any more christian blood to be shed for the captain of they which be call emier-bahare or lord of the sea call to his soldier to cut the table in the house the soldier misunderstanding he many of they leap into the boat and cut the boat rope and so drive away by this time our man have get they to their weapon and to their close fight the turk stand very thick in the waste hollow and clang their sword upon the deck one of the company throw a big barrel of powuer among they and after it a firebrand which take so good effect that it burn diverse of they the rest for their better safety as they think retire to the half deck and the poop where they be set off with musket shoot and entertain with another train of powder which put they in such fear that they leap into the sea hang by the ship side desire mercy which be not there to be find for that our man kill all they can find and the rest be drown only one man be save the turk all burn kill or drown save one who hide himself till the fury be past who yield and be receive to mercy thus God of his goodness and mercy deliver our ship and man out of the hand of our enemy for which his holy name be bless and praise evermore amen now let we look back to we imprison at Moha the boat return bring news the ship be take for which there be great rejoice the governor send off the boat again with order to bring the ship when they come so far off as where the ship do ride they find she go from thence under sail stand off so that they return and tell the aga the ship have escape and be go and that they think emeir Bahars and his soldier be take prisoner which news be nothing please unto he before day he send our interpreter to tell i the small ship be take which I do very believe to be true when it be day I be send for to come to the aga so I and seven more which be chain by the neck with i come before he he with a frown and not his wont dissemble countenance ask i how I dare be so bold as to come into this their port of Moha sir h. Middleton convent before the aga. so near their holy city of Mecca I answer it be not unknown unto he wherefore I come thither have long before certify he thereof and that I come not aland but at his earnest entreaty with many promise of kind and good usage he answer it be not lawful for any Christian to come so near their holy city of Medina this be the port or door thereof and that the bassa have express order from the great Turk treason at aden beside these three be with like treachery twenty man more betray at aden have leave give they to come on shore for business and shackle make the while etc. to captivate all christian that shall come into those sea although they have his own pass I tell he the fault be he that he have not tell i so much at the first but delude we with fair promise he give i a letter to read of captain Dounton that come from aden date long before the effect whereof be that two of his merchant and Purser be detain ashore and that they will not be release without land of merchandise or pay of fifteen hundred venetianos for anchorage and withal to be advise by i what he have best to do after I have read it he bid i tell he the effect thereof which I do he tell i since the write of this letter the ship be come from this place and that she be cast away upon a rock and that all the good and man be lose this be cold comfort to i to hear he will i to write a letter aboard to know how many turk be in the small ship I tell he that shall not need for that they have take the ship he answer that she be once take and possess by they but she be rescue by the great ship and take from they again and therefore will i to write to they aboard the great ship to come all of they aland and yield the ship into his hand and he will let we have the small ship to carry we home I say it be a folly to write any such thing for they that be aboard and have their liberty be no such fool as upon my Lettter to forsake the ship and good and come aland and be slave he say he know if I do write a letter to that effect they dare not disobey i I tell he I will write no such letter he inquire what store of money be in our ship I answer little and that be not for merchandise but to buy victual he ask what store of victual and water I tell he enough for two year which he will not believe he urge i again to write to will they to come all ashore and yield the ship or he will cut off my head I bid he do so for therein he shall do i a great pleasure for I be weary of my life but write to that effect I never will I be take out of my chain and choler and a great pair of fetter clap upon my leg and manacle upon my hand and so separate from the rest of my company they stow i all that day in a dirty dog kennell under a pair of stair at night at the entreaty of sherm^ll counsel of the bannians I be take out and place in a better room one more of my company which speak Turkish be with i my lodging be upon the hard ground and my pillow a stone my companion to keep i wake be grief of heart and multitude of rat which if I chance to sleep will awake i with run over i about midnight come the lieutenant of the aga and our trugman entreat i very fair to write my letter aboard to know how many turk be aboard prisoner and what be their name but in any case will i not to write any thing of the loss of our man nor of my own and my people hard usage but to say we be detain in the house where we lack not any thing till further order come from the bassa this letter I do willing write and to the same effect they will i but withal will they to look well to their ship and boat and to have a care to their man that not any of they come aland for fear of treason this letter they have with they and examine two or three of my man whether I have so write this letter be not send for that they can not get any man to go aboard with it but now they have find a man who be there present will undertake to carry it aboard so that I will write they shall use he well and do he no harm this man be bear in tune in Barbary and speak good italian I write the letter as they desire which be peruse as be the former and the next day be send aboard and answer return decemb. 1610. the effect be that all the turk be slay and drown save one who name be russwan a common soldier and that they be glad to hear I be alive for the prisoner Turk tell they he think we be all slay we continue in this misery till the fifteen of December not hear any thing from the ship nor they from we the aga come diverse time to i sometime with threat sometime with fair mean to have i write that all our people shall come ashore and yield up the ship I still answer he as I do at the first he be desirous to know what money be in the ship and what store of water I answer he money have we little but victual have we enough for two year he be in hope for lack of water and victual to have the ship yield unto he know that we can not have a wind to carry we out of the straight till May he say he marvel how so great a charge can be bear with so small a stock decemb. 15. I answer we have factory in diverse place in India who have stock enough in their hand to load we if we have bring never a penny worth of commodity with we and that stock we have be sufficient to lade our ship with pepper which in India be good cheap they in the ship be very evil to pass ride in a open and wide road the wind blow continual hard at south southeast enclose round with shoal their water beginning to fail they for that we have stave fifty ton to lighten our ship at our come a ground and hear nothing from we aland make they at their wit end not know well what to do they be in this perplexity the hardy part of John Chambers a honest fellow in the ship call John chamber offer they to go ashore to see what be become of we and to put his life and liberty in venture rather than see man live in this discontent which he effect and also this day be the fifteen of December with a flag of truce be set upon a small island a little to windward of the town he have one of out indian with he for his interpreter they be bring before the aga who ask he how he dare be so bold to come ashore without leave he answer he come with a flag of truce and be but a messenger which be permit among enemy he ask what message he have to deliver he say a letter to i and likewise if he will give he leave to see how we do they examine he and the indian very strict what store of victual and water be in the ship they both answer as I former have do that there be enough of all sort of victual for two year this be do they bring he to my dark cell who come out of the light be a great while before he can see i he deliver i the letter with watery eye to see i so fetter hand and foot in iron I demand how he come ashore he tell i after what manner and how he be examine by the aga. I tell he I think they will not permit he to return aboard for that not few day before one of the peppercorn man be come from aden with a letter to i and they keep he prisoner and will not permit he to return nor give he leave to go aboard our sh^ps he answer he come with that resolution from aboard to take such part as I do if they will be so villainous mind to stay he be but a messenger the sixteenth I return answer of my letter send i and deliver it to chamber and contrary to my expectation they let he and the indian return to the boat with leave to come again the next day if they have occasion the next day Chambers return alone for the indian be so fright that he dare not come my man send i diverse thing by he but the Aga be my receiver and keep they to his own use think they too good for i he return aboard and leave we to our wont misery attend daily what shall become of we look every hour for the sentence from the bassa of death or perpetual imprisonment or captivity yet God deal more merciful with we who never fail they that put their trust in he for upon the twenty of December come down from Zenan a Aga captain or chief of the chawss with order to bring we up all at his first light he be desirous to see i and my poor company there be three chair bring into my room wherein Regib Aga Ishmael which be the messenger from the bassa and jasfer Aga seat themselves Regib Aga begin to ask i how I dare be so bold as to come into that country so near their holy city without a pass from the senior I answer the king my master be in league and amity with the Senior and that in the article of peace it be allow we free trade in all his dominion and this be part of his dominion there need no pass he answer this be the door of their holy city and therefore not lawful for any Christian to come hither likewise he ask i if I do not know the senior sword be long I answer we be not take by the sword but by treason and if I and my people be aboard I care not for the length of he or all their sword he say it be proud speak of i also he will as former he have do many time to write a letter aboard to command all the man out of the ship and yield themselves to the bassa and receive like answer Ishmael Aga break off this idle speech by tell i he be come from the bassa with express order from he to conduct i and all my people to Zenan and therefore will i to send aboard for warm clothes for that we shall find it very cold in the mountain country I pray he if it be possible that my poor man may be send aboard and that I and some few more may be send up he say it be not in he to remedy it for it be the bassa order we shall all go up regib Aga say I shall have my desire that I and five more shall go up with i and the rest must abide where they be till further order from the bassa this be the eighteen day of December capt. Dounton come into the road of Mo^a this twenty day captain Dounton in the peppercorn come into the road from aden I write to he my mind what I think fit to be do @. 3 sir Henry Midleton and four and thirty other send to the bassa at Zenan description of the country and occurrent till their return decemb. 22. 1611. the two and twenty of December our iron be knock off all our leg save the carpenter and smith and some sick man that be not able to travel the carpenter and smith be keep there to build up the pinnace and myself and four and thirty person more of we sir Henry Midleton and 34. Englishmen be send to Zenan the escape of m. pemberton be appoint to go up for Zenan the chief city of the kingdom where the bassa be resident about four of the clock we set out of Moha all my company be mount upon ass and myself and m. upon horseback about ten of the clock in the night be ten or twelve mile from Moha master pemberton slip away from we we miss he ourselves present but say not any thing the best help we be able to do he he have which be in beseech God to send he safe aboard for the attempt be very desperate about one of the clock after midnight we come to our inn at a town call Mowssi they tell we all at our come thither yet miss not he that be want we continue in this lodging till four of the clock in the afternoon the next day at our set out of door they tell we and find one miss the aga inquire of i how many we be that set out of Moha I tell he I can not well tell but as I think we be four and thirty of we he say we be five and thirty and that one be miss I say it be more than I do know the chief cause that move m. pemberton to take this desperate action in hand be to see so many of we carry up together manacle with a captain and a guard of soldier to conduct we which he can imagine to no other end than death or captivity which be the opinion of we all I find a great friend of one Hamet Aga who send i diverse present and will i to be of good comfort Hamet Aga a great friend to we the consul of the bannians and Tookehar their great friendship to we for my cause be good he send i and my people provision of bread for our journey and withal his letter to the Kaha likewise the consul of the bannians who come every day to visit i and never come empty hand and Tookehar be our great friend all the time we be there prisoner and every day fail not to send to each man be one and fifty in number two cake of white bread and a quantity of date or he depart from Moha two day before we for Zenan promise i at his departure to do all he can with the bassa for our good which promise I think he well perform tie a city four day journey from Moha for at Zenan I be tell by diverse he laboure^ hard in ^ur business both with the bassa and his cayha which be a very discreet man and govern the kingdom we arrive at the city of ties which be four day journey from Moha upon Christmas day where we be marshal into the city two and two in a rank as they do at * * Constantinople Stambola with captive take in the war our aga ride in triumph as a great conqueror be meet a mile out of the town with the chief man of the city on horseback great cold in the mountain fur gown needful Zenan be in sixteen degree fifteen minute multitude of people stand all the way gaze and wonder at we thus be we use in all city and town we pass through a youth of m. Pembertons fall sick in this town and be leave with the governor thereof for that he be not able to travel I keep no journal from this time forward but this I remember we find it very cold all the way from tie to Zenan our lodging be the cold ground I buy most of our man which be slender clothe fur gown to keep they from the cold otherwise I think they will have starve I will not believe at Moha when I be tell of the cold we shall have upward and that make i go but thin clothe myself but experience teach i otherways wish when it be too late I have come better provide Zenan be from Moha a hundred and eighty mile or thereabouts as I judge north northwest it be in the latitude of sixteen degree fifteen minute which I observe by a instrument I make there every morning the ground be cover with hoary frost and in Zenan we have ice a finger thick in one night which I can hardly have believe have I not see it ice a finger thick in one night in Zenan they be fifteen day in go from Moha to Zenan we be fifteen day between Moha and Zenan the five of january two hour before day we come within two mile of the city where we lie upon the ground till it be fair day be much pinch by the cold not be able scarce to stand we be so benumb about a mile from the town we be meet by the subbassie or sheriff with at least two hundred shot drum and trumpet we be cause to go one by one in order a pretty distance one from the other to make the better show our man have their gown take from they and be cause to march a foot in their thin and ragged suit the soldier lead the way after come our man one by one our trumpeter be place next before i and command by the aga to sound but I forbid they after the trumpet come m. and myself on horseback and last come our aga ride in triumph with a spare horse rich furnish lead before he in this order we be lead through the heart of the city till we come to the castle the castle all the way be so full of people we can hardly pass for they at the first gate there be a good guard of arm soldier the second gate have two great piece of ordnance ready mount at the entry thereof after we have pass this gate we come to a spacious yard twice the length of the exchange in London the soldier at the entry of the gate discharge their shot and place themselves among many other that be there before they some on the one side and some on the other and a lane leave in the midst at my first come in I alight and be place on the one side with my man where I have not stay long but I and m. be bring before the bassa their come before the bassa it be their dinano or counsel day at the upper end of the yard we mount up a pair of stair some twelve step high at the head thereof two great man come and take i by the wrist and hold i very hard and so lead i to the bassa the place where he be seat be a long spacious gallery at the upper end thereof he be seat alone many great man stand on each side of he and other stand on either side from the low part of the gallery to the upper end which make a good show the floor be cover all over with Turkey carpet when I come within two yard of he we be stay he with a frown and angry countenance demand of what country I be and what I make in those part I answer I be a Englishman and a merchant and friend to the grand senior and come to seek trade he say it be not lawful for any Christian to come into that country and that he have give warning to captain Sharpeigh that no more of our nation shall come thither I tell he captain Sharpeigh be cast away upon the coast of India and come not to England to tell we so much which have we know we will never have put ourselves into that trouble we be in I tell he regib Aga be the man that have abuse i in tell i we be welcome into the country and that we shall have as free trade as our nation have in any part of Turkey with many other fair promise and that contrary to his word he assault we with arm soldier and murder diverse of my man and take i and the rest prisoner he say regib Aga be but his slave and have no such power as to pass his word to i without his leave and what be befall to i and my people be by his order to Regib Aga and that he himself likewise have such order from the Senior so to chastise all christian that shall come into those part I tell he we have receive great harm and if it please he to let we return to our ship it will be sufficient warn to our nation for ever come in those part again he say no he can not so let we depart but that I shall sit there and write my letter to the ambassador at * * stambol or Stambola or Stamboli be a correption and corruption of the greek word (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) which the greek use to speak of their go thither that be to the city so call it of special eminence above other city as Athens be at this day contract into satin from (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Postel comp. cos. and fr. port. Stambola and he will likewise write to the Senior to know his pleasure what shall become of we or whether he will permit we trade or no he dismiss i for that present and bid i go to my lodging which be appoint for i and take with i four or five more such as I think good I and those I make choice of be convey to the keeper of the prison house and the rest carry to the common prison where for their welcome they be clap in weighty iron one of our youth at such time as I be bring before the bassa think I be sole to have my head strike off fall in a sound with very fear think his turn will not be long after he fall sick upon it and short after die the six of january I be send for to the bassa Caya or lieutenant general of the kingdom to break fast with he after breakfast I tell he every particular how treacherous and vile I be use by Regib Aga he bid i be of good cheer and not think of thing past which can not be remedy and he doubt not but all will be well in the end and his best endeavour to do i good shall not be want shermall the bennian of Moha have make this man our friend then I depart with my keeper to prison where I be of better comfort than before the seven day I be send for to the cayhas garden where he feast i and m. tell i that short I and my people shall have liberty and be send to Moha where I shall have redress of all my wrong promise i to be my friend and before many great personage turk and arab say what kindness he do i be only for God sake but I well know it be in hope of some great reward from i Hamet Aga his letter do we no small good this day come to town a Moor of cairo a Moor of Cayro our great friend a old atquaintance of the bashaes and one that have lend he great sum of money at his come from Stambola when he be but poor this man be our next neighbour at Moha before and when we be betray and have a ship in Moha road find for India which he great doubt our ship will have take in regard of the wrong offer we but they let she quiet depart contrary to his expectation so that he become our great friend he write his letter in our behalf to the bassa and therein do much blame he in use we so hardly say he go about to destroy the country and trade in take such course with we at his come before the bassa he iterate what he have write and much more will he to have a care the trade of the red sea be not destroy by his mean and therefore counsel he to return i all my good and to send i and my people away content his letter prevail much with the bassa for when he send for we up it be his purpose to have put we to death and to have make slave of all the rest none in the country dare speak so bold as he of this which I have write concern the Moor of Cayro be I inform by shermall and Hamet waddy who be both present at read the letter and likewise hear the conference between the bassa and he this Hamet waddy be a arabian merchant very rich dwelling at Zenan and be call the bassa merchant he stand my friend very much in persuade the bassa that we may be kind deal withal and suffer to depart the eight I make petition to the bassa request that whereas at my come from Moha I have will the commander of my ship to forbear hostility for five and twenty day and after to use their discretion if in that time they hear not from i the time be almost expire that the bassa will vouchsafe speedy to censure my cause or give i some comfortable news to write they to stay they from do harm to which they may easy incline be without head or governor the eleven day I be send for to the cayha who tell i that now all thing be end and that my stay there be for the rest of my company which be come from aden and that present after their come up we shall all be send to Moha the seventeen m. Fowler and eighteen more of their company arrive at Zenan they be present bring before the bassa m. Fowler and eighteen more arrive at Zenan and such like question demand of they as he do of i afterward m. Fowler John Williams and Robert mico be send to keep i company and all the rest to the common prison to the rest of my man where they be all put in iron and their allowance from the bassa brown bread and water they will have all die with hunger and cold have not I relieve they better than the bassa the twenty five I be send for to the Cahays garden where we spend some hour in conference he tell i I shall present go with he to the bashaes garden where the bassa will have conference with i he counsel i to soothe he up with fair word and not cross he in any thing I ask he what he think whether he will surrender i all my good he say he can not tell I ask he whether I shall have my pinnace again he say likewise he can not tell but in any case he will i not to speak of it to the bassa but at my come to Moha to write my letter to he and he will solicit the bassa in my behalf and doubt not but to obtain it for i I tell he I think it fit to demand it now then hereafter for that I be desirous to know what to trust unto he bid i use my discretion the chief cause that make this man our friend be for a sum of money which I have promise to give he he will not be see to meddle therein himself but appoint shermall consul of the bannians to treat with i concern the same he demand much and I be willing to part with nothing we spend three or four day consult this business in the end I be constrain to give they content in promise after my delivery to pay he fifteen hundred venetianoes which be do the Cayha take horse and rid to the bashaes garden and bad our truchman bring i and m. thither when we come to the garden door we stay a hour before we be admit to the bashaes presence we find he seat in a summer-house in a chair his cayha stand at his right hand and half a dozen other at the back of the chair I be lead by two man which hold i by the cloak till I come within two pace of he and there they stay i m. come behind i at liberty without his leader he demand of i how I do and bid i be of good cheer for that short I and all my people shall have their liberty and be send to Moha where I with twenty nine more shall remain till all the ship of India be come into Moha and the rest to be send aboard and when all the say ship be come in and the wind settle westerly I and the rest of my company shall be permit to go aboard and proceed on our voyage to India I beseech he he will not detain so many of we he answer thirty have I speak and thirty shall stay then I demand if our good shall be surrend he answer no for they be all put to the senior account I demand my pinnace he say likewise she be put to the same account I tell he diverse provision belong to the ship be aland at Moha and desire I may have they surrender he say I shall then I speak to m. will he to speak again that our good may be surrender which he do and be answer as I be then I pray he to assure i of one thing and that be whether all my people shall be permit to depart aboard the ship the time of our abode be expire he promise i upon his word not any one shall be stay but be all send aboard and all thing have I a Turk to my slave he will not detain he for which his kindness I give he thanks then he begin to excuse himself praise his own mild nature in that it be our hap to fall into his hand he have deal merciftl and favourable with we which have it be in the time of any of his predecessor we have all suffer death for our presumption in come into that country so near their holy city and that which now be befall we be by order from the Senior the complaint of the bassa of cairo and Snachen against the english he be urge thereto by the complaint of the bashaes of cairo and Snachen and the sheriff of Mecca who have certify the senior at the be here of the ascension and her pinnace that they have buy all the choice ware of India whereby his custom be much diminish and will be the overthrow of the trade of these sea if it be permit and therefore wish it may be careful look unto whereupon the senior dispatch his letter with a commandment to he that if any more englishman or any other christian do come into those part to confiscate their ship and good or to kill or captivate all the man they can get into their power but he mind not to deal so with i but more favourable in permit we without further harm to return to our ship hope it will be a warning that neither we nor any other of our nation will repair thither any more the first of February I and m. be send for to the cayha February 1 1610. the bassa make a who give i counsel to go to the bassa to bid God give he joy of his late receive dignity which be the senior have make he a and send he letter of great favour with a sword and rich robe belong to a which robe and sword be a confirmation of he in so high a place and calling these present from the Senior be receive two day before with great solemnity and the party that bring they be meet by the bassa and all the chief of the city with all the soldier horse and foot six mile without the town where a tent be set up where the bassa disrobe himself and vest he in those which be send he by his master and so in great pomp come ride through the city to his own house I and other of my company by the appointment of the cayha have a place appoint we where we do see his come into the city our Trudgman by the appointment of the cayha conduct we to the vizier house where we stay not long but be admit to his presence I tell he my come be only to see he and to congratulate his new receive honour and to pray God give he joy he give i thanks and bid i be merry for what he have promise i he will perform and be better to i then his promise he be very pleasant and take this our come kind and so as a great favour master and I be permit to kiss his hand and dismiss return to our lodging many of our people in the mean while fall sick and weak through grief cold naughty air bad diet evil lodging and weighty iron I never cease solicit the cayha our man set at liberty till he have procure their liberty out of that loathsome prison so that the eleven day they be all free of prison and iron and have a house in the town and liberty to walk abroad and take the fresh air also the next day the cayha send i half a dozen of beef to bestow among my man so that in few day all of they I thank God recover their former health and strength the cayha inform i that Regib Aga have write earnest to the bassa that we may all be send down to aden and there take into our ship by which mean his town of Moha and such ship of India as shall pass the Bab shall be secure from danger or any harm our ship may do they this wicked counsel have prevail with the bassa have not God raise the cayha for our good to persuade the contrary the seventeen in the morning early the Cayha send for i m. and other and tell i the next morning I and my people shall depart for Moha after we have break fast he bring we to the bassa to take our leaf he begin again to extol his own clemency and the power of the Senior say he have a long sword straight charge i I come no more into those sea add that neither christian nor Lutheran may come thither no though they have the senior pass for so have he command he then I request if any of our nation come thither before I can give advice to England that they may not be betray as I be but plain deny trade that they may know what to trust to and to be permit quiet to depart which my request he will in no wise grant then I entreat he to write to Regib Aga to effect what he have promise i otherwise he be my mortal enemy will wrong i and my people he answer with great pride be not my only word sufficient to turn a whole city upside down if Regib Aga wrong you I will pull his skin over his ear and give you his head be he not my slave and therewithal appoint the cayha to write my dispatch I demand answer of his majesty letter but he will give i none this do I depart I tell the cayha I have never a weapon and therefore I desire leave I may buy a sword and ride down as I come up like a prisoner he acquaint the bassa therewith and he send i one of his cast sword the cayha also this morning give i a hundred piece of gold of forty madines the piece and fifty piece have he give i not many day before so that I receive from he in all a hundred and fifty piece of gold and from the bassa nothing but his rusty sword the cayha be of a liberal disposition and the bassa exceed covetous if any man be know to be rich he have need to carry himself upright otherways the least occasion will cost he his head that the bassa may enjoy his good as late befall a rich Aga who he cause private to be cruel murder and present after seize upon all he have the eighteen I pay all duty of the prison and go to the cayhas garden where we break our fast receive my dispatch and a letter to the governor of aden for re-deliverie of the pepper-corne boat they depart from Zenan I request his letter to the governor of for delivery of a youth of master Pembertons which be l^ft sick there I be inform he be enforce to turn Turk he write his letter and seal it the effect I know not which be do I take my leave and depart myself master Femell and master Fowler be mount on horse and all the rest upon ass and camel we have two chause to conduct we and a horseman the other afoot the description of Zenan this city be somewhat big than Bristol of good build of stone and lime with church or Meskits it be environ with a mud wall full of battlement and turret on the westside there be a great deal of spare ground enclose within the wall there they have their garden orchard and house of pleasure it stand in a barren and stony valley with high hill enclose it not be far off whereof one which be to the northward over-looketh the town whereon be build a small castle to keep it from the mountain people who accustom from thence to offend the city it have no water but wel-water which they dig deep for wood be very scarce and fetch from far and very dear in the easter-most part be the castle enclose with mud wall full of turret in which turret every night they place their watch which keep such a hollow one to another all night long that a man that be not acquaint which it can hardly sleep th^ bassa and some other principal man dwell within this castle Wall the keeper house wherein I be imprison join to the wall and at the foot of the wall be a spacious yard wherein a great number of people for the most part woman and child be keep prisoner or pledge to keep their parent husband and ally from rebellion the boy while they be little go loose in the yard but after they be come to bigness they be clap in iron and carry to a strong tower where there be many more keep in like case there they remain during the bassa pleasure those woman and child which remain in the yard live in little cottage which they have make of purpose the child go for the most part naked without it be very cold and then have they sheep-skinne coat to keep they warm they be as wild and r^de as if they be bring up in the mountain this night we arrive at siam distant from Zenan sixteen mile siam a small town and castle which be a small town with a castle upon the side of a hill the place and country about it be very barren and yield small relief to traveller about midnight we depart from Zenan and the next day be the nineteen we come to surage about ten a clock in the forenoon it be likewise a small village distant from siam about eighteen mile surage the country barren and the people poor and go almost naked save a cloth about their waste reach down to their knee we depart from hence at midnight a good city we come to Damare the twenty about eight of the clock in the morning it be a city build of lime and stone but separate in five part one a pretty distance from the other so that it seem to be so many village it be seat in a spacious valley or plaine have plenty of water and all kind of grain with all other provision for sustenance both for themselves and their poor neighbour who live in great penury and want it be distant from surage twenty mile we tarry here two day by order of Abdela Chillarby the bassa cayha who be governor of this province the two and twenty we depart from Damare about two a clock after midnight and come to ermine betimes ermine it be a small village and distant from Damare some fifteen mile the three and twenty we arrive at naqual Samare be a common inn for all traveller naqual samare^n ^n inn the turk call they censor which be build at the cost of the signior for the relief of traveller there be many of these censor between Moha and Zenan this censor be seat in the middle of a very steep hill call Nackhilsamar and some few scatter poor house about it upon the top of this hill be a great castle wherein the governor of the province which be a arabian dwell these craggy mountain country be for the most part govern by the arabian for the people of these mountain can ^rooke the proud and insolent government of the turk no Turk may pass this way neither upward nor downward without a passport of the governor of the province from whence they come this censor be distant from ermine some fourteen mile the four and twenty we arrive at Mohader Mohader a little village which be a little village at the foot of the great hill be distant from Nackelsamar some thirteen mile our chause have warrant from the bassa to take up ass for our man to ride upon which according they perform overnight but the next morning the arabian lie in ambush in the way and in despite of our chause take their ass away neither of our guardian dare to give they a foul word the five and twenty rabattamaine a inn be arrive at rabattamaine a cens^r with some cottage and shop adjoin thereunto it be seat on the side of a hill and be distant from Mohader sixteen mile grow poppy whereof they make their but it be not good the six and twenty we arrive at a cough house in the middle of a plain Merfadin it be call Merfadine and distant from rabattamaine sixteen mile the seven and twenty we arrive at be a city of half the bigness of Zenan and wall round with a mud wall here we stay all this day and the next a city in which time of my abode there I use the best mean I can for recovery of a youth of master Pembertons who the governor Hamet Aga have force to turn Turk and will by no mean depart with he but Walter Talbot have the turkish tongue be permit to speak with he in a chamber among other boy and youth who weep say unto he he be no Turk but be delude by they they tell he that I and all my people be put to death at Zenan and if he will turn he shall save his life but he will not yield unto they but afterward some of the agaes servant carry he to a hothouse when they have he naked circumcise he perforce when I see I can not get he I deliver Abdela Chillarby the cayh^s letter which be if that he be not turn he shall deliver he i when the Aga have read this letter he tell i the effect say that letter be warrant sufficient for keep of he I suspect the le^ter be to that effect when it be give i and that make i not deliver it at first this city stand in a valley under very high hill and upon the top of one of the high hill be a fair and strong castle all kind of victual be very cheap here in the country thereabouts be make some indigo but what quantity or of what goodness I can not learn indigo make this city be very populous and so be all the country and city we travel through the first of march we depart and come to eufras about noon march 1. 1610. eufras be sixteen mile from the country we travail mountainous and stoney the town little situate on the side of a hill about the five of january great multitude of people resort hither from far where they do some foolish ceremony to one of their saint and holy man which lie bury there which be do they go all in company to Mecca on pilgrimage the governor of this town be a Turk and use i and my people very kind at our go up and hear of my come down he send one six mile to a place where two way meet to bring we to his town where we be most kind use by he the second we depart thence and lodge at a censor call assambine some eleven mile from eufras here be no town but a few poor cottage assambine the three we go from thence and come to another censor some thirteen mile off it be call Accomoth stand in a barren common with a few cottage by it the four in the morning we depart thence and come to Mousa Accomoth Mousa a town seventeen mile from Accomoth the country we travail plain and barren and small store of inhabitant the town of M^^sa be not great and unwall but very populous it be situate in a plain indifferent fruitful hereabout likewise be make some indigo we depart thence about midnight the five in the morning about eight of the clock we come to Moha Moha we rest two or three hour by the way at a church or Coughe house call dabul build by a dabull merchant if we have not stay here we have come to Moha before day a mile without the town we be meet by our carpenter smith and such other as be detain there the day before their iron be take off and they have liberty to walk abroad the first question I demand be to know what become of master pemberton they tell i he light upon a Cannoa and get aboard whereof I be not a little glad for I be very doubtful never to have see he more at the town end and all the way to the house the people stand very thick and as we pass by bad we welcome back for it be nothing please to the people of the country to hear how treacherous the turk have use we we rid till we come to the house where we alig^te^ myself master Femell master Fowler be bring before he where I deliver my ^ from Zenan he receive i after his wont dissemble show of love and kindness bid i and the rest welcome say he be glad of our return safe and sorry and ashamed of what be past and pray i to pardon he and that hereafter he bid i assure myself he will be my friend and that the harm that have be fall we be not long of he for he do nothing but what his master command he I soothe he up but believe nothing he say he read the command of the bassa and say all thing shall be perform according whereupon he call in for breakfast and cause we to sit down with he bid i eat and be merry f or now he have eat bread and salt with i I need not doubt of any harm after breakfast he go to seek for a house for i we have a fair large house appoint we near the seaside where we continue two day but afterward we be remove from thence to a great strong house stand all alone in a spacious churchyard in the middle of the town and for our guard a captain and his company be appoint to that charge who ward all the day and by night our house be enclose round with his arm soldier the cause why we be remove from our first house be because it be too near the water side they doubt from thence we may attempt a escape the description of Moha this town of Moha be one three part less than unwall very populous and seat close by the seaside in a salt sandy barren soil the governors house be close by the water side and here by the same be the key or bridge which shoot a pretty distance into the sea to which key all boat belong to any ship be enjoin to land for fear of steal of custom and close adjoin to the key be a platform whereon be plant some dozen of brass piece at the western end of the town there be a fort wherein be the like quantity of ordinance this fort be ruinate at our first come thither but since pull down to the ground and new build the darling come into the road the captain of a ship of Dabull this afternoon come the darling into the road who bring we news of the welfare of the rest which be no small comfort to i after so many trouble the six Nohuda Melech Ambor captain of a great ship of Dabull which come into the road two day before my arrival at Moha come ashore with a great many of merchant with he he with the rest be carry about the town in pomp and afterward feast by the aga. I likewise be send for to this feast and entertain with all love and friendship the aga in presence of they all call for the Alcoran kiss it and voluntary swear and protest that he ought i no evil will but wish i all good and will endeavour himself to pleasure i the best he can his heart be clear of malice or hatred and be much grieve for what be pass I return he thanks seem great satisfy therewith although I give no credit thereto but be force to endure with patience what I can not remedy till it please God to provide better the seven day the Aga make a great feast at his garden-house for the dabullian to which I and master Femell be likewise invite the dabullian be all mount upon gallant horse with rich furniture and we upon a couple of tire lame jade which we bring from Zenan the eight we be all send for to come before the aga myself with all the merchant carpenter smith and other who he to the number of thirty think good be appoint to stay aland and the rest which be thirty six be send aboard the darling the nine have I make a escape have I not be more careful for other which I shall have leave behind i a excellent road on the coast of habashe call Assab roade then for myself this day the darling have take in thirty six man as aforesaid and provide of some necessary they lack depart towards the other ship on the coast of habashe where they have find out in the time of my absence a excellent road for all wind that blow in these sea it be call Assab road where they have wood and water enough cost nothing but the fetch the water be a little brackish but seem fresh enough to they that have live in want thereof the people of the country be as black as the negro of Guinea they be all mahometan alongst the sea-coast but up in the land they be christian and subject to Prester John they go almost naked save a cloth about their waste which reach to their knee they be at first come of our people very fearful but after they be acquaint and a peace confirm by oath on both side they daily repair with refresh as beef sheep and goat and sell they for money at reasonable rate and afterward they desire course calico rather than money I furnish they therewith from Moha in truck whereof they sell their cattle far better cheap than before for money deal faithful and kind with our people notwithstanding the turk seek to work they to the contrary by mean of small bark which pass to and fro the king of this country have his abide at a town lie upon the sea-coast call Rahaita Rahaita some forty mile to the southward near the Bab he send some of his chief man to the commander of the ship with present they return they the like who entertain those which be send very courteous with promise of any thing his country yield their vulgar speech be not understand by the arabian the better sort of they speak and write the arabian language in which tongue their law of Mahomet be write @. 4 indian ship at Moha sir Henry Middleton escape from the turk and enforce satisfaction APrill the first 1611. the darling debar for Assab with leave every ten day to return to see how I do April 1 1611. this his unlooked for kindness I hope in God will be a mean to work my freedom the second another ship of Dabul come into the road another ship of Dabul full of people the Nohuda rid about the town in a paint coat as the manner be these robe be but lend they for the present and afterward return to the keeper of the wardrobe to who belong a duty for lone of they the three come a jebba from aden which bring the pepper-corne Boat the four day come a other ship of Dabul which lade at Achin with pepper the three ship of Dabul these three great ship belong all to the governor of Dabul who be a persian and a great merchant and have many slave whereof melick amber be one and be in great credit with he he have the manage of the good belong to these three ship he be a negro bear in Habosse and may cost his master fifteen or twenty royal of eight and now never go out of his door but with great troop of follower like some great Lord the six I send to the cayha Abdela Chillarby a fair piece and a small barrel of powder which I promise to send he at my come from Zenan the seven another small indian ship come from India a small ship lade with cotton the eleven come from India two small bark malabar of one of the isle of Maldivia the chief of they come often to visit i till he be forbid by the Aga our enemy the twelve there come two bark from India for then the wind be westerly which continue so for five day and afterward come to the south southeast again the fourteen come in a small bark lade with Cotten for the bannians the fifteen come another from Bassanor the Nohuda come to visit i at my house which the Aga repine at the seventeen come into the town a great many camel and diverse merchant which come from Damascus sue and Mecca to trade with the merchant of India the nineteen merchant of Damascus sue and Mecca come in a ship and a bark of Cananor the captain of the great ship come to visit i with great troop follow of he which the Aga stomach send for he while he be talk with i and forbid such resort unto i the twenty come in a ship of Calicut and the darling the three and twenty come in a small bark of the king of Zacotora which come from Goa the second of May 1611. I dispatch letter for England of all our proceed in those part one copy to the english consul at Aleppo and another to the french consul at Cayro may 2 1611. which letter I deliver to a guzerat the ten come in a small bark from the coast of Swahell or with slave elephant tooth amber there have wont to come every year hither from thence four bark with like lade but this year will come no more for that their country be in war and the portugal have burn their ship these man buy their negro and amber at Cancamarra in s. Laurence where captain rowles be take and betray Cancamarra in s. Laurence where captain rowles capt. of the union be betray we inquire of they if they can inform we of any thing touch he also this day about noon come in the darling and according to her wont order shoot off a piece for a boat the shot graze upon the water to the towne-ward whereat the Aga be displease but give leave I may send aboard I write my letter and send one of my servant aboard with it command he to tarry aboard and come no more ashore and withal to tell m. pemberton he shall not send his boat a land till he hear further from i the eleven in the morning at the dawn of the day the aga with all the chief man of the town be rid abroad in great state to his garden to be merry which I see do not a little glad my heart and give God thanks which offer i so fair mean to put that in practice which long before I have determine for Hamet Aga and other have tell i the bassa will not perform his word but for fear I write my letter to m. pemberton wherein I certify he I mind as this day to make a escape aboard and that I will convey myself into a empty but and so be carry down to the boat as a empty cask the indian ship be come in and the turk promise be not perform but many apparent evidence that they never shall cause s. hen. Middleton to shift for his best escape and therefore will he the boat shall be send with all speed man with choice man and withal to send i a bottle of aquavitae and a other of wine to make drink my keeper which he according perform before I make m. acquaint with my determination I make he swear unto i to be secret and to use no persuasion with i to withdraw my mind from that I have resolve upon whereupon I show he what I have write to m. pemberton and withal show he how that himself and other shall walk out of the town to the water side to such a place as he well know and I appoint where I will not fail God send i into the boat to take he and the rest in also I acquaint he that the carpenter and other I have appoint to embark themselves to the southward of the town where lay a boat hard by the shore with mast and sail ready fit for their purpose but withal I have give the carpenter warning not to embark themselves till such time as they see the ship boat put off from the bridge all thing sort out well to our purpose the subasha which be our guardian and leave in town only to look to i fall to drink hard at a racky-house and I be doubtful of any good performance from my enemy the turk have long bethink i of all the mean I can devise from time to time to make a escape but can not light upon any project that have not apparent danger both to myself and those that shall attempt to escape away with i only this devise it please God to put into my head whereby I may be secret convey into the boat without be discover for my keeper and soldier eye be only upon i wheresoever I go all the rest of my company may walk abroad any where by day time without suspicion or any great regard I never go out of door but two or three soldier attend upon i wheresoever I go the boat be come and keeper all drink and all thing fit about twelve a clock at noon the subasha return from the aracke-house and be in one end of our house but a wall between we where his abide be the better to guard we I begin to put my business in execution and appoint the carpenter to take other with they and to go by two and two in the best manner they can to avoid suspicion and shift for themselves in the boat aforesaid but in any case not to meddle before they see the ship boat under sail to m. and those that I appoint to take into lee-ward of the town I give order likewise to go two or three in company alongst the sea side to the place I have appoint they to take they in and there to tarry my come after I have give these direction I be convey into my tub sir h. Midleton escape aboard and safe set aboard the boat which be do I force out the head of the cask and come aboard cause they to bear up with the leeward point where I take in John Fowler Benjamin Greene Rowland Webbe ro. mico ro. Conwey William Bownes John Wright Arthur Atkinson Thomas Euans John wood and Henry fortune m. and other be too slack in come out of the town be take before they can come to the boat the town be raise partly by the undiscreet run of some of our people and partly by see the boat bear up to leeward contrary to their wont course m. and those with he have likewise escape have he come by land to the point and not take water so soon as other which be both sick and weak do which be behind he when he take the water I come to a anchor and bring the boat a ground in tarry for they to the no little danger of we all I cause man to leap overboard to rescue he but before they can get a pike length from the boat he and those with he be all apprehend m. discharge a pistol in the face of one of they that hardly pursue he and mortal wound he before he be take it boot i not to stay long have all the town in pursuit of i and a very narrow and shall channel to pass between a small sandy island and the main it please God we light upon the right channel which quick bring we into deep water and out of danger of our enemy for which his great mercy towards we his holy name be bless and praise for evermore they in the darling keep good watch in the top which so soon as they see the boat under sail let slip and set sail bear up to lee-ward to have relieve we if need have be be come aboard we espy the boat wherein the carpenter be come towards we I send the ship boat to bring they and their boat aboard of we in this boat escape George collinson Robert Nathaniel symonds and John tailor but Walter Talbot who be appoint to come with they tarry so long before he come that the boat be put off he think to swim aboard and be drown about two hour after our come aboard come two poor arab in a Canoa but so fearful they dare not come nigh the ship till they be win by fair word and so with much ado a letter from m. one of they enter and deliver i a letter from m. show that they be in great danger of be slay or spoil by those that apprehend they but some of the soldier through former acquaintance bear they good will save they and bring they to the agae where they tarry his come at the first sight of they he look as pale as ash tell they they shall all loose their head ask they how they dare attempt such a thing they answer they come out of England under my command and do nothing but what I have command which in no wise they dare disobey he again threaten they with loss of their head and present cause they all to be chain by the neck from which chain they be quick release at the entreaty of Nohuda Melicke amber and Nohuda Mahomet of Cananor and other and permit to remain in our former house but with a strong guard than before this their kindness proceed not of love but for fear of their ship in the road which be then under my command I return answer of the letter and send the Aga word that if he do not send i all my people a stout message to the aga. with those provision of the ship which he detain contrary to the bashaes order for I mind not to be put off with Farriga I will fire the ship in the road and do my best to batter the town about his ear likewise I send word to the Nohudas that they shall not send any boat aboard the ship without first come aboard of i and to acquaint i with their business nor to carry any thing out of they aland without my leave and order after my departure there be no small disturbance in the town the aga not know how to answer the bassa fear it will cost he his head the subbasha which be my keeper at his wit end and know not whether he may stay or flee for his life the emeryor bahar or lord of the sea as they term he in little better take be accuse of consent to my escape one of our porter take sanctuary in one of their church and will not be get out from thence till he have his pardon and the nohuda and merchant in great fear of loss of their ship and good most of they send present of victual and refresh to master Femell and the rest which before take scorn to speak to they at night I send the boat well man to carry the news to our ship with order for their come over with all speed I ply to windward in the darling when the tide serve and rid a little without the great ship so that I have she and all the rest under the command of our ordnance the twelve come aboard Nohuda Mahomet of Cananor with letter tell i the Aga be sorry I be so depart which I know to be true for that he be determine within few day to have set i at liberty and all my people to my own content and for the provision belong to our ship which be ashore he will deliver they but for my people he can not deliver they without order from the bassa entreat fifteen day respite in which time if I have not all my man in safety send aboard they desire no favour I tell he likewise I must have my pinnace surrender i for that I will not depart the road without she he say he will acquaint the aga with my demand of the pinnace and doubt not but that I shall have she at the time limit I yield to his request upon his promise that I shall have both man and pinnace within the time prefix I dare not as yet demand restitution or satisfaction for my good till such time as I have all our man from the shore at his come ashore he acquaint the aga that he have conclude a peace for fifteen day upon his promise that I shall have my man and pinnace restore within the same time the aga be very angry that I demand the pinnace and send for master Femell and John Williams and ask what I mind in demand the pinnace which be the bassa by agreement with i say I may as well demand the good as the pinnace both which be put to the account of the signior they say I can not well proceed on my voyage without the pinnace but for the good they assure he I will never demand they in the mean time the darling cable anchor pitch tar and other thing be ashore be bring aboard and few day escape that I have not one present or other of refresh from the aga Dabbullian and other which will scarce take knowledge of i while I be ashore but now glad to flatter i this morning early come a boat from shore aboard the innermost ship I cause the gunner to make two shot at she which cause they to come aboard i I threaten they if they do so any more to hang they and burn their ship so that afterward they dare not attempt the like the thirteen the increase and peppercorn towards night come to anchor in the sight of the road for they can not fetch in that night the lee-ward tie be come against they the fourteen they get into the road and I go aboard the increase where I be receive with great joy of all my company the eighteen there come into the road a ship of Diu belong to shermall the Shabander lade with India commodity which I do embark both people and good a ship of diu. and cause she to ride hard by i the next day be the nineteen at the entreaty of shermall I license all the people save some few to look to the ship to go ashore this day be the twenty day I hear nothing from the shore the one and twenty master femell write to i they have be all chain by the neck the five and twenty come aboard Nohuda Mahomet and certify i that the bassa have give order for release of my people and pinnace and promise to bring they aboard on the morrow I shoot off three piece at his departure this day all our people ashore be chain by the neck and the next day release the cause they be so use they can not learn the six and twenty Nohuda Mahomet return say the pinnace be launch but the aga will neither deliver she nor the man till I have give he a writing firm by myself and four or five more of the principal in our ship with oath to perform the same to contain in effect a perfect peace with the turk his subject and indian and not to meddle in this sea or elsewhere in revenge of any thing that have pass nor to demand restitution or satisfaction for any good take from i I tell he I marvel he come every day with new matter he have the day before promise as this day to bring i all my man and pinnace aboard which I look to have have perform and for better security he and those with he shall remain hostage aboard till I have they and therefore will he to advise the aga he allege that he be employ of his own voluntary motion in this business shall reap much discredit and be laugh at for his forwardness if he shall write to that purpose and therefore he tell i plain he will not write whatsoever betide he but promise if I will give he such a write as he demand and send he ashore he will bring i all my people aboard before night I see I can get he by constraint to yield to nothing think best to give he some content though it be somewhat that may but carry the name of what he desire I thereupon cause a write to be make in english firm by myself and five more contain a brief relation of the treacherous usage of we in this country and nothing else we set to our hand as witness of truth of the same write withal I send advice to master Femell how he shall interpret it unto they I deliver he the write he desire but swear I will not say my word shall be cru than a turk oath at all time ashore he go leave some of the better sort of his company for pledge who he bid hang if he bring i not all my company aboard that night come ashore he handle the matter so that a little before night he return with master Femell the rest of our man set at liberty John Williams Christopher Cuningham water woodward John Clarke Henry Bauldin Edmund glover Toby birch Alexander james and Merciline Longfield three of they be vest to wit master Femell John Williams and Cuningham with paltry vest of little worth another be send to i which they say come from the bassa the Nohuda will have put it upon my back desire i to wear it as a favour tent i from the bassa I refuse it tell he I scorn to wear any thing that shall come from so unconscionable a dog and my enemy by who order I have receive so much wrong he see I will not take it leave it with my man and so depart carry with he the Turk take in the darling which have remain aboard the increase till that present he promise to return in the morning with our pinnace the pinnace restore the seven and twenty according to promise the Nohuda come aboard and bring my pinnace and demand of i if all he have promise be perform I tell he no for that I have not all my company they keep from i the boy at which they have force to turn Turk and he will I have before I will release the ship he tell i he will tell the aga and return i his answer and so depart this morning early I call a council wherein I propound whether I shall release the ship according to promise or detain they till restitution be make i it be conclude that I shall release all the ship which be of India and our friend and set our hope upon the ship that be to come from sue likewise I demand what course be best to take for recovery of the youth at by some it be think bootless to demand he but to hope of take some prisoner of worth which may procure his liberty I be of a contrary opinion and think it fit to demand he now when we shall have many to solicit for he rather than depend upon hope of take of prisoner which we may fail of and so it be conclude to demand the boy present and no speech at all to be make of our good restore the eight and twenty there be a write send i from the aga wherein he Nohuda Mahomet and shermall Shebander find themselves ship and good that I shall have within twelve day the boy from so that I will release the ship I give they leave to unlade the ship of Diu m. femell die and go and come to the other ship at their pleasure this night master femell die of a Callentura or rather poison by the turk as the opinion of our surgeon be the first of june be discharge out of the ship three boat lade of Cotton this evening we have a gust with much wind june 1. 1611. which come from the shore which break our land cable the wind be so hot we can hardly endure it I be fain to fly to my cabin not be able for heat to stay aloft I write a letter to the bassa in italian for restitution of my good and satisfaction for damage I be answer afterward the letter be not understand for lack of a interpreter exceed heat in the red Sea I again embark the ship of Diu and will not permit they to unlade any more good out of she till the bassa have satisfy i to the value of seventy thousand rial of eight which I have lose and be damnify by he I consider with myself that this be the sure way to attain to somewhat in lieu of our loss and not sole to rely upon the take of the ship of sue which the turk may easy prevent i of by give advice by land the second come Ally haskins my interpreter at Zenan aboard and bring i commendation from the bassa say he be sorry I be go after that sort away for he be mind to send i away better content and that he have prepare a rich vest to be send i and a horse and likewise the cayha have he commend hearty and desire i not to take any violent course here but seek for justice at Stambola for if I do any thing which may be displease to the bassa it will cost he his head that be the chief cause of my send back to Moha and tell i he have bring the english youth with he from by order from the bassa which the next day he say shall be send aboard conditional I will permit the ship of Diu and the rest to discharge I answer he I will in no wise release the ship till I have restitution or satisfaction for my good and damage to the value abovesaid the three the Aga desire peace for twelve day till the bassa have knowledge of my demand the next day Ally haskins Tocoursie a bannian and other come aboard and withal desire I will draw out the particular of my loss that they may consider thereof ashore I fulfil their desire and by write set down my loss and hindrance to be seventy thousand rial of eight and withal send the aga word whereas at first I be receive by he and come aland at his entreaty and upon his word a^^ promise of kind entertainment and free and peaceable trade he like a treacherous dog without any cause or offence give have cruel slay diverse of my people and villainous imprison myself and other and rob and spoil all he can seize upon to the value of seventy thousand beside great charge and loss of time if therefore he do not present make i restitution or satisfaction for the same about my demand and the allegation and answer message and letter pass between we day by day and at his entreaty I grant truce for twelve day in which time he certify his master of my demand I will do my best to batter the town about his care take all the good out of the Diu ship into my own and burn all the ship in the road and not depart thence till I be sufficient revenge all which I can do without breach of promise the time of truce be out and they not have perform covenant with i this day be the six the Aga send i a peremptory answer demand who give i leave to come into those sea say sith I come without leave I be just deal withal and touch the good and whatsoever else he have do nothing but what he have order from the bassa who himself tell i so much and if I be not please with what be past the best way be to refer it to the hear of our better at Stambola and if I shoot at the town he will shoot again at my ship and for the ship and good in the road they be none of he but if I do either hurt the town or ship in the road it will not be please to the sultan who will be sure to be recompense for any harm I shall do they to which I answer to come into this sea I need no lea^e but god and my king but for my come ashore the Aga have not only give i leave but much entreat i and for my good I know nothing I ought the bassa neither be I his factor neither have I at any time receive any thing of he or any the least courtesy neither have I do he or his any wrong and therefore no way his debtor whereby he may challenge any of those good which by his order I be rob of wherefore I must and will be pay for they not at Stambola where neither the bassa and Aga dare show their face to answer such shameful wrong which they have false charge the sultan to have command they to do but even there where I have be wrong will I be right and if they find themselves aggrieve they may go to the court of England to seek their remedy for to Stambola I mind not to go the eight I send master pemberton to Assab to buy fresh victual we have very many man sick in our ship I be afraid to have my provision from Moha doubt poison fear of poison by the turk which by friend I be warn to take heed of the nineteen come aboard shermall Sabander Ally Tocorsie and many other of the chief of the bannians to make agreement with i and bring with they master Pembertons youth decent apparel in new clothes after the christian fashion which the Sabander bestow upon he after some kind gratulation pass on either side the Sabander begin to tell i that he have always love and favour i and my people and be always ready to do i what kindness he be able and for the injury do i by the turk it do as much grieve he as if it have be do to his own people for which his love and pity of i in my misery he be like to pay at too dear a rate without I will now show myself favourable unto he for that the bassa have enjoin he to give i satisfaction or have send order to cut his throat and seize upon his good and this he protest be not feign but the very truth I answer it be the turk that have rob i and do i many injury and from they will I look for satisfaction and not from any other he will i to leave those talk and come to my demand I tell he he know what I demand for that I have send it ashore in the arabic tongue in writing he say if my demand be answerable to that write it be but labour lose to have further conference there abouts we spend most part of the day in beat the prize of our lose commodity and in conclusion with much ado we come to agreement that all the lead and iron shall be surrender and eighteen thousand rial of eight in money within fifteen day for satisfaction of all our good and loss sustain and thereupon a peace conclude between we and they for two year from the port of Moha to Cannanor upon the coast of India conditional that the bassa give i a write under his hand and seal for confirmation of this peace between our nation and they for the time before specify in this month and about this time begin a general and most grievous sickness in our ship few or none escape it begin with a great pain in the head and stomach great sickness bereave they of sleep the best remedy for it be vomit and bleed but some be take with fever withal who be long before they recover their health the rest that escape the fever quick recover and God be praise few die thereof and the second of july we receive the last payment the Sabander be there himself july 2. 16^1 I clear all reckon with he as well for money borrow of he while I be prisoner as for money disburse afterward by he he demand of i the money I promise the bassa cayha which be a thousand vonetianos which I will in no wise pay although he much urge i with my word and promise and that he shall be force to pay for that he have pass his word for the same I tell he the Cayha have not perform what he promise i in set i and my people at liberty how the cayha and he will agree I know not but I doubt the cayha will constrain he to pay it draw towards night the Sabander and the rest take their have of i to go aland and for his farewell I cause three piece of ordnance to be discharge the three come again Tacaroy and Ally and buy some vermilion of i for which I give they credit they promise to come over to the other side within fourteen day and make i payment also to bring i some provision of grain as I have give they order to buy i at Moha and a write from the bassa for confirmation of peace conclude in the afternoon we warp out of the road Assab and that night set sail towards Assab but can not get thither till the five day in the morning the turk practice to poison the well of Assab a letter from the k. of Assab the six I go aland and cause all the well to be empty and cleanse for fear of poison for it be often tell i at Moha the turk practise with the people of Assab to poison the wels. from this day till the thirteen day we spend in water and buy refresh not any thing in that time happen worth writing the thirteen the king of this country hear of my escape at Moha and my arrival in his country send three of his chief servant be attend with thirty soldier with a letter and a present of refresh to i the effect of his letter be to bid i welcome into his country with offer of any thing I stand in need of and that his country do afford as also not a little rejoice of my escape from my enemy with many other compliment I feast and reward the messenger and return they with a present to the king their master which be a vest of broadcloth and a fair look glass the seventeen come Afelba from Moha wherein be tocorcie the sabanders man and another Bannia^ they bring with they diverse provision which I leave order with they to provide i as also the money they ought i but the write from the bassa for confirmation of peace on his behalf they can not get but make excuse the bassa be so busy in the war he can not intend it so that it be manifest he intend to keep no quarter with our nation the four and twenty we all set sail out of Assab road to put that in practice which long before I have determine which be to ply to windward as high as Camaran and there to abide the come of a great ship which yearly come about this time rich lade from sue to Moha hope to be sufficient revenge for all my loss and disgrace offer i by the turk and the rather do I desire to meet with she for that I understand the traitor jeffor bassa and his disciple Regib-Aga have great adventure in she from this day till the last of this month we ply it to windward the wind still opposite to we we sail by day and common anchor by night we pass many and sundry danger for lack of a pilot and many time be like to have come aground to the hazard and loss of all have not God preserve we and yet she escape we in the night as we find in our return @ v. their departure from surat and what happen there with the cambayans and portugal the nine of August 1611. in the morning we set sail and in the evening about eight of the clock we anchor three league short of the babmandell August 9 1611. they return for India the western channel of babmandell three league broad the false report of the turk and indian the ten the darling and release appoint to go out at the wester channel which they find to be three league over from the main of habeshe to the island babmandell one three of way over from the island they have no ground at forty fathom the channel clear without danger and not as all the turk and indian report to be full of shoal and rock and not navigable for ship this their false report be to make we believe there be no other passage in and out into that sea but at the easter channel which may be so fortify that no ship can pass that way but shall be in danger of their ordnance for it be not pass one mile and half over between the arabian shore and the i will and upon the main lie shoal a good distance off we in the increase and peppercorn pass out at the narrow channel where we come in about four aclock in the afternoon we all meet without the straits and be in nineteen fathom be some four mile from the arabian shore we steer all this night our course alongst the land from the twelve day till the seven and twenty much wind with calm and contrary wind with a great current a great current set south-west westerly set south-west about four mile a hour for look in all this time what we get when we have a favourable gale we lose that and more when it fall calm be carry back by the current the seven and twentieh we have a gale of wind to carry we off we have sight of mount foelix a head-land to the westward of cape Guardafui at six a clock this night this hill bear south half west about ten at night it fall calm with a great sea out of the southeast at midnight come up a gale at south southeast and south find still as we sail this great sea which be a manifest sign we bring ourselves open of cape Guardafai for so long as the land be in the wind of we we feel none of this Sea the thirty we ply into the road of Delisha and about noon come to a anchor in the road the road of Delisha in Saco^ora we find there ride a great ship of Diu and two small ship one of the other the king both ship of India both find for the red sea take short with the monson the captain of the ship of Diu come aboard i with diverse other who certify i our people at surat be well and very well entreat and be daily expect ship from England and that captain Hawkins be at court with the king where he be make a great lord and have great allowance from the king by the year and for captain Sharpeigh the king have give he money to build a ship which then be almost ready at surat to be launch this and many other thing he tell i which I doubt be too good to be true the monson be far spend and therefore I desire the Nohuda of Diu to help i with his boat and people to ballast and water which he with the other most willing grant proffer i all the water in their ship so will be they to have i go from they I have all the water out of his ship and employ his people to fetch some from the shore I be often in hand with the king to sell i his aloe I can not of long time bring he to ask reason for it in the end with much ado I bargain with he for all pay dear for it than captain keeling do for his I think the indian be in hand with he for it and that be the cause he hold it so dear I leave letter with the king which he promise to deliver to the first English ship that shall come there the three of September have finish my business I make haste to be go sept. 3. 1611. I have with much ado a simple fellow out of the ship of Diu to pilot i upon the coast of India who take upon he to be a good Coaster in the afternoon about two a clock we weigh anchor and ply out of the road the six and twenty between nine and ten of clock we weigh have a gale of wind twenty ^^^tugall (@) at the (@) surat which bring we into the road of surat we rid by the three indian ship in seven fathom a mile from we rid seven sail of Portugal frigate or man of war there be thirteen more of they which be within the river of surat the portugal long before our come thither have intelligence that we be in the red sea and find for this place so that these frigate be purposely send to keep we from trade at surat or elsewhere upon that coast. the captain Maior of they be call don Francisco de Soto mayor be entitle captain Maior of the north he reap great benefit to himself by give cartass or passport to all ship and frigate which trade upon that coast. any ship or frigate which have not the same pass be confiscate or lose this night I discharge my pilot pay they well for their pain I send by they letter to such of our people as they shall find at surat for I can not learn how many or who they be that be there resident the nine and twenty answer from the portugal there come a small Portugal frigate from the admiral of the armada as they term they wherein be one Portugal and his boy who bring i answer of my letter send the day before from the captain Maior wherein he use some compliment certify i that he be glad to hear I belong to a king a friend and that he and he will be ready to do i service in any thing he may provide I bring a letter or order from the king of Spain or the viceroy for my trade in these part which if I can show he he will willing obey if otherwise he must guard the port he have in charge where the king his master have his factory I return answer by word of mouth by the same Portugal that I have neither letter from the king of Spain or viceroy neither have I need thereof for that I be send by the king majesty of England with letter and rich present to the great mogoll and to establish the trade begin in those part and for the factory they have there ay I come not to harm the same but that they may continue in the same estate they be and for our factory or trade I see no reason why the portugal shall oppose themselves against we for that it be a free country for all nation and the great mogoll nor his people any way in vassalage to the portugal and therefore will he to tell his captain he shall in friendly manner permit those english which be at surat to come aboard and confer with i concern our affair and that he will not urge i to use force for by the one mean or the other I must and will have they many other speech past which be here too tedious to write I bestow a vest of broadcloth upon the messenger and so dispatch he away he promise the next day to return we see it be not possible without pilot to go over the bar set sail from the bar foot where I have be to discover in the darling and in the evening come to a anchor in the road I go aboard the increase where I find letter from the shore they come from surat from Nicholas bangham former a joiner in the Hector Nicholas pang^ans letter from the shore wherein I be certify that we have no factory there and that he be send from captain Hawkins from agra to recover some debt that be owe there and likewise he have letter from captain Hawkins but dare not send they aboard lest they shall be intercept by the portugal what be become of the factor and good he mention not I write to he to send i those letter and other particular concern our business the three of October Hoia Nassan the governor of surat Hoia Nassan governor of surat and the governors brother of Cambaya send a mogoll unto i with a present of refresh and in their name offer to do i all the kindness they can but the portugal he say be the cause they can not do what they will but for their part they desire to trade with we which they see no way possible to effect so long as we shall ride there and the Portugal Armado by we and therefore they will counsel i to go for Goga a better place where we shall ride near the shore with our ship where the armado can not hinder our land and likewise it be near Cambaya where there be more merchant and great and better store of merchandise for our turn have to this effect deliver his message he be desirous to know what I determine to do whether I will stay here or go thither I answer as yet I have receive no answer from the shore save a letter of small import and till I know what be become of our countryman and good former leave in the country I can not resolve he and therefore I desire he to be a mean that some one of our people may come aboard to confer with i and pilot to conduct we thither and then will I quick resolve they what I will do in the mean while I can say nothing I give he and his interpreter a small reward and dispee^^d they the five a bramyney or priest of the bannians which come with the mogoll for a interpreter a (@) of (@) Hawkins from agra come in a boat of the town with a letter from Nicholas bangham and captain Hawkins letter from agra date in April last relate the manner of his favour and disfavouring by the great mogoll his fickleness in grant we trade and afterward disallow the same give the portugal firmae against we contradict thereby what former he have grant to we and our nation a letter of William Finch from lahor by the same messenger come two letter of a latter date from William Finch from lahor the one to the commander of any english ship arrive at surat the other to the company in England relate his proceed and intent to go home over land the unconstancy of the king and people of the country the practice of the portugal and many other circumstance advise i in any wise not to land any good nor hope for trade in those part for that the people be all fickle and unconstant like the king and dare not offend the portugal I have peruse these letter grow hopeless of any trade in that place yet resolve to try the uttermost what may be do before I will depart I understand by Nicholas banghams letter that captain Sharpeigh John jordan and other be come from Cambaya to surat to go along with i and although I can have no trade yet will I endeavour myself in all I may to get they all aboard and not leave they behind i the indian ship which rid by i have give over their voyage to the southward for that the monson for the southward be pass the Braminey desire my leave that they may carry their ship into the river which in no wise I will grant will he to tell the governor and the rest of the owner that their ship shall not depart thence till I have all the englishman at Cambaya and surat aboard of i if I have permit they to have go I shall have frustrate myself of either send too or hear from our people ashore the Portugal intercept both letter and man as much as they can the two and twentieth the portugal have lay they in ambush to cut off some of my man send on shore which when they see their best time of advantage break out and come in great heap confuse run towards our man and boat they discharge their shot at we and we answer they again with we both from those my man a shore and also from my frigate which ride close to the land all my man retire in safety to my boa^s and frigate and the portugal after some hurt receive return behind the hill out of shot and so in worse case than they come go back to their frigate there be of they seven ensign and may be in number about three hundred man at this instant when they come upon we by land five of their great frigate which rid a little way off to the northward come run upon we and shoot at we be nothing near within shoot we go with our frigate and boat aboard our ship to dinner little hope of any news as at that day from our people ashore the Portugal frigate row to the northward and anchor where they ride before I advise with captain Dounton master jourdayne and other what course be best to take and it be think fit to abide no long there but to return to the road of surat where rid the increase and there to determine what we have best to do the eight of November Nicholas bangham come from surat and bring with he some refresh Novemb. 8. 1611. a hundred sail of Portugal frigate which with himself be very welcome the news hold of the come of mockrib can. the viceroy son come into the river with a hundred sail of frigate the great part of they be merchant find for Cambaya I cause this night our ship which ride within to come off and anchor by i lest the enemy who strength I know not may attempt aught against they the nine the ship ride without the sand Hoia Nassan come down to the seaside I go to he with my frigate and boat and have conference with he he promise i not to fail two day or three at the further he will return and bring good with he to trade with i I tell he I have be here a great while and co^ld get no refresh of victual for my money and therefore desire he to give order the country people may bring i some which he promise to do and upon the same take his leave and depart the eighteen I receive a letter from Nicholas bangham wherein he write that there be little or no hope of trade to be expect this last letter of Nicholas bangham together with the breach of promise of Hoia Nassan bring i out of hope of trade think all their f^rmer promise to be nothing but invention to delude and weary i and in the end to turn i go without trade which they dare not let i have for fear of offend the portugal and yet loath to offend i with absolute denial these thing consider I determine to be go and therefore have often write to Nicholas bangham to come away but Hoia Nassan will not permit he he see he can not get leave to come he steal secret out of town and as this day arrive here anon after Hoia Nassan miss he as it seem and doubt at his come that be hopeless of trade I will be go send jaddaw the broker present after he with a letter from himself and another from mockrib can promise speedy to come both unto i to which in regard of his former promise breach I can hardly give credit yet I resolve to spend some few day more to see the event thereof the portugal lie all in the river not dare to come nigh we by sea think to entrap we by land and therefore a great number of they ambush themselves behind a row of sand hill not far from our land place where they keep close but God be thank they fail of their expectation all our people without hurt recover the boat in the mean season they in the ship be not idle but let fly apace at they both with great shot and small the portugal think to find we unprepared to bid they thus welcome present betake they to their heel and flee behind the hill where they lie lurk a while not dare to show their head they leave one lie upon the strand be mortal wound in the head which our people bring aboard the four and twentieth be Sunday jaddaw the broker come aboard and bring i word Mockrib can be come and will be with i before night after dinner I go to the shore side with my frigate where I find Hoia Nassan who send i word mockrib can be come and will be present there I return aboard and make choice of a good present to give he which be effect be well accompany I go direct aland where I find mockrib can Hoia Nassan with great troop of man abide my come the interview of mockrib can governor of Cambaya and sir Henry Middleton at our meeting we embrace each other our ship at the same time discharge some ordnance to bid he welcome which he seem to take kind after I have deliver he a good present we sit down upon carpet spread upon the ground where pass some conference between we be near sunset I entreat he he will be please to go aboard my ship and there take his lodging for that night which he present grant carry with he his own son Hoia nassans son and diverse other his chief follower but Hoia Nassan will not go it please i well to see he so confident and make i conceive better hope than before he have all this part of the country under his command I give he the best entertainment I can set before he such cate as upon such a sudden I can provide which he and those with he fall round to after they have do eat I deliver he our king majesty letter direct to he and tell he the effect thereof he seem to be very much please that his majesty will vouchsafe to write unto he and promise i to do we all the good he can not only for our present trade but also to give we any place or harbour I will appoint or name where we may fortify ourselves if we so please in fine I not demand any thing but I find he as ready to grant as I be to ask grow late I leave he to his rest and depart the five and twentti in the morning mockrib can busy himself in buy of knife glass or any other toy he find among my company I go with he and show he the ship aloft and below any thing he like belong to the ship he carry with he away gratis beside many toy of my company which he like I buy and give he endeavour in all thing I may to give he content after he have be fore and after he return to my cabin where he will needs see all my chest trunk and locker open and search whatsoever he see there of i that he take like to I give he for nothing by this time victual be ready he go to dinner which be do he be desirous to be go to see the other ship and there behave himself in like sort the thirty and one and thirty I send master Fowler John jordan and other our merchant to see the good they return and bring mustrel and the price we set down what we will give for each sort desire they to do the like by we that so we may come to agreement for both they hold i off with delay post i off from day to day but conclude nothing they will neither offer for our commodity nor abate in they the delusion of the guzarat and whereas I have sell mockrib can all our sword-blade the cheap because he shall take the one with the other they have choose out the best of they and return i back the worst be the better half and no speech when we shall be pay for they which do they remove their good to be go for surat and upon the same make proclamation upon great penalty that no victual or other thing shall be bring we leave i without cause thus abuse the eight of December in the morning decemb. 8. 1611. come mockrib can with all his crew upon the strand and about some forty pack of their good I come a land with a good guard of shot and halberd I go to he to his tent where after friendly salutation and compliment past we fall to treat of business and agree for price of all our lead quicksilver and vermilion and for their good likewise in lieu thereof it be to be note that all these good do not belong to these two great man but also to the Shabander and diverse other merchant yet for the most part the business be carry sole by Hoia Nassan no man dare either to buy or sell with we without his prevention and leave by that mean advance the price of their good and abase we to their great advantage and our great hindrance and loss the nine in the morning we begin to land our lead and to receive some of their good as also to be in good forwardness to make price for the rest when a letter come to mockrib can from his king mogul letter which dash all his mirth and our proceed for that present he be very pleasant before he receive and peruse it but afterward become very sad he sit a good pretty while muse and upon a sudden rise up and so go his way without once look towards or speak to i I be seat hard by he before he take horse he better bethink himself and send for i when I come to he he embrace i tell i he be my brother pray i to excuse this his sudden departure for that he have earnest business and must be go but he will leave Hoia Nassan with i to receive and deliver those good already bargain for and to bargain with i for more short after we hear he be put out of his government of Cambaya Hoia Nassan be late put out of his government of surat and other put in their place this afterward we judge to be the effect of the king letter and the cause of his discontent mockrib can be of late governor of Cambaya and all the sea-coast thereabouts have now nothing leave he in this country but the place of the customer of surat the ten the new governor of surat and Assan Ally come aboard the peppercorn to i to see the ship after they have be there a while we go to the trades-increase the factor be ashore to see the weight of the lead which with no little trouble be near-hand all land and embark ready to be send a shore they entreat Hoia Nassan that he will be please to go in hand therewith for that it will ask a great time in do the factor will have weigh with our english weight which he will in no wise agree unto the Weigher of surat be there with the weight of the town and with that weight will he have it weigh in the end see no other remedy they give he way and begin to weigh with the country beam after some few draft they desire they may understand the beam before they proceed any further to know whether the Weigher tell they the truth what it weigh for he know it and they not he may give they what weight he listen likewise they make trial of those they have weigh by his beam by we and find very great difference in five pig ten or eleven maunds each maund being three and thirty pound english weight he see he may not have the lead at what weight he list begin to cavil say he will have half money half good for his commodity otherwise we shall not have they rail and rave like a madman call for the carman to draw away the good say he will none of our lead nor other good but instant be go I be aboard the increase with the governor and sabandar the factor which be a shore send one aboard a purpose to advise i of their proceed and how that Hoia Nassan be cause the carman to yoke their ox to draw away all the good they have bring and if I do not take some speedy course for prevent the same he will go from his bargain and return all our good upon our hand again I think he be apt enough to do so by that little experience I have of he as also a custom they have in this country and by report in most part of India that what bargain soever be make between merchant and merchant may be rovoke rude custom in buy so it be do within the compass of twenty four hour yea although he have give earnest and carry away the good buy yet he may return they and have back his earnest I understand this bad custom before I land any of my lead and doubt to have such a trick put upon i I do purposely send unto Hoia Nassan John Fowler and other to know whether he will stand to his bargain before I land any lead which will put we to much trouble to land it and therefore I will be at a certainty with he he before many witness promise they to take it all and be as good as his word and that with all speed they shall land it and now come to the point of performance he fly from all he have former promise I advise with such as be about i what we have best do and it be think the sure way to keep those man which be aboard i for pledge till they have perform with we and if we can get Hoia Nassan into our possession to keep he and free those whereupon I detain the governor and sabandar tell they how Hoia Nassan have deal with i go about to delude i as former and therefore there be no other remedy but to keep they for pledge for performance of the bargain the governor counsel i to go a shore Hoia Nassan and the sabandar keep aboard as pledge and fetch the man himself which I do give the governor a good present I let he depart keep Hoia Nassan and the sabandar for pledge aboard the peppercorn the nineteen Hoia Assan Ally the sabandar come from surat he show i a couple of letter which be send from the viceroy from Goa one of they direct to himself the other to the captain Maior of Diu I open and peruse they both the effect of the letter to the captain Maior be that he have receive his letter whereby he understand the especial good service do against the english in put the english captain and his people to swim to his boat for their safety otherwise he have take they prisoner or slay they for the which he high commend he have do the part of a valiant captain and worthy soldier which good service do to his king and country will redound to his great honour for the which he give he as many thanks as if he have take the english captain prisoner and partly to gratify he he bestow those frigate which he late before have take from the mallaber upon he certify he he have send his son in the army which be young pray he to assist he with his counsel whereby he may gain a great name thus be the viceroy and myself abuse by the false report of a lie braggart the other letter to the sabandar be to thank he that he will not permit the english nation to trade at surat will he to continue in that mind and he shall do the king of Portugal great service for the which he shall not loose his reward this day come diverse cart lade with provision for the ship from surat buy by Nicholas Bauggam the four and twenty the account on both side be clear and business finish the pledge on either part release they promise we to deal with we for the rest of our commodity they tarry till the six and twenty day but do nothing worth note the seven and twenty come a jew aboard i which bring i a letter from Massulipatan date the eight of September from one Peter Floris a dantiscan employ by the company show his set out in February his speedy and safe passage and arrive there in the begin of September a letter of Peter ^l^ris januar. 2. 1611 the second of january 1611. I write to captain Hawkins from who I have receive a letter the eight and twenty of December and send captain Sharpeigh Hugh Fraine and Hugh greet to set the mind of captain Hawkins in some better course than he seem to aim at in his last letter to i as also to buy some indicoe and other commodity if they may be have at reasonable rate the six and twenty captain Hawkins and captain Sharpeigh come to the water side capt. Hawkins come aboard our ship they have leave their carriage behind they five mile off I land with two hundred arm man and go to meet they to safeguard they and their good from the portugal which I doubt will do their best to intercept they we meet they about some three mile off and bring all in safety aboard our ship not see any portugal the seven and twenty I send John Williams and one of our factor to surat upon business this day mockrib can come to town he have be to meet a great commander which be come from the war of Decan and be to pass by surat before his go out of the town he send for m. jourdaine and will he to commend he to i and to certify i that he be to go out of the town but will not tarry out above three day and at his return he will be as good as his word for what he have promise concern our factory now at his return he send for he again and with a frown countenance contrary to his expectation demand of he what he do there and why be we not all go he answer that he stay upon his word and promise that we shall leave a factory otherwise he have not be there he say again we shall have no factory there and that the long stay of our ship there have hinder he in his custom ten hundred thousand manuvey and therefore in the king name charge they to be go with speed out of the town for neither trade nor factory be there to be have for we John Williams return this morning and two cart with provision come from surat the nine and twenty I send for the factor at surat to do as mockrib can command to haste and come away for that I will be go @. 5 his go to dabul^^nd ^nd thence to the red sea and enforce trade with the guzerates the nine of February in the morning be calm February 9 we warp over the sand with the increase have we not get over this tide we have lose the whole spring this road of Swally stand in the latitude of twenty degree fifty seven minute variation sixteen degree thirty minute the eleven in the morning we set sail for the road of surat and anchor there in the afternoon by a new ship of surat late launch the road of Swally be in twenty degr fifty seven min. variation sixteen degree thirty minute and come out of the river she be find for the red Sea the latitude of this road be twenty degree forty two minute the twelve we weigh and drive to the southward and anchor two league from the road by a ship of calicut find for surat out of which ship I take a pilot for Dabul the thirteen we weigh and drive down at noon come a gale northerly at the come of the wind we have seventeen fathom we haul off west by south in twelve and fourteen fathom after steer south west by west till four a clock between which time we have from fourteen to twenty fathom upon a sudden we come to eight fathom and then to six be then in my opinion from the ship that rid in the road of surat ten league then we hale in east and east by south three quarter of a mile and find from six fathom to twenty again then we steer south-west by south till one a clock after midnight be for the most part against the tide at that time the water shoal in two cast from twenty to fifteen fathom have run in nine hour some seven league and a half then we hale off three hour be little wind till we come to twenty fathom then we steer south south-west at which time we see the land with two hammock thereon bear east southeast some eight league off which we judge to be Damon Damon at six in the evening we hale in south southeast the wind northerly it sudden fall calm and so continue till past midnight this morning our latitude nineteen degree fifteen minute have steer all night south by west and our depth between twelve and fourteen fathom five league of the shore in the morning little wind at noon come a gale we steer south the wind west northwest in the evening be between four and five league from the shore we have thirteen fathom at sunset we judge ourselves thwart of Chau Chau we steer south all night with a fair gale of wind the sixteenth we steer alongst the coast south and by east till six a clock in the evening keep for the most part in ten fathom or there about at which time we arrive in the road of Dabull he arrive at Dabull and there have trade which stand in the latitude of seventeen degree two and forty minute variation sixteen degree and thirty minute the seventeen the pilot which I have out of the Mallabar I send ashore in a fisher-boate with a letter which I have at my be at Moha from Mollich abor captain or Nohuda of a great ship of this place the letter be to the governor to entreat he to use i kind and to trade with i in the afternoon the governor and Mellick amber each of they send i a small present of refresh and many compliment offer i any thing the country do afford and if I please to send ashore he will deal with i for our commodity I send a couple of merchant ashore with a good present who be bid kind welcome and well entertain while they be there the eighteen nineteen and twentieth boat pass each day between the ship and shore be spend about the sale of some good the particular with each day business I refer to the account of the merchant hold it not fit here to be express by the three and twentieth we have deliver all our good we have bargain for and no hope of further sale in this place I determine with all speed to be go from hence the four and twentieth I call a council to advise what we have best to do I propound whether it be better to go from hence direct for Priaman Bantam etc. or to return to the Red-sea there to meet with such indian ship as shall be find thither and for that they will not deal with we at their own door we have come so far with commodity fit their country no where else in India vendable I think we shall do ourselves some right and they no wrong to cause they barter with we we to take their indicoe and other good of they as they be worth and they to take we in lieu thereof all man opinion be for the Red-sea for diverse reason as first the put off our english good and have other in place thereof fit our country second to take some revenge of the great and unsufferable wrong and injury do i by the turk there and the three and last but not the least to save that ship man and good which by way of Massulipatan we hear be find for those part which we hold unpossible to escape betray these thing consider we conclude to go back for the Red-sea from this day to the seven and twentieth we spend in get fresh water aboard they have buy all my red-lead and it be carry ashore and deliver but afterward dislike it they return it back in the evening we see a ship in the off two or three malabar which ride by we tell we she be a Portugal ship of cochin find for Chau I send the peppercorn darling and frigate to fetch she in to i the eight and twentieth my man in the frigate have pilla^^^ they which I take from they and return to their owner a Portugal ship take her lade be coco-nut have little else in she this day we spend in rummage the portugal ship I can find no bill of lade in she some small matter I take from she in regard of former injury offer i by the captain Maior don Francisco de Soto at the bar of surat as namely take my good and hinder my trade in that I sustain no further harm by they it be not for lack of good will but lack of mean as manifest appear by letter of the viceroy and other which come to my hand by chance what I have from they I have under the hand of the chief man in she march 24. the four and twentieth of march we have sight of the island Zacotora and at four in the afternoon the point of dellashaw bear south south-west six league off variation nineteen degree 1612. from the four and twentieth at noon till this day at noon we steer northwest and by west and west northwest and west all night think by daylight to have be near the westermost part of the island but contrary to our expectation we find we have go little a head have have a fair gale which show we have have a great currant against we from noon till four in the next morning current we steer alongst the land with little wind and then it fall calm the currant carry we direct upon a rock which lie four or five league from the w part of Loccatra we be force to anchor till we have a gale to carry we from it about two hour afrer come the wind easterly we weigh and stand to the westward and at noon we be four league from the rock here we find a currant set to the northward the seven and twenty we steer west south-west we meet with a great currant set to the northward in the morning we be thwart of abba Curia A^ba and before night have sight of cape Guada be some seven league off from yesterday noon till this day night our course west south-west we may go in that time eight and twenty league our true way west little southerly we stand in till midnight and then hale close of a wind to the southward and so spend the night till day the eight and twentieth by eight of the clock we be fair by the shore midway between the two cape of Guardafui and Felux cape the second of April master pemberton come aboard of i and tell i that he have be at Soccatora April 2. 1612. captain John Saris. and the king show he a writing leave there by captain John Saris who be general of three ship wherein he relate what time he come out of England his place of refresh by the way and his arrival there as also his proceed to the Red-sea to seek trade specify likewise that he have peruse a writing leave there by i wherein be allege many reason to dissuade he from go thither yet have the signior pass he hope of better entertainment than I have hear this unexpected news I call a council to advise what we have best do whereabout we spend but small time for that we be quick resolve to proceed as former we have determine have now no other way l^ft for back we can not return till the westerly wind be come which can not be before mid may. whereupon I present dispee captain Nicholas Dounton and leave he in the peppercorn to tarry there abouts till the five of this month for the keep of the port of aden and I with the trades-increase and darling to keep the twofold entrance of Babbelmandell we steer from thence with the head of aden be about seven league off aden in twelve degree seven and forty minute about four in the evening we be thwart of aden this evening variation thirteen degree and forty minute latitude of aden twelve degree and forty seven minute the three from four a clock the second day till this day morning little wind we steer alongst the channel west by north and west northwest towards the heat of the day it begin to blow we continue our course as before about sunset we anchor in twenty fathom four league short of the Bab where we ride till the next morning the four in the morning about eight a clock we weigh and set sail and about ten in the forenoon we anchor within babmandell in eight fathom water Babmandell fair by the channel which we come in at ^is half a league over between the main of Arabia and the island present at our come to a anchor there come a boat from the shore aboard of i wherein be a Turk and three or four arrabian soldier this Turk be chief of the place send by the aga of Moha to guard it he promise that if I will have a letter send he will present dispatch a foot-poste away who shall return within three day with answer whereupon I write a letter to captain Saris at Moha wherein I certify he the cause of my come and what I determine to do the six come in a jalba of zela a place without the Bab upon the habashe shore find for Moha her load be mat I buy of she twelve sheep and so permit they to depart this day much rain the seven come in a ship of Basanor in the morning early before day which I cause to come to anchor by i one of captain Saris merchant call Richard wickam a ship of Basanor letter from captain Saris. come this morning with letter from his captain the effect thereof I omit to write here I return he answer thereof by a Turk which come in his company but wickam I stay with i for that I doubt they of Moha will have keep he prisoner for that I embark the India ship the eight in the afternoon come in a ship of Diu a ship of diu. find for Moha I send off my frigate to fetch she in who bring she to a anchor by i this be the same ship I detain the last year in Moha roade this day we romage these two foresaid ship and take out of they such good as be for our purpose which be bring aboard i the nine come in a small frigate of Shaher lade with course Ollibanum a frigate of Shaher a bark of sinde note we buy some part thereof and pay they rial for it to their content we continue rummage the India ship for more good the eleven I stay a small bark of sinde note that ever since our come into the Bab till this twelve day the wind keep still upon the southeast quarter but now at northwest and likely to blow hard the last year the same day the wind come up at northwest and continue so for three day this course the wind hold every year the rest of the day and the next we spend in moor of our ship as also the indian ship which be ready to drive ashore have not we lay out more for they the wind blow hard at northwest the fourteen come captain Saris into the road about eight in the morning captain Saris and his fleet of three ship and anchor by i with his three ship they salute i with their ordnance and I they captain Saris captain Towerson and master Cox their chief merchant come aboard of i where we spend all that day in friendly communication I acquaint he with my great lack of cable which he promise to supply at night they depart to their ship captain Saris invite i and other the next day to dinner with he the fifteen I go aboard the Clove where I and those which come with i be kind entertain the signior pass this pass I have of captain Saris his gift a ship of Calicut a ship of Carapatan a ship of Cananor the hassain of surat another ship of surat a ship of diu. a ship of Dabul a small ship of Calicut a frigate of a great ship of diu. the rhemy a great ship of surat he show i the signior pass and read it to i many word pass betwixt we he promise to himself much good trade at Moha if I have not come which my experience find to the contrary at last we agree and seal it in write interchangeable that he shall have one three part of what shall be take pay for the same as I do for the service of his three ship in the action leave the dispose of the ship afterward to i who have sustain the wrong the sixteenth come in two ship I send my frigate and bring they to anchor by i the one be of calicut lade with Rice find for Moha the other be of Carapatan lade with pepper which ship come from Achen and be find for aden but by captain Dounton be chase to lee-ward of the place they determine to go for Moha this Carapatan be a place near Dabull they be subject to the same King the eighteen come in a ship of Cananor find for Moha she come from Achen her lade for the most part pepper the nineteen come in two ship of surat the one call the Hassany belong to Abdelasan find for Zidda the other a small ship of my old friend Hoia Nassan find for Moha I cause they to anchor by i take their sail from their yard and keep some of the chief man aboard of i by they we understand the great mogul mother ship call the rhemie be short to come the twenty come in a ship of Diu lade with India commodity find for Moha and present after come in a ship of Dabull she pass by we I send my pinnace after she which cause they to come to a anchor the one and twenty I send away passenger out of the surat ship about noon come in a small ship of calicut find for Moha which ship we stay the two and twenty come in a frigate of which come from Goa find for Zidda lade with gross Ollibanum and present after come in sight a great ship which pass the great channel and be chase by the darling who cause she to anchor by the Hector she be of Diu find for swaken lade with India commodity the three and twenty come in the rhemy of surat the queen mother ship lade with India commodity find for Zidda she be stay with the rest in this ship be fifteen * * plenty of pilgrim merchant which it seem the jesuite have learn in these part of the saracen which in all the indies advance the affair of state and merchandise to their country and wealth to their company under colour of preach the gospel as this book yield many witness the road of Assab hundred person in the afternoon I make sign to the darling to come to i which present she perceive and come I deliver each ship their sail and will they in the morning betimes to be ready to sail with i for that I will go to lee-ward to the road of Assab the four and twenty we weigh and set sail from the Bab and all the India ship with we leave the Thomas and darling to ply up to the Bab and go for the road of Assab we arrive at crab island about five aclocke and come to a anchor with all the fleet in twelve fathom water where we ride all night the wind at south south-west the five and twenty in the morning we weigh and all the fleet and stand in for the road of Assab and about one of the clock we come to a anchor in seven and a half of fathom the seven and twenty we fetch good store of Indicos out of the ship of surat and Diu the Clove be in the off in sight ply to and fro and not see we I cause the gunner to shoot off a piece of ordnance which they hear answer i with another and present bear up for the Road. chap. 12 nicholas dounton captain of the peppercorn a ship of two hundred and fifty ton and lieutenant in the six voyage to the east-indies set forth by the say company his journal or certain extracts thereof @. i. their come to Saldania and thence to Socatora july 22. 1611. the two and twenty of july at four in the afternoon we have sight of the table and point of Saldania bear east distant twelve league but by reason of calm and uncertain wind it be the four and twenty day before we be moor in the road where we find three hollander one whereof be find for Bantam and in her Peter but general of thirteen sail outward find who have spend his main mast and lose company of his fleet put into the road for to refresh his sick man the other two have make train of seal at Pengwin island find home Saldania be a bay some fourteen league north north-east from the cape Bona Speranza bay of Saldania and north by west ten league from cape Falso which be eastward of the former and may both be see in the say bay these two cape be also divide by another great bay the distance between these two bay be some three league be low marshy ground extend south and north which on either side be environ with mountain in this bay of Saldania when you have bring the norther point thereof west northwest northwest and by west for a small ship northwest thwart of the ledge of rock or water place near the shore which will be lay as it be in the swampe between the high mountain call the table and the sugarloaf in six five or four fathom according to the draught of your ship in clean ground and good anchorhold you may safe ride Pengwin island with his ledge distant three league off bear north northwest half west and stretch to the north and by west of you in the road the main land also though it be thirteen league distant trend a way to the west and by west so that there be little above three point open to let in the northwest sea which be the great storm Saldania have in former time be comfortable to all our nation travel this way both outward and home-ward provision more scarce at Saldania then in time past and why yield they abundance of flesh as sheep and beef bring down by the savage inhabitant and sell for trifle as a Beife for a piece of a iron hoop of fourteen inch long and a sheep for a lesser piece whereby weak sick man in former voyage have be easy recover and make strong now contrariwise whether our trade here be spoil by the dutchman we here find who use to spoil all place where they come only respect their own present occasion by their overmuch liberality or whether the cattle in former time so abundant bring down be prey take by war from one another or other difference which may make they greedy of iron to make head for their lance or dart which now by peace or reconciliation they have little need of the true cause for want of understanding in their language I know not but well I find that all the device we can use by bribe or otherwise to they which daily come down to our tent in fair weather will procure nothing from they for our sick man relief but four cow and those four cow which we do buy be so old and lean that there be but little goodness in the flesh for which they will take no iron but thin piece of copper of six inch square and some seven sheep at piece three inch square of copper cut out of a kettle whereof they make ring by six or eight together which they wear on their arm which be bright and smooth unto they seem very brave these people be the filthy for the usage of their body that ever I have see or hear of filthy people and loathsome for beside the natural uncleanness as by sweat or otherwise whereto all people be subject which the most by wash clear themselves of contrariwise this people do augment by anoint their body with a filthy substance which I suppose to be the juice of herb which on their body show like cowdung and on their wool of their head be so bake like a scurf of green herb for apparel they wear before their privity the tail of a cat or some other small beast and a cloak make of a sheeps-skin reach down to the middle of their thigh and according to the weather they turn some time the hairy side and sometime the dress side to their body their sheep have no wool but hair and be particoloured like calf Saldania sheep their leg be long and their body large than our sheep in England but not so fat the principal of these people wear about the bite of their arm a thin flat ring of ivory be very smooth jewel and ornament and wrought compass near sixteen inch wide and on their wrist some six eight ten or twelve ring of copper bright and smooth all either fasten together or wrought in one other toy also as bracelet of blue glass and pearl shell which be either present they or by idle people give they for ostrich egshel for quill of porcupine which without restraint the dutchman do ordinary buy also a other most strange and filthy wear to what purpose I know not as the gut of cattle about their neck which make they smell like a butcher slaughter-house in their hand they carry a small lance or dart that have a small iron head and a few ostrich feather as a fan to keep away the fly they have also bow and arrow but when they come down to we they will leave they in some hole or bush by the way they be straight make people and nimble of foot it seem that their habitation be movable to place of best pasture for their cattle as in the valley between the mountain who top far up into the country be cover with snow at this time but those near the seaside be clear thereof notwithstanding they be very high wild beast there be of diverse sort but these we have see fallow-deer Antilopes porcupine land tortoise baboon also the dutchman tell we of lion wild beast but we see none snake and adder fowl also abundance to wit wild-goose duck pelican Passea and crow fowl which have in their neck as it be a white band and small bird green colour and diverse other sort unknown also sea-fowle to wit penguin gull pentado which be spot black and white also a grey fowl the pinion whereof be black which the portugal call alcatrass and shag or cormorant at the island in great abundance and a other kind of foul like moore-henne great number of small whale fish there be of diverse sort but these follow have I see to wit in fair weather there be a small sort of whale in great number at the island seal in great abundance with the we take fish like millet be as large as a trought smelt thomebacke and dog and on the rock limpet and mesel abundance in the fresh water the union man catch with a abundance of millet as when we meet with they they tell we it be a very wholesome air and abound with good fresh water both for fill in the road and for traveller in the land which in small stream descend from the mountain one morning by my instigation my general and I accompany with thirteen man more whereof four be small shot go to see if we can find place where we may cut wood and be go some three mile and find none but small green wood whereof we in the peppercorn by reason of our great want be force to cut my general desirous to get refresh for our weak sick man the table determine to walk about the table to see if we can see any cattle that we may by any mean buy for our relief not think it will have be so long a journey where we pa^t through a most uneasy unequal stony unbeaten and as it be overgrow wilderness wherein often we be to descend and ascend through many deep and hollow watercourse over grow with tree from side to side which be make with the rain swift descent from the hill call the table and after a while find a beat path wherein we pass see many pen wherein cattle have be keep which for that it lead from-ward our ship we be force to leave and again have a most vile tiresome travel for a while till we hit into another path which lead along the mountain towards the road and have past a while between the mountain as n^ere as they will give we leave still follow the beat path which be our best guide at length we pass over in the swamp between the souther-most sugarloaf and the table at which time we have sight of the sea ^ide alongst which we go over the side of the cliff which at length we forsake go by judgement east towards the swamp between the norther-most sugarloaf and table where in the morning after we have rest ourselves a little by a fire we make haste and past over the aforesaid swampe and before break of day we come to our tent where we find all our man that can be spare disturb in arm divide into two company the one half under m. thornton the other under m. pemberton determine at day light to separate themselves and again to meet on the other side of the table to go and seek we which intent our approach do prevent refresh ourselves with what our friend have prepare for their intend journey all the day we keep the table on our right hand and the marsh on our l^ft hand which near the mountain be much pester with rock which have fall from the top of the mountain it be moist ground and seem to be good pasture for cattle in diverse place scatter we see some tree of small stature somewhat broad top bear a fruit in bigness and proportion like a pineaple but the husk not so hard and spongy the seed whereof be devour by the bird and the husk remain on the tree the leaf whereof be in form of our houseleek in England but not so thick at this time be their spring both tree and herb blow over the earth it much repent i that I come unprovided of all sort of garden-seed garden-seed to be set at Saldania which may be helpful or necessary for relief of any christian which hereafter may come hither which though the saluage shall somewhat spoil yet every christian captain will seek to augment and re-edify the same also acorn which in time may do good to posterity for tree be not here so long in grow as in our cold country I will not contradict all such as will esteem it more idleness in i to wish to sow where it be many to one I shall never reap yet for myself I esteem it more idleness in i that I have not be so provident as to have seek mean in England to have perform the same and I will to God I can or have mean to leave a profitable remembrance for christian traveller unto the end of the world in any place where I shall come now have to our utmost endeavour here finish all our necessary business to wit water and somewhat relieve our weak sick man with what refresh we can get which be principal mussel they depart from Saldania we prepare our ship to set sail the nine of August which by contrary wind be cross until the thirteen day follow the thirteen of August at foore in the morning we set sail from the road of Saldania have the wind fair at south southeast and at six a clock in the afternoon the cape Bona Speranza bear southeast distant sixteen league the sixteenth in the morning cape Bona Speranza bear northwest and by west distant twelve league and by four a clock in the afternoon we have bring the cape Aguilhas north-east sixteen league distant cape Aguilhas our course be southeast the eighteen day little wind but a high sea flower on the top like a breach in shall water the nineteen we have a very strong gale of wind the six of September at three of the clock we descry the island of Madagascar Madagas^a^ or s. Laurence in the latitude of 23. degr. 38. minute or s. Laurence in the latitude of twenty three degree thirty eight minute and at six a clock we anchor in twelve fathom water in the bay of s. Augustine where we find the union of London the vice-admiral of the four voyage who people be distress want victual to carry they home who relate unto my general their infortunate lose company with their admiral and pinnace between Saldania and the cape Bona Speranza and never since hear of they how they put into this bay outward find to seek they follow also after they and put into zanzibar a island border on the Abaxin coast where the portugal make show of favour and trade entice they to land with their boat three of the union man betray by the portugal at zanzibar where they betray and take three of their man the rest see the danger flee with the boat unto the ship who proceed on their journey till with contrary wind before they can recover any fit port for want of water they be force to return towards the bay of Antongil on the east southeast side of Madagascar but the wind or the course not suit with their determination they put into a good harbour or bay of jungomar on the northwest corner of Madagascar or Vingan^ra the captain of the union with the cape merchant and other betray at jungomar in Madagascar where they be a while feed with good word and fair promise and kind entertainment by the king that in short time the cape merchant in hope of trade for ambergris and other thing grow so conceit of this heathen king plain meaning that at the king request go not alone to he but persuade his captain and other merchant to accompany he who be bring to the king presence he send also for the chirurgeon trumpet and drum who refuse to go to he present there sally out of the wood a great number of people which attempt to force the boat and man in she with dart arrow and lance who perceive themselves prevent by the good care and endeavour of they in the boat they pursue the boat with arm canoas out of the river until by many shot from the ship she be rescue and few day after while they linger in hope of some good news from their captain and merchant they attempt the ship with a demi army of some hundred canoas which come in order and form of a half moon they attempt the take of the union with a army of 100 arm canoas which to prevent bring themselves under sail and shake they off and depart on their journey it seem that they can not fetch Socatra or the master unwilling to go to the red sea or surat but go to Achin and there deal for some fit commodity with the guzerates and from thence to Priaman to lade pepper where the merchant make bargain to receive it at Teccoa a island three league distant from Priaman at fifteen fourteen and thirteen rial and a half of eight by the Bahar of pepper every Bahar be three hundred and twelve there this ship the general plentiful supply with victual for who relief he make the long stay he also unite they in love one unto another who at our come in be divide to wit Samuel Bradshaw for his sober discreet and provident carriage in the company business much envy by their factious master and his adherent who we leave in the say bay the union leave in the bay of s. Augustine septemb 9 1610. find for England as seem lover and friend in this bay we continue seventy hour it be for the most part all deep water and uncertain no ground in diverse place by diverse report in two hundred fathom by we further examine of deep have be in vain but we find all the south shore in a manner from the wester point to the high cliffe-land all flat rocky who ledge be to be see dry at the low water at the easter end of the rock near the cliff we anchor in twelve fathom and may have rid near the shore in seven fathom we come in out of the sea with a strong gale at south south-west but come near unto the land the wind grow dull yet blow reasonable fresh in the day but in the night ordinary calm the time we be there but that be the new moon which make the foul weather in the country I can say of other time on the land it seem always to be very hot especial when the sun be to the southward of the equinoctial in this place be two tree of diverse kind some so full of fat sap that fire be put to it as it stand green of itself it will run up blaze in the lea^es and branch strange tree the timber be soft and the leaf and bough yield a yellow sap an other sort also of tree who timber be near as hard as and of colour white with a small brown heart whether any kind of white Saunders I know not that wood which we cut off for fire-word in the peppercorn which be the most plentiful of any sort there do all hang trase with cod of green fruit as big as a bean-cod in England call tamerim it have a very sour taste and by the apothecary be hold good against the scurvy our admiral man who have more leisure gather some as it be green for their particular use here be also plenty of a herb which for his form be scarce to be discern from a semperuive whereof the aloe call aloe Socatrina be make of all sort but I know not whether these savage people have either the knowledge or the use thereof the people by what occasion I know not forbear to come to we so that we get no kind of cattle for refresh neither beife nor mutton whereof other heretofore have be offer for a rial of eight a ox but now it be say that for want of government in the union when any be bring down what the factor do provident forbear to keep down the price disorder fellow for their own particular give what the saluage demand so that now they can scarce get any for ten shilling a piece disorder batter hurtful note it seem that in all place of this island man must stand upon their guard for the people be treacherous yet by report stout and valiant and not ignorant in order of their people in battle array as it seem by their order at Gungomar when they assault the union their weapon be bow and arrow lance and small dart which they carry in bundle now have perform all our necessary business as wood and water and relieve our countryman to the utmost of our power we set sail out of the say Bay the nine day of September at four a clock afternoon we set sail out of the bay of s. Augustine September leave the union there as aforesaid the one and twenty the wind be at east southeast and the current by my judgement set south-west note we be entangle with a lee-shore which we call the Carribas which be diverse small land of which also lie diverse ledge of rock that be by the breach of the sea only discern and spend six day before we can quit ourselves of they be between ten and eleven degree south latitude this coast lie near north-easter and south-wester and the wind all these six day between the east north-east and east southeast so that against our will we be still force to lee-ward though by tow with our boat and otherwise we endeavour to get off mozambique this place by my judgement may be to the northward of mozambique somewhat more than seventy league by night for the most part we be near those danger which be always between we and the shore that we can never discover near the main nor give any good judgement of the distance between island and island neither set they down their true form the great danger be in the strength of the current set on and no place to anchor in be deep water close aboard the rock and though somewhat near these rock you have ground yet it be so deep and foul ground that there be no anchor and on the norther part hereof though by my estimation we be little more than two league from the shore yet we have no ground in a hundred and fifty fathom these be sandy land and for the most part be full of tree after it grow dark every night we may see the fire on shore make by the countrypeople but we have no list to spend so much time as to go on shore to speak with they after it please God that we have once get clear of these danger we to our great admiration find the current to carry we to the north-ward as much more as by our judgement the ship go as when by our judgement we may go some fifteen league current October we go thirty league the second of October we have much rain the nine we find the current to cease except it set to the east-ward which we can not discern the ten eleven and twelve we find ourselves to loose every day more and more by the current the seventeen at sunrising we descry two land which for their likelihood be call the or the two sister which he one from the other west by south and east by north and be distant from the west point of Zacotora some seven league and a half we steer north north-east with the west point of Zocotora have these depth twenty three twenty foore and twenty six fathom distant from the say point some three league and a half after we have get about the wester point we find the wind to shorten so that it will not permit we to lead it alongst the coast but by the help of a current we be put off the admiral and the darling anchor in twelve fathom while I in the peppercorn through calm and a gale of the land can not get into shall water to anchor in till the nine day at noon what time we anchor in twelve fathom near to a town call Gallanzee and towards the cool of the evening I go with the pinnace and unto a low sandy point thwart the admiral and darling a league to the eastward of our ship to try to get fish for refresh of our people abundance of fish hope in the cool of the evening there to meet with my general which fall out according to my desire God bless we with abundance of fish which serve all the whole fleet two meal and much long if it will have keep here my general inform i how that the people with who in the morning he have speak have confirm that which he great doubt which to our grief will prolong our voyage which be that the easterly monson be already come and all our hope of get to Cambaya be frustrate for this nine month of which we expect to be better inform by the king at Tamerin the place of his residence Tamarin the twenty day be Saturday we anchor at a point near six league short of Tamarin and five league from the point of Galanzee which we do by the help of a sea-turne which continue long that night but not content by gain and hold that place till we can by day be better advise by reason of a edy tide by the shore on the westside by the shore where we ride on the westside thereof which force our sterne to windward and a little flatter gale of the land we weigh and be force off into the currant so that the one and twenty day we be carry back thwart of the town of Galanza and far off in great depth the two and twenty we in the peppercorn be like to have be put clean off the island but the admiral and darling get into shall water and there anchor and about two a clock I also anchor in the bay westward of Gallanza in six fathom Gallanza and present go on shore with my pinnace carry to seek fresh water go with a flag of truce to see if any of the inhabitant will come to i for I earnest desire to speak with some of they in hope to have procure some goat or other refresh for our people but none as it seem dare come to we for fear of the king displeasure who will have nothing sell to any stranger but from himselve it seem he will have none of his people have to do with any stranger but that all intelligence allowance for fresh victual and prize must come from himself as afterward I find though now I wonder to see the people stand afar off in troop and come not near we which make i think they have spy attend on they by the king order to be the ca^se so at night have fill thirteen of water I return aboard this night be a high water at nine of the clock at a full moon I esteem it flow upright between ten and eleven foot all the time of flow the stream set to the northward I mean close by the shore and with the ebb and a small gale of the shore we set sail and stretch it alongst the shore some four or five mile thwart of the sandy bay of our fish and near our admiral and find the currant there to set off to the westward currant we anchor till the next help of the tide or wind the five and twenty be Thursday as the wind serve we set sail and about eleven of the clock we anchor in eight fathom a mile from the land Tamarin right against the town of Tamarin where the king house be north from the castle on the top of the hill above the town at our anchor the general shoot off five piece of ordnance I three and the darling one the general send master femell on land handsome attend with the pinnace fit with a red crimson tilt present the king with a present which be from the general a fair gild cup of ten ounce a sword-blade and three yard of stammel broadcloath the king to receive they have by the waterside in readiness fit a orrange-tawny colour tent where he sit attend on by the principal of his countryman the arab and a guard of small shot they continue conference more than a hour he thankful receive the general present bid he welcome show desire to see he on land promise he water free and what else the island do afford at reason according to the drought of the island which continue two year without rain for aloe not a pound to be have his own frigate be go to sell it in the Red-sea for the ascension he say come first hither in the month of February and find a guzerat ship here within eight day she depart in her company towards the Red-sea and eight day after come in her pinnace who make no stay but follow her admiral and in july both the ascension and pinnace return out of the Red-sea to Zacotora where they hasten to take in water and soon after depart towards Cambaya further he say the ascension and pinnace cast away upon the coast of India that his frigate be at the port of bazain near Damon in India they be inform by the portugal that the say ship and pinnace arrive on the coast too soon before the winter and foul weather be past be both cast away but the man save the king send the general a present of twelve goat the six and twenty be Friday my general go well attend on and with a guard to visit the king our ship give he as before five three and one piece of ordnance the king visit and he be receive on land by the king order with ten great shot and otherwise he be receive by the king in orderly and civil sort and have both for he and his follower so good cheer provide as the place can present afford but the king show no willingness that we shall here make any long abode for he wo^ld not yield that we shall set up our pinnace here his excuse be this that neither his own ship nor any other as the guzerat which he have great profit by dare not come into this place while we be here and further I suppose the time we stay here be very chargeable to he in this respect for to show the strength of his town he have draw down the arab and other from all part of the land and while they stay here they live on his charge which I think be the only occasion he will have our absence this day we fill a great part of our water Saturday we almost make a end of water out of a pond feed by spring descend from the hill Sunday our people go on land to recreate themselves and do no other business this king of Zacotora be call Mulli Amore bensaide king of Fartac or Canacaym and now be here but viceroy under his father who be king of Fartac in Arabia not far from aden and come into the sea at he say that his father hold war against the turk of aden in his own defence for he deny we a letter to the governor of aden say he will not do we so much wrong the people that he use for his honour and strength in Zoccatra be the arab the rest that live in most servile slavery be the old inhabitant of the island which have be banish people there be for merchandise grow upon Zoccatra aloe which they make about August how aloe be make of a herb like unto semperviva which we have in Spain but no great quantity not pass a tun in a year there be a small quantity of or dragon blood a little whereof our factor buy at twelve penny a pound and date which serve they for bread which the king sell at five rial of eight by the hundred cattle for man sustenance these bull and cow at twelve rial of eight a piece goat at one rial a piece sheep at half a rial a piece and hen at half a rial a piece all exceed small according to the dry rocky barrenness of the island wood at twelve penny a man burden ever particular be a very dear pennyworth and what else this island may yield I be yet to be inform of but of rock and stone dry and bare it seem the whole island be compose @. 2 of abba Curia Arabia foelix aden and Moha and the treacherous deal of both place this day all our important business be do we set sail direct our course to aden-ward in the Red-sea they depart from Zacotora for aden take leave of the king with three shot out of the admiral one out of the peppercorn and one out of the little darling our course after we gate of the land alongst by abba deal Curia to cape Guardafui which be the eastermost point of Abax be near west distant four and thirty league to wit from the wester point of Zacotora to the east end of abba Curia be fourteen league and abba Curia a long narrow ragged island the length of abba Curia may be in length east and west some five league from the west end of abba Curia to cape Guardafui be fifteen league on this island abba Curia the king of Zoccatra have some people and goat north from the middle thereof two great white rock near three league be two great white rock near adjoin one to the other and be some half a mile in length these rock be not white of themselves but make white with the fill of bird the one and thirty be Wednesday at eleven a clock we be thwart of the wester point of Zacotora Saboyna and at two a clock the white rock call Saboyna we leave north on our starboard side which bear northwest and by west four league of the most wester point of Zacotora and at three a clock afternoon we descry the two high mountain of abba Curia bear west south-west distant ten league the first of November be Thursday at sunrising we be thwart of the middle of abba Curia Novemb. 1 leave it on our larboard side two league and a half off and the two rock on our starboard side distant half a league at noon we be in north latitude twelve degree and seventeen minute the variation seventeen degree and five and thirty minute this afternoon we meet with a currant cape which set we to the southward at one in the afternoon we descry the cape but it be night before we come near it so that we pass it by night without any true discovery thereof the second be Friday in the morning we be thwart of a high mountain nine league westward from the cape and between that point and another high point five league distant west southerly by the compass there be a low sandy point lie one league and a quarter off into the sea and some three league more westerly we anchor and go on land with all our boat for to cut wood whereof we in the peppercorn have great need here we meet with some of the inhabitant who inform we that the last mount we pass be call feluck or by the portugal but so soon as they know we be christian they flee from we the three day be Saturday we land again and cut more wood and afternoon we set sail stand on our way westward towards the Red-sea continue our course till the five day ten a clock at which time we descry the coast of Arabia foelix bear north northwest and north by east be distant from the near land some twelve league at noon I find myself in thirteen degree eight and twenty minute north latitude at sunset we be distant from the land some twelve league Novemb. 5. the mountain within the land all high very rough without show of grass wood or any other fruitfulness we now direct our course west and by south as the coast lie soon expect to see the city of aden for that with my first fall with the land I esteem myself not above four and twenty league short to the eastward thereof but whereas I esteem the ship make their way northwest by north over the gulf by reason of the currant we find they have make a little better than north and that at our fall with the land we be little less than threescore league short of aden we continue our course alongst the coast with a good sail all day and a short sail all night to the end not to overshoote aden all the way for the most part in five and twenty twenty fifteen twelve ten and eight fathom Wednesday at sunsetting below the mountain be very near it on the sudden we descry aden which be situate under the foot of a unfruitful mountain a description of the situation of the city of aden in Arabia a place where I shall scarce have look for a town but it be set there for strength where it be very defensible and not by any enemy easy to be win if the defendant within be man of resolution and so that it be former victual and provide of munition and to seaward though it be in a manner dry at low-water there stand a high rock somewhat large than the tower of London which be not by enemy to be in haste ascend by reason it be so steep and that but one way by narrow step to get up where four man may keep down a multitude this rock be so wall flankered and furnish with ordnance as it seem to i it may command both the town and roade yet who will avoid it may ride in nine fathom water without their command or within their command from nine fathom downward also a little distance to the northwards of the foresay rock be another rock be low almost even with the water which be of small compass whereon be a fort build and well furnish with ordnance the soldier usual continue in this garrison of aden I can never understand but according as occasion be they be draw down from other inland town the low country adjoin within it do supply it with provision and partly with their dark which pass in trade from aden to Barbora a town right over on the Abexin side from whence they bring cattle and much fruit and provision with myrrh and incense and what else I must conceal till f^rther information get a secret the latitude of aden 2. degr. 35. the u^^iation westerly 12. degr. 40. min. this town stand in the latitude of twelve degree and five and thirty ^ the variation westerly be twelve degree and forty minute it flow by estimation upright between six and seven foot water on the change day a southeast by east or northwest by w^st moon make a full sea this mountain at who foot the town stand be a Peninsula point out into the sea and towards the main be first a narrow neck of sandy ground and within of the l^ke a large marsh-like ground stretch up to the mountain which may be from the town sixteen or twenty mile at o^r first anchor the governor in the dark of the evening send a Arab in a Canoa to view our ship who refuse to come aboard though he be call Thursday morning the same Arab come aboard the admiral from the Mirabel or governor to understand what we be if friend we shall be welcome to land this while be a present make ready to send the governor which be a gra^ed turkie-fashioned piece they send a present to the governor of aden and a principal sword blade send to land by John Williams and one m. Walter linguist with other factor to accompany they the turk not permit they to come into the town entertain they without the gate near the water side yet with great show of joy pretend much kindness to our nation with who they say they have have much familiarity in Stambola Aleppo and other place but use not one word of any trade with we but frame their speech to make we understand that they every day expect the come of thirty thousand soldier which to we seem very strange that so barren a country as that seem to be can yield provision for so many people but understand their speech proceed of fear it be signify that our general request unto the governor be that for his money he will give he a pilot to carry his ship to Moha then he tell they that he be but deputy to the Mirabel or governor which be out of the town and the next morning will be return and then the general shall be thereof inform he send the general a present which be two Barbora sheep with broad rump and small tail some and other fruit wherewith our people return Friday the general send again betimes in the morning to require a pilot for Moha then they be bring into the house and still continue with fair word but the Mirabel be not yet return but when the deputie-governour hear our ship be under sail find away he send no pilot turkish trick^ but a request that if the general will not stay and trade with all his ship yet that he will stay one there for their supply demand the prize of diverse of our commodity which give present show of content if performance may follow according with gloze show of indigo Ollibanum myrrh and diverse other thing there f^t for we but before the messenger come to give knowledge to the general our ship be so far about the point that by reason of the current we can not again get about the easter side of the point in sight of the town but anchor thwart of a bay on the south side of the town the general see diverse people fish in the bay and great store of people of fashion on the hill go to the shore side in his pinnace to inquire of they when the current may change and that we may get about the deputy governor show himself angry pretend our come be to discover their strength and with no good intent in so much that John Williams be in doubt they will have stay he but the Mirabel now present be late come to town seem not so rigorous but dissemble the matter give good word grant a pilot for Moha Mirabel be Lord yet desire that one of our ship may stay for their supply say that that town by former governor ill usage of stranger be grow out of trade which he do endeavour to set on foot again hope by we to make a beginning and further that as he be a governor so have he a bassa be superior over he from who if all our ship depart without trade at his town he shall have blame in that it will be impute to his ill usage of we to drive we away the cunning treachery of the turk and for that we understand by other that the former part of his speech be true our general and we think the latter part to be true also which be mere to delude we which the general by the messenger do in a manner grant so we can find safe ride for our ship the dangerous easterly monson on this shore which he make slight or little regard of wish our ruin and no safety Monday morning early John Williams be again send to the governor for his pilot according to the last night promise and have now answer from the governor that the pilot wife will not permit he shall go unless we leave four of the principal man in the ship in pawn till his safe return which breed in we a general dislike of their inconstancy yet the general for performance of his former promise determine to leave i behind in the peppercorn but alter his determination in my direction for whereas before I be direct not to carry above a quarter part of our good on land at one time now we be to carry none at all for since they will not trust we with one of their rascal people but on such disgraceful term therefore he think fit not to trust they with any of our good but if they have need of any of our commodity as they pretend to have they shall buy and pay for it aboard the ship and in case they mistrust any evil deal we shall exchange pledge so that for so many as for do their business they shall need to have aboard we shall deliver on land so many of the near like in quality if not like of this that we may follow our admiral to Moha the same day about noon the darling be a smallship of 90. ton all thing be determine of the general with his own ship and darling depart towards Moha and as they prepare to set sail they descry a sail in the off which they suppose to be a guzerat find to Moha out of which the general have hope to procure a pilot stand off with her a little while till perceive it to be a small sail then before they expect give over their chase and stand on their course towards babelmandel Tuesday we labour with long warp to get up both against wind and current whereby we get well up as man strive to hasten their own harm be thwart of the fish Bay the Mirabel of aden send a boat and a messenger aboard to desire to speak with the merchant to know whether they purpose to trade with they or no whereupon m. Fowler John Williams and the purser for other business go on land the merchant declare to the Mirabel in what manner we have direction to trade with they or Amir or Emir signify Lord the Mirabel not like of that way in no wise accept of such trade this seem a contradict to his purpose and policy therefore lest after their return aboard I shall depart for Moha as they say he think best to detain those three man thereby to procure he some thing three of our man stay on shore though he pretend that he stay they for anchorage and other duty amount to fifteen hundred venetianoes of gold every one at one rial and a half of eight before this town of aden I make my unprofitable abode until the sixteenth of December live in continual danger if any storm have happen which be there ever very doubtful on this monson or time of the year by rummage I omit no mean for bring our good in readiness if so it shall happen that in the end we find sale or trade with they for notwithstanding by the variety of trick whereby from day to day they false delude our people in their hand as to send messenger after messenger to my general to Moha to obtain licence to bring our good into their town and then the merchant will resort out of all place in the country near-hand to buy the same which may be say lest we have discover the unlikelihood of any merchant in that town likely to do the same yet can I never conceit hope of trade or honest deal among they all the time I lay there for the most part I send my pinnace every two or three day to land to know how my factor do with some one or two man beside the cock ging which whatsoever they have to do they be courteous deal withal the soldier frequent their company cunning treachery give they drink and if any man jew or bannian have over reckon they in the price of any thing they will ever be ready to do they right all which I make account be do by the governors direction the better to abuse we by draw our people to conceit well of they and trust their flattery and lie wherein they excel and on the resort of any extraordinary people into the town they will tell our man that they be merchant come to see if we have land any of our good for they to buy when they be soldier call in out of some other near adjoin inland town upon some plot in their head new devise and likewise our factor in person be most time kind use and be resort unto by such as the governor appoint and that shall tell his tale whereas he have so provide that not any not so much as a Arab fisherman nor other be permit to come near unto i lest they shall tell i the truth to his disadvantage by my people in the pinnace I send of purpose to discover by who I be inform this city in time past have be great and populous but at this time the house both great and small be great ruinate and sink in every part of the town aden decay the present state thereof shop of merchandise there be none of any account merchant none to be discern worthy of that call for money seem to be very scant among they which appear when our man offer to change a piece of eight for asper they use to take it from hand to hand gaze as at a strange thing a ill sign in a place where a ship lade of merchandise be bring to sell. this present governor time grow near out that he must be go and therefore before his departure will have be glad to have see we so foolish as to land some of our good by any devise will often commend captain sharpeigh confidence in they who be here in the ascension sixteen month before we and how at first he bring good on land without mistrust and sell it and his man come bold on land like merchant man of which since we do not the like he make doubt whether we be so or not and that he take delight to hear his trumpet sound on his wall all which I take to be no other than hook device and untrue delusion for I can think but that if at the first like harmless man they trust much they repent it before they go away capt. sharpeigh the first of our nation at aden captain Sharpeigh be the first of our nation that come here and perchance may pass away in some reasonable sort but since then they have have time to advise themselves how to do more villainy which they have nothing else to plead my conceit be that at our first come they make account to buy our good without money and that their plot in desire first one ship to stay be twofold first it wa^ more likely for they to work their will on one ship then on three second in procure the stay of this here the other two be the better to be deal withal at Moha since what villainy can be wrought on they at both place be for the seruice-and benefit of our bassa and they know that we be ignorant that this winter time now ensue be so tempestuous and unfit for any such business of commerce and that no ship can long stay there without their favour and friendship as in the case of fresh water to drink only if there be no wind or sea to be dread which be both often most vehement and at aden be low shore nothing to hinder the main suff and violence of the mount billow whereby they may with good judgement think that in little time we may be force from our road at nine fathom into five fathom near to the town in some shelter of the island and under command of their ordnance from whence without their leave we can not have carry she out again or if this fail he may think by colour kindness or some other device for our own pleasure or by want of water sometime to draw some store of our people and that of the better sort on land to they which already he have whereby to force they to procure the rest to bring in the ship but indeed he have ill counsel for his haste spoil his market at the first by stay our three man doubt our ship will be go which make i very suspicious and wary in send but few man on land at once Saturday I send my first letter to the general to Moha by a soldier of aden fit for the governors turn who return be so order that he never come near any of we with a answer he pretend that the governor of Moha promise delivery of the same but present send he back with a letter to aden Thursday the governor ride out of town who remain absent till the first of December in the mean time our people in prison be more hardly use capt. Dounton letters to sir h. Middleton suppress pay in a manner as much to the messenger for fetch their victual as it cost beside have little countenance or favour any way show they and it be tell they that the Mirabel be go and a new be to come in his stead but it prove not so for that time Saturday about midday the same return again into the town and come to our man in prison speak kind unto they and cause good provision to be make for they at his own cost whereby he gull we by pretend friendship promise nothing but kindness and good deal so soon as we shall begin to trade and then they shall have their full liberty without payment of the aforesaid fifteen hundred venetianos former demand the custom five in the hundred all other charge reasonable and ready gold for what we sell and therefore wish that as before we have send a fool of our message that now we shall send a man of our own with a guide of he who we may be sure will bring true answer from our general this day I make show to be prepare to be go with the ship aboard come a letter from John Fowler to impart to i this joyful news urge i again to write to the general to know his pleasure herein for land of our good wherein I be not so straight tie but I may have do it myself if I have see any sign or likelihood of good deal which see no cause of encouragement I keep to myself to the end not to be urge by the importunity of other to do any thing unadvised which may either prejudice my friend or wrong myself now see the time be before i till may to go to Moha for so long the easterly monson last at such time as rigorous weather or be whole frustrate of trade shall drive i hence and be once go I can come hither again till the five of May or june whatsoever thereby be to be get wherefore for diverse respect I desire to hear from the general Monday I dispatch away the messenger with a letter to my general which prove a after-griefe to i and eight day after we have nothing but show of kindness and good quarter think long till our messenger return that we may begin our good market Saturday my boatswain inform i of his great want of small cordage for diverse purpose wish that he and some other may go ashore to lay some on the strand by the town wall now while we have leisure before our great business come in hand for which I send to land to entreat the governor that our people may do such a business in safety under his wall which be promise with great favour in the best and convenient place they can find with a house at night to put up their thing till the next day in the meantime the governor set smith to make of shackle for our people and some of they be by sign tell of it which suspect nothing take it as a merry jest which afterward they find in earnest twenty more of our man betray Wednesday afternoon my man be all betray that go on shore find shackle and pinion and some put in the stock all torture and grievous abuse strip of their money and all else they have my pinnace lose the ging go among the rope layer so there be two merchant a purser and one to attend on they a gad apothecary my chirurgeon and master Caulker who carry my letter to Moha as aforesaid my boatswain and one of his mate two quarter master the co^per carpenter and gunners mate and my cock-swaine and five more of the cock gang which in all be twenty person some few for their pleasure the rest to work see the gang who be most of they appoint to keep the pinnace but be out of my sight they do what they listen and the boatswain seem to want their help about his rope Monday I set sail out of the southermost road of aden direct my course towards Moha through the straight of babel-mandell in the entrance of the red sea be distant from aden west by sou^h thirty two league the arab both here and in all other place of Arabia of all degree be in great servitude to the turk a eclipse of the moon Thursday at four in the morning the moon be eclipse and at one in the afternoon I past th^ B^b or straight be half a league over have in the midst ten fathom water and towards both side eight six or four fathom depth as one list to borrow to and may be some two mile through which set a good strong tide both ebb and flood I leave on my starboard side a mountain and rocky Peninsula extend from the main be all near low-land with a low narrow neck of sand and on the larboard side I leave a low island of some five mile long east and west be also rocky between the west end thereof and the Abaxin coast for aught I can discern be a clear channel of three or near four league broad but I think not much use by the ship for that the water be deep and not for anchor beside the other be the near way we be past the Bab be ignorant what danger lay in our way or how far within the straight the town of Moha stand whether in a river or bay or how else we know not but discover we keep by our lead between nine and seven fathom all alongst the Arab coast and as the day light end we anchor in eight fathom nine league within the Bab against a little mount stand alone by the seaside Friday at six aclocke in the morning we set sail stand alongst north and north by west as our depth direct we first between nine and seven fathom and last between six and four fathom when we come to have the shoal without we but as we come near to Moha Moha eighteen league within the bab. which be situate eighteen league within the Bab on the verge of a low sandy barren ground our admiral we see rid alone and no darling some four mile into the sea in six fathom and ride with two shot ahead by reason of the vehemency of the weather which erst I suspect not my present ca^es be somewhat in this unknown passage for the safety of the ship which without great vigilancy and regard to our depth may have be set fast to our further famine but the near I come the more my grief gnaw at my heart as one while revive my grief for the loss of so many of my man and then cast doubt what may befall my friend here their pinnace man I see lie along by the ship side wherein be master thornton the master but dare not put off till we be thwart of they for fear they shall not recover their own ship again be once put off by reason of the wind and currant I be somewhat near as a signal of heavy news they pull down their flag whereby I understand some misfortue be befall my general I be anchor he with the pinnace come aboard where after the blast of passion and grief by the defect and frailty of the flesh somewhat blow over he begin by degree to inform i of all thing that have happen since we part at aden as first of their quick passage from aden to the Bab where they take in a pilot to bring they to Moha the trade increase arrive before Moha in the red sea Nove 14. 1610. where the fourteen of November they arrive that be from aden in thirty hour yet their misfortune be such that against the town and very near the road whether by misunderstanding or the pilot neglect to the depth or be not acquaint with the work of our ship it be not material to examine but on the sand the ship come aground and so stick fast that she bilge stand on the shoald of the bank so as notwithstanding the great sea by force of the wind the head and stern be in deep water do heave and set without any painful strike but to get she off without lightning they can not wherefore they can not be precise in trust themselves without pledge in the hand of the turk who omit nothing to prevent our doubt of be welcome with great variety of friendly promise in every thing we demand and request once make they be ply with bark to lighten the ship wherein they use great expedition we land as well our wheat-meale vinegar sea-coal pitch and tar with our unbuilt pinnace and other provision which come next hand or in the way as well tin lead iron and other merchandise to be sell and stave near all our water and of all other master Laurence Femell seem most fearful for that in a private boat he speedy carry all his thing on land leave nothing that he regard aboard of the ship of his own the ship now have lie a ground hour the trades-increase set afloat with great travail to lighten and shift the ship they get she afloat it be also to be understand that this part of Arabia from eastward of aden and up the Red-sea to Cameran which be threescore and ten league within babmandell and I know not how far within the land be call the land of yeoman or Ayaman and now govern by one jeffor bassa who residence be in the city of Zenan which they account to be by moderate travail fifteen day journey by post I think they go and come in that time and the governor of aden and Moha which be the better place in that it be of more resort of ship and these governor be yearly place by he as at this present in Moha be one Regib Aga by his place or office who be his servile slave attend on he and he be prefer to aden where he command the other year when captain Sharpeigh be there and for that he be a beneficial knave to his master he be prefer to Moha a better place now at our first arrival he send to give knowledge unto his master with what information best please he and be to stay for direction from his master how to deal with we we trust they as man of human feel be ignorant of what be against we now while the messenger go to know the bassa pleasure how to dispose of we the aga be lay the ground of his treason and draw every thing towards readiness for the effect of his desire harvest omit nothing which may further his villainous purpose also by draw into the town from the near neighbour island town and country adjoin such and so many soldier as may fit his turn who rigour and malice against we he neglect not to provoke by scandalous reproach as may best se^ue for his purpose as that we be pirate and christian which they account as bad enemy to their holy prophet Mahomet and his law and that our come be to discover how to ruinate and destroy the holy house of their god as Mecca and Medina and what service they shall do to God and their country in destroy of we as also inform they that we have so much money and good as if they will behave themselves valiant when time serve will make they and their country happy with so many other delude device as seem fit for such a action mean while our innocent distrustlesse man hire and fit their house and prepare against the return of the bassa his answer for present sale of their commodity by the abundant show and promise of favour to they the aga ever urge by wonder at our small quantity of good in the ship of so great burden and ever be boats send for good after the ship be afloat and that there be no more till further occasion to be land his greediness seem to be such as the poor Arab barque-man show fear to return without lade but when he perceive there be no more at present to be have he go another way to work which be he inform our merchant that all ship that come to this town in trade their captain for their better assurance as a pledge of good deal receive the segnior vest for their better security which be once invest in the view of the people no man after dare offer they any wrong as all the principal officer of every ship have sign of courtesy the which unless our captain do come on land and accept of he shall never think he the great Turk friend nor believe his meaning be good as he pretend and therefore shall doubt to give he trade lest he be a man of war shall turn they to further mischief which unless he receive such right according to the welcome and custom of the place he can not but think his end not for their good the ship now moor in a place from whence within seven or eight month be no return the vehemency of the storm so great the unknown danger in these sea such no place of more comfort know and no man permit to come near we that either can or will better inform we of the contagious weather ensue the danger there to be expect or more comfort elsewhere to be find but as it be must stand at the turk mercy whether they will give we life or restrain water or other relief to maintain the same our house hire our factor and good on land in readiness and present sale after answer bring except and now this unexpected doubt cast whether we be true man or thief and no way leave to approve the former or to shun the latter but the come on land of our general on who safety depend the carriage and estate of the whole voyage which can not but cross their mind and conceit since they know his determination be otherwise master Femell give the general knowledge of the Aga his word and further give he to understand that the company business without his presence on land can take no effect but must rest without do any thing which once know sir Henry Middleton notwithstanding the little trust he have in the faith and honesty of the turk in these foreign place and the infinite regard and care he have to follow and pursue the plot and benefit of this his journey as well here as in India and place of more hope now be urge that his absence be likely to prove prejudicial to the company answer that all his endeavour during the voyage be whole intend for the benefit and not prejudice of the company and be it not for the safety of the ship and good of the voyage he can take delight to recreate himself on land as well as other wherefore now since his company there may further the business and not be impute unto he for his pleasure he will not be niggardly of his presence among they therefore he prepare himself to land to put they out of doubt and to receive that vest of the great Turk as the badge or assurance of safety to such as with like solemnity have it put on their back and before his go come master femell aboard to inform the general of what he think fit to prepare he in against his land but at the instant when sir Henry Middleton be to enter the boat whether by any suspicious whisper among the turk or whether he feel any guilt of conscience for be the occasion to hasten the general land to stand before he in any danger that may happen or some sudden apprehension of fear as in fainthearted people never want of any violent course by the turk to be attempt master femels fear the first day of the general land or what else I know not but at the general go to land he be cape-merchant and sway the buy and sell will have stay aboard but can not in such a case be spare be so great a actor in the business sir Henry Middleton go on land the general be come to land be meet by the governor and principal of the town be carry to the governors house where he have a rich vest of cloth of gold put on his back a horse very rich furnish for he to mount upon the governor hold the horse while the general get up all which be reason sir Henry Middleton shall accept of be as they pretend the badge of their friendship the communication after the solemnity be end be such and so solemn and with such protestation and show of kindness and friendship as may deceive any honest man or which be not a deceiver himself sir Henry Middleton in short time after see the variety of kind show by the governor towards he and in regard of the long time he have to stay there desire leave of the governor that he may there set up his pinnace which he bring ready frame out of England the governors answer be that the country be before he to do whatsoever please he as if he be in his own country seem glad that he will command he any thing which may content he for which forthwith sir Henry Middleton cause present all thing to be bring to land which need to be use in the say work with all his carpenter smith or other that may further that work in hand and to that end all have possible may be use for dispatch of the same sir Henry Middleton with his attendance and furniture keep house on land by his continual presence to further the say work which also cause many more to resort on land for their several end than otherwise will have do the eight and twenty of November Regib Aga his plot grow to ripeness and receive strength by the direction of his master jeffor bassa send the general word in the afternoon that he have receive so good news from the bassa concern our business that he can not altogether conceal the same but tho^ght good for his content to send he a taste thereof till his better leisure serve he to reveal the particular this seem to be do to make sir Henry Middleton more secure who upright thought give he no cause to suspect any such mischief as at present be prepare for he and he but in the evening instead of good news from the bassa the bloody treason of the turk he effect his predeterminate treachery with iron mace knock down the general master pemberton and the merchant with all the rest that at that time be on shore where they also murder eight of our man who by reason of their former favour and show of kindness not deem any such treason to be intend towards they be naked without weapon to resist such unexpected murderer thus they without mercy not only in chain keep prisoner both by the neck hand and foot the general with eight and forty of his company and master pemberton with nine of his company but also with three great boat full of soldier attempt to surprise the darling who ride near the town than the trades-increase by (@) mile who not know of the betray of their master boat and man see a boat come aboard esteem it to be their own boat but present descry two boat more and all full of people begin to mistrust false measure but the turk come aboard and see no man stir think themselves sure possess of she murder the trumpeter who they find aloft asleep but in the end our merciful God turn their pretend mischief towards we upon their own pate and make they fall into the pit that they have make for we for in repel these unexpected enemy though to the less of two more of their own man seven and twenty turk slay who be slay in the conflict be slay and crown of the turk in flight seven and twenty whereof the admiral of the town who be their leader be also one thus have clear themselves of they quite they cut their cable and set sail and stand off and anchor by the trade who as yet know not of the betray of the governor neither of their attempt the darling till they of the darling have inform they thereof by which mean they prevent another mischief for that the trade boat with a three more of her man some to fill water and other for pleasure be go on shore also this morning in the darling on her gallery they find one of the turk soldier who have escape with life but their boat go be leave behind he they carry prisoner aboard the trades-increase from this eight and twenty of November till the fourteen of December by reason of the continual storm they hear no news from the general but the fifteen day John Chambers one of the trade quarter master with a flag of truce go on shore where he find the general and the rest in chain as aforesaid in most inhuman manner so that one can not go aside to ease himself but the rest in a row must go with he to their great annoyance yet at his return bring hopeful news of the enlargement of all save the general and master femell who be to go up to Zenan the place of the bassa residence there to answer to such matter as shall be object against they also the seventeen day the same messenger go again on shore in manner aforesaid carry with he certain provision and other necessary for the general relief and the rest there with he who return with variety of news but none good thus much master Thorneton at his come aboard i as aforesaid inform i of the one and twenty day in the afternoon decemb. 21. by the same messenger I send a letter to the general to give he knowledge of my misfortune at aden who return bring i a letter from my general in brief inform i of the business before repeat as will i if by any mean I can get out of this sea and to stay at aden till I have hear what will become of they also he have send the darling to ply out towards aden to give i information of his betray and to prevent my come to Moha also that he and six more of his compapanie be the next day to take their journey towards Zenan the bassa court as aforesaid the two and twenty the general with all his company except the carpenter who wrought still in chain upon our pinnace for the bassa and unable hurt man who remain still in chain at Moha set forth in their journey attend on by a strong guard of soldier lest any of they shall escape yet the same evening notwithstanding their narrow look to our man m. pemberton slip aside among the bush with so much haste m. Pembertons escape as his weak sick body be able make to the water side where although tire with run it please God that he find a Canoa have in her a paddle wherewith to row in she he put off to sea commit himself to the danger thereof rather than to stand to the turk mercy and through row his faint weariness increase so that in the morning his inability force he to give over row have nothing to refresh himself but his own water it so please God that the same morning aboard the trade increase be descry a Canoa in the off which seem to drive unto which be reasonable fair weather the trade send off her pinnace who bring both master pemberton and his Canoa aboard their own ship be scarce able to speak through faintness from this day to the seven and twenty day the weather continue for the most part boisterous and stormy also this seven and twenty day the darling through foul weather have lose anchor and cable and not able to perform what the general as aforesaid have send they about return unto Moha roade where I who they be send unto in the peppercorn do ride the second of january with all three ship we set sail out of Moha road january 2. intend to ply up towards babmandell for three respect first for ease of our ground tackle be through long boisterous weather much decay and second to seek place to fill water for our people to drink by want whereof we be very much distress and three and last there to stop the passage of all the indian ship enter this sea whereby to draw the turk to release our general people and good our great necessity constrain this our present attempt in this fair seem weather at our first set sail we stand over to the Abaxin coast they Passover to the Abaxin coast. where we leave the darling to look her anchor and cable former lose we with the trade and peppercorn ply up to windward but have scarce any aboard the better in the evening anchor on the Arab side in eight fathom some three league to the wind-ward of Moha and some four mile from the shore the three in the morning the tide of ebb in hand we set sail work to windward as before in the afternoon the wind so increase that I in the peppercorn spend my two top-sail and constrain to bring other two new one to the yard before which be effect the the night approach and we more than half sea over towards the Abaxin coast where in regard of the foul weather we former have at Moha for two respect I must desire to stop first the next morning if the weather be fair to have the darling company to proceed on our former purpose second the weather unfit by the place and sight of the darling to find easy road to anchor in this day between eight and nine at night so soon as we can get into sixteen fathom water by our sound lead in fast seem ground we anchor the trade somewhat to the northward or lee-ward of the peppercorn and as towards morning the wind increase with a churlish sea with cloudy dark weather in which we lose sight of the trade increase but by reason of the dark weather doubt nothing at which time she have break a anchor and drive and let fall another anchor which afterward drive from sixteen to six fathom they be force to cut a way to flat the ship head to the offward to prevent further danger the four of januarie day light approach we prepare to weigh our anchor sudden the ship drive from sixteen to eighteen fathom and before we can flat our ship head to the offward we have less than six fathom which soon after increase to eight ten etc. we then see the trade to my disturbance stand over towards Moha and see William pemberton in the darling ride in a easy road to who I will glad have go both for quiet to my mind and ease to my ground takle but that I know not what need the trade increase may have of my carpenter in case of any casualty whatsoever I know not of in my hasten after her the weather rigorous we split both our new top-sail the night before bring to the yard they be sow with rot twine as all our sail for the most p^rt have be through which mean it become night by what time I get into the road where present to my grief I understand of the trade misfortune to lose two anchor and cable as aforesaid wherefore I send my carpenter aboard to stock some other anchor from this to the eighteen day with little ease we continue a wearisome road to the spoil of our cable as aforesaid from the six day to the eleven day every day come canoas from the town bring letter from the carpenter with vanetie of forge news inform they by the aga who permit their send the rather for that most common it be to get wine or beer wherewith they pleasure the turk and sometime send some little fresh victual according as they have wherewithal to buy or be permit to send aboard the twelve the darling return into Moha ride to we salute i with three piece of ordnance as a sign of good news and by master Pembertons instant come aboard of i to my great comfort confirm for that he have find a good water place and a very easy road for our ship a good water place find and his anchor and cable that he go to seek which as aforesaid they in his absence be force to let slip the eighteen in the morning there come certain from Moha to we bring two bullock two goat certain hen egg and some fruit but no news from our general this day at one in the afternoon we set sail stand over towards the Abaxin coast where master pemberton find the safe road and wattr place and at night we anchor three league short of it under a island which for the abundance of great crab thereon we call crab island Crab island the nineteen we weigh again and stand near into the bay and anchor under another lesser island the twenty we weigh again and stand further into the bay and anchor right against the water place some half a mile from the shore in eight fathom water I send George jeff before in the pinnace to seek out the river and to see if he can speak with any of the country people who no soon land but by and by there do present themselves unto our man sight at least a hundred of the country people arm with lance whereof one come to our people be of a bold spirit than the rest who not only speak with they but also desire to go aboard with they who at his come aboard inform i by a interpreter how that the turk have send word unto they how they have betray and murder diverse of our man turkish pestilence and wish they also to do the like to as many of our man as they can lay hand on this youngman be a principal man son and be very kind unto we all the time we be in this bay he this night do lie aboard the trade increase where he be very kind use to his great content the one and twenty I with all our boat and most part of our man go on shore set some to dig of well some to fetch of ballast other to fill of some little water out of a little well we there find make ready to our hand and the rest be arm to guard they that wrought and soon after our land come down unto i the priest the father and brethren of the young man afore mention who as yet be not go from we who at his come ashore they very joyful receive present i with a goat I also give unto they four of the trade shirt put in by the merchant for the company which they very kind receive promise to bring down the next day some goat to sell unto we for our money which they very honest perform as by the sequel may appear the two and twenty I have continue ashore all night with a good guard to see that there shall no harm be do to our water I appoint our man to their business as the day before but by reason of the boisterous weather none of the country people come down to we the cause of my present continuance on shore be for that I see such ill usage of my general and his people betray both at aden and Moha although they have make such fair show and promise I have no assurance of the honesty of this people to we breed in i suspicion what harm may be attempt against we here by the turk or by their persuasion to this country people either by poison our water or other way therefore further than needs must I trust none so also I continue this night ashore with a good strong watch. the three and twenty have settle our company to every particular business there come down to we the same man who the other day have be with i and after they follow some other drive before they diverse goat to sell to we according as they have promise I very kind entertain they and cause the purser to buy their cattle and in the evening they depart very well satisfy promise every day to bring down more of which they make good performance this day we make a end of water from the four and twenty to the six and twenty day they bring down every day both goat and sheep whereof we buy according to our occasion and spend they return well satisfy the nine and twenty the wind at north northwest we set sail I determine to get up to the Bab with all our three ship there to make stay of all the indian ship that this year shall enter this sea by they to force the turk to redelive my general and the rest of his company our good and pinnace as aforesaid but be thwart of crab island it fall calm the tide set right on the island of this time I make the best use I may for so soon as we have anchor I accompany with master Thorneton and master pemberton go on shore with all our boat and most part of our man who I appoint to cut of wood both for dress our victual and other needful use this afternoon we descry come over from Moha two jelbas one whereof come direct aboard the trade bring i a letter from my general date the f^fteenth of january inform i of his safe arrival at Zenan with all his company save Richard Phillips master Pembertons youth who he leave very sick at a place call tie who desire to be inform of master pemberton whether he be safe escape aboard or no for that he doubt the arab attend on their ass to have murder he for his ass he rid on of the variety of hopeful seem promise of his enlargement be only delusion this letter be keep till the seventeen of the same also mention of the safe arrival of master Fowler and the rest of my company betray at aden at Zenan how God have raise he friend among the midst of his enemy to wit the Raha who be next in degree to the bassa with diverse other that favour his just cause contradict my present determination of stay the indian ship for that as yet they have no just cause to object against he it may prove prejudicial not only to he and his company but also to our nation trade in the mediterranean sea but that the bassa have clear Regib Aga of the betray and murder of he and his company take it upon himself as that it be do by his warrant and command to this my general letter by the same messenger I return a answer first give he to understand of master Pembertons safety the road on the Abaxin coast thirteen league from Moha February 17. the road of Assab our infortunate lose and spoil our ground tackle of my present determination intercept by his letter my opinion of their fair seem yet delude promise and last of our safe road and water place on the Abaxin coast right opposite to Moha be some 13. league distant where we have refresh reasonable cheap the seven of February the trade return to i in the road of Assab master Thorneton bring i my general letter date the five and twenty of February therein desire i as yet to forbear revenge on they which have wrong he also inform i of the present hopeful estate of his business also that five day after the date hereof he with all his company be to take their journey down to Moha will i till his arrival at Moha to expect no more letter from he also give i knowledge of the death of John baker one of my quarter master and Richard Elmesmere one of the trade company to this my general letter for want of conveyance I write no answer the first of march I send the pinnace to the town and in she the purser and the say awl march 1 the town who in their go find a place of better water descend from the mountain by reason of the reins within the land whereof we afterward fill some water but the rain once end it be dry up they have buy some few goat and sheep return and in the evening we descry a boat come over from Moha to us-ward the second the say boat come aboard the trade bring i a letter from my general wherein he give i to understand of the cause of his delay of his journey partly by reason of a great solemn feast of the turk approach but principal to have the Sabander of Moha his company for the more safe travel also wish the carpenter forbear to proceed any further in build the pinnace for that the bassa intend she for his own use and not for we also will i to forbear revenge the five I send the darling over to Moha to expect news from my general where she find in the r^ad a great ship of Dabull call the Mahomet the Mahomet of Dabull this day the general with all his company arrive at Moha the eleven I doubt lest any evil have befall the darling by reason of she so long absence set sail with the trade and peppercorn stand over towards Moha but before I be so far off as Crab^land ^land I see the darling come over and for that the wind shorten upon we and w^ not able to ^^tch the road I send master Thorneton in the pinnace to understand what news but I in the peppercorn with the trades-increase return into the road again in the evening master pemberton with master Thorneton and two and twenty of the trade company and fourteen of the pepper-corne company betray at Moha and aden come over the point of the island bring i a letter from my general wherein he give i to understand of his assure hope of enlargement so soon as the indian ship of this year be all come in and the westerly wind come also that the turk have seduce the aforesaid Richard Philip who in his journey upward he leave sick at ties he by threaten they have force to turn Turk and therefore come not down to Moha with he he rejoice to hear of master Pembertons safety also inform i that none of the letter I have send he be deliver to he also desire my opinion whether best for he to make a escape aboard if he can or to remain at the turk devotion also wish that the peppercorn be the next that come to Moha the eighteen I with the peppercorn set sail stand over to Moha but be near over it fall calm and a lee-ward tide whereby I be force to anchor in twenty fathom water on a bank which we there find three league from Moha and in the evening there come off a Canoa unto i to know what we be deem i to be a indian ship for that by reason of the hazie weather they can not well discern we the nineteen in the morning I set sail the wind at south stand into the road whereas yet be only the say great Dabul man but before I come to a anchor my general send his man aboard i with a letter that frustrate my present hope wherein he give i to understand that he must be force to dispeed i away very sudden for that my presence cause fear in the dabullian and discontent to the aga. notwithstanding this my general letter I send George jeffe in the pinnace on shore by who I send two letter the one brief to give to understand of our want also my opinion of the turk performance who through custom of falsehood their true performance be not to be expect but only to feed sir Henry Middleton with fair promise to serve their own turn and then we have no matter to work upon save the empty ship which the turk have their good on land will nothing regard and then my general to remain at the turk devotion whether to be send aboard according to the bassa his enforce agreement or to be ransom at their pleasure or send back again to Zenan and so to Stamb^la the other if he shall think good to show the aga therein make show that so long as he be detain prisoner his power extend not to command we that be free and at liberty and therefore can not keep we from the road of Moha nor in any other thing further than we see good ourselves to these my letter the general write a answer the copy whereof follow sir Henry Middleton letter to captain Dounton captain Dounton your overmuch care may work your own harm and do i and my company no good and therefore take nothing to heart more than be cause for I have have and still have my full share thereof and whereas you allege you be loath to deparr this road without i I be more loath to tarry behind if there be any remedy I make a force agreement with the bassa at Zenan that the ship shall absent themselves out of this road till all the indian ship be come in and then at the first come of the westerly wind both I and all my company shall be set free if they fail to perform with i than I will have you show your endeavour in the mean time you must have patience as well as myself I will be loath the agreement shall be first break on our side without any cause give by they for the provision that shall have be send in the jelba it be my fault it be not send in that I do not urge it to the aga. after your departure to morrow as I desire you to see perform I will go in hand with the lade of the good in the jelba which shall not be above three day absent from you I have promise the ship shall not come in the road till the westerly wind be come which will be a month hence at the further in the mean time you shall hear from i by jelbas or boats which I will send of purpose I doubt not but there will be good performance make with i by the turk in that my agreement be make with the bassa and not with Regib aga. if I doubt any new stratagem I will have attempt to have escape away before this time I have have and still have mean for my escape be it not to leave my people in danger of their life doubt not if they perform not with i when the westerly wind come but I shall have good opportunity I have lay a plot to have escape if I can have persuade master femell but he will by no mean be draw to any thing till he see whether the turk will perform or no he make no doubt but to be send aboard with the first of the westerly wind when you shall come to demand we you may ride in your quiet road-stead on the other side with all your ship till God send we that long wish for westerly wind unless you get a slatch of wind to carry one of your ship to the Bab to see if all be well there and so return back to you I know that all sort of provision waste apace in all the ship which God send i aboard I hope quick to renew the seven and twenty according to my general request I send the darling over to Moha for effect the foresay business the twenty nine and thirty the Budwees bring down both goat and sheep to sell. the first second and three of April the Budwees bring down either bullock goat or sheep April 1 to sell unto we the four the darling return from Moha but the wind take her short she be force to anchor to the northwards or lee-ward of the road till the wind shall come more large the six the darling come into the road of Assab and anchor near the water place near the trade to deliver the victual and other provision which have be so long detain by the turk and also bring i a very kind letter from my general the seven the darling ply up to a island near the pepper cra^e island there to be carreind this island we call crane-iland for that on it we kill most crane from this day to the twelve day the darling do land her good and victual and unrig their ship and certain of the trade company be gather of breme the one and twenty the king of Raheta the king of Raheta send i a present by a kinsman of his be a fat cow and a slave he continue aboard the trades-increase all night the thirty the trades-increase be heild and trim on both side so far as convenient may be this day we fill all our empty cask with water be nine and twenty ton the water be fair the four and five day of May we trim all our boat be reasonable fair weather may. the wind at south southeast the seven and nine day the Budwees bring down good store of sheep and goat but through want of cloth we buy very few only three bullock which we give money for the eleven my general make his most happy escape aboard the darling sir he^ry Middleton escape with fifteen more the manner you have in his own journal with fifteen more of his company the twelve my general send the pinnace over from Moha and by she a letter give i knowledge of his escape as aforesaid also desire i upon the sight of this letter to repair over to Moha with the trades-increase and peppercorn which direction I present put in execution make the ship in readiness to set sail but before my come he so behave himself in the darling to the terror of his enemy the turk that neither boat from the shore dare go aboard any of the indian ship neither from the ship to the shore without ask his leave and make know their business so that now regib Aga of Moha begin to sing a new song and insinuate with sir Henry Middleton by diverse messenger as by Nohuda Mahumet and other of the general best friend there with present now fear what harm may happen unto they in recompense of his treachery towards he and therefore desire to have peace with the general for master Femell before his return aboard in more especial favour be by the aga invite to his house whereto he be urge and there too soon yield to eat and drink with he whereupon some former speech give out by master Femell that he will make complaint of his wrong in Stambola which now he remember at his departure with a smile countenance tell he they may meet together at Stambola this night be come aboard he seem over-ioy but three day after about two of the clock in the morning he end his life as we all thought by poison the surgeon open he and this be their conceit whereupon the general embarge all his ship the nine and twenty at two of the clock in the morning as aforesaid master Femell cape merchant die the death of master Femell june 1. the first day of june in the evening we have a very strong gust of wind be so hot that it be able to take away our breath it also drive the sand of the shore in such sort we can scarce look to windward the second come aboard the admiral awl the son of Portugal parent be a captain turn Turk who for that he have be the general Trudgman or interpreter at Zenan and so have some acquaintance with he and therefore be send down to capitulate with he of a peace he inform the general that master Pembertons say boy be already bring down to Moha and promise the next day he shall be bring aboard this awl and taccacee a bannean come to know the general demand which be a hundred thousand rial of eight the eight in the morning the general send the darling to beloule a place on the Abexin coast be ten league to the northward of Assab to fetch water beloule a place on the Assab coast. and buy some goat for relief of our man who begin to fall sick of a faint disease the best remedy for which as we find be let blood and purge of the body this disease go away in bile and scab and this disease no man escape clear of the nineteen shermall Sabander of Moha accompany with many of the chief merchant of the town and the awl Haskie and Tacaccee a bannian come in state with diverse sort of music from the aga to the general aboard the trades-increase to capitulate of the foresaid sum by he demand for satisfaction for our say good which then in regard the general and all we see at the present no more to be get and that which shall be agree upon to come out of the say Sabander of the bannians our friend his purse who daily relieve our man in their misery with bread and other sustenance not so much as our dog but also have daily allowance from he so that always his presence administer comfort to our distress people therefore it be conclude we to receive our iron and lead again and for the rest of our good not to be have wherein be conclude all vest and other present the general have give the sum at present agree upon be eighteen thousand rial of eight and for that at present they have not money to defray so great a sum they desire the general to take out of the say ship of Diu so much good as he shall esteem a fit pawn for so great a sum which they will daily redeem as they can raise money and then the ship to go in present to land and make sale of the rest of her good Richard Philips m^ster Pembertons boy restore the utmost time limit for the last payment be fourteen day the Sabander bring aboard with he according to promise master Pembertons boy be clad in apparel of the english fashion @. 3 their departure from Moha to Assab and after that high into the Red-sea thence to the Socatora and after to surat july 3 the three of july have reasonable provide the ship with rice and other grain for that our english provision consume apace the general with all three ship and pinnace set sail and stand over to the bay of Assab there by get daily refresh to recover our weak faint sick man where we arrive the four day at eleven of the clock afore noon the five six seven eight and nine day the Budwees every day bring down either bullock sheep or goat the thirteen we make a end of water the king of Raheta send the general three fat bullock for a present by one Abdella his sister son the general very kind entertain he and accept of the king present present he again with a vest of broadcloth the general also give the king hearty thanks for all the kindness and good deal receive from his subject at this his port. the say Abdella then desire the general to come with his ship near than Bab be by their report a good harbour and be near the king town and more plentiful of refresh where he may better show his love unto the general this day the general feast he aboard the trades-increase and in the evening cause a banquet of sweet meat and wine to be prepare on shore against their land whereof he have both eat and drink very thankful take leave of the general and depart to the king again their endeavour to take a rich Turkey ship which come from sue the four and twenty we set sail from Assab direct our course towards Cameran a island on the Abaxin coast some forty league to the northward of Moha in fifteen degree north latitude in which be a town and fortress to which place they think they be come or near come to stay for direction by reason of our be near to the the northwards it be seldom see that any will attempt go while the westerly monson last which in the Red-sea blow most all northerly till the last of july we turn up all day and anchor at night in which we be pester with a dangerous shoal to which we unaware come so near t^a^ we have oftentimes enough to do to quit ourselves of they when we have little more water than we need this continue two day have no pilot nor other mean and the ^^rr^nts uncertain ready to find it and the weather doubtful be in uncertain place to rid^ in open water if the weather in the night shall prove adverse the general with grief be often move to give over the business of seek the Turkey ship of sue himself conclude that it be fit for he to provide for the safety of his own ship which be to he certain then with too much hazard to pursue thing uncertain and perchance may miss find she when he come there two land call jubal succour and jubal a^ree so we bear up with the island of jubal succour which be big and high and another great island to the southwards of it be also high call jubal Arree these two neighbour land be environ with diverse other small land to the southwards and in diverse place ledge of sink rock be discern only by the breach on they those land as they lie south and north by supposition may be in length some ten league they lie north northwest from Moha where in clear weather they may plain be see which happen very seldom from the wester part of jubal to Beloula the course be south-west by south distant some twelve league little wide of which course lie two sink rock know by the breach they be near adjoin to the say land south by west from the wester part of jubal Arree be two land and a rock and from these towards the coast of Africa south-west lie four other small flat rock lie distant from the former some four mile and a half there be no danger in go near they for we find deep water close aboard the south westermost of they be the near to the africa coast. August 6. the six of August at four of the clock in the morning we set sail from our good harbour of Assab and before six at night we anchor in the road of M^ha see near the town wall moor and unlade the say Gallion which come from sue which we have go to seek and mist we as we be entangle among the shoal and be come into Moha five day before also there be come in one galley and three more every day expect the seven the general go in with the peppercorn and darling for dispatch of his business so near as the ship can well ride and also if need require to command all the ship in the road and about ten of the clock our old friend Taccacee and sabrage the sabanders man come aboard with a present from shermal the Sabander to these the general give notice of his business and dispee they away the ten about eleven of the clock before noon babmandel sail on both side we pass through the easter channel of babmandell find in the midst nine or ten fathom and towards either side seven six or five fathom according as we edge in or off the darling and release put out through the great or south-w channel which may be some four league over all seem very clear of danger the release go far by the shore on the south-west side of the island of babmandell in twelve fathom the easter channel be not above a mile and a half over the eleven at noon the high land of aden bear north northwest distant some eleven league and by estimation east by south half a degree some six and thirty league note also that from this day unto the end I reckon the day from noon to noon for that by every day observation of latitude I rectify my traverse as now from noon the eleven day to noon the twelve day I reckon upon the twelve day only in my discourse I reckon according to the true day as from midnight to midnight etc. the one and twenty from noon to six at night east some four league before sunrising we descry mount foelix bear east by north eleven league distant by which we certain perceive how the currant have abuse we from Tuesday the twenty day afternoon to Monday the six and twenty day notwithstanding some while of the land and other while sea turn between calm oftentimes a pretty gale continue sometime four six or seven hour together yet by reason of the currant we can never get a head but by the say six and twenty day in the morning we be fall to the westward some four league the six and twenty day at nine of the clock in the morning have continue under a steep high whitish cliff all the foresay time it please God to send we a small gale of wind off the shore with which we come off north north-east into the sea in hope there to find the wind more prosperous the seven and twenty by judgement we may run east north-east fourteen league this day at four afternoon mount foelix bear south by east some nine league distant this mount by my estimation may be sixteen league westward of cape Guardafui cape this night when it be calm as also when the wind blow we meet with a poach sea which well inform i that we grow near the length of the head-land and begin to bring the southern sea open of the cape or the point of the land the nine and twenty we descry Socatora note that in this traverse from aden to Socatora be no certainty by reason we be so much delude by the currant wherein by the water oftentimes we seem to get yet by the currant we lose or be drive back now have effect all our business as water and get some ballast and buy all the aloe here to be have and leave letter of advice with the king of Socatora for such of our nation as in like manner may come to trade in the Red-sea both to prevent their loss of time and further trouble the four of September at two in the afternoon we set sail from the road of Dellisha the wind present grow calm so that we do little good all the night September 4. the three and twenty at six in the morning be near the end of a ebb we set sail and stand away north and north north-east two hour some two league the wind at south our depth from ten to sixteen fathom and present as against a wall seven six and five fathom about eight of the clock we have sight of the tree of India which stand both in south and north Swally which bear east by north from we by a meridian compass distant six league we run in east north-east and north-east by east with the flood still raise the land to the northward till near two of the clock our depth uncertain sometime more and sometime less shun diu^rs suspicious ripling keep between eight and fifteen fathom we anchor in soft oze and by my observation it flow east north-east one quarter north and west by south one quarter south by the moon and by this time the flood run five hour and the ebb seven hour by reason of the winter fresh by the abundant reins be not yet full expel and therefore do overcome or shorten the floud-streame but at other time though the spring-streame go always strong yet the flood and ebb be equal six hour a piece in the winter-streame which be june july and August my conjecture be that cable and anchor nor ship bow can be make of force to resist the stream the coast lie here near north and south this day be come to a anchor my general send off his pinnace to fetch a boat which sail near we who come from surat and be find to Goga a boat of surat load with Rice who inform he we be over-shot surat a great way towards Cambaia and that we must return seven or eight league if we will go to the bar of surat this boat the general keep with he because they will use the master of she for a pilot. the four and twenty there come another boat voluntary aboard the admiral and also continue with good content with we for pilot the former inform the general that there be stay for we at the bar of surat fifteen arm Portugal frigate to intercept what we shall there intend so at full sea which be at two afternoon we set sail with a little wind at south stand off west into the deep channel turn down the ebb while day light will permit and then anchor in four and twenty fathom in a vehement stream where ride till morning daylight when the ebb be spend and we not able to weigh our anchor till the tide break so that we make a small tide work yet this five and twenty day night at seven of the clock we anchor some league short of the road southward of the bar where we see ride at anchor three indian ship the six and twenty in the morning with the tide of flood we set sail stand into the road where we anchor by the say three ship of surat which be intend to be lade for to go to sumatra but partly by reason of our approach and partly for that the portugal will come to no reasonable composition with they for their custom and or pass their voyage be give over according to our pilot former information we here find eighteen sail of Portugal frigate whereof sometime more and sometime less according as they see occasion appear in our view eighteen sail of Portugal frigate all be under the charge or conduct of don Francisco de Soto mayor captain Maior of the force of Damon and Chau accompany also with the captain Maior and force of Diu who for a long time together without intermission so pester the stream about we that none can neither out of the river nor any other way come near we but they will narrow search and see that they have neither letter nor other provision that may comfort or relief our necessity whereby they often take occasion to rob diverse of sundry thing with threaten that they be bring they unto we their enemy and therefore confiscate by this mean our man grow to great weakness and every day more and more of our man fall down with the scurvy want to refresh or comfort they at last by our neighbour the ship boat of surat we receive a lame advice from one Nicholas bangham leave by the Hector to attend on the merchant there yet after many day be get from he which for the purpose be lie by he both a letter from captain Hawkins remain in agra which be the place of the great mogul his residence and another from William finch at lahor which be go home-ward over land by the way of Persia w. Finch intend to return into England by the way of Persia by which the general understand the little hope they conceive of any good for our nation in this country people without faith after some time there be knowledge give by the say Nicholas B^ngham that captain Sharpeigh John jourdaine and other be every day expect in surat be come from agra by the way of Cambaya which give some content to sir Henry Middleton the thirty by the general direction I with the peppercorn darling and release set sail endeavour to find the passage over the bar into the river of surat but partly by the portugal diligent attendance to cut off from we our boat which sound before the ship if they exceed the command of our ordnance and partly the uncertain and dangerous sudden shoalding we in each ship find do chief frustrate our present endeavour @. 4 many proud affront of the portugal disgust from the indian Octob. 1 the first of October we all set sail back again towards the road where our admiral rid but the wind shorten upon we and the tide of ebb grow also strong we can not fetch the road but be put off some four mile westward of the road wherefore it be Wednesday before the wind and tide so much favour we as to get into the Road. sir Henry Middleton write unto the Portugal captain mayor require he that if he can not permit he to trade here yet that he may take in the merchant and other his countryman which be here on shore in this country and then he will be go from this place but the Portugal captain answer to this be no for he will carry they to Goa and from thence they shall be send home also it seem that John jourdaine insolence of Portuga^s have be flatter with the father both at agra and Cambaya and have obtain some commendation to the viceroy or request or hope of conduction into Portugal know at present no better mean to get into his country by which sir Henry Middleton can never imagine nor expect any safety to such as continue firm to our state and country and near the time of this letter from sir Henry Middleton captain Sharpeigh by some principal Portugal then on land in surat make motion either by letter or otherwise to the captain mayor to give he his segure or safe conduct for his safe passage aboard the english ship whereupon the captain Maior in scoff write unto the english captain and his companion his segure for their safe come aboard his galliote without addition for his departure thence the thing which he require and further to show the base account he make of our nation add that if they will take their passage along with he to Goa he will use he and his company with as much favour as he will do to turk moor or other nation that use these sea and all other nation a few persian except be jew bannians and gentile which though it be in he a unpleasing and vile speech yet I like well his plainness in show they what to trust to before not think they can have escape his hand otherwise it be likely that some of they will have be persuade that their usage shall have be better than be here promise sir Henry Middleton be very zealous in procure the liberty of our countryman though both by captain Hawkins and William Finch his letter and by all else we can understand of the country all hope of good here to be do for the company either for present or to come be whole quench he write to have they come by land and meet he at Dabull but that journey be think too tedious and by reason of the war in Decanie dangerous the time thus lose seem very tedious wherein our water and other provision fast waste our people daily for want of comfortable refresh fall general into sickness which make our estate doubtful not know where or by what mean to get refresh we be so guard by these our enemy that none can come to we neither can we go from our ship and captain sharpeigh make provision for we at the town though without hope that it can escape the Portugal who lie in continual wait for it it be provide it be in vain to sell it again but order be give to send it howsoever it be immediate send towards we the eleven sir Henry Middleton much disturb in mind at our present doubtful estate and our great loss of time and that to so little purpose and therefore leave the trade increase in the main road he with the peppercorn and darling and release put in practice to discover alongst the coast to the northward to find out some place where our ship may safe ride so near the shore as to command the place of land and frustrate the portugal attempt for take our boat and people but the day near spend we anchor near the north point thwart of the bar at the entrance of the river of surat this day Allonso Gransidio die the twelve early in the morning ungracious gratitude the portugal take the boat which be come towards we with our provision in scoff the captain Maior present send thanks to captain Sharpeigh for his care of he in send he victual for his supply this say morning at the first of the flood we set sail stand with the point to the northwards and by reason of the quickness of the stream and our suspicion in this unknown place we ever put that ship small of draft head-most and before the small we send our row boat make no more haste with our sail then that our boat may keep head with their oar and yet further to prevent what peril by these strong tide may happen we have our anchor always in readiness to let drop whensoever by their sign ahead we shall understand of any sudden shoald the army of the portugal likewise weigh and follow keep a breast between the peppercorn and the shore they all row in order of battle with their colour display oftentimes make great shout as in some great attempt the captain Maior in a small frigate go from frigate to frigate throughout his fleet encourage they at length the darling boat a good distance of between the ship and the land by occasion of a suspicious ripple and where she be sound present by the captain mayor direction one of their small swift frigate be overbold through our long sufferance rue forth with great swiftness to cut off from we the darling boat be second by another of the same kind the master of the darling see his boat and man in such danger can no long forbear but for her rescue he begin to shoot at they the former frigate get clear ahead but the second see our shoot fly so fast at she with fear put on shore the man abandon she run away in the mud the army now come up for her rescue perceive our shot come among they so fast shove a stern leave that frigate to our devotion we perceive they so to leave she and for that she be fit to serve our turn bestow the fetch of she in this frigate we find some small quantity of indigo cinnamon comin-seed cotton yarn a Portugal frigate take Mirabolans dry for physic and one small ballet of Candekins mill and very course all of small value these thing have the portugal late take from a poor bannian by this occasion we anchor here in seven fathom water thwart of the north point in the mouth of the river of surat within musket shoot of the shore at low water here we rid till the next day the thirteen in the morning we weigh and stand somewhat near into the shoreward and anchor in six fathom present we descry diverse man on land wherefore the general send master jeffe and Matthew bragge ashore with a flag of truce but they be Portugal and perceive they land retire flourish their sword as though they have achieve some worthy exploit this day about nine a clock in the forenoon the general send a way the darling into the main road where the trade increase rid she make no stay there but present again return bring with she one of the indian ship boat and seventeen of their man who the general at time send away with letter to the town to captain Sharpeigh who before their go the general royal reward also promise they better satisfaction at their return five of they be this evening send away with letter who promise to return again to we with letter but according to their accustom practice of lie and deceit they only speak to give present content and mean the contrary so that there be no hold in their word this day there come somewhat near we a great indian boat lade with paddy the general make stay of she and for our present supply buy of she one candy and six maunds of paddy which the next day we take into the peppercorn and they have satisfaction to their content be dismiss depart the sixteenth we see two frigate ride a good distance to the northward of we which the general have a desire to see what they be and to know the cause of their ride there which be portugal and see we row alongst the coast towards they they set sail stand awhile alongst the coast and then to the off but find ourselves further and further a stern give they over and stand in with the river and point of south Swally we land determine with our net to fish but the depth of the water not serve the general be go up the river in his Galliot to fish at which instant there come a good gale of wind off the sea wherewith again come in the two former frigate accompany with two other frigate new come from the bar-foot of surat in which be the late captain of our little frigate who late hazard his life by run away in the deep mud suppose now by worthy valour to recover she again as soon after we be inform to who attempt the wind be as favourable as adverse to we who have far to row to windward over a broad shoal whereon we always have between three and four foot water but we somewhat get off to set sail and the release not far off to second we and contrary to their expectation in stead of fly see all our endeavour bend to hasten the meeting with they and see our musket shoot fall but little short of they which immediate be like to reach they but as seem their former resolution find some contradict for they all at once exchange their steerne for their prowess give we some waist base shot in their run away we pursue long since we lose not much we be ever in hope to get ground of they but the wind increase and what between our people tire at the oar and our too small sail to our little frigate put they clean from we and so we return to the peppercorn leave the darling the twenty in the morning Thomas Glemham in the pinnace go on shore to attend the come down of any of the country people either with message or provision to sell all give direction if any come to give he knowledge by shoot off three musket together that the general in the frigate will then go on shore the pinnace come on shore one man only for a sentinel go on shore who no soon come to the top of a small hill near the waterside but present see a troop of portugal rush out of their ambush towards they retire to the pinnace who row a little from the shore and anchor the portugal come to the water side discharge their small shot at our pinnace who so well repay they with their musket that present they run away soon after they see one of the inhabitant on horseback who come down as they suppose the present sight of the portugal hinder and therefore shoot off three musket together which the general hear present go on the shore with the frigate but contrary to our expectation the say Indian come not down to they neither any message nor letter neither from the general nor captain Sharpeigh in the evening some of the poor inhabitant bring down some few fruit to sell which the general cause to be buy and as our man repair to the frigate to come aboard there come down unto they three man out of the Portugal army who for some disgust there give they flee to we for succour the one of they a Dutchman bear in Lisbon call Lorenzo de Campo the other two be portugal the principal of they call Frances consalues the one and twenty in the morning the general in the frigate go on shore where he no soon land but present a indian bring he a letter from captain Sharpeigh certify sir Henry Middleton that the next day he will come down with all his good guard by a hundred horseman this day a Mallabar boy call Antonio who have be five or six year captive to a Portugal soldier in this army now find good opportunity to his desire flee unto we for succour the two and twenty early in the morning the general go on shore in the frigate attend by the release to expect the come down of captain Sharpeigh according to his information in his letter now approach near the shore the frigate anchor and present land thirty man with small shot the general appoint one of they for sentinel to stay on the top of a small hill near the water side the rest also to be near the water side for the better avoid any sudden attempt but all to look about to see if they can discover any body come down from surat-ward the sentinel in short time see two bannians come from the north-ward whereof he instant give knowledge these bannians bring down some tobacco and other trifle thing to sell they be come aboard the frigate certify the general that the last night five englishman come from surat to a village some four mile from this place three hundred portugal assault our man and that this morning they come from they and that this afternoon they will come down to we present there sally out of a valley between two hill on a sudden seven troop of portugal with their colour display who our man see make a stand the portugal also make a stand as have no list to come within the reach of our shot although there be near three hundred of they the general command our man to retire and to embark themselves which be do according the portugal than make pursuit after they and with five or six base by they bring for that purpose and other small shot they begin to shoot at our boat and man but do they no harm who fail not to answer they again with the like whereby as afterwards we be inform they go away with the worst now after long stay and our people not come according to our expectation the general return aboard the peppercorn determine this afternoon with the ebb to be go from this place to the trades-increase but as we be set sail a company of man be descry come from the northward wherefore we again anchor and the general go on shore in the frigate where present come down to they three of our countryman of the ascension company to wit Thomas Musgrave Bartholomew davis and William Morgan who with they bring captain sharpeigh and John jordaine clothes and provision certain englishmen^ome ^ome aboard on Thursday come down to they captain Sha^peigh with a hundred horseman for his guard all arm with bow and arrow and sword with he come aboard jaddow the broker and a braman or bannian priest and a other indian captain sharpeigh his servant the five and twenty sir Henry Middleton in the frigate captain Sharpeigh come aboard our general go on land go on shore accompany by captain Sharpeigh and John jordaine where Coia Nassan at the water side promise to meet he who be there in readiness according to his promise the frigate come to the water side the general be fetch on shore on a pallankin bear on four man shoulder and there kind entertain by Coia Nassan and according to the country fashion a carpet be spread whereon they sit to confer of our present business it be by they in a manner conclude our ship to go to Goga a place on the wester side of the gul^e near to Cambaya and to have pilot from the shore for our more safe conduct but a sudden and at this time of the year unusual shower of rain happen they break up their conference promise the next day there to meet again full to determine of our say business the six and twenty according to mutual promise the general in manner aforesaid go on shore in the frigate who anchor near the shore side Coia Nassan in one of our boat send off jaddow with a present of ten fine Bastas and fifty bushel of wheat to the general and two pilot for our safe conduct to Goga the general very kind accept thereof and with the pinnace go to the shoreside where on a pallankin in manner aforesaid he be receive and entertain on shore where they proceed on their former conference but the pilot have discover the manner of the place who unfitness give no content and therefore their determination therein soon alter and it be conclude and agree upon that our ship shall for the space of six day be go off to sea which the portugal perceive they suppose will also be go and then we again to return and sudden to dispatch our business this evening we set sail stand to the southward to the trades-increase but the wind shorten upon we so that we anchor some mile westward of the road this day in the morning Thomas La^^ die the seven and twenty in the morning the general depart aboard the trades-increase and soon after send his pinnace for captain Sharpeigh and my s^lfe October to confer about our present business also he send man to fetch away the frigate and portugal from the peppercorn after a counsel hold the general send a letter to don Francisco de Soto captain Maior of the Portugal army therein repeat the manifold discourtesy by he show towards we first not only hinder our land but also the passage of our letter keep we from all relief for our sick man and what at great charge be provide he have take from we and keep we from our people on shore which if we can have get we have be go long since and also his endeavour the twelve of this month to cut from we our boat sound a head our ship what time we take one of their frigate which we now have do o^r business if he will send for she we will free bestow she on he again also the general release the indian ship who for conveyance of letter between captain Sharpeigh and he he restrain from go into the river who now be dismiss they present depart towards surat also we make ready our ship to be go off to Sea the nine and twenty we set sail to sea-ward the Portugal frigate still follow we in their accustom manner this day we meet with a boat find to Cambaya lade with Coco nut of who the general buy seventeen thousand which he distribute among our people and the indian boat be present dismiss this day be m. mullenex the second time put into the peppercorn the one and thirty s. Henry Middleton see that the portugal still follow we determine to stand off no further but again to return to do our business so far as convenient we can in despite of they the first of November according to the general predetermination we return to the north-ward as the wind and tide permit Saturday in the morning November 1. we anchor thwart of south Swally where the general in the frigate go on shore but hear no news from surat this night the portugal in the river shoot off diverse piece which they tell the indian be for joy they have receive tiding of the come of two great galley and twenty frigate more for their assistance whereby they abuse themselves in think with their lie to terrify we who be now arm to withstand all their villainous practice usurp authority in a other king dominion where they have no more to do then in Denmark the five sir henry Middleton send William pemberton master of the darling in who endeavour he have firm confidence with his ship the release and frigate again a excellent road find to discover to the north-ward as aforesaid who there find a bard place wherein not only our small ship may at high water go but also the trades-increase be a little lighten may also go safe over the bar and there ride within caliever shoot of the shore the six in the morning with the first of the flood we all set sail stand to the northwards and anchor thwart of the place discover at high water we with the peppercorn darling and release go in over the bar whereon the least depth we find be three fathom and a foot but at low water three foot be in we all anchor within caliever shoot of the shore as aforesaid in eight fathom and right a head or to the northward of we anchor twelve Portugal frigate somewhat without the reach of our ordnance this afternoon the general and myself with a guard of forty small shot go on shore to seek out some place where we may relieve our want of fresh water in the salt marsh we find a place of brackish water whereof till better can be get we be force to make use here the inhabitant bring down to sell five or six goat and sheep and some fruit which for relief of our out-tired weak people be all buy the seven we fill some water buy some small provision as the people bring down we hale the release a ground in hope to stop her leak be as it be in a manner devour with worm for the safety of she and her people we erect a tent in which I continue keep a court of guard and sentinel aboard to prevent the practice of the portugal our enemy to prejudice we the eight all our carpenter use their best endeavour to try the stop of the pinnace her leak this day Nicholas bangham come down bring provision such as by the general direction he have provide as limb for our disease people bread lamp-oil and candle and his own provision this evening some of our inhabit neighbour of the near village news of more portugal inform the general that in the river be arrive two galley and eighty frigate upon which news the general alter his determination and for the better security think good to bring all our force together the better to frustrate any practice that may be intend against we wherefore at his first departure aboard his ship which ride in the off give i direction to guard the say bark upon the shore and as soon as the tide serve to heave she a float by my ship or the darling which about midnight be perform when present we set sail over the bar and rid by the admiral the nine in the morning Coia Nassan come down the general be then on shore he certify the general that so soon as all our ship be come into the road he will bring down good and trade with we in the mean time a market shall be keep upon the sea strand of all necessary provision also inform the general that the frigate last come into the river be a Caphala or fleet of Partugall merchant frigate find to Cambaya at his departure Nicholas bangham go up to surat with he the twelve be in the road we have a market there keep upon the strand of diverse sort of provision a market at the road of Swally to wit meal bread bullock goat sheep hen butter and cheese sugar and Sugar-Candie limb water-melon goard onion radish pallingeny cucumber milk a kind of Peascod which they call paupery and a small fruit as big as a little crab be in taste between sweet and sour and in the midst thereof have a small round stone sugarcane and tobacco also saltfish dry and prawn and Palmita wine which they call taddy all these afore-named thing be at reasonable cheap rate the one and twenty my sentinel upon the mount see over the top of a other hill near adjoin the head of some of the portugal who there lie in ambush to the number of five hundred man a second assault of the portugal he have no soon give the alarm but present they see themselves discover they all with their colour advance with great celerity run down to cut off our people from the boat but have a little taste of our shot both out of great and small piece and see some of their fellow tumble in the mud they make as great haste back out of the reach of they diverse of they that fall down afterward come to themselves and make mean to crawl away only Antonio de Sowso a gentleman of Chau have a deadly wound in the head lay still we see the neglect of compassion by his friend in commiseration fetch he aboard who wound be incurable he die within two hour after and we bury he on the shore sir Henry Middleton in his ship in the off hear our piece and doubt of some disgust hasten with his frigate full of people unto we yet notwithstanding we give the enemy leave to take his pleasure on the shore without land to try any further fortune with they go on shore we find diverse of their relic as shoe and sock which for their more expedition away they leave behind afterward we be inform by the Muccadam or Constable of Swally that the portugal have kill and hurt in this attempt eight of their people the four and twenty afternoon come down Mucrib Chan with one hundred horseman the arrival of Mucrib Chan the governor of Cambaya and many more footman five elephant with diverse camel cart and ox for transportation of his provision wherein he show his greatness furthermore he have diverse cart to carry his leopard wherewith at his pleasure he use to hunt he be there meet by sir Henry Middleton at who land be discharge a volley of a hundred and threescore small shot and at the instant of their salutation each ship in order shoot to wit the darling three the peppercorn five and the trades-increase nine piece of ordnance than be deliver unto he the king of England letter and present unto himself whereof with all show of kindness he accept and Macrib Chan with sixteen mogul and moor such as he make choice of leave the rest of his follower a shore with Hoia Nassan and Coia Arsan awl and other merchant where be erect as it be a little town of tent bold accompany s. Henry Middleton aboard the trade increase where in the best manner the ship afford he be entertain and continue all night and part of the next day Macrib Chan come aboard the trade increase sir Henry Middleton often urge he concern our main business which he still put off with delay till a other time but all his book be both himself and by diverse instrument to find out and buy all such fantastical toy that may fit his turn to please the toyish humour of the great king his master and for aught that we can gather further than serve his own turn he little respect our sell or buy of our principal merchandise bring for that place have satisfy himself in th^t ship by his witty inquisition desire in like mann^r to see the other ship where he run the like course aboard the peppercorn he buy all our chest of sword-blade whereof he seem to be so greedy as he will not trust we to send they after he but will see they all send a shore before his departure which in few day after have select out all the crooked one and such as like he send back the rest careless and ill condition as their accustom manner be to do all thing whatsoever they have buy when by all the view they can have they dislike the same which business be end they hasten a shore accompany by s. Henry Middleton myself captain Sharpeigh and John jordaine he be land carry we to his tent where be all set upon carpet with many of his friend sir Henry Middleton again move speech concern our business as aforesaid which he again put off till to morrow when we see nothing to be do and the night approach we take leave depart aboard to spend the night in consultation of our next day business or affair the six and twenty in the morning sir Henry M^ddleton hasten ashore think to do much business be come he be inform that Macrib Chan be go and yet the better to pacify he they tell he he be go to the portugal to make friendship between we which the general well know be not so but rather suspect that his go to the portugal be have receive already from we in present all he can get that he will now also see what he can get from the portugal to do ill office against we wherefore lade with discontent he again depart aboard his ship in the off Hoia Nassan yet stay pretend of purpose to buy our commodity whereof the general set down the particular prize but this day be far spend it be refer till the day follow the seven and twenty in the morning Macr^b Chan send one of his chief gentleman and his broker with a letter to the general base vanity which I suppose to be of import and behoof of our commonwealths business present in my boat send the messenger aboard the admiral the effect whereof be soon find to be no other than to beg his perfume jerkin and his spaniel dog which be deny he the day before when he beg his beaver hat also he desire our workman and smith to make he the model of a chain pump also this morning captain Sharpeigh and master jourdaine go ashore to Hoia Nassan to confer with he of the prize of our commodity the eight and twenty Hoia Nassan depart to Su^at carry with he the general jerkin and dog which Macrib Chan have former beg and that we shall the less doubt he leave behind he in his tent Hoia jellardin his son-in-law pretend he shall stay till his return Hoia Nassan be once go he set slight be careless of our business and the next night he dissolve his tent and depart to no small disturbance to we see none leave to rectify any business this day Bartholomew davis one of our carpenter be send to surat to make provision of plank and board for re-edify of the release we there into encourage by their favourable promise in which be very small hold for he once there find nothing but delusion or delay for wheresoever he find timber either he can not find any to sell it or not to see it so all his business be not only frustrate but he also in despair of liberty to return this day master jourdaine master frain and other go up to a village near adjoin to view some pack of indian cloth which Hoia Nassan have bring down thither to barter with we for some of our commodity they return bring down the mustraes of every sort and the prize demand for they Corge the general upon such as he like set down what prize he will give for they require they to do the like by his commodity and to have answer the next day but they hold they at high rate and offer weak for our commodity which they esteem of necessity we must be force to sell they howsoever the first of December they perceive that sir Henry Middleton will not give they their demand for their commodity nor sell they his at their own rate to show their carelessness decemb. 1. or to try his temper do not only speedy send for their mustraes of clothes but also carry back to surat all such pack as they have former bring down to Damka a village three mile from we also the poor inhabitant be restrain from bring down provision to sell we as former by permission they do the six the general be inform the mockrib Chan and Hoia Nassan be come down and in the evening we see as it be a village of tent pitch somewhat more than a mile within the land to the eastward of the road but whether they come in peace or no we know not the seven jaddow and Narran broker come down certify the general that mockrib Chan and Hoia Nassan be come down and be now at the tent and to morrow will be here with he barbarous inhumanity they translate our king letter and then depart but yet their extraordinary sadness as man send by constraint give we no hope of good towards we the rather for that they have former restrain as prisoner our man send to the town about business as also their severity in proclaim the loss of their nose to any that shall bring down any provision to we whereby they show their desire to force we away by famine this day the darling be again hale off to her morning chief commodity for India the eight mockrib Chan and Hoia Nassan come down with a great train to the waterside and at the same time to put jealousy of their ill deal from we bring down some forty or fifty pack of indian clothes and so increase to the number of a hundred and eight pack yet the sight thereof can not move all of we to believe they mean faithful to deal with we but they have extraordinary desire to our quicksilver and vermilion and mockrib Chan to our velvet though they make small show thereof yet for that it can not be have by itself without our lead and other commodity by which mean they condescend to deal at present for our lead also defer all the rest till some other time but will not deal with we otherwise but so as they will gain fifty in the hundred at their own door without further adventure and we which we have bring so far we can not draw they but to such poor rate as will bear but a small part of our freight hither the nine in the morning sir Henry Middleton go on shore not have any sure confidence in their performance where in word they continue firm wherefore the trade increase begin to land her lead somewhat before noon be bring unto mockrib Chan a letter from the great mogul whereat he be so damp that scarce any word be to be get from he but present after dinner he depart but Hoia Nassan and other continue as they pretend to effect the business this night before the general go aboard be still in suspicion of inconstant deal and see the great pain and toil in land our lead and what intolerable disgust or discontent will arise among our people if by shrink from their word we be force again to embark the same send some of our factor with the broker to Hoia Nassan to signify the same and before further trouble to know his full resolution who return he answer he shall not need to doubt for they will have it all whereby without further doubt the great expedition be use for land thereof this day in the evening William johnson sailer of the darling and John coverdale trumpeter of the admiral run away to the Portugal army and John pattison to surat the ten there come aboard to see our ship the governor of surat and Coia Arsan awl be depart from the peppercorn with the general aboard the admiral in the off this sudden disturbance happen which cross the content on all side for John jourdaine come speedy from the shore to inform the general how that Hoia Nassan have already the velvet and some other thing which he most desire be now in a great fit of wrangle so that he think no good for we will be do for he have both make they give over weigh the lead and also send for his ox to draw away the cart with the pack of indian clothes whereat the general grow so impatient that he present make stay to enforce performance both of the governor and Coia Arsan Ally to their great trouble of mind but after some little pause the general cause they to be embark with himself in the frigate and come in call upon i in the peppercorn to impart what he have do wish my opinion who see he in the right way see no cause to counsel he to revoke the same but rather for security of our business to persevere from i he depart to the shore with a reasonable guard and give Hoia Nassan knowledge what his cross deal have force he unto and that since the governor of surat come in courtesy and the business concern he not wish himself to come aboard and take his place and he will dismiss the governor who see no other remedy with a grim look and sour countenance come into the frigate and the governor to his great content be dismiss and they be bring to remain with i in the peppercorn the eleven we continue land of our lead and have so lighten the admiral that at high-water the night follow to our great content we bring she in over the bar also have now all our strength together where our business lay the twelve in the morning sir Henry Middleton send for the gentleman prisoner to be bring aboard his great ship which Hoia Nassan for long time obstinate refuse till I have order to send he p^rforce he be there in regard of the hasten of our business it be think fit to enlarge they both leave other pledge in their place as for Coia Nassan be Coia Illardin his son in law and one of his son and for Hoia Arsan awl two persian merchant and for pledge on our side to remain with they in their tent be John Williams and Henry boothby this night be open count sort and agree for forty pack of indian clothes the fifteen there come to we two Portugal youth from the army one of they be the captain Maior his page Portugal fugitive the sixteenth in the morning we see to the southward five Portugal colour display whereof the general understand present by his command be land some two hundred arm man with shot and pike to meet they which they perceive retire in which pursuit be near unto our Swally we meet with Hoia Nassan and all his troop Portugall bravery and flight who be come down with some twenty pack more of indian clothes he inform the general that the portugal be already get over the muddy creek and be near unto their frigate wherefore the general give over his pursuit and return aboard the nineteen Peter rosemary a Portugal who we bring out of England a sailer of the trade be appoint as guardian to attend on or look to Francisco consalue they both run away to the army the seven and twenty there come from surat Hoia Nassan to see if he can buy any of our clothes and other commodity but not agree upon the prcy he again depart this day by a jew from Masulipatan the general receive a letter from one Peter Floris a Dutchman employ by the company of merchant of London trade to East-India who have there settle a factory certify the general of three ship which be come out of England whereof one be to go into red-sea which be very unpleasing to the general and we all in regard of the danger we suspect they shall fall into the thirty master jourdaine and master Fraine be send to surat to agree for some more indian clothes as also to urge the put off of some of our commodity the same day the general receive a letter from captain haukin at Cambaya signify that his determination be with all his household to take his passage to Goa and from thence to England but sir Henry Middleton conceit if he once get to Goa his good will stop his passage to England if not shorten his life by the same messenger do most earnest and friendly advise he to the contrary and invite he to take his passage with we into England also our people at surat inform the general that mockrib Chan make show to be willing that we shall leave a factory for vent of the remain of our commodity which keep we sometime in hope but afterward vanish by inconstancy the eight of januarie Nicholas vphlet come down from Cambaya january 8. with letter from captain haukin to the general certify he that by reason of his former letter he determine to come down to our ship and take his passage with we the six and twenty captain Sharpeigh master Fraine capt. Hawkins captain Hawkins with all his good and family and the rest Nicholas vphlet except come down who the general with a troop of some two hundred man go some three mile up into the land to meet and guard they from the portugal who army be not fare off the seven and twenty the general send John Williams to surat to know their resolution for leave a factory there the nine and twenty John Williams return with a absolute denial of have any further deal with our nation but be all command to be go out of surat not permit they to stay to receive debt there owe they wherefore they send to know the general pleasure whether they shall present come down or use mean to delay the time to see whether their determination therein will alter the thirty sir Henry Middleton write to our people at surat speedy to repair down to our ship the one and thirty according to the general direction all our people come down from surat with all their good the six of February there pass by towards Cambaya a great Caphala February 6. or fleet of near five hundred sail of Portugal frigate the nine in the morning upon the top of a high water the admiral warp out over the bar and anchor in the off this day about noon come down from Cambaya Nicholas vphlet captain haukin servant who they have leave behind in pawn as aforesaid for who we stay since the last of januarie what time our merchant be expel surat this day in the evening we set sail and go out over the bar and anchor in eight fathom some mile in the off thereof near unto the admiral @ v. their departure to Dabull Socatora the Red-sea and act there we depart the nine have continue here the space of a hundred and thirty eight day in which we sustain many and sundry abuse by delay breach of promise which hold the country people from trade with we and have exchange a few commodity at very hard and unprofitable rate which hold further trade disappoint we of settle a factory which hold some debt former and command our merchant out of their town and our ship to be go the cause move they to hasten we away as we afterward understand grow thus at the instant of their conference whether fit for they to permit we to leave a factory to vent the rest of our good bring for that place there or no be deliver into the hand of mockrib Chan a letter from Dangie a bannian in Cambaya by the instigation of the jesuite there advise they that if they give place to the english in surat the threaten of the portugal the portugal will come with force and burn all their sea Townes and make spoil of all the ship they shall send abroad the content whereof be applaud of most all agree it to be their best course and thereupon dismiss our people as aforesaid this road of Swally within the barly in twenty degree fifty five minute north latitude the variation in sixteen degree and forty minute westerly observation of the tide etc. at Swally we find the water highed more on the full moon spring then on the change by four foot the one be four and twenty foot the other twenty the night tide high than the day tie by three foot according as the wind blow the coast or strand within the bar lie near south and north by the compass which the variation allow be north by east and half east and south by west half west also at west south-west half south and east north-east half north the moon make a full Sea the ten the general stay to dispatch his business with jaddow and Narran the broker also we take out of a frigate find to the rehemy at Goga certain Candy of Rice and pitch give they bill to be pay at surat by two man who be indebt to captain Hawkins account the eleven in the morning at six a clock at high water we set sail and at two in the afternoon we anchor in the south ride at the bar foot of surat they depart from surat by a new ship call the Hassany find with the rehemy unto the red-sea also we take out of another frigate certain charcoal assign they to be pay at surat in manner aforesaid the fourteen at one of the clock in the morning we meet with a bank whereon we have from sixteen to thirteen fathom and sudden again to twenty and twenty two fathom after which we hale up by a wind west by south some three league from six a clock in the morning to noon south southeast some nine league the wind at north our depth twenty nineteen seventeen and sixteen fathom what time we be some ten league of the land westward in north latitude nineteen degree thirty seven minute at one a clock we pass by three Mallaber ship find for surat lade with Cayro or stuff to make rope and Coco nut who there rid in fourteen fathom nine league off from the land to spend the ebb and southeast from seven other ship near in towards the mountain from noon to midnight we go south southeast some five league the most part of this night be calm the fifteen to noon south southeast six league the wind northerly a very easy gale this night we hear diverse great ordnance shoot off ashore this night our passage have be in fifteen thirteen and twelve fathom this land be mountainous mix with diverse valley like harbour or entry our latitude at noon be nineteen degree four minute at sunset we be three league of the shore our passage in between twelve and six fathom from noon to midnight our course be south by east eleven league the wind northerly the sixteenth to noon south by east twelve hour eleven league the wind northerly the land high and full of harbour like bay all alongst in fine shoald in five fathom and four mile of the land and nine fathom three league of our latitude eighteen degree one minute this day at sunsetting we anchor in seven fathom thwart of the bar of Dabull to which town the general go in hope to sell some of his english commodity Dabull or as it be to shoot another arrow after diverse former lose the seventeen in the morning the general in the frigate go in near the bar to discover the depth and so aboard again which be five fathom very near the south point of the entrance but very little further north-ward towards the middle of the entrance but two fathom the latitude of this south point be seventeen degree thirty four minute the variation be fifteen degree thirty four minute latitude 17.34 variation 15.34 this day about noon come off two boat from the governor the one with a present which be three bullock certain sheep bread and water million in the other boat come the messenger which be send to know what we be and our business though they before do imagine who we be partly by our acquaintance with they at Moha as also their hear of our be at surat the message according to the indian manner be deliver with many compliment and promise of all friendship and further that they will buy our good for money and give we indigo cloth and pepper for the same which be more than we can expect or they have order to grant for what indigo they have with cloth and pepper be present to be employ in their own ship now find for the red sea upon these kind promise the general send merchant ashore both with a present to the governor and with mustre of english clothes and other of our commodity but of all except some little broadcloth and kersey of our best colour as stanimels poppiniay green and other light colour and lead in bar we can sell none for our red lead Dabull double deal the governor buy and send it aboard again and somewhat after the manner we find at surat the governor deal double with we grant free leave to sell yet underhand have man in wait to restrain or beat away such as come to buy so that no man buy make his own price for what he desire to buy for corn and other provision and water to be bring aboard for money we have with all favour and at last we have a cable of eighteen inch and ninety six fathom of the country stuff worth eight pound sterling for one of the darling anchor now whether such kindness as we receive be out of their good disposition to stranger or not it be hard to judge they have present blow abroad and inform at Moha that we endeavour to right what wrong any shall impose upon we and therefore may seem to make the best show unto we the six and twenty in the afternoon beside diverse Mallaber merchant ship which anchor by we we see also in the off a great ship and frigate to who Portugal ship two hour before night the general send off the darling to bring in the say ship but doubt the miss of she by night as also the smallness of his force to command she when night come send of i also in the peppercorn with his frigate well man to attend upon i in regard of the frigate in her company about midnight though very dark I get sight of she ride at anchor send our frigate to the other run away and the great ship get sight of we be come to sail but be command to strike sail do it also their captain and principal to come aboard i he send a soldier and two more in a canon who excuse the captain to be age and unwieldy and that their great boat be so pester with lade that they can not row she wherefore though unwilling I be force to send my own pinnace for some of the principal merchant and soldier but with such straight direction to my cock-swaine that upon pain of great punishment he shall permit none to go into she to the end to prevent spoil I intend sir Henry Middleton shall be the first Englishman shall enter she meanwhile our frigate with the other which they have take return to we and to my grief give knowledge that they kill one of the portugal in fly now have diverse of their man aboard i I give direction to stand in for Dabull but by reason of their ill steerage which we impute to be do of purpose and for that with all our sail we can not fetch they up be get a little a-head we and fear they may mend their sail and get from we I cause they to be call unto to take in their sail and anchor till day which direction give and our anchor ready to let fall I depart into my cabin to examine some of the portugal what their ship be lade withal meanwhile my master pretend to doubt whether the ship be anchor or no without any order or knowledge send my pinnace aboard wherein go one of his mate more greedy of pray then careful of credit who do not only go into the ship but there fell to rifle who though often call make no haste away till his own pleasure be fulfil against who come aboard I cause Thomas Glenham John Staughten George Cockam and Robert mico the purser to be ready at the ladder with a lantern and candle to search they one by one in the portugal sight aboard our ship and turn they out of the boat which be do and the thing throw into the boat stern by Thomas Glenham John Staughten and Robert mico I send again aboard the Portugal ship will the purser to tell they aboard if there be any thing else want they that have be aboard without my direction shall make it good but by reason that Thomas love George jeff and Matthew bragge three master mate of the admiral late dead the frigate be now command by one terrie a servant to Giles thornton who before our boat get aboard again notwithstanding they be command to the contrary go aboard with our frigate whereas like disgoverned pilfer people they run all into the ship not forbear to break open chest tumble into the frigate and make spoil of all thing that like they forbear no ill language to such as I have send to restrain they but the evil be do it be too late to undo it and though it breed in i much trouble and present discontent yet I use the best mean I have leave to cure the same unruliness in mariner when prey be present which be I desire William pemberton who with the darling come new to we to make the more haste into the road and to inform the general of our people misbehaviour to the end before they shall have mean to convey away or remove the same care may be take for bring off all thing to light which the general no soon understand but at one a clock when we all anchor by he command both the frigate wherein our people be to anchor of and non^ of they to come aboard he and sir Henry Middleton and myself with the captain and merchant of the Portugal ship go first to our own frigate and then to the frigate new take where our people be and have every one narrow search and all thing take from they and they turn one by one out as they be search of all what be find belong to the frigate be there leave and then our small frigate be by our pinnace tow aboard the Portugal ship where all the rest be deliver for the use of such to who it belong this ship belong to cochin call the saint Nicholas of burden some three hundred ton the captain name (...) be find to Chau a Portugal ship of 300. ton take their lade confess be principal dry Coco nut some tin black sugar and nut ten fat of China dishy certain bag of Allome and some small quantity of China dishes and some Cayro or ball ropes we make all inquisition possible for their bill of lade but none they will be know of which put we to great trouble to find out the little we have from they which be certain ball of China raw ^lke some small quantity of clove and some few cannastre and three chest of cinnamon and some wax to make we candle all which be as it be but a mite in comparison of the damage do we by the portugal the frigate belong to Chau and find to O^mus of burden sixty ton her lade Ric^ and Tam^rin out of who we take (@) bag of rice for our provision this business continue we in do every day somewhat till the first of March by this frigate the general dispatch away all such portugal as come to he from the army at surat to wit Lorenzo de Campo and his consort the f^llow take in the frigate and the two boy that come away from their master give they money in their purse according to their several quality beside the apparel former make for either of they unto the merchant that aught the most part of the silk the general give a fine broadcloth and to the captain of the frigate from who we take the rice a fine kersie also this day the governor send to gi^e the general knowledge that the next day or night follow the great Caphala which pass by we the six of February aforesaid towards Cambaya will either the next day or night follow again pass by towards Goa which howsoever they pass either by night or day we see they not consultation the four the foresaid business be effect the general call we all to consultation what be best to be do show his desire to go to the bar of Goa there to demand of the viceroy restitution of our wrong do to we and our nation by the portugal to the end if that he refuse to do it we may the better have warrant to right ourselves upon any portugal which by our endeavour we may meet with all which demand of the most be think reasonable but not fit in regard of the shortness of time and variety of delay and treacherous plot we be to expect to our further abuse wherefore it be conclude and agree upon for that the time not yet serve to go to the southward about the cape Commerin again to return to the red-sea in this vacant time to see if we can get away these good lie upon our hand in a manner hold for lose to recover some of our former loss from the subject of the great mogoll as also to cross the turk at Moha and aden for the mischief they have former do we and principal for to rescue defend or recover that ship send out by the company the year after (@) come out which we hear of from Masulipatan which we have great doubt of lest she befall into like mishap as we do in the red-sea but for that this day the wind serve not to set sail we defer it to the five day in the morning they depart from Dabull (...) to (...) sea again the five at six a clock in the morning we all set sail from Dabull stand away north northwest alongst the coast the general wish to see the ship of cochin near unto her harbour of Chau clear of danger by the mallabar their enemy and at sunset we anchor in seven fathom some league distant from the land distant from Dabull some six league and short of Chau some nine league the wind at south and so veer to the westward from the coast of India to Socatora we this time daily find our ship further to the southwards then by our course we can expect and especial when we be thwart of the gulf or entrance of sinus Persicus which I imagine to be some currrent set thence to the southwards the twenty of march the general despee away William pemberton in the darling before to Socatora to inquire of our ship find for the red-sea and India which we hear of from Masulipatan the four and twenty at ten a clock in the morning we descry land bear west south-west the easter end of Socatora some eight league distant be the easter end of Socatora be high land have four white cliff or sand hill the norther part whereof by reason of the hazinesse we can not discern the five and twenty of march at sunne-setting the point of Delisha bear southeast four league distant the six and twenty at five a clock in the morning it fall calm and the current set northward upon the rock whereby we be force to anchor in four and twenty fathom water on the south southeast side of the rock which be Saboyna some half a mile distant the rock Saboyna at this rock be great store of fish between nine and ten a clock we again set sail stand away westward of cape Guardafui the wind be at south the seven and twenty about four a clock in the morning the rock northwards of abba Curia thence distant some three league and a half bear north of we some half a mile off which be by estimation twenty league west by south from the wester point of Socatora our depth we there find be sixteen seventeen and eighteen fathom day be come we see the island of abba Curia the eight and twenty in the morning at six a clock March the cape southeast seven league distant and mount west half a point southerly nine league we come within four mile of the land and the depth forty nine and thirty thirty seven and twenty three and twenty one and twenty eighteen and fifteen fathom and about three afternoon in a fret of wind at east north-east we anchor in rough ground in seven fathom a mile and half westward from mount all which coast the general coast along in his frigate and take in and bring along three of the country people which he give letter unto to be deliver unto the darling if she come here after our departure and so put they a shore they inform the general that four day since there pass by towards the Red-sea four indian ship the nine and twenty in the morning the general send letter to other people on land to be deliver to the darling the country people bring down to our man to sell frange the western christian in the eastern world be since that expedition of Godfrey of Bullen call Frankes because the principal of that army be french in nation or original some store of sheep small goat with some small frail of Olibanum and gum arabic all which they have at reasonable rate the people still take we to be Mahumetans and not christians or as they call they frange who they favour not so the boat return aboard about noon the general think good no long to stay for the darling wherefore we set sail stand away towards aden in Arabia at four a clock in the afternoon mount foelix bear east by south half a degree south some eight league distant from noon the thirty day to one a clock in the morning the one and thirty day thirteen hour northwest eighteen league the wind at north north-east this day afternoon we descry the land of Arabia foelix the one and thirty in the morning at one a clock be near the land we cast about to the southwards to spend time till day at five a clock in the morning we cast about again northwest to landward from six a clock in the morning to six afternoon twelve hour we stand alongst the coast west by south and west south-west thirteen league always keep within five mile of the land in depth between eighteen and thirty fathom from six a clock to midnight six hour west south-west six league the first of April from midnight till six a clock west by south half south five league at which time by estimation we be eighteen league short of aden April 1 this day the general send for i master law and master Fowler to confer of our separation at length it be conclude that I in the peppercorn shall continue near or before the town of aden to keep that no indian ship shall arrive or stay there but to put they by towards the Red-sea and to that end I receive a direction or commission from my general who be with all expedition with the trades-increase to repair to the Bab or door of the Red-sea both for safety of the company ship whereof we have intelligence from Masulipatan to be follow our tract both to the Red-sea and India even into the mouth of the wolf which by God mercy we have escape as also there at once to take revenge both of the turk and subject of the great mogoll for the wrong do to our king and country the second from midnight to six a clock west south-west three league little wind at east about eight a clock in the morning what time we shall have be separate some eight league eastward of aden we find at a anchor the darling who have get before we by reason of our linger for her four day who have do their business at Socatora and be again depart thence before we pass it and gate a day before we by the Saboyna abba Curia and mount foelix where we linger for they they bring from thence the copy of a letter leave with the king by captain John Saris commander of the ship of our indian company to wit general Saris. the Clove the Hector and the Thomas signify that notwithstanding by sir Henry Middleton letter he understand of the villainy there do to we he with his say ship be go into the Red-sea immediate the general with the trades-increase and darling depart towards the Bab leave i in the peppercorn at a anchor some eight league eastward of aden according to former determination the three at one a clock in the morning we set sail and stand to the southwards the better to discover and so all the day under sail we keep up to windward of aden in the morning we see three sail find for aden but stand away from we that we can not come near they all night for that it blow hard we do not anchor but lay a hull to try our drift which I find in ten hour to be three league so run further in and the four day morning about seven a clock I anchor in twelve fathom some league or four mile from the town of aden the twelve in the morning a little after midnight we set sail to cross she and at daylight we descry she ride at a anchor some three mile southward of we with who present we trim our sail to stand withal and she present be under sail and stand in with aden between nine and ten a clock by shoot off a piece at they they come room and strike their topsail and send in their boat to we they tell we they be of calicut and find to aden a ship of calicut and their ship belong to the Samorin or king of calicut from whence they have be forty day in come they come near Socatora and touch at mount foelix where they see the general letter leave there for the darling where also they see a ship of Dabull which come from Achin the Nobuda of this ship be call Abraham abba Zeinda their ship cargazon according to their information be as follow Tamerick three ton Rice three and twenty hundred kintal jagara or boon Sugar forty bahar seven bahar ginger dry four kintal and a half pepper a tun and a half Cotton one and thirty pack each pack contain five or six maunds she have in her threesore and fifteen person for the use follow twenty to bale water and other business below eight for the helm four for top and yard and other business aloft twenty boy for dress several man victual the rest merchant and pilgrim this ship be of burden a hundred and forty ton thus have to the utmost examine they and they be of a place who inhabitant never wrong our nation therefore without diminish any part of their good but only with their good will two ton of water for our need and so I dismiss they though to the great disturbance of their mind when by no mean I will permit they to go into aden to make sale of their commodity which if they do once attempt I threaten they I will sink their ship and leave only their boat to save their life yet their unwillingness to depart make i add many more threaten that if they hasten not away before I see any other sail to give chase unto I must then be force to sink their ship to be sure to keep they from the turk our enemy whereby they put themselves to sail and stand somewhat of the land but to lee-ward so to our disturbance we all day and night keep off and on under sail for fear lest in the night they shall slip into aden note that any ship we here see before we can come to speak with they there have be advice send from the governor of the town to inform they of we and when we have the Mallabar under command the governor send a boat aboard with diverse arab and two turk soldier of the town which have former be instrument to Abdraheman Aga to bind and torture our man then in their hand which now see the man they use ill bring they in no small doubt what their usage now shall be as their guilty conscience prick they who I suppose come as spy to see what we do bring some fruit to sell at the first sight of our man who they know they will fain have put off their boat and be go but I will not permit they April cause they to be put in mind of their behaviour former towards our people in their hand and when without any evil speech give they I think they sufficient by their own mind terrify I cause to be tell they that they shall see how far our nation differ from the rigour of injurious turk which most cruel handle our man without offence who by all fair promise they betray and that I yet know they to have exercise their force in abuse my man yet notwithstanding I will without discourtesy or harm dismiss or send they away who present depart with many promise the next day to bring we more refresh the next morning they send we a boat with good fish and promise to come anon with better provision which they be provide but by reason of my set sail and stand off to put the malabar to lee-ward towards the Red-sea I be too far for they to row unto i which ship if she have stay may have be occasion that the aga may have permit they to perform their promise to we the fourteen in the morning the wind at east we descry another ship of like burden find also for aden a ship of pormean which about ten a clock we force to anchor I send aboard to search she and to bring away some of her man while I cause my boat to be hoist out understanding they be of pormean a town not far from cutts-nagone be tributary to the great mogoll who despise our king and abuse our nation the Nobuda be a bannian I with this ship be at a anchor some two mile from aden our enemy and find by the mallabar work the day before that if any other sail of never so much importance shall approach this place before I can finish my business with this I must either leave the one or the other to their own will for which respect I be more careful to send to search what she have in she by my own people our man unlade this ship then to examine they belong to she what be in she so with great labour in rummage before the darkness of the night overtake we we have out of her fourteen pack of course duttie of six corge a pack and six and thirty ballet contain some six and thirty corge of dutties course one small ballet of Candekins mill or small blue piece of calico with some thirty or more bastas white a little butter and lamp-oil which be all fit for we yet discover the rest of her load be pack of cotton-wool as we term it which the next day we think further to examine this day Maharim Aga of aden send i a present of henne-egge limb and which I will not look at as to receive as a present but by the messenger I send the Aga word that the variety of injury do unto my friend and nation here the last year have constrain my present approach to do my nation and myself what right I may to the disturbance of the turk and as my come hither be not to deserve any favour from they so my meaning be to forbear to receive any of their dissemble courtesy for since they cut our throat when we come to they in friendship what may we expect from they now when we come in hate and despite of the turk of all these part but in regard it be send my people shall give they for their own use so much as the thing be worth also there come aboard a fisherboat bring good store of fresh-fish which I cause to be buy for our supper always make the bringer to eat part of what he bring fear of poison the six and twenty in the morning we descry a sail to the southwards of aden ply to the eastward to who in the afternoon I send my pinnace which bring she in near unto we she be a jelba of Shaher find home lade with graine and other commodity as opium and other also diverse pilgrim from Mecca be passenger in she find home the seven and twenty in the morning we see a jelba ply to the eastward between we and the shore wherefore I send my pinnace to fetch she off who I find to be the same jelba of Shaher that have pass by we the seventeen and two and twenty of this present as aforesaid of they for a trial we buy nine pound and a half of opium and so again dismiss they the eight and twenty in the morning we set sail ply off and on to windward of aden with the wind at east the nine and twenty still under sail as aforesaid in the afternoon we descry two sail stand towards aden Bander Zeada a place on the Abaxin coast. unto who in the evening I send off my pinnace well man to bring they in near unto the ship which by four a clock the thirty day be effect they both belong to a place on the Abaxin coast call Bander Zeada the one of they lade only with mat the other with some mat and threescore and eight sheep with great rump which we buy of they and so dismiss they who present set sail and go in unto aden the wind at east southeast east and north-east the eight with a easy gale of wind at north-east by east we continue ply towards the bab. at ten a clock we descry the land on the Abaxin coast side may. which at first show like a island but approach a little near we plain perceive it to be the main land from thence we steer away northwest towards the Bab which by estimation be some ten league distant which at near four in the afternoon we descry where we lie linger off and on to spend the night day light appear we stand in towards the Bab where in the entrance of the Bab we descry a small sail a stern of we come into the straight wherefore I strike my topsail to stay for she and send off my pinnace to she who come up with we again bring the Nohud^ and aboard who I examine and find they to be subject to the great mogul they belong to a place call Larree a ship of Larree stand at the mouth of the river of zinde situate at the mouth of the river of zinde with they I lust up into a bay on the east side and anchor in seven fathom I send my merchant to search what she be lade with who find diverse pack and fardel of cloth pack and fardel of seed of diverse sort leather jar of butter and oil whereof some they eat and some they burn in lamp a great quantity and since for want of water she have many passenger I can not fit keep she with i be uncertain of wind I resolve to take out of her the likely pack of indian cloth to serve for our turn with some butter and oil for our needful use as by the purser and factor note appear and so dispee they to Moha into which business before we can well make a entry about three a clock in the afternoon I descry open the east land of the straits a ship of 200. ton a ship of two hundred ton and immediate follow she a huge sail who main yard be forty three yard long at sight of which ship they be very near before the land permit i to see they by what time I have get my people aboard five only except which I leave arm to keep the ship of Larree have get up my anchor and be come to sail but the great ship though short of i yet be in a good stream and a fresh gale and I in a bay have a eddy and faint gale she get a end and have somewhat overreach i before I can come to cross they so that I be bring to a stern chase and be come near she by her mast and top we know she to be the mahomedy of Dabull our friend which we can expect no good by yet know the pride of the captain I will very glad have command over he for that he will never the maham^dy of Dabul neither former in the road of Moha nor yet at Dabul come to visit sir Henry Middleton but I find he reach from i wherefore I give they one shot and stand with the other ship who see we stand with the great ship strike a Hull think to lose we by the darkness of the night now approach I take she to be a ship of Diu but when we come to they they tell we they be of cuts-nagone a place not far from the river of zinde her lade cotton-wool some few pack of indian cloth some butter and oil a ship of cuts-nagone a place not far from ziade have get some of her principal man aboard i I cause they to edge up with i into shoal water on the Arab coast where by light I endeavour to find out my five man in the larree ship and at midnight we anchor in twelve fathom four league within the Bab where the next two day we take out of the larree ship sixty six fardel of indian cloth which for that we be otherwise furnish for all our english commodity and need it not be redeliver to they again with part of the butter and oil only eight corge of Bastas for which they have content these thing be take out I put into they the passenger and pilgrim of the cotton ship they use their best diligence as the wind will permit they to hasten to Moha I send by they a letter to sir Henry Middleton if they shall find he in the road but before they depart we see a jelba come from the Bab and for that the wind be not good they send away their Canoa row before and hasten to we who inform i his jelba belong to bender Zeada a town on the Abaxin coast half a day journey westward from bender who be find to Moha with his boat full of mat who go a land as he pass the Bab be tell by one that have a letter for i that my countryman who I look for be go to Assab with eight or nine indian ship but he that have the letter will not send it by he expect a reward if by the wind I shall be put back to the bab. I now know where my general be this afternoon set sail but the wind not favour i we anchor again @. 5 their barter with the indian ship and departure to sumatra the next day in the morning s. Henry Middleton send Giles Thorneton his master to certify i how glad he be of my come the rehemy a ship of 1500. ton and to let i know that he have at command all the desire ship of India as the rehemy of burden fifteen hundred ton the Hassany of six hundred the mahumady of one hundred and fifty ton of surat the of four hundred and fifty ton the Cadree of two hundred ton the the sabandar of Moha his ship of two hundred ton all of Diu beside three Mallabar ship the Cadree of Dabul of four hundred ton and a great ship of Cananor he further inform i that before I can get into the road the general with all the pride of his people and captain Saris with his people will be go on shore to receive the king of Rabita who be come with his nobility and guard to see and visit the general and new come general the day be near spend captain Saris s. Henry Middleton and captain Saris leave the king in his tent and go aboard the trades-increase to supper where I understand of a contract make between they first at the Bab wherein it be agree here to put off all our english good for such indian ware as by mutual consent of certain of the merchant of both side shall be think fit near about that time as I be also inform there come from the governor of Moha to sir Henry Middleton to capitulate of peace mammy captain of the galley and other who demand what be the sum that in satisfaction he require sir Henry Middleton near the proportion of the last year demand require one hundred thousand rial of eight which know they desire respite to send to Zenan to know the pleasure and resolution of jeffor bassa therein and then he shall hear from they again and so take their leave by sir Henry Middleton direction the darling be in prepare with a small cargazon of indian clothes to be go for tecoa the nineteen the darling depart towards tecoa also captain Saris prepare the Thomas to follow the darling to tecoa who also depart the three and twenty day this day also sir Henry Middleton dismiss a ship of Diu call the Azumcany belong to shermall Sabander of Moha the thirty a general meeting be aboard the trades-increase at dinner where captain Saris and captain Towerson be invite for the further conference of our present business at noon there come over from Moha the Sabander of Moha mammy captain of the galley and a aga they all appoint by the bassa to confer with sir Henry Middleton about a agreement for satisfaction of our former abuse the sum whereof they demand of sir Henry Middleton who as former require one hundred thousand rial of eight and see nothing to be abate thereof they desire leave to have conference with the Nohudas or captain of the indian ship and other principal merchant which be grant which as it seem be to try what custom they can augment upon the indian good towards payment of the say sum so they depart on shore where they have prepare for they a fair tent but diverse of the Nohudas in regard of former injury either forbear conference or withstand their augmentation which see by no mean to be accomplish they take leave of sir Henry Middleton promise so soon as they have answer from the bassa they will give he knowledge thereof june and what therein they may do and so again the nine of june they depart towards Moha all this time our people be employ in rummage open pack and repack of indian clothes fit for our turn july they depart from Assab ride give they of our english commodity in lieu thereof the eleven sir Henry Middleton with the trades-increase and captain Saris with the Clove and Hector depart the road of Assab carry with they in company towards Moha all the indian ship but I with the peppercorn remain in the road with a small ship call the into who I re-delivered all the good that I have former take out of she a small ship call the the nine and ten of may. the twelve at three of the clock in the morning we both set sail follow our admiral and the rest towards Moha but the wind be adverse together with a lee-tide we be force to anchor near three league to the lee-ward of the Road. the thirteen at nine of the clock in the morning the wind and tide somewhat favourable we all weigh and stand up with the road where about four of the clock in the afternoon we anchor the nineteen sir Henry Middleton perceive that the turk intend nothing but delay further to abuse we who now in our own view labour in unlade of a ship of cuts-nagone lade with Cotton which sir Henry Middleton determine to hinder till such time as the turk shall have make agreement with he for his wrong sustain and therefore come aboard the peppercorn by who direction I warp in near unto they discharge at they diverse piece of ordnance till they cease their labour also all this week follow they keep we in hand with delay but make no agreement at all the six and twenty sir Henry Middleton and captain Saris appoint a meeting aboard the mahumody of Dabul where all the Nohudas of the indian ship be send for s. Henry Middleton as often time before relate unto they the wrong and damage sustain from the turk with who till he receive satisfaction from they for the same he can in no wise permit they to trade but notwithstanding he have already quite himself for the injury sustain in India yet must also now be force to carry out of this sea with he all the indian ship that this year by they the turk may receive no benefit but the indian see that by reason of the turk abuse and delay it be likely to prove unto they a unprofitable monson though their departure will be much prejudicial to the turk without trade with they by reason of the loss of their custom yet rather than to carry back again their indian commodity they desire to make a composition with sir Henry Middleton and captain Saris every ship several to pay a certain sum of money and we to forbear to hinder their quiet trade upon this proffer make by the indian sir Henry Middleton after good consideration have no mean to force satisfaction from the turk without further prejudice of the indian and therefore at present determine to accept of their offer still leave the satisfaction due from the turk till future time and to begin withal composition be this day make with mere mohammed tackey Nohuda of the rehemy for fifteen thousand rial of eight she be in value near equal to the other four ship the six of August composition be make with all the indian ship and their several sum in part receive captain Saris dispee away his vice-admiral August captain Towerson depart from the red Sea general Saris depart from the red Sea they leave the red sea and coast the east India pass by cape comorin Zelan and ^o to sumatra captain Towerson in the Hector who this day depart the red Sea the thirteen captain Saris have receive all money due to he by composition from the indian depart the red Sea the sixteenth at eight of the clock in the morning we set sail with the trades-increase and peppercorn and about nine a clock at night we anchor eight league short of the Bab in seven fathom water the seventeen at five of the clock in the morning we set sail with little wind and at two of the clock afternoon we again pass the straight of babmandel and from thence at six of the clock we be east southeast seven league from six a clock to ten a clock the eighteen day we lay becalm so that her way be not to be regard from ten a clock to sunset east-ward some three league and before seven a clock we anchor in one and twenty fathom two mile from the coast of Arabia thwart of the east end of the great mountain and seventeen league from the bab. the nineteen at sunset the say mountain bear north-west by west some eight league distant all this night and the twenty after noon the wind so variable that we be always trim of our sail from tack to tack so that between the disadvantage of the wind and the current together we be set so far back westward as bring the say mountain north northwest of we again at eleven a clock the wind come at west a fresh gale and at sunset the high land of aden bear north-east by east eight league off all this night follow we have very little wind and variable so that the one and twenty at sunrising we perceive ourselves lose at least two league westward from sunrising till noon we have a small gale of wind increase strong and strong at south-west and south-west by south so that I esteem to have go east southeast some nine league at sunset aden bear north north-east seven league off by a meridian compass all this night be in a manner calm from four a clock in the morning to sunset be four and twenty hour I estimate to have go some fifteen league at which time aden bear northwest half north distant f^ue league be clear weather the three and twenty we descry the Abaxin coast be fifteen league distant force of a current and clear weather the six and twenty we find such a current that though we lie up north-east by east north-east or north north-east we make our way all easterly be carry to the southward by force of the current the nine and twenty we again descry land which for the highness we at first esteem to be the land of cape but the cloud clear up from the top of the hill we plain perceive it to be the same land see yesterday whereby we the better understand how the current have abuse we which by my estimate set near south-west from the thirty in the morning to the one and thirty at noon we find that the current have set we to the northward of our course from the last day at noon what time our latitude be twelve degree and thirty five minute to the first of September at noon the wind at south east-ward and not to have run above twelve league and by our latitude be thirteen degree thirty minute we find ourselves almost a degree differ to the north-ward and also to have lose to the westward as by the variation appear be less by fifty five minute by reason whereof I estimate the current there to set near north-east the second three four five six seven eight and nine day we have all for the most part close weather September the ten and eleven cloudy weather with often shower of rain the twelve we see diverse snake swim on the top of the water which in boisterous weather seldom appear snake swim on the top of the water a sign of be near the coast of indiae yet a apparent sign of be near the coast of India the thirteen we also see more snake this day we have sound from fifty five to forty fathom the fourteen in the morning at sunrising we descry high land bear east by north some sixteen league we stand in east by south till four a clock afternoon till the near sea-coast land between we and the high land bear east eight league off what time we direct our course south alongst the coast of India we find the water for the most part muddy and thick and some sudden spot of clear our depth while we stand in east and by south be from thirty to twenty fathom and in our south course edge into sixteen fathom and so to five and twenty fathom the fifteen we still keep at the like depth have a gentle gale at north northwest and clear water but no snake appear the sixteen run alongst the coast of India or Mallabar between twenty and sixteen fathom about one a clock we be west from a high hill of especial note which stretch out like a point into the sea have all low land to sea-ward on the north-side the land fall away to the east-ward and on the southside make a bay the high of this sea-coast mountain stand near in twelve degree ten minute which shall be the land of magicilan the seventeen the wind come opposite to we at south-west at two a clock in the morning with thick weather and much rain continue till daylight we on a lee-shoare and a unknown coast what time the wind veer up to the north-ward and we edge off into deep water in this gusty time we lose company of our admiral but at daylight the weather clear up we come together direct our course again to the southward be edge off from the land the eighteen the land be all foggy be hardly to be discern the most part of our way this day be by the help^ of the current our depth all this day be between five and twenty and nine and twenty fathom all Ozie ground the nineteen we be some fourteen league distant from the coast the wind at south-west fair weather with some little drill rain till nine a clock at night no ground at forty fathom from nine to eleven a clock at night we have a very vehement shower of rain and the wind very little northerly and after the rain east north-east our depth at midnight be forty four fathom be by estimation some ten league of the land of Mallabar the twenty we have fair weather the wind very variable our depth forty four and forty five fathom all day be Ozie ground the one and twenty we have very little wind variable till three a clock afternoon when fell abundance of rain with the wind at north northwest thick weather and forty five fathom water the two and twenty in the morning at nine a clock we descry the cape Commerin cape Commerin and by my near estimation the coast here lie away southeast alongst unto the cape the three and twenty we have fair weather and the wind at south-west by west descry the high land to the east-ward of the cape Commerin at near five a clock afternoon hear north northwest distant eighteen league the four and twenty we have a very stiff gale of wind between the south south-west and west and much rain cloud and fog and our course east southeast by a reform compass at five a clock after noon we have sight of Zeilan through the fog rise all full of humock and bear from the north-east by east to the southeast by south some six league distant the five and twenty from break of day till noon we be pester with variety of gust and shower of rain the wind be large but the weather clear up about noon we descry the souther-most point of Zeiland call the cape Gall^ Zeilan bear north north-east distant five league find the latitude thereof to be five degree forty minute the six and twenty seven and twenty and eight and twenty we have fair weather with some few droppings of rain and the wind between the south-west and west south-west the nine and twenty and thirty we continue our course east southeast the wind constant between the south-west and west south-west with very much rain and vehement sudden gust of short continuance and follow with a easy steer gale the thirty in our bread room we find much harm do to our wheat by wet also all our course dutty or brown calico of pormean for sail put there for most security we find twenty piece rot the nineteen at three a clock after noon we anchor in the road of tecoa where we find the darling October tecoa in sumatra who have continue there from july unto our come in in a great part of the reins which be not yet end they have before our come bury three merchant and three sailor to wit John Fowler Francis Glanfield and William Speed also they have most of their man sick and have get but little pepper which remain on the island and little more be here to be have until the next season which will be April and May but the civil war be a hindrance to our trade here also we find the Thomas a ship of the eight voyage civil war a hindrance to our trade be new come from Priaman where they have as slender success as our darling here here we hear of the safe return and prosperous success of captain David Middleton his voyage also of the four ship of the nine voyage whereof two be already arrive at Bantam also of captain castleton his man of war who have be here late inform of fifteen sail of hollander already come or near hand all lade with munition captain castleton and of two ship of new-haven in France come also to trade all which quell the life of the present hope of our out-tired cross and decay voyage the two and twenty sir Henry Middleton find so cold comfort at this place sir Henry Middleton in the peppercorn haste to Bantam November Raia boonesoo go to the war great deceit of the naturals depart the night follow in the peppercorn towards Bantam leave i in the trades-^ncrease to remain till the sixteenth of the next month the second of November all the man of all sort in tecoa go with Raia boonesoo to the war till who return we can expect no business to be do on the main this day in take up the wine by the rottenness of the cask there prove great leakeage the twenty we fetch the remain of the pepper weigh the day before in which by the people we find much deceit in some bag be small bag of paddy in some rice and in some great stone also rot and wet pepper put into new dry sack to our f^rther abuse yet know it we have no remedy have get all thing in and our man aboard we fit our thing to hasten away and near midnight in the moonshine the wind at north-east of the shore we set sail we wrought not only to avoid the two know rock three league from the island of tecoa the one south by west the other south by east have six and twenty fathom between they Ozie ground but for the better security we direct our course so near as we can the same way we come in yet as we stand off the wind something shrink on we yet we lie first west than west by south and west south-west and last of all south-west and by west and the current set we somewhat southward our depth proportional from fourteen to seven and twenty fathom all Ozie ground the next cast four fathom and the ship fast on a rock a stern four fathom and on the starboard mid-ship a quarter less than three fathom and under the head three fathom a ship length five fathom a ship length on the larboard bow six foot in the larboard mid-ship sixteen foot under the larboard gallery twenty foot the ship fast on a rock and round about within a cable length deep water she remain on the rock from a little after three until five a clock the merciful God so provide that the wind grow calm and the sea smooth and in our feel the set or motion of the ship the place consider be very easy yet the water do so increase that both our chain pump with painful labour can not in long time free the same but our general endeavour with most expedition possible be to get out a stern anchor which be let fall in six and twenty fathom right asterne and two three of a cable out to heave she off right asterne wherein the gracious lord so bless our endeavour that before we can with the capstaine heave the cable teach they getoff the rock the ship be of she own accord set into deep water which no soon do but we have a Westerley gust which put we off some mile from the rock where we anchor for our boat which bring our cadger after we and it be clear day we can not discern where the rock stand also a principal reason we anchor be our exceed desire and haste for Bantam that without necessity enforce I wish not to put back again and waste more time hope our leak will easy be overcome at a anchor I pass the day till two a clock consult and advise with such as with their best counsel be appoint to assist i what be best to be do our present estate consider which we find diverse way to rest dangerous first in regard of the leakenesse of our ship which continual employ many people at once to keep down the water second in a manner no provision of ironwork for the chain but that the pump present employ which often break or for weakness slip to our great discomfort for if they shall be any long while in mend and the water so increase that we can reach under the pump to ceve the chain our work will soon draw near a end three the desperate carelessness of many of our people in the great need consider their faint weakness and inability to hold out labour by course diet as they pretend four to remember what be certain in the ship which require care to preserve it five captain sharpeigh misfortune and the lewd demeanour of his people in like case of great need too late to be forget the danger in proceed diverse cast up notwithstanding at the first diverse of our man do urge the same by counsel reasonable for the safeguard of all I make choice to return within the island of tecoa there by God help to endeavour the stop of such a part of our leak they return to tecoa as we find to be in the fashion piece in the stern at sunset we anchor in the place which for our turn we desire this day long time we keep both our chain pump go to free the water which ever increase when the chain happen to break which happen often the two pump employ at once twelve man which labour indeed be so extreme that it can but little while without shift of spell be continue but the water once bring low and the chain hold one pump at once have ever discharge it and yet it tire all our people by often shift in which business I find it require more than ordinary mean to appease their discontent clamour and murmur if the place may have afford the two and twenty three and twenty and four and twenty we labour to land indigo cinnamon and other thing still make way to lighten the stern of the ship where we know the leak be but we can come to it December until the eight of December we be thus employ in the amend of our leak which do we set sail from tecoa and with our boat a head we gate over the bar have four fathom at a low water and be without the island by the help of a fine breach at north north-east north northwest and northwest as the sun grow high both dullerd and shrink upon we so that we lie but south south-west and south by west and by estimation come near the rock we have former sit upon we use great diligence with boat a head but can discern no show of it the sea be smooth we stand away to the southwards south by west and south from sunset to sunrising the nine day with a small gale at northwest by west we stand away south-west by south ten league and the wind at west northwest and west at which instant we descry some part of a great island bear south westerly at which time we steer away south this night we have much rain in gust with thunder and lightning the wind very fickle shrink to the south-west and south south-west which stay not long then to the southeast east southeast and east and again to the southeast in which time to sunrising we have sail about some eight league also that part of the island the last night see now bear southeast distant eight league also eastward we see the high land of the main of sumatra near twenty league at noon in two degree and eleven minute south latitude the high land of the main of sumatra and the northermost part of these land be from the sound we come through between the wester isle southeast distant nine league it be the twenty day before they arrive at pulupanian the peppercorn be fit there sir henry Middleton call a council to advise touch the late harm which the trades-increase have receive upon the rock by which council it be resolve that she must of necessity be new strengthen and careend before she can well return home which require long time whereby she can not go home this year it be conclude that the peppercorn shall immediate be dispatch for England to give some satisfaction unto the adventurer until the trades-increase may follow the peppercorn be lade on the four of February set sail from thence for England leave sir Henry Middleton with the trades-increase behind we arrive on the ten of May in the road of saldanie where I hope to have find all the ship former depart homeward but come into the road the road of Saldania Hector and Thomas captain Newport I only find the Hector and Thomas two ship of the eight voyage and captain Newport in the expedition of the twelve voyage here we continue but four day where with the help of captain Newport his man and Cooper we have take in all our water and the fourteen day at night end our labour therein the fifteen have water but no whit refresh our weak people yet to keep company with the Hector and Thomas homeward at nine a clock in the morning we set sail with the wind all southerly but be out we be much pester with opposite wind whereby we be drive to the southwards this night we keep company with the Hector and Thomas the expedition be get about the cape Bona Speranza determine their course towards the confine of Persia to some place where they may in safety land sir Robert Shirley and his persian lady and sir Thomas powel with his english lady who be find into Persia also the next day we be all in company together but towards evening the Thomas become far a stern but the Hector with lofty sail bear away this night by what mean I know not they lose our company which by all mean we again endeavour to get and for that by stand to the southwards we know they can not run we out of sight yet we think against all reason to stand in upon a lee-shoare stand into the land-ward to seek to discover they but not see they we linger in for they until the nineteen day sunrising in which time we be employ in repair our weak and decay sail this day at sunrising Saldania bear southeast half a degree east distant seventeen league the weather be cloudy and dark the twenty one and twenty and two and twenty day cloudy dark and overcast weather june the six of june as we come about the north-east point open the road and be luff in have our anchor ready to let fall we descry two carrack in the road two carr^^ks^ who neighbourhood be not to my content neither dare I trust to anchor by they in regard of their accustom treachery I stand off again by a wind a while to deliberate what to do and think to stand in again to try whether they will be go which if they be ready I suppose they will think we have more company nearehand but we find the current set we so fast to the lee-ward that we can hardly recover the road at two a clock in the afternoon see no other remedy we bear up the helm and stand on our course for England our hope be frustrate both of refresh our weak sick people they cross the equinoctial and also of further stay to regain the company of the Hector and Thomas the fifteen and sixteenth we have diverse shower of rain the eighteen we cross the equinoctial line the ten of September we have a very strong gale of wind and a hollow sea and not able to get any part of the south-coast of England we stand on our course north-east septemb in hope ^o fetch milford-haven in Wales the soon to send letter to the company the eleven at five a clock in the afternoon we descry the coast of Wales to windward and the coast of Ireland lee-ward be a high hill between Waxford and Waterford this night we spend with our head to the southwards and in the morning we stand in towards the irish coast resolve now the wind be constant adverse and impossible to fetch milford-haven and our mean allow no long deliberation I determine to go into Waterford rather than into any other harbour the thirteen in the morning we descry the tower of Whooke the only mark for the river of Waterford be some three leaugue distant from it at eight a clock we descry a small boat come forth of the river of Waterford unto who we make a waft which they perceive present come unto we be a Frenchman find to Waxford who I hire to go again into the river before to give knowledge of our come unto the lieutenant of the fort of don canon to prevent our stop there for that by reason of the narrowness of channel it may endanger the ship in wind up at a anchor there they arrive at Waterford in Ireland and at noon we gate up into the river so high as the passage here we find master Stephen Bonner of lime with his bark come hither a fish who put apart his own business with great diligence endeavour the best for the ease and relief of our weak and sick people the eighteen I dispee away master Bonner towards London with letter to the company to give knowledge of our arrival and of our want wherein I desire to be supply the one and twenty doctor Lancaster bishop of Waterford very kind visit i bring down with he his good cheer and make a sermon aboard the ship and offer i the communion but thereto be unprepared I refuse yet hearty thank he for his good will the ten captain John burrell come unto i to visit i promise i money to supply my want if I will send some man with he to corcke for it the eleven day I dispee away master Mullineux with captain burrell to Corcke for the money which he promise to supply i withal the twelve Anthony Stratford lieutenant of the fort of don canon have hire a villainous fellow who for his misdemeanour I have cause to be keep in the prison of Waterford to say what may befit his present practice to bring we within the compass of piracy have obtain a warrant from the earl of ormond come to the passage where he send to desire i to send my boat well man to fetch himself and diverse other gentleman aboard to see my ship but my boat according to his desire be come to land he apprehend my man and present come aboard where he arrest i and my ship for piracy and so commit i to the fort of don canon to prison give extraordinary straight charge over i that none shall come at i but who he listen without warrant from he and such as by his permission come to i he will have put to their oath to declare what conference they have with i my man swear to bring no letter from i to any one neither from any to i also diverse of my people they this night examine upon their oath omit no mean to draw they to accuse i so I continue in prison till the sixteenth day morning what time the say Stratford bring i a letter from sir Laurence esmond his captain invite i to meet he at the passage with who when I come up to the passage I there meet with s^r Laurence esmond accompany with the bishop of Waterford come from the earl of ormond to replace i in my charge again which by their great entreaty and persuasion I again undertake the three and twenty master Mulleneux have send my letter to the company to give knowledge of the afore mention troublesome business return from cork with money to supply my want the five and twenty master Benjamin joseph in a small ship of Bristol come unto i bring with he both man money and provision for my supply which with all speed we take in hasten to be go the six of October October we depart the river of Waterford towards our long desire home the twelve in the morning we be thwart of beachy and at eight a clock at night we anchor in Dover Road. the thirteen in the morning we set sail out of Dover road and at ten a clock we anchor in the down near unto the assurance the king ship salute she with five piece of ordnance immediate come aboard of i master Cocket the master of she who again make stay of my ship till further order from the lord admiral upon this I present send away master Mullineux to London with letter to certify the company hereof the seventeen come down from the company master aders bring i a letter from the company a release for the ship and master Punniat a pilot to bring she about the eighteen in the morning we set sail and at six a clock at night we anchor in the road of gorend the nineteen in the morning at six a clock we set sail and at night we anchor at Tilbury the twenty in the morning we set sail and at ten a clock we anchor at Blackwall where in the afternoon come down master deputy and diverse of the committee unto who I deliver up my charge and so conclude this our tedious and out-tyring journey chap. 13 the seven voyage make in the globe into East-India set out under the command of captain ANTHONY Hippon observe and write by NATHANIEL marten master mate in the say ship we weigh from the black-wall in the good ship call the globe be find for the east-indies the three of january 1610. and about five of the clock we anchor at Gravesend they arrive at Soldania the one and twenty of may 1611. and thence set sail the six of june follow they sail not far from Mosambique and Comoro and Pemba and on the last of july pass before gall upon Ceilon all which as be a mere main relation and the like course oft run by other be omit August 4. the four of August in the morning I observe the variation and make it to be thirteen degree seven minute and at noon we be in the latitude of nine degree fifteen minute and the land be about six league off and as much as we can see it on the poop the wind veer north by west and the north northwest and we stand in three hour and then found be about three league of the shore and have nine fathom and the land than bear west northwest to the northwards and south the other way and we judge the land to lie northwest or northwest by north. at three of the clock we cast about and stand to the northward and the wind veer to the west and west south-west and we lay as near as we can till five of the clock the six we keep ourselves in eight and twenty and thirty fathom and then the wind scant and veer to the west northwest so the water deepn present the six in the morning we perceive ourselves to be in a great current by the ripple and we send off our pinnace to come to a anchor and we find the current to set north by west and we make our way from four of the clock in the afternoon the five till noon the six north northwest and run seventeen league and then we be in the latitude of ten degree and one and thirty minute and from noon till two of the clock we steer away northwest and then we see diverse fisherman hard by so we look out at topmast head and see land west northwest and northwest and so we run in and then we be in twenty fathom about eight league off and as we run in the water shoald easy and at three of the clock we see a tower or pagoda and a ship that bear northwest of we and then the great pagoda of Negapatan and the ship be one in another and then we run in till we come into eight fathom northwest Negapatan and then we be about two league of the ship and three league of the shore from six of the clock at night the six till seven at noon we steer away north by east and so keep always between twelve and fourteen fathom and run sixteen league and be in the latitude of eleven degree seven and fifty minute from the seven till the eight at noon we steer away north by east and run about twenty league by judgement and then we be thwart of the high land up in the country that rise in hammock this day we take the boat of s. Thome the nine at noon the town of maliapor bear north northwest two league off and the mark to know the town be the high hill up in the country paleacate there be a shoal about two league to the southward of paleacate which lie about a mile or more from the shore and the north-east end of it lie off about a league we run over the very end in three fathom but if you keep in ten or twelve fathom you shall not need to fear any part of it the nine at four a clock we anchor against the town and it bear west by north of we there be a cross to the northward of the town which if you be between two or three mile of the shore you see it but you can see the town the ten in the morning we weigh and stand further to the northward and anchor in eight fathom we not like our former road and then the cross bear west by south of we when the westermost point bear west by north and the northermost point bear northwest the ten at noon master Browne and master Floris go ashore there come a boat from the governor for they but they go in our Skiffe and as they be go over the bar paleacate stand in thirteen degree thirty minute the Skiffe be sink but never a man drown God be bless paleacate stand in thirteen degree and thirty minute the thirteen I observe the variation and make it to be one degree and fifteen minute upon the semicircle the fifteen master Anthony Hippon our captain go ashore to speak with the governess the sixteenth the captain and all the merchant come aboard because they can get no trade the sixteenth at ten of the clock we set sail for petepoly petepoly and from ten till the seventeen at noon we run about thirteen league and be in the latitude of fourteen degree and fifteen minute and make our way north by east from the seventeen to the eighteen we run by my judgement about three and twenty league and make the way north but it be sad weather and we can not observe about seven of the clock in the morning the eighteen we spy a Galliot ride in seven fathom some foore mile of the shore and she ride till we be almost within sack shot of she and then she weigh and run into shoal water into the shore but we stand not after she because the water shoald and at that time we see a breach some two league of the shore to my judgement and whereas we steer away north north-east we steer away east north-east and east by north but have no deep water till we bring the breach north northwest of we and when we see it first it bear north by east of we from the eighteen at noon till five of the clock in the afternoon we steer away north-east by east partly because we will run into deep water and partly because the land grow out more easterly and at five of the clock we make a tuft of tree that be near petepoly and it bear north-east by east of we six league off and then be the high land to the northwestward of the town which do then bear north by west of we and at seven of the clock we anchor in nine fathom the tree bear north-east and by east of we five league off and the wind westerly the nineteen in the morning by five of the clock we weigh and stand with the tree and about nine of the clock we anchor about two league short of they in five fathom and the tree bear east north-east of we and then present there come aboard two Gingathas or boats our merchant send they ashore with a letter and about two of the clock there come another and a messenger from the sabandar they land at petepoly who the twenty day do send aboard two boat for our merchant and bring a present and then go ashore master Floris master Lucas master essington and Adam Dounton and the pursers mate and lemon the one and twenty about eight of the clock there come a Gingatha from the shore and bring a letter from our merchant who do let we understand that they be kind entertain and present we weigh with the wind at north northwest and run off a anchor almost thwart of the river mouth and about three of the clock in the afternoon we weigh and anchor in the road where the tusk of tree bear north-east by east ea^^erly and we do anchor in nine fathom and a half the mark to go in over the bar be a Pal^^ito tree on the bank upon the northermost end of the high cliff it be but a little tree I observe the variation and make it to be twelve degree seven and twenty minute the eight and twenty master Floris come aboard and Simon Euans about twelve of the clock and about four of the clock we weigh for Masulipatan with the wind at south-west and we steer off into eight and nine fathom south southeast and then we bear up southeast and southeast by east and keep ourselves in nine and ten fathom till eleven of the clock at night and then the wind veer to the east and east southeast so we anchor in nine fathom till five of the clock in the morning the nine and twenty in the morning about five of the clock we weigh with the wind at south south-west and steer away east southeast and east north-east and north-east and at noon the uttermost part of the land bear north of we so by my judgement the land eastward from petepoly lie east and by south and west by north and at noon we come into white water of the point and it shoald a little before we come into it half a fathom but when we be in it we have the same depth six fathom three league off about two of the clock in the afternoon the wind veer northerly so we come to a anchor in seven fathom about five of the clock we weigh and stand in north northwest and northwest by north till seven of the clock and be calm we anchor in five fathom the westermost land bear west northwest westerly and we see two ship which bear north westerly and northwest and the norther-most land bear north. Masulipatan the thirty about one of the clock we weigh and stand in for the road Masulipatan which bear north of we and we never have above five and four and a half all the way so about five of the clock we anchor in three fathom and a foot and the great tree which be the mark for the road bear west by north westerly of we and the southermost land bear south and by west southerly of we and the northermost bear north-east easterly of we the one and thirty master Floris master Hessington Simon Euans Cuthbert whitfield and Arthur smith go a shore to stay there in our Skiffe decemb. 28. the eight and twenty of December I observe the variation and make it to be twelve degree two and twenty minute the point of Masulipatan be in 15. degree 57 minute north. the thirty we weigh from Masulipatan about seven of the clock in the morning with the wind at north-east by east and we halde it off southeast and southeast by south till we come into eighteen fathom at noon the point that bear south by west southerly of we be west and by north by the compass and then I observe and make it to be in fifteen degree seven and fifty minute and at eight of the clock at night we anchor in six fathom and a half the four of january I observe at noon and make the road to be in fifteen degree six and thirty minute january 4. the five and twenty and the six and twenty we observe the sun and certain star by the sun we make the town of Petepoli to be in fifteen degree nine and forty minute the star call the ships-sterne we have in one and twenty degree nine and twenty minute the foot of the crosier twelve degree four and fifty minute and the flank of the centaur in fifteen degree two and thirty minute the foot in fourteen degree one and forty minute the wind at southeast and south southeast February 7. the seven of February the merchant come aboard and carry all the luggage quite away the wind at south southeast night and day the eleven of February we weigh out of petepoly roade have the wind at north northwest about six of the clock in the morning they depart out of the road of Petepoli and stand off south southeast but very little wind and the current set to the north-east and we anchor in five fathom and a half it be calm we have run off about a mile and a half and the wind come off the sea all southerly the twelve about nine of the clock in the morning we weigh with the wind at southeast and southeast and by east and we hale off south south-west and south by west and south-west as the wind will give we leave till three of the clock in the afternoon and then we anchor in nine fathom water they strike over from Petepoli to Bantam in java with the wind at south and south and by east and make our way south-west and by south six league out of the road by my judgement and the high land bear west half a point southerly in the road it bear west half a point northerly the fourteen about four of the clock in the morning we weigh with the wind at south south-west and stand away southeast and southeast and by south as the wind will give we leave at noon the Palmito tree bear north half a point easterly about six league off or seven and we run in ten fathom from the twenty of march at noon till the one and twenty we have very little wind easterly and calm march 12. we make our way south south-west by my judgement and run seven league and at noon be in the latitude of two degree six and twenty minute at night we observe the variation and have it in thirteen degree fifty seven minute on the semicircle and the amplitude be four degree twenty seven minute which be subtract to thirteen degree fifty seven minute make the variation to be nine degree twenty five minute from the one and twenty at noon till the two and twenty at noon we have the wind all northerly we steer away south and run fifteen league by the log and then we be in the latitude of one degree thirty four minute at night I observe the variation and make it to be ten degree ten minute which do prove a great current to the westward a great current to the westward from the two and twenty to the three and twenty at noon we have the wind variable between the north and the west we have little wind and gusty weather we steer south by east and run eight league and at noon we observe the latitude of fifty seven minute at night I observe the variation and make it to be ten degree the magnetical azimuth be fifteen degree fifteen minute the amplitude be five degree thirteen minute from the three and twenty at noon till the four and twenty at noon we have the wind between the west and south-west we steer away south by east and run three and twenty league by the log the equinoctial and then we be under the line by our observation from the four and twenty at noon till the five and twenty at noon we have the wind between the north northwest and the south south-west and we steer away south southeast we run by the log one and twenty league and then we be in the latitude of fifty seven minute to the southward of the line at night I observe the variation and make the magnetical azimuth to be fifteen degree forty minute the amplitude six degree no minute which make the variation to be nine degree forty minute from the five and twenty at noon 1612. till the six and twenty at noon we have the wind variable between the north northwest and the west south-west we steer south southeast we run fifteen league by the log and then we be in the latitude of one degree thirty minute at night I observe the variation and the magnetical azimuth be fifteen degree five minute the amplitude be six degree one and twenty minute which make the variation eight degree fifty four minute from the one and thirty at noon till the first of April at noon we have the wind southerly and very little and make our way east southeast twelve league April 161^ and at noon we be in the latitude of four degree one minute from the first at noon to the second at noon we have the wind between the west northwest and south south-west variable and gusti^ we steer away southeast by east half a point easterly we run by the log one and twenty league and two three and then we be in the latitude of four degree twenty four minute we make our way twelve league east southeast and ten league south and by east by judgement which do agree with my observation in the morning they observe the variation and have the almicanter and magnetical azimuth one degree thirty minute the amplitude eight degree forty seven minute which make the variation to be seven degree twenty seven minute about two of the clock in the morning Adam Douglas depart this life from the second at noon till the three we have the wind between the northwest and the west south-west we steer away between the east southeast and the southeast by east but because of our latch to the southward I judge that she make her way east southeast we run thirty two league by the log and then be I just with the wester most part of the i will of Eugano by my reckon the i will of Eugano they arrive in the road of Bantam the six and twenty of April about four of the clock in the afternoon through the almighty good assistance we come to a anchor in Bantam ride in three and a half where Puloponian bear north the body and Pulotundo bear northwest by north and Puloduo east southeast and the wester-mo^^ point thwart of pulorange bear northwest by north northerly the uttermost point bear east by north northerly and the eastermost island pulo lima be even join to the westermost point of java and present after we be at a anchor come aboard master spalding with two oth^rs and two of they lay aboard the one and thirty of May in the afternoon about foore of the clock August spalding they depart from Bantam fo^ Patane and S^am june our merchant come aboard and about nine of the clock we set sail we steer away north north-east with the wind at south the first of june in the morning the wind veer to the eastward and so to the northward very foul and gussie weather we bear up and anchor under Pulotando in nineteen fathom half a league from the shore about five and six of the clock in the morning we weigh with the wind at southeast and within a heave or two we have but five fathom and so shoald till we have but four fathom steer away north northwest the ne^rest land be south-west six league off a long woody island which be a long woody island some four mile long of which we look for a ledge of rock or sand from six till noon we make our way north by west seven league about eight of the clock in the morning I espy Lucapara at topmast head about eight league off Lucapara the seven in the morning about six of the clock we weigh the wind south-west and between six and noon we make our way northwest seven league and about ten of the clock we raise Mompyne north-east eight league off at least and after we raise this hill we have never less than ten fathom keep the shoald of sumatra Mompyne the nine in the morning about five of the clock we weigh with the wind at southeast by south and steer away northwest by north and so northerly as the coast do lie but we never come near the point of Mompyne than three league and a half or four league because of a ledge of rock that lie two league of the easter-most point of sumatra be the seven point of the straits and these ledge of rock ^eare east and west one of another we have no soon weigh but the water deepen to eight nine ten and so to fourteen fathom when you have Mompyne southeast of you then be you clear of the rock at noon I observe with my quadrant and make she to be in one degree thirty nine minute and then Mompyne bear southeast easterly of we the ten about three of the clock in the morning we espy a island that bear north northwest three league from noon till six of the clock at night they pass the equinoctial l^ne to the north. we make our way north half a point easterly six league and from six till noon the eleven we make our way north eighteen league and we be in the latitude of one degree to the northward have two land the southermost bear south-west by west of we seven league off and the northermost bear westward south-west seven league off and then we have five and twenty fathom this i will of Bintam all the night long we have from twenty to five and twenty fathom I espy land at topmast head west by north twelve league off which be the high land of Bintam from noon till six of the clock at night we make our way west by north seven league we have five and twenty fathom water and then the high-land of Bintam bear west south-west six league off and there be three little land at the southeast end of Bintam the twelve we make our way north by east easterly five league and then we be in the latitude of one degree thirty five minute have twenty six fathom and the northermost part of Bintam west northwest ten league when four glass be run after noon I espy at topmast head a island that bear northwest northerly nine league off from six of the clock at night the thirteen till the fourteen at noon we to my judgement make our way northwest by north in regard of the current nine league ten glass in the night we have it calm and drive north northwest and we shall have it deep and shall a fathom at a cast till we have but eleven fathom and then deep till it come to fifteen or sixteen fathom from six at night till the fifteen at noon we make our way by judgement north north-east northerly ten league but at noon we make she to be in four degree forty eight minute and then we have thirty fathom at eight of the clock we have a island bear north by west of we five league of the main be four mile off and then we have twenty six fathom this great island and the rock bear north by west and south by east one of another and be four mile in length we perceive in the night be calm to have a great current set to the north-ward latitude 4. degree 35. min. and I judge this island to stand in four degree thirty five minute from noon till the six at night we make our way north northwest half northerly eight league our sound be thirty and twenty five fathom and then we have a other island bear west by north of we not unlike the former we have five and twenty fathom at six of the clock five or six league of the main the island lie about one league from the main from the sixteenth at noon till the seventeen at noon we make our way north northwest twelve league a sink rock but as we be almost in the narrow we spy a sink rock in the fair way so we fear the worst have eleven fathom and one league of the main we hale it o^f north-east and north-east by east to get clear of two little land that be to the eastward and so we go to the eastward of all at noon we observe and make the ship to be in five degree fifty four minute from the seventeen at noon till the eighteen at noon we make our way northwest westerly eight league from the nineteen at noon till the twenty we make our way northwest northerly eight league a little rock^ in the morning about seven of the clock I see a little rock about three league of^ at the topmast head and as we come up with it about noon I go with the Skiffe to sound about it and we have twelve fathom a stone throw off it and when our skiffs head be a shore we have six fathom and a half up and down by the rock it lie between three or four league of the westermost point of the land and bear southeast southerly a little and about two league and a half from the souther-most land or three we have little wind westerly and variable but for the most part northerly from noon the twenty till the one and twenty at noon we make our way northwest northerly six league with the wind westerly and northerly we be faint to anchor twice in the night because it be calm and the current set to the southward we have very fair shoalding off into fourteen and into seven or eight from the one and twenty at noon till the two and twenty at noon we turn it alongst the shore with the wind westerly and then we have the low sandy point south of we two league off the four of August at night we weigh out of Patane road about nine of the clock with the wind at south south-west August 4. they depart from Patane for Syam and we steer away northwest and northwest by west northwest by north but by my judgement from nine till noon we make our way northwest half a point northerly ten league and then the high land bear south-west of we in th^ roade our depth from three to seven eight and ten fathom from noon till six a clock at night we have ten league little wind at northwest and north and north-east but we make our way north north-east one league and from six till six in the morning we make our way north northwest half a point northerly eight league with the wind variable and westerly and then we espy land that bear west northwest of we ten league off from six of the clock in the morning till noon the six day we make our way north northwest five league to our judgement latitude 8 degree 7. min. and we observe and make the ship to be in eight degree seven minute and then the high land bear west and north ten league off and then we have seventeen fathom from the six at noon till the seven at noon we have little wind and calm we make our way north northwest to my judgement we can not run above six league but we make it to be in eight degree three minute from the seven at noon till the eight we have little wind and variable round about we make our way north northwest eight league or ten latitude 9 degree 40. min. our depth eighteen and nineteen fathom from the eight to the nine at noon we have little wind and variable round about and then we make the ship to be in nine degree forty minute and then the northermost great island bear west south-west and the souther-most bear south-west in the morning we see two land from the nine to the ten at noon we have it calm and go little or nothing the wind northerly our depth one and twenty and two and twenty fathom from the ten to the eleven at noon we have little or no wind and go two league north northwest we have it northerly and westerly and our depth twenty and twenty one fathom from the eleven at noon to the twelve we have the wind variable and gusty round about and we run about eight league north by west and the depth twenty six and twenty five fathom from the twelve at noon till the thirteen we make our way north by east twenty four league with the wind at south and south south-west and south-west our depth twenty six and twenty eight fathom seven or eight league of the shore from the thirteen to the fourteen we make our way north by west sixteen league the wind south-west our depth two and twenty and five and twenty fathom five or six league from the shore from the fourteen to the fifteen we make our way sixteen league north by west with the wind westerly our depth nineteen and twenty fathom six league off from the fifteen to the sixteenth at noon we make our way north and by west ten league we have eight nine and ten fathom alongst the low land four league off than we bear up to the east and east southeast till midnight and for a hour we steer away east north-east till we come into four fathom and then take in our sail as fast as we can but present we have but three fathom and a foot before we can get in our sail so we anchor in three and a foot till the next day and the water fall thirteen foot and more they arrive at Syam so that we have but six fathom and a half at low water and then we lay out a warp and when she fleet we warp into deep water the eighteen we set sail and hale it off into five fathom where we anchor have the souther-most island south by east of we Novemb. 1612. they depart from Syam and the eastermost east and by south and the river mouth north of we westerly the three of November about one of the clock in the afternoon we weigh out of the bay where we leave our man and grave our ship and hale it off from the west to the south southeast to go clear of the island and so steer away the four at noon I make the ship to be in twelve degree thirty three minute have run in these three and twenty hour but five and twenty league and to my judgement have make her way one thing with a other count south by west the wind northerly on the eleven we arrive at Patane he be after this at Syam again and again at Patane and make a second voyage from Masulipatan to Bantam 1614 and thence to England 1615. but his journal be so large that I dare not express it note that he say that the i will of s. Helena be a hundred league more to the westward then be lay down in plait the twenty of August 1615. they come before the lizard they spend in this whole voyage four year and about eight month their action and exploit in this voyage be deliver more full by m. Floris out of who journal I have take the most remarkable for I think these mere marine relation be though to some profitable to the most tedious for which cause I have abridge this to make way to the next write by a merchant of long indian experience and f^ll of pleasant variety chap. 14 extract of PETER williamson Floris his journal for the seven voyage in which he go cape merchant translate out of dutch. he arrive in England 1615. and die two month after in London @. i. the voyage to paleacatte Petapoli Masulipatan Bantam Patania and siam have covenant and agree with the right worshipful the governor and deputy of the east-indian society we embark ourselves in the globe the five of january 1610. Stylo and set sail for Gravesend the five of February we set sail from the down the one and twenty of may 1611. we come into Saldania bay where we find three ship and two boat come aboard we one from Isaac le Maire and the other from henrike Brouwer Sa^d^nia Bay much refresh be not here to be have at this time of the year by reason of great store of rain be now their winter the mountain also cover with snow we use great diligence in seek of the root Ningim for which purpose the say two holland ship have come thither root Ning^m one be of japan that first discover the secret but at this time the new leaf begin only to peep forth that have we not receive instruction we can not have know it the right and ripe time thereof be December january and February it be call of these inhabitant can we have fill our water and refresh ourselves with eight sheep and twenty neat. set sail out of the bay leave behind we the boat of Isaac le Maire with his son jacob who lie there to barter for hide and skin and to make train oil which be to continue there till December barter at the bay for hide to he we give letter for England near Tena june the ten we be in great danger a storm of thunder lightning wind and rain almost violent thrust we on shore but God merciful and powerful give we unexpected deliverance Au^ust 1 Zelon Negapatan no^e falsehood of map the ^^rst of August we see the land of ceylon fall with gall and run along the coast on the six we fall before Negapatan be twenty eight mile league from our guess the map in that place be very false the like have also happen to the hollander which in the night may be very dangerous neither find we the island so broad as it be there lay m. Mullineux lay punto de gall in four degree which lie in six towards evening we pass before the road and may see the town and house very plain ja^agapatan s. Thome paleacatte the seven we pass Lanagapatan where the hollander have a factory be weary because of little do on the eight we come before saint and on the nine before paleacatte pass over the shallow be in length above a musket shoot have but three fathom water here come two boat aboard we one from the Sabander another from the hollander the ten the sabander man bring we a caul or conduct to come safe ashore whereupon ^and master Browne go ashore but by the roughness of the sea be turn over yet God be thank no man be drown the Sabander meet we compassionate our mischance and appoint we a house promise we to procure a letter from the king to the governess of Conda Maa on the eleven John Van Wersicke the dutch precedent on the coast of Choromandell show we a caul from the king of Narsinga hollander triump in our way Raia wherein be grant that it shall not be lawful for any that come out of Europe to trade there but such as bring prince Maurice his patent and therefore desire our departure we answer we have commission from his majesty of England and will therefore do what we can hence arise high word which the Sabander calm tell of the governess her come thither within three day on the sevente^nth come Conda Maa and captain Hippon come on shore we be ready to go to she when we receive word to the contrary and that the next day she will send for we we suspect the hollander close deal and the next day send to the Sabander no man come for we who answer the king have make grant to the hollander and we must go to he the dispatch of which business will have cost we two month space and hazard the monson for Patane if we will procure liberty the hollander also have make realie two elephant to send to the King wherefore we resolve to prosecute our voyage for Petapolt and Masulipatan the twenty we arrive before Petapoli and the governor send we a caul we agree with he for three three custom and send good on shore resolve that master Lucas and master Browne shall stay there and that I shall go to Masulipatan where be a better road for the ship Masulipatan thither we come on the last of August and Zaldchar Chan bring we a caul we agree to send a present to Mirabel Sumela a great officer under the king which farm out his revenue to Co^dapoli in regard of the shift of the under officer on the twenty of january decease Cotobara king of Badaya or Lollongana and of Masulipatan and great tumult be fear but the wisdom of Mirabel Masunim prevent the same present elect mahumad vnim Cotobara new King son to the brother of the decease who have leave no child behind he a youngman of great hope his uncle have put all in the hand of the persian but this show himself contrary and a enemy to Mirabel Sumela the fountain of tyranny governors perfidy the governor deal treacherous with i in a bargain of cloth and lead for lance say he have agree with i for four thousand pagode intend by that cozenage to raise the custom agree at four to twelve allege for reason that he be a Mirabel and that he be bear of Mahomet posterity who word must be believe before a christian I not know how to deal with this knave the time not suffer to send to the new king at golconda golconda see no mean to end with friendship resolve to practice enmity but at last by intercession of other moor we end in a kind of agreement have also clear at Petapoli Bantam we have a good monson depart for Bantam and arrive there the six and twenty of April 1612. we find the dutch ready to depart thence for jacatra by reason of the governors new exaction but we have no house there after some contest agree with he for three custom factory at Succa^ania in borneo by order of David Middleton a factory be settle at Succadania and continue by master spalding but it seem as thing be carry rather to private then public benefit the first of june we set sa^le from Bantam and on the two and twenty come into the road of Patane Patane where we find the Bantam a ship of enkhusen of who we learn the manner of the country on the six and twenty we go on shore in great state take with we a present of about six hundred rial of eight to accompany the king letter we be well receive according to the manner of the country the letter be lay in a basin of gold the king letter queen of Patane and carry upon a elephant with minstrel many lance and little flag the queen court be sumptuous prepare the letter read and free trade grant we pay such duty as the hollander do we depart from the court without sight of the queen and be bring to Dato Laxmanna the Sabander and officer appoint for stranger where a banquet of fruit be set before we and thence to the orancaya Sirnona and ^here also do eat something the next day the queen send we meat and fruit aboard the three of july depart hence a dutch pinnace call the greyhound for japon july 3 w. Adams in japan the master mate thereof be the same man which have bring the letter from William Adams to the english at Bantam by who we send the company letter to master Adams which he promise to deliver with his own hand this otherwise we can not have do for those of japon be at enmity with this place japanite burn Patanie and have burn Patane twice within these five or six year much ado we have to get leave to build a Warehouse here fire-free which we do hard by the dutch-house in a place assign we thirty fathom in length twenty in breadth the house eight fathom long and four broad but their demand seem very unreasonable amount beside former charge to four thousand rial of eight whereunto yet in hope of future benefit we yield sickness also much afflict we as if the plague have be in our ship and captain Hippon die the nine of july death of captain Hipp^n capt essington who successor be nominate in the box n. 1. master Browne but he be dead before the box n. 2. be open wherein Thomas essington be name and do succeed hereunto be add loss by thief which like resolute dissolute come into the house a lamp burn and steal money out of my chest two hundred eighty three rial of eight and other good fifteen person sleep in the house and a great black dog and watch keep in the yard which make suspicion of some of our own but we can never learn any certainty I and John person and six more be leave here in factory the globe a^ Syam tiger and the ship depart the first of August for Syam I will have write to Syam of my ill market of lawn but can not send by water and by land no less than four together will travel for fear of tiger and many river they must pass which make their demand to pass so far that I be force to wait better opportunity in September the king of jor overranne the suburb of Pahan burn all before he and likewise Campon sina which cause great dearth in Pahan Pan or Pahan and Campon sina the cause of our want of vent here where four year before I have see such quickness as if the world will not have provide sufficient be the portugal bring to malacca the wont quantity and the hollander fill Bantam and the Moluccas as also the trade of moor at Tanasserin and Syam beside Tarangh a haven new find out by Keda the guzerates and another from Negapatan and we help to cloy the market so that the rumour be sufficient to keep down the price for ten year I can at this present make five cento which have make four of one thus be man wisdom disappoint I resolve to send a Cargason for Maccasar Maccasar in celebe send John person as chief in a juncke of Empan October the eight on the nine arrive two juncke from siam in one of which be send i a letter from master essington and master Lucas of their trouble and small likelihood of sale cambois and jagoman beside the former cause the country be fill with war those of cambois and jagoman prepare against Syam the five and twenty depart hence the juncke for borneo jambi Maccasar jortan and other place among who be the juncke of Orancaya Raya Indramouda for Bantam and thence to jortan Amboyna and Banda and back to Maccassar I can imagine what the hollander mean to s^ffer these maleysians chinesians and moor of those country and to assist they in their free trade through all the indies and forbid it their own servant a Dutchman testimony of dutch iniquity in his own word as they be in the tran^slated copy November 11. countryman and brethren upon pain of death and loss of good sure a token of great ignorance or envy suffer turk and heathen to grow rich rather than their own countryman shall get their live sure a great ingratitude and a token that God punishment be come upon they the eleven of November the Glohe arrive from Syam have be eight day in the way they have arrive in the road of Syam the fifteen of August and cast anchor at three fathom high water but the next day the water ebb thirteen hour together they have but seven foot muddy ground and therefore not very hurtful they remove further off where they have three fathom at a low water be four mile league from the bar the town lie some thirty league up along the river whether they send news of their arrival the Sabander and the governor of Mancock a place situate by the river come back with the messenger to receive his majesty letter but chief for the present expect captain essington and master Lucas go with they to the town customer custom where the seventeen of September they come before the king who promise free trade and give every one a little golden cup and a little piece of clothing the mandarin officious officer will have interuert the king command for their own covetousness take at their own price what they please and pay when they be please with bribe with worse demeanour then in any other part of the indies though the rest bad enough till complaint be make to the king they be charge not to molest they and the good be carry to the house which the king have assign be of brick the best in siam near to that of the hollander now be the time of reins and the countery cover with water the six and twenty of October arise such storm that old folk have not there see the like tempest rent up tree by the root and blow down the king monument which he have erect to his father the ship har^ly escape by the diligence of master Skinner and Samuel huyt cast out a three anchor be drive notwithstanding her two anchor from six fathom to four and not pass a english mile from the land master Skinner be beat from the anchor-stocke ride of siam a sa^e harbour but in a south south-west wind but very strange recover five man be drown one after the rest who they suppose devour of a whale which they see soon after they have see he this storm last four or five hour and then follow a smooth sea as if there have be no tempest a tempest yet continue aboard the ship by reason as be report of the reasonless masterly master who be therefore apprehend and Skinner place in his room whereby that weather also calm Bantam Patane and S^^m three prin^^ (@) place of trade as for their trade they be too much becalm this be the three place of trade in all the indies and so far distant from Bantam and Patane the cause whereof be this @. 2 relation of strange occurrent in Pegu siam joor Patane and the kingdom adjacent siam have be a mighty kingdom and ancient since subdue and tributary to Pegu which yet continue not long for the king of siam die leave two son which be bring up in the king court of Pegu. but fly from thence to siam the elder call in the ma^eyan language or the fiery king and by the portugal the black king set up himself as king against who the king of Pegu send his son the prince who be slay in these war and have be occasion of the destruction of the whole kingdom and many million of peguan life for the king sore grieve for the death of his son see Pegu story in my pilgrim lib. 5. cause his chief peguan lord and soldier himself be of the kindred of the brama to be slay this cause great perturbation diverse tributary king whereof he have twenty fall daily from he which at the last encourage this black king to make war against he go to the city of Vnxa or Pegu before which he lie some two month without do any thing he break up his siege and return to siam but the king of Pegu not long after because of the great dearth and death give over himself and all his treasure into the hand of the king of tangu king of tangu and arracan sharer of Pegu to prevent also fall into the hand of the king of arracan come against he with a mighty power this king of arracan easy make himself master of the town and country almost empty and famish think to go into tangu that king send ambassador offer to deliver unto he certain portion of the treasure of Pegu the white elephant and the king daughter both which I have see in arracan 1608. as also the king of Pegu or else to kill he as afterward it happen that the king of tangu slay he with a Pilon wherewith they stamp their rice as be free against any stab in this manner come this mighty empire to ruin so that at this day there be no remembrance of it Siriangh the king of arracan give the town or fort of Siriangh lie upon the same river of Pegu in keep to the portugal especial to Philip de Nicote to who he give the name of Xenga that be honest which honour Xenga do after requite take his son prisoner some three or four year after and ransom he at eleven hundred thousand Tangans and ten Galeas of r^ce who yet also domineer and care for no body thus by pegu destruction be siam receive and have since bring in subjection the kingdom of Cambaya lania^h jagomai Lugor Patane teneserm and diverse other 1605. the black king decease without issue and leave his kingdom to his brother call the white king a covetous man but enjoy his kingdom in peace he die 1610. leave diverse child behind he hence much alteration for lie in his deathbed he cause his elder son to be slay be a young man of great hope at the instigation of one jockrommeway one of the principal lord of siam jeckrommeway a traitor who have many slave think to make himself King this present king be the second son of the white king who not long after dispatch that traitor japanders insolence which have among other slave two hundred and eighty japanders these think to revenge their master death and to achieve some memorable exploit run together to the court of this new king possess themselves of king and court be with out suspicion and compel he to deliver four of the principal noble to be slay as cause of their master death and have sometime use he at their pleasure they compel he to subscribe with his own blood and to give some of the chief Palapos or priest for hostage to such agreement as they propound and so depart with great treasure after much violence the siamite not be able to right themselves upon this occasion the kingdom of Cambaya and Laniangh rebel rebellion as also one Banga de Laa a Peguan and the king of Laniangh come the last year into siam within three day journey of the town of Odija Oudija hope to find the country still entangle with these slavish japonian broil but they be depart the king of siam come forth to meet he which the other dare not abide the two other king be say to have join league to come together in April to dispossess this young king be about two and twenty year of age which yet without treason of his own they be not likely to effect once it be our hard hap to hit upon these bad time so unfitting for trade we resolve that the ship shall winter here in Patanie force thereto by diverse cause queen of patanic go a hunt the one and thirty of December the queen accompany with above six hundred prawe go to sport herself she lie first at Sabrangh where we go to salute she have both sight and speech with she in company of the hollander shee be a comely old woman threescore year of age tall and full of majesty in all the indies we have see few like she shee have in company her sister which be next heir and her young sister little daughter which have be marry to Raia siack brother to the king of joor this her sister common call the young queen they have speech with she be yet a unmarried virgin about six and forty year of age after we have have some conference with she she let fall the curtain intimate thereby that we shall depart signify that next day we shall come again which we do and be well entertain there be twelve woman and child to dance which I have not see better perform in the indies then be all the gentility command to dance or at least make show thereof which cause no small laughter we and the hollander must do likewise and the queen thereat rejoice she have not be out of her house in seven year before till this go to hunt wild buff and bull whereof there be great abundance as she pass along with her train betwixt our house and the ship we salute she with some piece from the ship and musket shoot on shore in this winter of November and December the water by continual rain great water be high than have be in the memery of man so that many beast die many house be drive away and much harm do the five and twenty of january we have news by a dutch ship from siam january that master Lucas have sell more than half his good and that the king have buy a great parcel thereof neithr will he suffer the officer to carry away the good with a pretext of the king name without a testimonial from the King we have also news from Keda that the portugal have come with fifteen hundred man from saint Thome hollander house in paleacate take and take the hollander house in paleacate slay their man and carry away the good in march I send the ship for siam with more good the king of Pahan marry the young sister of the queen of Patane who she have not see in twenty eight year have request the same by often solemn embassy and not obtain have make stay of all the junke that come from siam Cambaya Bordelongh Lugor or any other place lade with rice for Pahan and send forth all her power by water consist of about seventy sail with some four thousand man under the command of Maha Raia Datoe Bessar and Orancayo Sirnora with order to bring her sister hither either in friendship or by force se that Pahan shall have much to do by reason of the great dearth the burn of his house Rice and barn as also the war of joor who as be say make great prepartion to go in his own person for Pahan and the king of borneo prepare on the other side to their succour in April 1613. here arrive diverse junck from Cambaya and China in may I receive letter from siam and good news of sale and of the globe arrival he be busy to send a Cargason of good for japan see good to be do with China commodity I take up three thousand rial of eight of the queen at interest for three or four month allow six to the queen and one to the treasurer we receive ill news from Bantam fire at Bantam that have twice be burn the great english house also full of cloth and that of the hollander with great loss of a great english ship at pulo panian much distress and great mortality there come news also that the achener have besiege joor the trades-increase july the twelve here arrive the king of Pahan with his wife the queen sister july and two son much against his will leave his country in great poverty famine fire and war have join conspiracy he bring news that the achener have take joor joor or johor take and carry all the ordnance slave and other thing away with they Raia Boungson with his child be take prisoner and the king of joor flee to Bintam it be besiege nine and twenty day some hollander also who ship be then at joor be there take and slay dog kill none of the go to entertain this king of Pahan only all the dog be kill for his sake because he can endure none he take our shoot as he pass by we in his honour very kind desire we to visit he and to trade in his country july the sixteenth we have news of captain Saris his be at Mackian in the way to japan also of the death of sir Henry Middleton on the four and twenty of May death of sir hen. Middleton as be think by grief for the most part the trades-increase lie there on ground without mast with three and thirty man the great part sick the ship be sheathe on the one side and not on the other in she have decease a hundred english and more chinese which wrought for wage and eight dutch take by the dutch. by some strange sickness captain Schot have take the castle and island of with great quantity of Sandalwood in the also they have do much on the Spaniard and a hot war be likely to ensue july the one and thirty come the king of Pahan to our house with great state make great promise of kind entertainment in his country August the first the queen send for we to the court where be make a great feast in honour of the king of Pahan there be also play a comedy by woman after the javan manner apparel antikelike king of Pahan depart wively constancy Maccasar in celebe very pleasant to behold on the nine the king of Pahan depart have be here a mock stock to the patanee but the queen sister will not leave he but return back with he in lieu of get great present have spend almost all she have on the sixteenth I receive a letter from Thomas Bret at Maccasar of a bad market and that John person be fall frantic and that they have buy a junke with purpose to have come away but that in the mean time the darling come thither be full of clothing to settle a factory there September the eighteen arrive here Raia Indra monda which have go from hence October the twenty five he have be at Maccasar and thence to Banda where he make a good market hollander in Banda r. welden Englishman he bring about two hundred sockle mace and a great parcel of nutmeg he bring i a letter from Richard welden by he I learn the state of Banda the general Peter de Bot have minister severe justice hang some for sleep in the watch on a gallow hard by the castle which cause diverse to run to the bandesians and ten be turn moores neither can they of the castle by any mean recover they nor have they of the castle any command at all over the bandesians Banda not command by the dutch. only they make the junke to ride under the castle as also the ship so command the sea but not dare to give a bad word on land to the bandesians the three and twenty the globe arrive from siam and I receive a letter from m. Lucas that he have no news from the Cargason send to jagomai because the passage be stop by reason of the war between the people of away and of Laniangh jagomai Au^ or away and Laniangh the king of away be say to have take Siriangh and to have cause the to be slay the king of siam expect he with great force keep good watch on his border I pay the queen her debt in gold October the four be the moor first day of Lent about eight of the clock in the morning uproar by javan slave in Patania arise a mighty fire in the town or rather the fort and court of Patania the cause be this Datoe bezoar and datoe Laxmanna dwell near to each other and be except Raia Shey the rich in slave of javonians it chance this datoe bezoar have be threaten by his javonian slave that they will kill he Laxmannah Raia Suterbangh and other which at last come to their ear whereupon Datoe bezoar call in his slave examine the business which by the^ be deny notwithstanding he cause two which be most suspect to be find which the Pongonla of the slave will not suffer who be thereupon by the say bezoar thrust through with his cryse or dagger the javonian slave enrage hereat have lay hold on their lord but that his other slave free he their fury nevertheless slay all which come in their way and set fire on their house the javan slave of Laxma^nah see their country man in trouble in sight of their master and in spite of his threat come to they set all on fire and be in all about a hundred person run to the great gate call Punta Gorbangh set all on fire on both side as they go so that the whole town except some few as the queen court Orancaio Sirnora Datoe Bandara and the Meskita be burn and the javan go alongst the street take the best bondwoman that they find along with they and stay till one of the clock after dinner domineer none dare to come at they we mean while be not without fear in our quarter they threaten to fall on our house wherefore with the hollander together we keep strong watch send aboard for as many arm as may be which come in very fit time for they be land and thing set in order we resolve to go to visit they and to stop their way which happen even just as they be come downward but understand by their spy of our strength and come towards they they retire thwart to the field and flee to and so forward to Bordolongh Sangora and into the country thus we without harm receive get the name of defender of stranger the javan be follow afterward to little purpose three or four sick man be take prisoner what become of the rest be not know at our departure this be the three time that Patania have be burn twice by the japanders and once by the javan a thing strange and almost incredible on the one and twenty we take our leave of the queen which give to i and to master essington a golden cryse factory leave at Patania and siam we leave William ebert in the house with Robert Litleword and Ralph Cooper with letter also for m. Lucas at siam the same day arrive the unhoped for hope from johor where arrive and go on shore before they can return aboard the armada of Achen be before the town to besiege it hard h^ps of the ho^e a dutch ship before mention wherefore they send a letter aboard for thirty arm man to be send by land and to come as high as they can in the river with the (@) to fight against the achener which by reason of the shoald they can not do high enough to hinder they but that after twenty nine day the town be render by composition thus remain twenty three hollander prisoner and twelve come aboard where none of command be leave but the master mate and one assistant these resolve for Patania but encounter with a storm be drive on the coral ground of borneo and be by a large wind put thence upon pulo condor it be now impossible to recover Patania they seek refresh in the where they have a good bay but a ill kitchen the people be their enemy they come to Patania with eighteen man the most lie in pitiful pl^ght in their cabin shee bring seventy thousand rial of eight and twenty nine pack with Indie cloth @. 3 their voyage to Masulipatan accident during their long stay there and their return the next morning we set sail the five and twenty we be with the southerly land of Ridangh which be about eighteen or twenty il^s Ridangh Capas pulo lie in six degree and in the evening by the isle of Capas which be three little isle lie some thirteen league from the former and two from the continent the six and twenty we see pulo Tyaman south and south by east from Capas twenty eight league the nine and twenty be calm we come to pulo if you keep at eighteen fathom you need fear nothing but what you may see the first of November we see the point of jantana or johor and the mount upon the island of Bintam and the next morning come in sight of Pedra Branca and about ten of the clock come to the dangerous riff which fall off from the point of ^ohor four league into the Sea John Hugens describe this shall very well Linschoten which we pass not without danger have the point with the three little land west south-west from we it be good to keep towards the sea till you bring the little isle shut in with the point of johor and Pedra Branca open with the i will of Bintam Pedra Branca be a rock full of foul and be-dunged which cause the top thereof to be white and give it that name till the seven we be every day busy turn up with the flood till we be past the river of johor and come about two league from Sinca on the eight diverse prawe come aboard we hard by the straight be of the salad under the king of johor which for the most part keep in their prawe with their wife and child and live on fish by these we understand that the king of Achen have send Raia bouny so young brother of the king of johor back again with great honour attend with thirty prawe and two thousand achener to rebuild the fort and city of johor with good store of ordnance and other necessary have marry he to his sister and that he shall be set up in the old king place here we take a pilot to carry we through the straits the nineteen of December we arrive at Masulipatan where we find a english ship Masulipatan and two hollander we understand that mirsadard be out of place and that Atmachan and Busebulleran do govern the english ship be the james the james. and be send express to second we in our voyage m. Marlowe m. davis m. gumey and m. Cob come aboard we and deliver we letter the one and twenty I go on shore where we be meet by Wentacadra son to Busebulleran with the sabandar and other moor and be well receive they give we diverse tesseriffe and to the director Warner and i to each a fair horse which I refuse suspect their treachery but be compel to accept it I take a caul at four and landedgood the twenty five of january the james depart for Petapoli and on the seven of February from thence for Bantam on the eighteen of February I go to narsapur Peca and the nineteen the ship be bring into the river draw nine foot three quarter and have ten and a half contrary to the report of some which wish no good to we the three and twenty I arrive again at Masulipatan and dispatch the Peon for surat write to m. aldworth that day arrive a navette from Pegu wherein come Cornelius Frank by who we understand news from Pegu. that it be certain that the king of away have take the fort of Siriangh and slay all the portugal and that Xenga or Philip de Britto be either spit or so^lathed this be do in march ^ast the king have give order for rebuild the old town call all the peguer together and make many fair promise himself go forward towards Tenesserin where Banga come to he with fifty thousand peguer who before have be under the king of S^am the moor in Masulipatan rejoice great at this conquest hope to get the trade of pegu into their hand again and prepare two ship to send thither in Septemb^r in march come news of el^uen ship arrive at Goa eight from China and three from malacca which bring down the price of the market in a good hour for i which have almost dispatch before in April 1614 Atmachan depart for to give up his account the year come to a end it be well for he the king have depose the great treasurer and give his office to Malick Tusar Atmachans friend and well for we these governors debt be good while they continue their place otherwise doubtful tho. essingtons sudden death the eighteen of May at five in the evening die captain essington of a sudden heat have eat his dinner at the table he have some Biles about he which at that time of the year be very common one great one on his shoulder which will not break suppose the cause of that heat I go and set the ship in the best order I can they all refuse other governor but i which think it a abasement to tread in the step of my under merchant I commit it for that time to master Skinner hold all in hope that they may do their best endeavour and return to Masulipatan where I find three person which say that they wer^^ent with letter from Ohiama queen of paleacatte Obiama queen of paleacatte jaga Raia governor thereabouts and of saint Thomee Apa Condaia secretary of the great king Wencatadraia wherein they send i word that if I will come thither they will grant i a place right over against the fort of paleacatte with all such privilege as we shall desire and other great promise beside but I consider how I and the james have be entertain there can believe but little yet at last we agree that one of they shall stay with i and the rest shall depart with one of my folk who shall carry the letter to the aforesaid person as also to the king wherein I repeat the bad entertainment which we have at paleacatte and if now it please he that we shall come into his country then to send we his caul or safe conduct to which we may trust Wenca^adria k. of Narsinga his ca^l and to the English the nine and twenty of july arrive four person as ambassador with my man wengali from the great king of Narsinga or velur bring i a caul with his which be a white cloth where his own hand be print in sandall or saffron as also one from the queen of paleacatte and diverse letter from jaga Raia Tima Raia Apacondaia and other the king letter be write upon a leaf of gold wherein he excuse the former fault do to we in paleacatte desire that now we will come into his country and choose a place to our best like his offer and that there we shall build a house or castle according to our own like with other privilege he give i a town of about four hundred pound of yearly revenue with promise to do more at my come thither the hollander have wrought much against it but their word be not now in such force the inhabitant grieve to see every year english ship pass by without any profit to they and therefore fill the king with complaint and procure these friendly offer I keep they with i allow their daily charge till the ship be come into the road then to consider further my man wengali have be in person before the king and speak with he the king lay his hand on his head and present he with a tesseriffe ouerflowing in August be in narsapur and thereabouts a great overflow then have be see in nine and twenty year that whole salt hill town and Rice drive away and many thousand of man and cattle be drown the water be three yard above the common highway in golconda which have a branch r^nning into this great river dry in the summer be about four thousand house wash away two stone Bridges one of nineteen the other of fifteen arch as artificial make as the like may scarce be see in Europe in my judgement at least three fathom high above water be three foot under water and six arch of that of nineteen wash away be a bridge which may well be compare with that of Rochester the four of October the ship be sheathe come over the bar without hurt hinder before by the foul weather and now I call fresh for my debt and write thereof the three time to the court tell they that I will be pay the interest also whereupon they write to Mirabel Ma^umad and the Sabander to look that I be content the three and twenty the ship come into the road of Masulipatan and I take order for ship the good on the five and twenty come news of the death of Wencatadrapa king of velur king of Narsugas death and his wife burn with he after his fifty year reign and that his three wife of who Obyama queen of paleacatte be one have burn themselves quick with the corpse great trouble be fear the hollander be afraid of their castle new build in paleacatte soon after come sixty six soldier to strengthen it in the Lion the first of November arrive the lion from Bantam which bring news of the cast away of the Bantam in the tessel and of the white lion at saint Helena of the james arrival at Bantam and go thence for Patania james for Patania I see the governors trifle delay for his debt and be in danger thereby not to return this year resolve to carry he or his son from the custom house aboard the ship how dangerous soever the attempt seem the whole company promise therein to live and die with i whereupon I give order for the boat to go aboard and to bring six musket wrap up in the sail and so to lie in the custom house till we shall see our opportunity moreover see we may not bring any weapon on shore I give order that all our folk shall stay within the house and come to i in the custom house as soon as I shall send for they five to take hold of the soldier pike that be of the governor or his son guard and so present to enter the custom house which stand hard by the river side and then to shut the door so may we be able to carry they into the boat before the alarm be know in the town we have they in the boat we need not to fear we keep it secret yet have the hollander intelligence who esteem it a brag and so reveal it not the one and twenty of November the gentile have a feast gentile feast which solemnity happen thrice a year when the new moon come on a Monday in which both man and woman come to wash themselves in the sea esteem thereby to have great indulgence the Bramenes also and Cometis do the same on the four and twenty I demand my money of the governor very angry have stay seven month long than bargain ask also Mirabel Mahumad why he do not help i according to the letter of the court who laugh answer they will talk with i at the custom house when my anger be over I reply I will no long be make a fool I will show myself a captain of the king of England who be not accustom to such knavish deal thus go I to the custom house where I find the governors son with a small guard his soldier have set their lance over against the custom house it now be also high-water as if God have offer occasion forelook wherefore I send home as be before agree for master Skinner and the rest leave only three to look to the house who present come and lay hold on the pike and enter the custom house shut the door in the mean time I hold Wencatadra arrest by the arm till two or three come to i valorous and strange attempt of the English the governor son carry prisoner aboard who take he in their arm carry he into the boat into which I present leap and be follow of the rest put off from shore row away so that before his father and Mirabel Mahumad can come to the custom house we be in full row but in regard that it blow hard and that we be force to row under land within the length of two cable to keep the depth of the channel they come with might and main to pursue we some come hard by the boat but be out-rowed some meet we in front which have endanger we but discharge three musket we fright they and carry away our prey in sight of three thousand people be much past the bar before they co^ld come to it and come safe aboard I have give order to George chancey to stay ashore with three man more to give a reason of this hostility and to get in the debt but he contrary hereto go forth of the house to see this enterprise be by some unruly fellow set upon and thorough beat which come to the governors ear he take he into his protection fear his son may pay for it in the afternoon come from shore werner Van B^rchem the Hollander with the king interpeter to demand the cause of this action who I answer that they know it well enough and I have also leave my un^er merchant on shore to tell they of who hard usage understanding I make as though I will be revenge on Wencatadra but by van berchems intercession remit it conditional to execute the same hang he at the yard which he write to his father if any of my man shall be wrong i prohibit also any boat to come aboard without a letter from George chancey else will I set they all before the Ma^^ the hollander van Berchem with the secretary come aboard again on the seven and twenty offer the governor own debt I demand no more but his and Callopas who surety he be and for the rest that he as governor shall send such as refuse to pay aboard and I will hold myself satisfy Berchem also protest against i of all damage which they have find or may bear because of my hostility to which protest I answer by writing show the nullity thereof and their ship the same night depart for Patane in the meanwhile Wencatadra remain aboard without eat or drink for he be a Bramene superstition of Bramenes may neither eat nor drink in any man house but what he have dress himself which make i so to pity he that I offer if any two moor of quality will come aboard in his place I will let he go on shore but none will undertake it and he must continue his fast the governor therefore pay his and callopas debt and make all the rest to pay except miriape^k and Datapa which be in golconda and I send back my prisoner the thirty of November after this agreement diverse moor and other come aboard to visit i promise to write to the king the truth of these proceed desire i not to hurt any moor ship I answer I be for this time satisfy but let they hereafter take heed of give like cause and have better ear for englishman complaint I also send letter to the king at golconda to the same purpose for quick Iustice I dispatch likewise the ambassador of velur in respect of the trouble there and my short stay deny fit opportunity yet I leave letter with they for the first English ship with my best advice the seven of December master chancey come aboard with the rest and next night I put to sea have offer to come and take a friendly farewell on shore but the governor fear I will write of his deal by those moor refuse pretend he be ashamed to see my face who of a good friend he have make his enemy the three of januarie we arrive at Bantam where we find the james come from Patane the Hosiander and concord I go on shore and receive of master John jordaine the several stock unite principal factor at Bantam letter from sir Thomas smith testify that the company be join in one etc. from master Cockin at Maccasar that he have receive the Cargaton send by William ebert with other circumstance from Adam Denton and master Gourney complain of the dead market because of the war from master Lucas also of his fear in the same regard but the darling be go thither I hope will comfort he here we agree that the hosianders good shall be discharge into the globe and Edward Christian make captain thereof in that country by general beast shall be captain of the globe and Nathaniel salmon master and master Skinner shall go master in the Hosiander and that in the globe shall go fifty man in the james five and fifty twenty in the Hosiander which be to stay here and three or four to keep the concord on the thirty the james depart to go on a month before and to stay at the cape or at saint Helena that we may go together see the Hosiander can not so quick be make ready it be think fit to send the concord for Amboyna George bale go in she and George chancey be to stay in Macasar the ship Zelandia arrive from japan letter from japan and bring letter from master cock that master peacock with the hollander be slay in cochin China and that master Adams and four other english be go thence for Syam the fourteen of February arrive captain David Middleton with the samaritan Thomas and Thomasin the man be well and in good disposition captain Middleton understand of his brother death this be supply out of m. Martin journal and the loss of his ship the trade increase be perplex and resolve to go home wherefore he call a court to see the dispose of the ship and the man again of the Hosiander it be then think fit to send home the samaritan with the very first the thomas to sumatra and the Thomasin for Amboyna to succour the concord and the Hosiander for Petania and japan to visit those factory which be put in execution they set sail out of Bantam road the two and twenty of February April the thirty they enter the road of Soldania where they find the james which arrive the day before the advice and attendant outward find the seventeen of May they weigh and the first of june come to saint Helena chap. 15 a journal of a voyage make by the pearl * * for the further of marine knowledge I have think good to add this voyage how ever hold society with the east-indian society Lancerota to the East-India wherein go as captain master SAMVEL CASTELTON of London and captain GEORGE bathur as lieutenant write by JOHN TATTON master the two and twenty of August 1612. we depart from black-wall for Gravesend and be much hinder by contrary wind it be the five of November before we can attain to the land end of England the seven and twenty of November we fall with Lancerota one of the canary Iles. the three of December we tow into Lauratavi Road. the five we be put out of the road by foul weather decemb. 1611. Teneriffa and spend the whole month about this i will and Teneriffa and take in sixteen pipe of wine the last of this month we meet with a small ship of London a little in the off which have former be in the road with we a small ship of London take by a holland man of war which a holland ship of war have take who man be all drink in the night she steal away have but three man in she into who we put two man and a merchant who we shall have set on shore at the grand canary but the weather not permit we he agree to go for the i will of palm we think there to better our provision the small ship this day do bear we company the fifteen day we anchor in the road of cape Verde where we water and get some Oxen. Rofisco Road. the one and twenty we weigh and go over to Rofisco for beef and at five of the clock anchor in Rofisco ride in five fathom note that there be but eleven fathom over the bay in a east and by north course for so lie Rofisco from the isle which make the road at cape Verde the two and twenty we get seven beef the three and twenty in the morning we depart from Rofisco the eight and twenty the first Ternado February 20. they cross the line be in latitude six degree thirty two minute we meet with the first Ternado last some two hour the twenty of February we cross the equinoctial line and make our way south southeast the fifteen of April 1612. the latitude thirty two degree thirty nine minute April 15. weed call Trombas sign of be near the cape of buona esperanza Luzia the Bay the wind south-west we steer in east southeast and meet with many great weed call Trombas by the portugal and the water be much change we steer away east southeast till five of the clock then we see the land between the east southeast and east north-east we steer away east till seven in the morning then we be thwart Lucia some four league off we sound and have forty three fathom rock than it fall aland the sixteenth at noon latitude thirty three degree no minute at five of the clock at night we be shoot so far into the bay that we bring a ledge of rock south south-west of we then we steer off the seventeen in the morning we be some seven league of the shore have get some three league to the southward this day our latitude be thirty three degree no minute we stand in for the shore and at three of the clock come in fair by the point in fifteen fourteen and thirteen fathom and have sometime hard ground sometime soft Ozie and when we be shoot within the point two mile of the shore we have nine fathom for the most part soft Ozie then we anchor in the southeast side of the bay in seven fathom soft ground the one point north north-east some seven league off the other which we come in by northwest the eighteen in the morning we send our boat and Skiffe on shore they go on shore and find people a calf for a piece of a iron hoop and a good sheep for a hatchet the Skiffe present return bring news of people whereof some twenty come to they we send the Skiffe on shore again with a iron hoop cut in piece and some hatchet and for a small piece of this iron hoop we have a calf and for a hatchet a excellent good sheep then we send our boat to seek for water but range the bay can find none a little puddle we see of which the people drink make sign that there be none other this country seem to be a very barren place our boat go into a river in the bottom of the bay have six foot water upon the bar at a high water and go a mile up a very tine river but all salt water and a barren country the nineteen in the morning at two of the clock the wind come up at north northwest and blow right in we weigh and make a board over the bottom of the bay in ten nine eight and seven fathom then the wind come to the west south-west and west by south and so we ply it out all night becalm some three league without the point of the road the two and twenty at noon latitude thirty three degree fifty three minute we be some eight league of the shore the three and twenty in the morning the table the road of Saldanha copper in chief request August Priaman in thirty eight minute of south latitude variation four degree fifty minute Tecon Airebangye a town eight minute north latitude a shall the table bare southeast some five league off all night be calm the four and twenty we come into the road of Saldanha the people desire nothing so much as copper brass they regard not the four and twenty of August we depart from Priaman for Tecon Priaman stand in thirty eight minute of south latitude and the variation there be four degree fifty minute northwest stand in five and twenty minute of south latitude have three or four shoald between they but keep some four league of the shore and there be no fear the one and thirty we run into a bay and there be a wilderness we bring on a false keel on our pinnace this bay be call by the name of a town a little to the southward of it call Airebangye the latitude of this bay be some eight minute north latitude round about the shall go in be nine fathom and a quarter less but between the main and it be the best channel with a northerly wind because the point of the isle lie shall a good cable length off to the northward some two mile of the shore thwart the w point which be to the northward of airebangye lie a shall whereon be but eight or nine fathom water be rock but all over between that land and the long isle in the off which lie some seven league off be but eight and twenty and thirty fathom the ten of September we get up with the wind off the shore within two mile of Pattahan the eleven in the morning we anchor at the south-west end of the isle of Pattahan in fourteen fathom Ozie the river of Pattahan latitude no degree twenty eight minute and at two in the afternoon we anchor thwart the river of Pattahan in five fathom Ozie all this coast be Ozie near the shore without it be the shoald this river be very good water and you may go into it six or seven foot upon the bar it stand in no degree twenty eight minute of north latitude the fourteen we go from Pattahan with two governor for our pilot for baron and Achen with three boy the sixteenth we be a little short of a big island a big island in one degree forty minute which lie some two mile of the main with two other small isle on the southside of it and between the main and it lie a high round homocke be a isle this be some twenty five or twenty six league to the northward of Pattahan this big isle stand in one degree forty minute and on the northwest side be a fresh run down a steep cliff like a little river all in a breach and show white a great way off seven or eight league you may very well see it on the north-side of this isle be a fine bay go fair by it we have thirty fathom Ozie south-west or west south-west some four league from this island lie a shall a shall within this isle your depth be two and twenty fathom and so close into the main twenty fathom all Ozie your anchor over both floocke the last of October we depart from Nieubar where we have good refresh for the isle of ceylon the canoe still trade so long as we be any thing near November the twelve of November at noon the sun shine we make our ship in five degree thirty five minute by which observation I find our ship forty league far southerly than I can judge by our sail in less time than two day at eight of the clock in the morning we see the land of ceylon north-east by north of we some twelve league off be the high land within de Galle gall in ceylon then it prove calm and we get out our Skiffe to sound but find no ground the thirteen at noon latitude five degree thirty two minute variation thirteen degree twenty four minute at night all night the wind variable little wind but very much rain variation thirteen degree twenty four minute we slent it in to the northward the next morning the land be east north-east the fourteen at noon our latitude be six degree or six or five the souther point of ceylon call Diundra east of we the sixteenth in the afternoon the wind southerly out of the sea we weigh and go into the bay the bay of Velagam where the boat be call Velagam think there to water and anchor in seven fathom fine black sand the one point west north-wester the other point which we come in by south south-west westerly and ride within a quarter of a mile from the shore this night we send our Skiffe on shore with a flag of truce but go not on shore the people make show they can not understand Portuguise the seventeen we send our boat to the other side of the bay where there be house build by christian portugal where the people come down to our boat and one of they come into the water near the boat speak very good portuguese in habit like one of the country people but we judge he to be a Portugal he answer our man that we can have nothing till they have acquaint their king and so bid we return the next morning and we shall have answer from their king with very please word but soon after we perceive a ambush of the portugal and weigh the two and twenty we send our boat and Skiffe on shore think that for their two boat and man they will have give we water but we command our long boat not to go near the shore but to lie off to succour the Skiffe if need be the people on shore keep themselves close send one man down to speak to our Skiffe that if they will give they money we shall water who make answer that our captain be very well content to give they what it please they to require and tell they that we be find for Maticalo a city upon the isle to trade then he draw near to the Skiffe seem to be afraid and tell they in the Skiffe that they have gun and will shoot he but they make answer they have none as indeed they have not for the boat be fit for their defence come near he talk very friendly the treason of the portugal seem to yield to any thing but on the sudden he retire from the Skiffe there come off such a volley of small shot as the like have be seldom see I think not less than two hundred which hurt all our man in the Skiffe be six but none deadly thank be God in the long boat none be hurt but the Skiffe be even in the wash of the shore at their discharge of their shot they sally out of the bush some of they run up to the neck to have get hold of the Skiffe but two of our man have better heart than the rest although hurt row she off the long boat discharge her fowler and her small shot make they retire into the bush again and so both our boat come aboard again the four and twenty we stand to the eastward about diundra the souther point of the isle and anchor all night some seven league to the east the six and twenty we stand to the eastward along the shore and at noon anchor thwart a river the river Wallaway which the people call Wallaway in eight fathom black Ozie sand yet show a great river within but the mouth be dord up our boat be at the mouth of it think it to be a rock that lie thwart of the river mouth and the sea go high they can do no good but come aboard the seven and twenty at five of the clock at night we be thwart a shall in the off of we a shall and be shoot to the eastward of it we take in all our sail but our fore-course and stand it off a try to spend the night and not like the weather I call to get up our new fore-course and while it be get up the other split be some four mile of the shore we lay it a hull till nine of the clock have four and thirty fathom then we lay it about to the shore and at eleven of the clock anchor in thirteen fathom fine sand some three mile and a half from the shore be less wind another shall sandie hill the eight and twenty in run some five league we meet with another shall without we some three league from the land the shore be sandy hill the depth some five or six mile off a three shall six or eight fathom at one cast we have but five fathom which be another shall but it show not be a smooth Sea then we come into ten and fifteen fathom and stand still to the eastward a point of rock a fine river they water we come to a point of rock and there see a fine river we anchor on the east-side of the point in nine fathom black Ozie sand the point bear south-west and by south of we here we water keep a guard upon the rock of thirty small shot here some people come to we with fear make show of great friendship they have for the most part of they very great hole in their ear the description of the people and some of they have their hair upon their head like the chinese long and make up with a knot upon their crown they be all naked they wear only a piece of cloth about their middle hang down to their knee here two come aboard we at several time which speak good portuguese they promise all thing but perform nothing but find the first to play the villain with we yet as far as we perceive not by his own mean we take occasion to detain the one aboard send the other with threaten and promise on shore to procure we victual who stay somewhat long put his fellow which we have detain in great fear who feign himself sick and will fain have go on shore but the next day his consort come with two calf the four of December in the morning we stand to the eastward till the brise come December which be about two of the clock and fetch not the place by six league we anchor in ten fathom two mile from the shore fine black sand latitude six degree forty minute latitude ^ degree 40. min. variation 12. degr. 46. min. variation twelve degree forty six minute north-westing here we ride till the eight then we stand to the westward and anchor all night thwart a great hamocke the nine we anchor all night a little to the westward of the westermost shall the eleven in the morning we stand fair in by the river Wallaway but the sea go high we go along to the westward and at night be thwart the point some five league to the eastward of Diundra here we ride till the sixteenth at which time the current set strong to the eastward which be very seldom we weigh and ply to the eastward the seventeen we stand it in and fetch in a little to the westward of diundra thwart the two red cliff and anchor in twenty five fathom the point east a little northerly two red cliff the eighteen we break up our pinnace be so worm-eaten that she weary our man with free she of water here we ride the wind easterly all this month out januarie the seven easterly wind begin to blow than we bear up for the river of Wallaway where we stay and lay up new shr^wds upon our main mast have very much wind easterly january we ride here ten day together in ten fathom three quarter of a mile from the shore the point lie east southerly of we the nineteen at midnight we espy a sail the twenty in the morning in less than three league chase we take she they take a ship and the same day we stand it away to the northwest out of sight of land then we stand in again the four and twenty we anchor some seven league to the northward of de Galle the five and twenty we begin to discharge she ride in thirty fathom some three mile from the shore the second of February we have do with the ship leave in she near a hundred ton of pepper and sanders the three day we set sail home-ward February they return homeward Colombo at six of the clock at night we be in fourteen fathom some five or six mile from the shore thwart a island which be some six league to the southward of the portugal fort upon ceylon call Colombo the twenty of march latitude thirteen degree seven minute the great variation 24. degr. 16. min. variation twenty four degree twenty six minute be the great that we find we steer away south-west and feel no current note that we meet with current and many rippling from south latitude four degree thirty minute till we come into thirteen degree no minute sometime the rippling make a noise like overfals especial be in the parallel of Pedras Brancas to the westward of it the four and twenty latitude sixteen degree fifty minute variation twenty three degree ten minute we steer south-west the twenty seven latitude twenty one degree variation 23. degr. 10. min. a new island discover in 21. degree than we see a island west south-west and south-west and by west some five league from we be very high land at six of the clock at night we anchor on the easter side of it in ten fathom fine black sand a mile from the shore from forty fathom to four fathom close into the shore you have fine black sand here we send our boat on shore and find infinite number of great land tortoise as big as a man may well carry which be very good meat the north-east point of this i will be very high and steep infinite number of great tortoise a good water place pearl i will and a little to the southeast of the point be low land where be a fine run water like a river and though a boat can go in yet it be a very good place to water in somewhat distant from the shore the i will be like a forest and therefore I call it England forest but other call it pearl island by the name of our ship there be store of land foul both small and great plenty of dove great parrot and such like and a great fowl of the bigness of a turkey very fat and so short wing that they can fly be white and in a manner tame and so be all other fowl as have not be trouble nor fear with shot our man do beat they down with stick and stone ten man may take foul enough to serve forty man a day our man travel into the land find another river and a pond with great store of mallards in it and wild goose moreover they find infinite store of great eel as good I think as any in the world strike they with a pike and they will fly from you not past two or three yard and there will lie still again you may wade after they at your pleasure I weigh one of they because they be big than ever I see and it weigh five and twenty pound and they be the sweet fish that can be eat a excellent place for refresh I think it be so good a place as the world can afford for refresh be also without people the first of April 1613. we go away and bear about the north-east point all the north side of the i will be fine low land April 1613. and full of tree more pleasant in sight then the southside the second latitude twenty degree fifty eight minute the i will bare southeast by east some five league off 22. deg. 48. minute note that we see no danger about the i will but the shore itself at six of the clock at night the south-west point be of we southeast by east variation twenty two degree forty eight minute the first of May latitude thirty eight degree forty seven minute which be the great latitude that we ever raise to the southward 38. degree 47. minute the great latitude southward we steer away west northwest the eleven at noon latitude thirty three degree fifty eight minute by which observation I find a northerly current and find myself to the westward of cape buona esperanza the first of june all these ship the Solomon and four great hollander depart from the road of saint Helena but within four hour after they be go there come about the point two great carackes they be to the west of cape buona esperanza june 1613. the other ship be still in sight we have most part of our company ashore sick I send the boat on shore have not above ten man aboard so there come as many as be able some of our sound man be up in the mountain when the boat be come aboard we cut our cable in the house and drive away set sail as fast as we be able be in all but six and twenty man have leave behind we sick and sound five and twenty man of our own company and one indian with all our water cask and diverse other thing for the use of our sick man be leave on shore so hasten towards the hollander and make sign for their stay and within night come up with the admiral of the hollander and tell he of this news he be very glad and desire to make sail for the road again and make sign to his fleet to follow and so stand for the road as wind will serve but in the morning his big ship both of force and burden be miss with the Solomon of London yet his three ship and we ply it up for the road and get in the three day at noon the admiral of the hollander go first in the three of june the fight between the three hollander and two carackes and anchor on the broadside of the admiral carrack he veer so much cable before he bring up his ship that his stern hang by the gallery of the carrack but with his two stern piece lie very low and his quarter piece he so gall the carrack that he put she from two piece of ordnance and may have sink she if they have not be too covetous have desire to carry both the next come the Bantam and anchor in such sort that she have her broadside upon the bow of the same carrack and so rack she afore and baste that it much cool the portugal courage then come the white lion whereof one simons be captain and lay she thwart the house and so tear she that a man may see all the sea wash into she between wind and water and withal cut her cable and so she drive off from the white lion the lion of Holland blow up and sink forty nine hollander blow up and drown and have drive on shore but that the vice-admiral carrack have a ca^le fast on shore and so the carrack lie in the bite of this cable in time get another cable and anchor ready and so bring she up again though long first then the white lion make way to veer aboard again with a general consent that all three ship shall lay she aboard the white lion fall with her broadside along the vice-admiral carack let fly her whole broadside and likewise the carack at she but still vere to get aboard the admiral carrack his man still ply his low ordnance upon the vice-admiral one of his piece break over his powder room as some thought and the ship blow up all to piece the after part of she and so sink present in the time of this fight eleven of our man come out of the mountain who we espy fetch from the shore out of the bay to the eastward of the chapel leave on shore fifteen of our company one be a indian in the white lion be Hen^ie Bacon and Henry Teddiman blow up and nine and forty of the hollander then the admiral whereof John derickson lamb be captain see his force so much weaken himself have then of his piece dismount with many of his man kill and hurt and we be of small force think it best to leave they for want of help promise to furnish we with water the three of june lose one after another and change a few shot with the carackes we stand away for England july 18 1613. the sea of grass or Saragasso they cross the tropic of cancer the eighteen of july in the morning we meet with many weed and a small long lease with white berry of the bigness of a corn of pepper the master of the caravell aboard the hollander report that far westerly the sea be so thick with these kind of weed that they hinder a ship way they call it the sea of grass he affirm that in former voyage he have be in it the nineteen we cross the tropic of cancer english voyage beyond the eastindies to the land of Japan China cauchin-china the PHILIPINAE with other and the indian navigation far prosecuted their just commerce noble vindicate against turkish treachery victorious defend against Portugal hostility glorious advance against moorish and ethnic perfidy hopeful recover from dutch malignity just maintain against ignorant and malicious calumny the four book have bring to light rather as a midwife the fruit of other travel than i own as a parent the imperfect untimely birth of other englishman and that more mature well complexioned strong limbed and if genethliacal conjecture fail not hopeful promise riches honour happy success and long-life of the east-indian society which we have also in a scenical history or a historical scene the actor be the author and the author themselves the actor of their own part art act design bring from the cradle to the saddle from weak infancy of first beginning to the happy progress and growth of youthful vigour and courage I make a stand and in the mid of our indian course finish the former book that as after a long ascent of some steep hill man take breath and review with delight that which with irksome labour and weary step they have pass or like the land-traveller rest in his inn or the weather-beaten mariner refresh himself in some midway harbour which here you see our indian navigator do in Soldania or at saint Helena you may also after that stay begin a fresh career with revive spirit and renew alacrtie resume this booke-voyage and read navigation so may your mind in few hour and a safe course without fear of rock sand wind storm of unseasonable monsons unreasonable man fugitive traitor pirate false friend open foe of a ill market hard custom or harsh account to be give at last communicate in that which these with so long labour and so perilous danger have do and suffer and here first we present unto you the east-indies make westerly by the illustrious voyage of captain JOHN SARIS who have spend some year before in the indies by observation to rectify experience and by experience to prepare for high attempt have here leave the know coast of Europe compass those more unknown of Africa from the atlantike to the erythraean sea and after commerce there Mercuri^ compass the shore and pierce the sea to and beyond all iustname of indian and Asia penetrate by a long journey the land city court of the japonian empire there settle a english factory and after safe return be ready to render thou the pleasure of his pain and why stay I thou any long by a more pleasant discursive way to discover to thou the karity of that discovery and by hand by the eye to lead thou alongst with he all the way and then leave thou to those that shall tell thou after accident and late occurrent in the japonian indian and asian affair chap. i. the eight voyage set forth by the east-indian society wherein be employ three ship the Clove the Hector and the Thomas under the command of captain JOHN SARIS his course and act to and in the red sea java molucca and japan by the inhabitant call neffoon where also he first begin and settle a english trade and factory with other remarkable rarity collect out of his own journal @. i. their sail about Africa visit diverse land thereof and come to Socatora the eighteen of April 1611. we set sail out of the down April 18 1611 the six of june follow we pass the equinoctial line the first of August 1611. we arrive in the bay of Soldania where have well refresh ourselves the space of eight day the nine of August in the morning we weigh anchor and about four in the afternoon be five league of the cape buona esperanza the second of September of latitude twenty four degree twenty one minute way east by north northerly six league that since our come from cape buona esperanza we find no monsons of west-wind as have be report but to the contrary do find north easterly south easterly and easterly wind with extreme storm raine thunder and lightning yet at that present very fair and so hot that calm be to be doubt the three latitude twenty three degree fifty minute way south by west twenty three league wind at south the bay of s. Augustine in the i will of saint Laurence about five at night we make land be the island of Madagascar otherwise call saint Laurence the bay of saint Augustine bear east by north about six league off and then steer away north north-east variation at sunsetting fifteen degree eleven minute westerly we sound but have no ground at one hundred fathom the land not very high but sandie and then we pass the tropic of Capricorn to the northward the ten of September latitude seventeen degree three minute way northwest twelve league wind at north-east we steer north northwest variation at sunrising thirteen degree a strong current fifty four minute westerly here we find a strong current set south south-west for these last four and twenty hour she can not have run less than four and twenty league have a stiff gale but for the reason aforesaid in the evening we make the island Primeiras bear west by north about four league off the eleven latitude seventeen degree thirty three minute way south by east half a point easterly fourteen league the wind at noth-east and north-east by east a storm note note that have stand but one watch and a half to the east-ward the current do carry we thirty minute to the southwards of the latitude we be in by the last observation then we stand in for the land north northwest hope of a better wind near the shore with less current an^ sudden the water change but we can find no ground at a hundred fathom in the evening we make the land bear north and north by west about six league off find it to be the island Primeiras but be to the northward of it Ilhas Primeiras it show somewhat long than before for it do bear from the northwest to the north of we we sound and have twenty fathom small glister sand and sound again have twenty fathom black Ozie with black shell then we stand off to the eastward the storm continue with more wind in the night then in the day and have stand off one glass we sound and have two and twenty fathom gray sand and shell the twelve latitude eighteen degree seventeen minute way southeast by east eight and twenty league wind at north-east a storm so that these last twenty four hour we be carry by the force of the current forty four minute to the southward of the former observation variation fourteen degree one and forty minute westerly about night the wind veer to east north-east so that we lay north with the stern the thirteen latitude nineteen degree sixteen minute way southeast by south two and twenty league wind north-east by east little wind the current very strong against we the fifteen latitude sixteen degree six and forty minute way north north-east half a point easterly thirty league wind south-west we steer north-east by north. note here we find not the current so forcible for we have depress the pole one degree seven and twenty minute these four and twenty hour the reason we suppose to be that the island juan be between we and the current for we make account it do bear east by north eighteen league off variation at sunsetting twelve degree eight minute westerly the sixteenth latitude sixteen degree not nine minute way north north-east eighteen league we steer north-east by north wind south-west by south little wind but a strong current variation at sunrising thirteen degree not three minute westerly the seventeen the ship way north by west eight league variation twelve degree one minute westerly in the morning we make the land to the southward of Mosambique make it to be the island Angoxa bear west south-wst seven league the westermost part of the say island seem whitish the main to the northward bear north by east the island Angoxa smooth champion ground we steer north-east by east and towards evening we see the land trent to the northward seem to the seaward to be full of tree here we find the current to set north northwest for we can perceive by the land that we run very fast to the northward and have little wind we sound often but can not find ground at a hundred fathom the nineteen latitude fifteen degree twenty nine minute way south by east four league wind at east southeast we steer north-east but by extremity of the current we be carry to the southward so that we be here ten day a extreme current to the southward and can not get to the northward notwithstanding we have a fair and reasonable stiff gale the one and twenty latitude sixteen degree twenty minute way south by west four league wind north-east and north-east by east little wind in the morning we be near the northermost of the island Angoxas bea^ing west by north about three league off and to windward of we we espy a very dangerous shoal a very dangerous shall lie east of the north part of the main at the least three point into the sea have a dry splat of white sand between it and the main we sound and have ground at thirty fathom red stone like coral with gray sand and shell we stand off it be a lee-shoare and westerly current and find by our skiff which be send off that the current do set exceed strong to the south-west by west and such uncertain shoal we stand off for saint Laurence the isle Angoxa in sixteen degree twenty minute note that these island Angoxas which be many do stand in the plat in fifteen degree forty minute and we find they in sixteen degree twenty minute to the southward of the equinoctial variation thirteen degree no minute westerly the two and twenty latitude seventeen degree five minute way south southeast eighteen league wind north-east and in four and twenty hour that we part from the land we lose no degree forty five minute but towards evening the wind come to the southeast and southeast by south we steer north-east and north-east by east and east north-east for the island saint Laurence look out for juan which Hugen van Linschoten will to beware of and not to come near it in a small moon notwithstanding we be enforce to put ourselves in hazard to get out of this current and dangerous place variation at sunsetting twelve degree forty four minute westerly the three and twenty latitude sixteen degree four and twenty minute way north-east two and twenty league wind at south south-west we steer east north-east to rid we of the current have depress the pole these last four and twenty hour no degree one and forty minute variation at sunsetting thirteen degree sixteen minute westerly the four and twenty latitude sixteen degree sixteen minute way east north-east ten league wind at south-west and south southeast till eight in the morning it come then to the north and north by east little wind land unexpected near i^an in the morning at break of day to our great admiration we see land to the westward bear north by west five league off not once look for any that way l^nd unexpected near but to the eastward for juan which we make account can not be above six league south from we and be be-calmed do doubt least the current will set we upon it in the night but the day clear we find it to be the northermost island of the Angoxas though i will Angoxas whence we depart the one and twenty ditto in the afternoon which so amaze our mariner as that they be discourage of get our voyage this way the reason of this difference be as we suppose by a counter current which certain in the small of the moon do set east north-east and west south-west from the Plashella or point of the shore which lie north-east by east of the northermost part of juan which meet with our ancient enemy the north north-east current have thus violent put we over to the westward notwithstanding we have have a fresh gale and fair wind until this morning that it fall calm note that if there be any such island as juan it lie not so far to the westward as daniels plot make mention note of i. but stand near the main island otherwise we must of necessity have see it they of the four voyage in the ascension make account that they pass to the east-ward of it and s. Laurence which thing the portugal hold impossible say that it stand so near the main island as that there be no passage but a little channel which once one of their ship be enforce to put through and since nor afore they have not hear of any to have do the like wherefore it be hold among we to be but a cunning of the portugal to place such a island so far to the westward to the end that such as shall sail this way be not so well experience as themselves a falsehood of the portugal may give it a birth fall into this extreme current which we certain find to set more westerly than north-east and south-west wherefore it be necessary for all such as shall be find this way to be upon the coast of s. Laurence by the first of june and from the cape s Augustine until they come into twelve degree no minute to keep up to the eastward and not to make their way to the west of the north or north by west for fear of the south-west current which with calm and fourteen degree two minute variation westerly will perforce set they over upon the coast of Soffala and most certain it be that in August and September you shall find very violent northwest wind so that if you will stand it over for s Laurence you shall not fetch it without great danger of the shoald of India the current take you on the broad side I mean if you be to the north of the say shoald neither can you stop upon the main to keep your latitude for it be break ground and very deep water the three of October we come to a anchor after much trouble by current between Soffala and Mosambique October in thirteen and fourteen fathom latitude sixteen degree thirty two minute longitude seventy six degree ten minute variation eleven degree fifty minute westerly we anchor under a island near unto the main upon which we neither find people nor fresh water though we dig very deep in the sand the ten we weigh the wind at south south-west and stand over east by north for s. Laurence hope thereby to get out of these current thus be we toss to and fro with variable wind and still trouble with the current come out of the north-east until the twenty six we come to a anchor under Moyella the il^ Moyella where they have refresh which be one of the land of Comora latitude twelve degree thirteen minute to the southward of the aequinoctial where we refresh ourselves eight day procure bullock goat hen lemon pines papane pomegranate sugar cane Tammarin hen Rice milk root egg and fish in exchange of small haberdashery ware and some money and have here kind usage and great store of fresh water the rather for that we stand still upon our guard I invite the king of Moyella be a mahometan aboard the Clove and entertain he with a noise of trumpet and a consort of music with a banquet which he refuse to eat of because it be then his lent which among they be call rammadam mahometan manner of fast till sunset but he take away with he the best of the banquet to carry to the queen his mother say they will eat it when the sun be down the q^eenes name be Sultanna Mannangalla the king name be Sariffoo Booboocarree he request the general to leave he a letter in his commendation to those that shall happen hereafter to come thither whereby they may understand of his honest deal with we the like letter he have procure from Stephen Verhaghen admiral of twelve Holland ship who arrive there in the year 1604. which he deliver unto our general who give he the like with this caution in the end thereof that they shall not give too great credit to they but stand upon their guard for that oftentimes weapon continue peace the inhabitant here be negro with short curl hair and pintado about their middle some wear white cap other turban by which we know they be mahometans the king himself be apparel in a white Cotten coat a turban upon his head and a guz^rate Pintado about his middle he be little white than the ordinary people who be black he be leave he have a round thin black beard great eye of a low stature and of very few word he can speak a little arabic which he have learn in his pilgrimage to Mecca from whence he have the name of sheriff here they desire money whereby we understand spanish rial of eight rather then commodity but for crimson broad cloth red sculd cap Cambaya clothes and sword blade you may have any thing the island afford which serve only for refresh and no way for merchandize he give the general a note under his hand of friendship which be not long I have here insert (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) Sharefoo Boobackar king of the island call Moyela his note under his hand for further friendship 1611. write in arabic (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the four of November we set sail from this island Moyella the seventeen in the morning we make the land be the main of melinde the bay or gulf call November the main land of melinde bear northwest about four league off the land trend north-east south-west we have thirty fathom small gray sand and shell wind at east north-east we stand off southeast a stiff gale and a very great sea which show to be shoal water and a current which we find to set alongst the shore north-east latitude two degree ten minute variation at sunne-setting twelve degree thirty one minute westerly note this land lie more easterly than in our plait otherwise we shall not have fall therewith so soon note for by our reckon we be at least forty eight league off the nine and twenty latitude four degree forty four minute variation seventeen degree thirty four minute westerly be as we suppose twelve league of the shoal call Baxos east by south we have a great ripple and over-fall of water as if it have be shoal-water but sound find no ground at a hundred fathom the wind come about here to south southeast our course north-east the first of December latitude three degree forty minute our way north north-east eight league wind at north north-east east east southeast and north east by north December little wind for the most part calm and have a very fearful ripple of the water much like unto the fall at London bridge be out of sight of land and find no ground at a hundred fathom fearful ripple of the water when we stand into the land it leave we but bear off be fifty league from land we find very terrible variation sixteen degree fifteen minute westerly the second latitude two degree fifty five minute way north-east by north eighteeene league wind variable the ripple continue variation fifteen degree fifty seven minute westerly which move we to think that we have a current set to the west the variation decrease so sudden the three latitude four degree four minute way south twenty three league wind variable most part calm with great ripple of the water and a very strong current southerly so that these last twenty four hour we be carry back to the southward of our former latitude one degree nine minute the four latitude four degree thirty three minute way south ten league little wind and variable betwixt the north-east and east by south very strange ripple of the water and strong current southerly variation eighteen degree forty four minute westerly the five latitude four degree fifty four minute way south by east seven league wind variable betwixt north-east by north and east by south the ripple continue and current southerly variation eighteen degree eleven minute westerly at sunsetting the six latitude five degree five minute way southeast by east eighteen league wind variable betwixt north-east by north and north-east by east a gale and at sometime more fearful rippling of the water then before yet can have no ground at a hundred fathom these rippling show like shelf and be not at all time alike but sometime more sometime less but meet with many time in a day and make a noise by the ship side as if she do run five league a watch when she do scarce go a head we be much terrify therewith the rather because we can not imagine from whence it shall proceed see no land but suppose ourselves to be among the easter-most island which lie off the northermost point of s. Laurence here we have rain thunder lightning and sudden gust which continue not long the seven way east by south eighteen league wind betwixt the north and north-east the ripple still continue the eight way north-east twenty two league wind at south-west and south-west by west with ripple but no ground at a hundred fathom variation twenty degree seven minute westerly the nine latitude four degree eighteen minute way north-east eighteen league wind variable little current and no ripple variation twenty degree forty seven minute westerly here we find it extreme hot the ten latitude four degree twelve minute way east north-east seven league wind from northwest by north to north-east by east many time calm with no ripple nor current southerly note we have find continual calm ever since we come off the main and the further off the less wind variation twenty degree fifty seven minute westerly they have pass the line a month and five day before the five and twenty note it be a month and five day since we be in latitude no degree one minute to the northward close by the shore since which time we have be put back into five degree five and twenty minute to the southward wherefore those bound to Socatora at this time of the year must hold to the eastward of Pemba two hundred league east by north the variation there increase westerly which will bring you the more northerly and so keep the island Socatora open of you between the north by east and the north north-east you shall be in the great possibility to make the best use of these wind which near to the main we find to keep between the east by north and east by south a continual gale but off at sea about the island Mascharenas at north-east north and sometime at northwest west and west by south with calm ripling of the water very fearful thunder and lightning and albeit the north-east and northerly wind be but bare help ply to the northwards yet this benefit you shall have that by how much easterly you be by so much the more you shall recover to the northward of the line before you meet with the main which if you can avoid see not in this time of the easterly monson until you be full in the latitude of ten degree to the northwards of the equinoctial but in the time of the westerly monson note keep the shore aboard for it be very bold but lie much more easterly then in our plait the first of january latitude three degree fifty eight minute to the northward of the equinoctial january 1 Magadoxa cape Das here we make land be the main of Magadoxa cape Das bear north north-east eight league off the land low sandy and barren all alongst the wind at north-east and east by north a stiff gale we stand off to the eastward way north by west twelve league the second day latitude two degree one and thirty minute way southeast by south five and thirty league much wind and current southerly have depress the pole in these last four and twenty hour one degree seven and twenty minute whereof six and twenty league she have run by dead reckon and nine league she be carry by the current contrary to expectation the eighteen latitude six degree seven and twenty minute to the northward of the equinoctial way northwest by north four and twenty league wind at north-east and north-east by east about two of the clock we make the land be the main call Doara the main land call Doara the south-part bear west and the north-part northwest by north about eight league off seem not very high but sandy and barren we stand off with much wind and a current set northwest as we suppose otherwise we shall have get further to the northward note that although the variation hold little proportion yet do we find by experience that in run to the eastward we have variation westerly increase and stand into the shore northwest a notable thing concern the variation our variation be westerly decrease so that by reckon according to our plait we find ourselves much further of the land then by just proof by variation which true be a most certain thing to be credit observation be take by one of experience with a exact instrument our so often fall with this main have gain we this knowledge variation at sunrising seventeen degree thirty six minute westerly and at set seventeen degree twenty minute westerly the first of February we make the land bear north-east by north about seven league off we sound February 1 and have ground at twenty seven and twenty eight fathom soft sand this land be call cape dorfuy cape Dorfui^ be very high and barren by the seaside many gust the nine latitude ten degree thirty seven minute way west by north sixteen league wind north-east by east we have now sight again of cape Dorfuy from whence we depart the first day contrary to our expectation bear northwest about nine league off have find a strong current in the off set west northwest which until meet with this land again we dream not of but rather think we have be forty five or fifty league off not once look for the land we sound and have fifty fathom fine small sand about five league (@) this land be high and full of mountain the ten latitude eleven degree twenty minute way north-east by east easterly sixteen league wind from east by north to north-east we sound and have ground at five and forty fathom small black sand about eight league of the high land of cape Guardafu^ we make trial of the current with our pinnace (...) (@) Curi^ and find it to set north by east towards evening we have sight of the island abba Curia bear east north-east about ten league off be very high land rise in two part like two island the fourteen latitude eleven degree two and thirty minute wind north-east and east north-east calm here we have sight of the eastermost Irmana seem to the eastward low land about six league off the fifteen latitude eleven degree seven and twenty minute way east southeast six league wind east east north-east east southeast and north-east calm for the most part make account to be eight league of the eastermost Irmana but we be mistake for it be abba Curia and the do bear north-east of we twelve league off variation at sunsetting seventeen degree three and twenty minute westerly and in the night the wind come fair to the south southeast we lay east with the stem with help of a current easterly contrary to the report of former navigant and by break of day we be six league of the westmost Irmana bear east southeast and have sight of Socatora ten league off the sixteenth latitude twelve degree nineteen minute variation at sunrising seventeen degree two and twenty minute westerly we bear up and go about the wester point of Socatora towards evening we have sight of the white rock which lie about four league of the westermost point of Socatora the point and the rock bear one of the other northwest by north and southeast by south the say rock loom like a sail stand to the eastward larboard tack aboard and be so make for by they of former voyage the current still help we to the eastward the seventeen latitude twelve degree seven and forty minute variation at sunsetting seventeen degree two and twenty minute westerly wind variable at southeast and southeast by south calm but a strong current set alongst the land after we be about the wester point this night we come to a anchor one league and a half to the westward of the king town call Tammarin in twenty fathom water distant from the shore two mile our shoald in after we have ground be two and twenty twenty nineteen twenty twenty twenty small white sand the wound east southeast and southeast calm the eighteen we come to a anchor in the road of Tammarin right before the king house in nine fathom water a league from the shore fine sandy ground the road of Tammarin @. 2 occurrent at Socatora and in the Red-sea the general send master Richard cock cape merchant with the Skiffe well appoint unto the king to acquaint he what we be this letter be a brief sum of sir Henry Middleton his disaduenture in the red-sea by turkish perfidy as in his own journal you have read with caveat to all english and notice of the road Assab or Caixem and the cause of our come and to provide cattle and fresh victual master cock return have be friendly entertain and feast by the king and the rest that go with he they bring a present of fresh victual from the king to the general together with a letter leave there by sir Henry Middleton date the first of September 1611. aboard the trades-increase in Delisha ride in the island of Socatora the original our general keep and return the copy verbatim for the future ship the nineteen they go in solemn manner on shore where the king bid we welcome and feast all the company in his royal manner himself be rich vest in crimson velvet lay rich with goldlace his house be build of freestone castle-like he have above a hundred attendant whereof about fifty be well apparel according to the moor fashion the rest be natural of the island after many compliment and courtesy at night we take our leave of he his name be sultan bensay son to the king of cushion upon the Arab side we pay here for kine twelve ryalls of eight the piece sheep three shilling the piece and for goat one rial of eight a piece which though it be dear yet be the most of they not man meat be so vild and more than beastly buggered and abuse by the people as that it be most loathsome to see when they be open we pay for rice three penny a pound date three penny a pound hen twelve penny a piece tobacco seven hundred leaf a rial of eight egg penny a piece the king will take no english money but all ryalls of eight the twenty seven our general cause a meeting of his merchandize council unto who he read the company remembrance and the letter receive by the hand of the king of Socatora from sir Henry Middleton and show they that whereas he have be put in good hope by the company remembrance to have obtain good store of aloe here at Socatora which now he find frustrate the king be whole unprovided and not able to furnish we therewith until August and whereas we be appoint to go from hence to aden and Moha in the Red-sea the monson not serve for surat we be now unterly dissuade from the view of those part by the treachery and wrong do to sir Henry and his Fleet. and last whereas if we do not go for the Red-sea if we shall remain here in Delisha ride six month attend the monson we shall find it very chargeable and be able to effect nothing for until the end of September there be no come upon the coast of Cambaya his opinion be that notwithstanding these bad tiding receive from sir Henry yet that we shall go for Moha we have with we the grand segnior pass which the former ship never have for hereby we shall be able to certify the company what stea^ the pa^^e may stand they in determine to stand upon our guard and not to adventure any one man without good pledge so that we may ride secure and obtain trade aboard though none on shore our force be able to defend and offend upon occasion the great power that port can raise and find no hope of commerce than he intend to make use of his majesty commission in respect of the violence offer unto sir Henry and his company and so enforce the put off of our english commodity or to make spoil of their scale and custom by not permit the indian ship which be expect in the five of march to enter there which wo^ld be a matter of no small hindrance unto they but until then he will be very unwilling to deal with they by force and this course he do the rather approve of because here need no part of company but the fleet may keep together and assoon as the monson ^hould permit go joint together for surat according to the ^ order their force unite the better to resist whatsoever the enemy shall attempt the council general assent to what he propound and so conclude to keep company together and go for the Red-sea the first of march we weigh anchor and set sail for the Redsea the wind at s. e. and south sometime little wind march 1 note the wind since we come to a anchor here be in the morning and so till night for the most part at north-east by east and east north-east and at night o^f the land between the south and southeast fair and temperate weather until you come to four fathom where we may have rid a musket shoot off the shore and further in be three and three fathom and a half it be bold all the bay alongst keep two cable length of the land fair sand and some stone among a demie-culuering will reach the castle which be of no force latitude in Tammarin bay twelve degree five and thirty minute to the north variation eighteen degree Tammarin Bay two and forty minute westerly the king of Socatora give counsel that if we go to the Redsea we shall ply to the southward of abba Curia for that keep on the north-side we shall ^eep it over to the arabian shore and shall not without great trouble fetch cape Guardafui so that by proof we find it best to keep the abash shore aboard the four in the morning we see cape Guardafui bear west eight or nine league off we steer in west northwest latitude twelve degree one minute the cape south by west four league off no ground at a hundred fathom the land high and smooth variation at sunrising seventeen degree four and thirty minute westerly in the evening we have ground stand in alongst the land mount Feluke to find the bay of Feluke our depth be twenty six seventeen and eighteen fathom here we resolve to go for Moha and not for aden because aden be a town of garrison and of little trade with other inconvenience as exaction of custom etc. as appear by the six voyage here we take good store of mullet with our Sayne other large excellent fish with line and hook several sort of sweet gum here be gum of several sort very sweet in burn also fine mat w^ll request at aden and Moha and the indies for ordinary the indian ship touch here both inward and outward to buy thereof and of the gum also victual sheep and butter which be far better cheap then at Moha for daily boat go over lade with victual to sell at aden and Moha but they will not barter for any thing but linen cloth the benefit of the town of Feluke note that at Feluke town there be wood and water to be have plenty but not in the bottom of the bay the passage up to the town be so large as that three ship may pass a breast without danger the go in be between the high homock and the low sandy point the master be will to ste^re from hence west by north alongst the south-shoare to demity and then to shape their course over to aden the nine latitude eleven degree fifty eight minute way west five and twenty league wind at east and east by south a stiff breese all day but at night little wind keep alongst the shore about eight league off we steer west by north variation at sunrising fifteen degree ten minute westerly the ten in the morning steer west by north the wind easterly we have sight of two small island two small island lie off the high land of demety about a league of the main distant one from the other four league the eastermost bear south by west seven league off and the westermost south-west the same distance we stand over for the high land of aden northwest by north and northwest the wind at east and east by north a stiff breeze easterly current variation fifteen degree no minute westerly latitude eleven degree fifty eight minute the eleven we have ^ight of the high land of Arabia make it to be the high-land of bear north by east by the compass eight league of latitude at noon thirteen degree eleven minute of variation at sunrising fifteen degree two minute westerly have have a strong easterly current come over for we steer between the north northwest and northwest and be so carry to the eastward that she make but a north by west way contrary to expectation for have we have no current we shall by course have give she a northwest way westerly but after we be shoot in about some twelve league of the shore we find no current the point or head-land of aden break it off as we suppose I send certain instruction in write to captain Towerson and master davis to be observe at our arrival in the road of Moha for the better grace and countenance of our action and safe guard of our ship have to do with so treacherous a nation the twelve variation at sunrising fourteen degree five minute westerly in sight of the high-land of aden bear west by south ten league off we steer in west south-west and at noon have latitude twelve degree forty nine minute about five league off the southmost point bear south-west by west we sound and have ground eighteen fathom soft sand the thirteen in the evening fourteen league to the eastward of the entrance into the straits and to the westward of aden sixteen league we come to a anchor in respect we be not acquaint with the coast and find the inconvenience aforesaid keep all day within three or four league of the shore to the time we anchor our sound be forty thirty eight nine and twenty eighteen seventeen sixteen fifteen sixteen seventeen nineteen eighteen nineteen fathom here we let fall our anchor sandy ground the wester-most land we can see bear west by south southerly and the high-land to the eastward north north-east about four or five league off the fourteen in the morning we weigh the wind at west by north a small gale with ra^ne have have none till this present these four month no rain in four month we steer south-west by south as I near as we can lie for the straits in the evening esteem ourselves to be off the straits we shorten sail and stand it off and in with a short sail keep our lead all night be eight or nine league of the main of Arabia we stand off west by south and have no ground at a hundred fathom the fifteen our course west by south southerly six league wind east southeast the land which on the fourteen about six at night do bear west by south ten league off do now bear south-west by south four league off to the eastward here we have sight of three small land or hummocke bear north northwest one league and a half the great show as if it have a castle upon it be the eastermost here be a current set from the southeast and about noon open the straits we steer north north-east the wind at east by south than we steer north and north by east have thirty eight and twenty seven and twenty eight and twenty three and twenty one and twenty nineteen eighteen seventeen fifteen sixteen ten ten twelve ten nine seven and nine and when we have open the white-house which stand on a sandy bay on the starboard side of the entrance north-east and the rock or low point on the same side east north-east we have six and seven fathom fine black sand then we steer north north-east until we bring the rock or low point east half a point southerly than north by west latitude at noon twelve degree fifty six minute and keep this course we have seven six six and a half and as we go in the deep water fourteen fifteen and sixteen fathom good ground and at night do let fall our anchor in fifteen and a half fathom black Ozie ground distant from the arabian shore three league and from the Abesh shore on the other-side ten league fair clear weather so that we can see from side to side the wind at south southeast little wind they can see from side to side of the straight the sixteenth in the morning we weigh the wind at east southeast we steer north by west for Moha and have eighteen sixteen fifteen fathom about four league of the shore then we steer north and north by east and have nine ten eight and seven fathom but find a shoal or bank which lie to the south-east-ward of the town we steer north northwest keep in eight nine seven fathom and edge to the southward we have ten eleven ten and a half until we bring the town east by south southerly of we and be in five and a half fathom where we let fall our anchor the steeple or high church stand in the town bear east and one league of the point to the southward south by east three league off you must bring the high church east northeast easterly before you shall be clear of the shoal aforesaid at your come into the road the shoal whereon the trade increase strike which be very dangerous and where the trades-increase do set at least four and twenty hour but it show itself by the colour of the water here at entry we have very much wind at south and south southeast with a great Sea not long after we be at anchor the governor send off a poor old slave in a small Canoa to know what be the cause of our come the general use the poor man kind who of his own accord tell he that the english that late be here be not well use by Regib Aga then governor whereupon he be cashier Regeb Aga displace ider Aga successor and that the governor at the present be call ider Aga a grecian by birth a man very kind to stranger and a great friend to merchant the general will the purser to give the poor man two rial of eight and so return he to his master with answer that we be Englishmen and friend to the grand signior and will upon his send of a worthy and fit man acquaint he further with the cause of our come present after he send off a italian turn Moor well clad with the like message and to know whether we have the grand signior pass the general tell he he have not only such a pass but likewise letter from the king majesty of great Britain unto the bassa the italian desire to see they which the general deny in respect he hold he a base fellow from christian to turn Moor but will he to acquaint the governor therewith and that we be appoint in honour of the say pass to shoot off fifty one piece of ordnance at our arrival here in this road which he intend present to do the italian entreat that he may first give his master to understand thereof which be grant and the purser will to give he five rial of eight and his boat one his name be Mustafa Trudgeman the ordnance shoot out of each ship be the Clove nineteen Hector seventeen Thomas fifteen piece the town answer with five piece of excellent ordnance and two galley three apiece these galley be stout galley of five and twenty oar on a side and well fit yard up the captain name whereof be Mamy and the captain name of the town mahumet-bey the seventeen the general receive a present from the governor ider Aga that be to say three bullock twenty hen two basket of and two of lemon with many compliment desire he to come ashore he return he a fair fowl piece and will the messenger to tell he that he desire to have a sufficient pledge from he for his safe return when he shall come for reason not unknown to the governor the governor send his secretary unto the general with a letter to know what answer he have former return he by Mustafa Trudgeman for he have give he at much entreaty a bottle of wine be so drenke therewith before he get to the governor as that he can not speak which be certify by the secretary on the eighteen master cock and Bolton our linguist be send ashore to acquaint the governor that the general come be to entreat trade and that whensoever it please^ he to send a man of equal worth to remain with the ship as a pledge for his safe return he will in person come and visit he and also to let he to understand that our general be not ignorant of the wrong do by regib Aga unto sir Henry Middleton his countryman and his company but if we may now have quiet trade all matter pass shall be forget and we will treat with he of such our business as th^ G^and signior have give we ^eave which we hope shall be for all our good the secretary remain aboard pledge for master cock and Bolton he do eat of our victual but have it dress by his own people at night they return have be well use feast vest in cloth of silver and carry up and down the town with music before they to give the people to understand how welcome they be as master cock understand it but at their come away they be bring into a house and dis-robed of their ve^ts the general ask the secretary whether it be ordinary and usual with they to do so he answer yes he reply that in no other part of Turkey the like be do that ever he hear of in the end the secretary be dismiss and half a violet kersie give he he be very importunate to know whether the general be not of kin unto sir Henry Middleton the like be demand of master cock by they ashore fear that he be come to take revenge of they the letter write from his mouth be this right worthy and my esteem good friend I have have conference with they you send ashore and have use they in the best sort our country fashion do afford invest they with robe and conduct they back with music that the country people may take notice how you come and be receive in amity and if it be your pleasure to come ashore to i to morrow I will give you the best entertainment the place will afford with a true and upright heart without guile or deceit and will send you my secretary or any other pledge you shall esteem fit if it please you to send i word thereof by my interprter which be now abo^rd your ship the time you will have i send my pledge and hour you mean to come ashore I have write yesternight to jeffer bassa and it will be some fourteen or fifteen day before I have answer from he yet in the meantime if you please to send any of your people ashore ^o buy e^ther fresh victual or any thing else the country will afford they shall be welcome as also to s^ll any thing they please without any molestation at all and so expect your answer I cease from Moha the five and twenty of De 1021. Mahomet dus como Amico Aga Aga de Mucha I have also diverse letter of Mamy captain of Mucha Moha or of the galley there unto the general which to avoid prolixity and because the substance be as the former I omit I have yet cause some of the seal to be cut and here add for the rarity be not in wax but stamp of ink in form as here be express likewise I have add a piece of a letter in the banian hand and language common in great part of the indies write from the Sabander in Moha to captain Saris. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the twenty the governor send aboard according to agreement the day before mohammed Aga admiral of the shore general Saris land at Moha^ and commander of the road for the turk custom and anchorage and nasuffe a grave old man with two attendant proper man to remain pledge for the general so he go ashore with all the merchant the three skiff well fit and have one and fifty piece of ordnance shoot out of the ship at part he be receive at the land place by the captain of the galley and diverse other principal man with waits drum and other musical instrument play before and diverse piece shoot out of the castle the people follow in such abundance that we can hardly pass have pass two guard of very proper man well clad we be bring into the governors house which be build all of freestone with very fair and large stair and so be lead into a room spread with rich carpet at the upper end of the room be a window make after the fashion of our bay-windowe where a silk quilt be spread upon the floor and two cushion of cloth of silver lay thereon he be request to sit down but present the governor come forth of another chamber accompany with five or six person rich apparel himself in a gown of cloth of silver face with rich fur he take the general by the hand kiss his own hand and put it to his head then he lead he by the hand to the say window where they sit down and after some few compliment he deliver unto the governor our king letter which master cock do read and Bolton our linguist interpret to the captain of the galley and he to the aga which course he hold for state after he deliver he the grand signior pass which he give to his secretary to read which do he take it kiss it and lay it upon his head without further ceremony the original I have in my hand and have cause a little of the beginning to be here express and therewith the form of the grand signior seal a little contract to come within the page and here to give delight to the curious reader annex all the large stroke or line be gold the rest azure with red here and there beautiful intermix after which follow the same letter patent for better patencie english out of the arabic the great turk letter patent english you that be my most laudable fortunate wealthy and great vicereys and beglerbey that be on the way from my most happy and imperial throne both by sea and land unto the confine and bound of the east-indies owner of some part of dignity and those unto who belong to give aid help and succour in God cause and mussulmanicall religion upon their emperor book the wealth and greatness of who let it continue for ever likewise unto you my most laudable and valiant Saniacq bey that be under the abovenamed beglerb^ys owner and h^pe of future great dignity and those unto who belong dutiful aid and help in God cause and religion upon their emperor direction the honour and dignity of who be ever continue and unto you my most laudable wise and prude justice of peace judge and minister of justice that be within the precincts of the say saniacqbey who judgement justice and word do flow as from a fountain of all wisdom and prudence the worthiness and greatness of who dignity and function let it continue for ever also unto you my laudable great and most worthy captain and reyse of all our navy and ship that swim upon the face of the Sea unto you my laudable captain of the castle city and town and unto you worthy and laudable customer dwell upon the sea-coast upon river Bridges and all other part of our dominion and thereunto adjacent upon sight of this my most high and imperial commandment in conformity of your most find duty you shall arise and do obeisance and reverence thereunto hereby you shall understand that the ambassador of the king of great Brittany that reside in our happy and most high port have give we to understand by his supplication that forasmuch as some of his master the king of great Britain his subject have with great charge and labour discover a trade in the east-indies and withal understand of wealth and likelihood of trade in some part of our dominion by the way to be have in their passage to the say indies be therefore desirous to visit those place for the better enlarge of their say trade to the end that such man may in so good and laudable enterprise have all favour aid and help so far as lawful and convenient may be grant have request we in the name of his say master the king of great Britain to vouchsafe they our safe-conduct and recommendation in conformity of who request as also in regard we and our predecessor be and have be for the space of many year in strict league and amity with the aforementioned king of great Britain and the subject of that kingdom who long have have and at this present have free traffic and trade in merchandize in our dominion and province through the mediterranean sea we therefore do command and express charge you all and every of you our above mention subject and officer that you will not only kind and love entertain and receive the say merchant and subject of great Britain come or pass through or by any of our dominion especial intend to trade to the dominion of Yemen aden and Moha and the part adjoin thereunto assist and relieve they with all thing needful for themselves their man and ship but also free to permit they by land or by sea to go or sail outward and return even as their occasion shall require and to remain in any of our Dominons country or city grant they such liberty of traffic and privilege as shall be reasonable without give or suffer any let or hindrance injury or molestation to be offer or do unto they yea you shall yield unto they such office of benevolence and humanity as shall be meet and convenient to be yield unto honest man and stranger undertake so long and laborious a voyage and if so be that we shall understand that contrary to the capitulation the amity and league which be between we and the king of great Britain you do offer they the least wrong and any way molest and trouble the say merchant in their traffic and aught else know you for certain that you shall not only incur our high displeasure but you shall be punish for example unto other and therefore carry yourselves conformable to this my imperial commandment and give credit to this my imperial ensign write at our mansion guard at Constantinople on the fifteen day of the moon call Zil^^gie anno. 1019. the governor afterward take a copy thereof and return it again he tell our general that he be welcome desire that what have former be past touch Sir Henry Middleton may not be remember for that the quarrel grow by two drunken man and be by the then governor rash follow for which he be displace five month since and as concern trade he can not permit any great matter till he have direction from his master jafar bassa of Sinan who he have write unto and will within ten or twelve day return a answer earnest entreat that he will permit his people to come on shore to buy what they want and to sell small matter to the end that the natural may see that we be in peace and amity together and that what be pass be forget these his speech make good what the general have former conceive touch the doubt that the east-indian ship will make of their come in here unless they understand that we be all friend and their not come in here will be a great hindrance to every officer of this port. beside we ride so near the shore as we do of purpose as that no laden ship can come in but that she mu^t p^rforce ride within call of we which do put they in the great fear whereby he reckone^ himself sure of trade either a shore or aboard the ship and that keep the town in this awe he may the more bold adventure his skiff and people to the shore to fetch what our ship want the governor feast they very royal at a dinner with all sort of wild fowl hen goat mutton cream custard diverse make dish and confection all serve in vessel of tin different from our pewter and make goblet-fashion with foot the dish so place the one upon the other that they do reach a yard high as we sit and yet each dish fit to be deal upon without remove the meat be all serve up at once and that before we sit down our drink be water simple or else water boil with a herb call Canhaw therein which be in taste somewhat bitter we do sit crosslegged upon carpet lay upon the floor for there they use neither table nor stool dinner end he lead the general into a inner chamber where he have four little boy that attend he be his bugger boy there they two be set upon a crimson velvet carpet the rest of the chamber floor be spread with very rich carpet one of the boy bear a linen napkin in his hand do usher in two of the other whereof the first have a silver chaffingdish with coal the other bring a dish wherein be diverse rich perfume viz. ambergris aloe and other the governor request the general to let the boy cover his head close with the napkin which do the other boy hold the chaffingdish with the perfume put therein under his head that he may receive the fume which be very pleasant after he have finish the governor and two other chief man about he do the like be as it seem a ceremony much use among they have confer a while together there come in three of the boy again the one bring a vest or gown of cloth of gold wrap up in a case of taffeta die in saffron to preserve the colour of the Gold the other boy have a Shash or turban stripe all with gold and in length twenty two yard the three a Damaskeen or turkish sword rich garnish with silver and gild both hilt and scabbard the governor himself do put the vest upon the general and do gird the Damaskeen unto his side tell he that they be not present from himself but command by the grand signior who as he say do bestow they and entreat he to ride with the cady who be chief justice there and the captain of the galley about the town that the people may take notice of the amity and friendship that be betwixt we they bring a horse rich trap the mettle work of the bridle all of silver but he rather choose to go on foot that he may the better view the town whereto they give consent and so we walk together about the town and have view a house wherein to have settle our factory I be bring to the house of the captain of the galley where he have a costly banquet and thus return by the governors house he meet he upon the stair where again earnest entreat that the discourtesy offer sir Henry may be forget and that it may appear by his often come or send his people a shore they take their leaf one of another and so accompany with a great train of the best of the town he return aboard where the ship discharge fifteen piece of ordnance the turk that remain pledge have diverse present give they be send friendly on shore and have fifteen piece shoot off at their part the one and twenty the general send m. cock and other a shore with a present to the governor a case of bottle fill with which he do earnest desire the general to give he and to send it so wrap up as that it may not be know what it be likewise be send two vest of violet broad cloth to his eunuch they have further direction give they to inquire a shore what custom be due in and out the weight measure valuation of coin prize of Indicos calico cotton-yearne and other commodity fit for we to lade also to procure the Jew to come aboard who be in the ascension at her cast away near the bar of surat and can give we certain intelligence of sir Henry success note of Moha roade note that this road of Moha be very open and dangerous with very shall water a mile of the town low land even with the Sea at this present the wind south south-west a great storm which cause such a sea as that we do send not less than seven foot ride in five fathom and the wind at west you have no succour but the country people say that in the time of those wind extremity of herb begin in the fine of may. which begin in the fine of May the extremity of heat be such as that it dead the wind which make that season very contagious the thirty one the general understand from the captain of the town that yesternight late arrive the messenger from the grand bassa with letter to the governor to this effect that he shall yield we peaceable trade both on shore and with the indian ship as he will answer the contrary at his peril and to let we furnish ourselves with what we want he be doubtful of the certainty of this please news for that not half a hour before m. cock have speech with the governor who speak of no such matter the captain say that the reason of the governor not speak thereof be because here be a jelba find for Mecca and ready to depart which he will not have to know that the bassa have grant we trade fear lest they shall acquaint the sheriff at Mecca therewith who by his letter to the grand signior may cause the grant to be revoke but we rather think the bassa have return some harsh answer with direction to do that unto we which as yet he can effect we be so watchful and wary over he and therefore will not be know to have receive answer from Sinan till better bethink note that hosoroofe one that close have send a letter of m. femell testify their treacherous usage here do now send word by our linguist that the general shall beware of come a shore himself unless he have good pledge as former and then he may bold come but otherwise not to trust they though the governor shall swear upon his Koran for they be soldier and do not much respect oath and as he hear the news that be come from the bassa do not tend to our benefit for that the copy of the grand signior pass be not as then come to the bashaes hand but than shall be full see what will be do which will be within six day the second of April 1612. the caravan from in Egypt arrive here in Moha April Caravan of Cayro indian ship the three come into the road two indian ship one of Chau the other of Cananor their lade indico and pintado ambergris and cotten-yarne with at least four hundred passenger who carry much wealth about they we salute they with nine piece of ordnance out of our Fleet. they answer with three chamber a piece be all they have the general send the Skiffe to inquire what news upon the coast of surat the captain send word that there be three english ship trade there but further can not tell the captain of the town with five chief janissary come aboard be send by the governor to let our general understand that the bassa have write unto he to entreat and use we kind and to permit we peaceable trade desire the general that he will in person come a shore the next morning and he shall further understand he crave pardon not forget hosoroofe admonition but captain Towerson be desirous to go a shore the captain be request to tell the governor that the general upon good pledge will the next morning send his brother unto he which be well like of so have feast the captain and his retinue and give they diverse present they be send a shore with twenty one piece of ordnance at part which he send word that he take so well as that we shall not want the best assistance he can do we the four in the morning though the pledge be not yet come yet desirous to see what the bassa have order captain Towerson be send a shore for we hold the two indian ship which rid hard by we for sufficient pledge if on shore any injury shall be offer the governor use he friendly and vest he to content but nothing be effect of that he go about the turk not perform their promise the governor send word that it will be fit to send two of our man of good fashion up to the bassa to Sinan with the king letter and present and then speedy dispatch will be have to our like whereof the general approve intend the next day to lay out a present for he the five the captain of the galley send aboard three letter which the last night come to the governors hand from s. Henry Middleton and captain Sharpeigh three letter from sir Henry Middleton and capt. sharpeigh who ride then at a anchor at Babmandel the effect whereof be that he be come from surat and have little or no trade there that captain Hawkins upon distaste be come from agra and with his wife be aboard his ship that he have bring all away from thence except one man of captain Hawkins which go over land for England and that he be come back to be revenge of the turk wish our general to get his good and people aboard with all speed hereupon he alter what yesternight be agree upon and forthwith send one of the merchant away to sir Henry with a letter of the proceed of his voyage and of the manner of our entertainment here hitherto that if he have not thus come in he have on Monday send two man of fashion up to Sinan note the two indian ship aforesaid do discharge here these good follow indian merchandise aloe sixty kintal indigo six hundred churl out of both ship sash of all sort great store cinnamon of Celon one hundred and fifty bahar each Bahar three churl and a half osfar which be a red dye great quantity clove great store Bastas or white from twenty to forty royal the courge a Corge be twenty piece a great quantity the price of indigo be from thirty to thirty five forty and fifty rial the churl the seven the general write to the captain of the town that he shall procure the indian merchant to barter with he at reasonable rate for such of their commodity as he shall desire and as may serve to lade one of our ship which do will satisfy s. Henry of their now friendly meaning towards we and cause he to forbear all hostile attempt at this present there be a great rumour spread in the town of a jelba or two which sir Henry have take come over from the Abesh side with victual in respect whereof we dare scarce adventure our Skiffe and gang a shore the general receive another letter from captain Mamee that the answer which the governor have receive from the bassa be in these word ider Aga you have write i that three english ship be come to Moha to trade in merchandise with the grand signior pass give they fa^thfull promise from i to come on shore to take a house until the monson be past to buy and sell. you have likewise write i that they will send up two man unto i give they all thing fit for their journey etc. captain Mamee do further write that what our general will propound the aga and he will underwrite that for barter they will do something for love but nothing by force and be as willing to lade all the three ship as one note as we be inform the weight here use be call a inen which be two Rottalas a Rottala be a pound of their weight ten be twenty pound of they weight of Moha which make twenty three pound english haberdepoize sometime four and twenty pound as the Weigher will befriend you a churl of indigo by their weight be a hundred and fifty pound and of we betwixt a hundred and sixty six and a hundred and seventy pound Cotten wool be sell by the Bahar which be three hundred Rottalas make betwixt three hundred thirty two pound and three hundred forty four pound English at eighteen royal the Bahar very good and clean their measure of length be call a Peeke contain seven and twenty inch or three quarter of our english yard the nine the governor send off a Canoa to entreat i that the general in the morning he will send a hoar and he shall have both the bassa answer and a warrant to stay all such jun^kes as shall pass sir Henry and force they to come in hither and trade with they for such of their good as he desire etc. and that he will suffer his people to come ashore because the merchant be now grow fearful by reason of sir Henry stay some of the ship the ten master cock be send ashore have conference with the governor and captain Mamy who tell he that they be now full resolve that what they have former promise they may not perform the Cadie dislike thereof say that they may hazard their own life thereby that neither merchant nor broker will come aboard as our general have request the knight have so discontent they that they of grand cairo have their factor there which lie purposely to engross indicoe and other indian commodity whereof they will not buy until they shall see what quantity will come that the bannians or indian leiger ashore which have indicoe in their hand will not sell hope of a scarcity he also bring word that they deny ashore to buy any of our good unless we will land they first note the grand signior custom of this port Moha be worth yearly unto he fifteen hundred thousand chicquenes which rate at five shilling sterling a piece be yearly thirty seven thousand five hundred pound sterling according to the report of the governor to master cock @. 3 their adventure with sir HENRY MIDDLETON with other observation of those part and arrival at Bantam the eleven the general cause the merchandize council to meet and consult what be best to be do see that sir Henry thus keep the juncke from come in thither and that there be then no further hope of trade here it be agree upon that until the monson will permit we to proceed further we shall continue friendship with the town as hitherto we have do etc. the twelve the general be inform of sir Henry earnest desire to speak with i and protestation of great kindness and love resolve to go unto he and so will the master with the first wind to set sail for Babmandell whereof he do let the governor of the town to understand and take a letter of he to carry to sir Henry the better to continue friendship still with he the fourteen in the morning we arrive at the Bab where we find the trade increase ride and four indian juncke or ship the general go aboard the trade where he remain until night but nothing can at that time be conclude upon betwixt the general the fifteen sir Henry come aboard the Clove the sixteenth our general see sir Henry resolution call his council together and acquaint they with what he observe thereupon and that in regard that by these brabble and jar happen betwixt sir Henry the turk and the cambayan our hope of any trade to be have at surat be as small as that which we have already find at Moha our best course will be that the Hector and Thomas shall weigh anchor and ply between aden and the Bab the Clove to keep the Abesh channel there that none may pass by in the night and so to meet with as many of the indian ship as we can to who we may put off our broadcloth lead tin iron and elephant tooth commodity which be provide for those part in barter for such as he know will vent well in those country whither we be afterward to go if we light upon indicoe they will be good for England also that he have certain intelligence of two very great ship daily expect call the Rehmi and the the least of they by report able to lade the Hector with requestable commodity hereunto they general assent to be put in practice with the first wind the general go aboard the trade where at length this agreement be make that both fleet shall join to trade with as many of the indian ship as they can meet with and to exchange our english commoditity with they for they sir Henry to dispose of two three part of all the good which shall be barter for from this day forward and general Saris the other three the grand signior to have his custom pay hereof write be make be seal and deliver betwixt they the Hector and Thomas be appoint to ply between the north end of Babmandell and the Abesh shore to meet with all such as shall come that way with charge that no man shall take the value of a penny out of they or offer the least violence to any of their person etc. the eighteen in the evening a ship of Cananor arrive lade with spice drug and other commodity the general se^ sail for Moha the wind at south and south by east a stiff gale where we arrive within five hour after the governor present send off to we entreat to know how all thing pass at the Bab request that our linguist may be send ashore to acquaint he therewith which be according do the twenty the Skiffe be send ashore to fetch our linguist who return and bring a present of fresh victual from the governor to our general the governor entreat to have a muster of our commodity which master cock carry present to he he like of diverse colour of our broadcloth promise to take for a thousand rial beside some quantity of tin and lead many other desire to have lead and iron wherefore he entreat that in the morning some quantity thereof may be bring ashore for he have once begin the merchant will certain follow and trade with we he send three sample of indigo but none of lahor which be round and the best the price a hundred rial the churl which be a hundred seven and twenty pound or Rottalas of Moha and about a hundred and fifty pound English but they will not sell by any other weight then that they buy by which they may very well do the price so unreasonable for we esteem the three sort to be worth but thirty forty and five and forty the best the churl our general write to sir Henry and captain Towerson and send his letter over land by mahume secretary to the galley the one and twenty we send ashore eight clothes one tun of iron one tun of lead two chest of tin of six hundred weight they offer for four of the best clothes three half rial the Peeke which shall be seven and twenty inch but measure by another Peeke prove to be one and thirty inch the Bahar of tin a hundred and twenty rial the Bahar of iron twelve rial lead fifteen rial which be no price to our like at night the merchant return with their commodity aboard again the five and twenty the general upon conference with master cock resolve to set sail and go to Assab where we come to a anchor the seven and twenty about eight at night he find the trade and Hector ride there with eleven sail of juncke or indian ship of several place note that come into this road or harbour keep the northern side aboard leave a little rock or hummocke on your starboard side than we have twelve eleven ten nine eight and seven fathom sandy ground and in seven fathom we let fall our anchor about half a mile of the shore the thirty the general send his Skiffe to the juncke to give warning to the nohoday and merchant that they shall not offer to set sail without his leave the Nohodas and principal of they request that such of their good as we desire may be sort out of hand that they may not loose their monson of go to judda offer to bring aboard our ship what pack we will to be open there and to carry back what we refuse the nine of May 1612. I cause the indian ship to be measure which be find to be of the scantling follow viz. the rehemy be long from stern to sterne-post a hundred three and fifty foot for rake from the Po^^ aste seventeen foot from the top of her side in breadth two and forty her depth one and thirty the mahomedee in length a hundred six and thirty foot her rake aste twenty in breadth one and forty in depth nine and twenty and a half her main mast in length be six and thirty yard a hundred and eight her main yard four and forty yard a hundred two and thirty the other be not much less the ten captain Mamy come from Moha to treat with sir Henry concern his demand but first he come aboard the Clove where he be friendly entertain and after the general go with he aboard the trade where he deliver to sir Henry two letter viz. one from the bassa of Sinan and the other from the aga of Moha the effect to know what he demand of they for they be ignorant of any after injury offer to he and for the former they say that they have give he satisfaction before his departure wherefore they entreat the junke may be discharge and send for Moha his answer be that he demand satisfaction for the loss of his man life and for the make of he lose his monson to the overthrow of his voyage Mamy say if he will write his mind he shall have answer from the bassa in fourteen day the twelve captain Mamy return with letter from sir Henry the fifteen the king of Rehita be a petty prince upon the african or abbess side the k. of Rehita ride upon a cow visit both the general come ride down upon a cow to visit sir Henry and our general he have a turban on his head a piece of a periwinkle shell hang on his forehead in stead of a jewel apparel like a Moor all naked save a Pintado about his loin attend with a hundred and fifty man in battle after their manner weapon with dart bow and arrow and sword and target both the general go ashore with a hundred shot and pike to prevent all treachery that the turk may plot against they by colour of this courtesy be loath to let he return without a interview lest they shall want the refresh which they may have by his friendship here at Assab which be under his command they present he with diverse gift and according to his desire do give he his lade of that he be scarceable to stand they be mahometan be a black hard-savoured people with curl pate the king bestow upon our general five bullock and proffer all the assistance he may do they this day the peppercorn arrive from aden bring with her a juncke which come from sixde or the river Indus lade with butter oil and Cambaya cloth they bring we news that Mallacamber captain of the great ship of Diu have escape they with his ship and be arrive at Moha pass in sight of they the peppercorn shoot at she but can not reach she she go so well this be the ship for which the peppercorn have purposely weigh and which the Thomas and darling have so long expect to have come to babo this day our general have a note deliver he of the prize of commodity how they be late buy and sell at surat whereof the copy follow viz. broad-cloath of three and twenty pound a cloth several colour twenty mamoodye the Conido of five and thirty inch and five mamoodye make one rial of eight kersey eighty four mamoodye the piece which be less than we do cost in England lead the great maund thirty three pound at seven and one three part of mamoodye tin the small maund five and twenty pound at five and a half rial of eight at Dabull iron the Bahar contain three hundred and threescore pound at one and twenty rial the Bahar piece damask from twelve to eighteen rial the piece ellephants tooth threescore and five mamoodye the great maund of three and thirty pound indigo Cirkesa three sort whereof the best at fourteen Rupias which make half a rial of eight the second sort twelve Rupias the three sor^ eight the great maund of three and thirty pound indigo lahor which be best of all three sort whereof the best at six and thirty the second at thirty the three at four and twenty Rupias the maund of five and fifty pound charge of bring it to the waterside ten in the hundred for the and twenty in the hundred custom for lahor the seventeen we begin to weigh lead and deliver our english commodity to the captain and master of the junck in part of payment of the good which we have receive of they the Thomas be dispatch for Socatora Priaman and tecoo the three and twenty the Thomas man with nine and forty man all in health set sail for Socatora for aloe and from thence for Priaman and tecoo upon sumatra for pepper the one and thirty the messenger from the bassa of Sinan the Sabander of the ba^nians at Moha and captain Mamy arrive at Assab to compound the difference with sir Henry Middleton june 24. the four and twenty of june the trade set sail out of Assab road for Moha and the five and twenty day the cloave do follow the same night they in Moha make great bonfire and firework which for that they have not do the like before when we be there we suppose they therewith to brave we the six and twenty our general send his Skiffe to the shore with letter to the aga the sabandar and captain Mamy and give the Cockson charge not to put ashore for fear of surprise the effect of these letter be to see what ready money may be procure to clear the account betwixt the indian and we the nine and twenty the governor return a answer to our general more ceremonious then of substance so that the thirty day we return again to Assab Road. july 1 the first of july the trade come thither likewise and fall to our old trade of barter for indian commodity the five mere Mahumood tookee captain of the rehemi of surat which be the queen mother ship bring diverse dish of meat aboard the cloave be dress after their fashion he be accompany with diverse of his principal merchant who be all kind entertain his ship be at the least of twelve hundred ton the eleven we all visit the cloave and Hector the trade and peppercorn weigh anchor and set sail for Moha together with seven of the indian ship which for the most part of they be better than any of we any way in the evening we anchor short of Moha the twelve we weigh and stand for Moha and about three in the afternoon we all anchor before the town of Moha the eighteen one of the juncke which be indebt to we get in so near the shore that we doubt she will steal all her good ashore whereupon the next day the cloave and the pepper corn do warp near and discover many jelbaes aboard the juncke to unlade she but at their go ashore the cloave Hector and peppercorn make many shot at they so as the man forsake both the juncke and the jelbaes and swim ashore the castle nor town not once shoot at we albeit we be much within command of their ordnance the twenty the galley fear our come so near warp behind a island to the northward the seven of August we have advice of the arrival of the great ship of sue August 7. and four great galley at Bogo a town on the abbess side about half a day sail from Moha our general receive a letter from the governor of Moha show that this day be festival among they and that thereon they be accustom to shoot off certain piece of ordnance desire that it may not be take in evil part doubt lest we shall hold it do in a bravado and so in requital shoot into the town again about noon they discharge piece out of the fort three from the landing-place and diverse from within the land with abundance of small shot which go off in good order some of their great shot go a head we and some a stern to show what they coul^ do but all past in kindness hereby we find the report of this place false viz. that here be only two piece and that they be not able in two hour to discharge they the eight the Hector set sail for Priaman and tecoo the monson now serve have eighty eight english in perfect health the nohodais or captain of the juncke the Hector depart for Priaman and tecoo desire to have passport from our general for their better get into their country in case they shall meet with any more of our nation which be grant the ten all rekoning be clear with the three juncke the and Mahomodi the eleven we clear the Rehemey and Salameti note our whole cargason of commodity and rial barter for in this place do amount but to forty six thousand one hundred seventy four rial of eight I have think good to add here two acquittance for better understanding the premise in Moha road in the Red-sea the ten of August 1612. memorandum that I mahomed Hashen Comall adeene ashen captain of the hassavy of surat have barter and sell unto captain John Saris general of the eight voyage into the east-indies for the sum of seven thousand four hundred rial of eight and 11/4^ of a rial in these good follow viz. sum total of all the merchandise sell as above say be rial 7400 11/4^ and I have receipt in payment thereof these good follow viz. sum total of these good receive amount unto in rial 7400 11/4^ and in witness of the truth I have hereunto set my hand and seal the day and year above write (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) in Moha road in the Red-sea the twelve day of August 1612. memorandum that I Nohada hassan captain of the good ship call the cawdrie of have barter and sell unto captain John Saris general of the eight voyage into the east-indies for the sum of two thousand nine hundred forty and six rial of eight and ^9/^^ part of a rial in these good follow viz. and I have receive in payment these good follow viz. and in witness of the truth I have hereunto set my hand and seal the day and year above write (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) english commodity not u^ndible in any quantity at Moha we depart for Bantam in java at the port of Moha we find not our english commodity vendible for any quantity the natural poor and the turk unwilling to deal with we the thirteen we set sail from Moha for Bantam our company seventy five man all in perfect health the four^eenth in the morning in sight of babo but the wind large at northwest we steer east by south through the great channel on the abbess side have eighteen fathom about one league of the island babo where be very good and safe harbour for ship and of good receipt but the place be barren September 3. 1612. the th^rd of September we arrive at Socatora in the road of Delisha have be much hinder in our passage hither by a west and northwest current we understand that the Thomas have be here three month past but stay not for that they can not agree upon the price of aloe the four the merchant and linguist be send ashore friendly entertain and furnish with horse to return to the Skiffe but can not agree upon the price he hold it at forty rial of eight the kintal of one hundred and four pound say he have only five and twenty hundred weight for which he be earnest solicit by the portugal be loath to lose time here it be conclude that he shall have thirty rial for one parcel and thirty eight for another so he deliver four thousand sixty seven pound which cost one thousand four hundred eighteen and a half of rial of eight we find the king very false both in his weight and word but we use he kind for the good of future voyage the eight we set sail for Bantam the two and twenty latitude by the star eight degree twelve minute the wind at west south-west we steer east by south about midnight we fall into the strange and fearful shine water that ever any of we have see the water give such a glare about our ship as that we can discern a letter in the book thereby it be not half a hour before so dark as that it be not possible to see half our ship length any way cuttle fish yield a wonderful glare in the Sea or Zeilan we doubt it have be the breach of sink ground and think to have cast about but find that we have sail in it for half a hour and see no alteration we hold on our course quarter very much wind but at length it prove to be cuttlefish which make this fearful show the seven and twenty in the morning we have sight of the island bear north-east by east about seven league off be very high land up into the country but low to seaward the nine and twenty about noon we fall with cape comorin cape comorin in seven degree two and forty minute false plait bearng east by south about fourteen league off be high land and towards the north show double land near the waterside we sound and have no ground at a hundred fathom note that this land lie in the latitude of seven degree two and forty minute to the northward of the line but in our plait it be make to stand in six degree and ten minute which differ one degree two and thirty minute stretch south southeast by experience we find that it lie more northerly and in our course we have no sight of any of the island describe in our plait neither do we discover any of the island whereof the number be say to be so great make our account to have pass between the main and the northern coast of the in eight degree no minute descry no land until we see this main the fifteen of October latitude four degree nine and forty minute to the southward of the line this day we have sight of sumatra October 15. south latitude four degree nine and forty minute sumatra whereof the eastmost part do bear east north-east fourteen league off high land here we find a very strong current set to the southward which put we off from the land note that those find for the straits of Sunda must keep sumatra aboard after they be come into one degree thirty minute to the southward of the line for there begin the current keep thirty league off with good look out for there be many Cayos fifteen or twenty league off which by reason of the current we do not see the eighteen latitude five degree and twenty minute way east northerly very tempestuous with thunder and lightning very fearful with much rain so that we can not see the land but praise be God notwithstanding the evil weather our people be all then in as good health if not better as when we part out of England the four and twenty we come to a anchor in the road of Bantam where though contrary to expectation we find the Hector which arrive there the day before we arrive in the road of Bantam the james. with the james in her company and certain fleming the arrival of all these ship and expectation daily of the trades-increase the peppercorn darling and Thomas to follow occasion a great though sudden alteration in the price of commodity those of any request be raise very near to thrice the value of what they be buy for the day before the Hector arrival cloave which the mariner of the Hector and james have buy the day before for sixteen rial of eight the peecull be now rise to forty rial and upward pepper the day before be at ten rial of eight the ten sack but upon our come be raise to twelve rial and a half etc. the six and twenty we go ashore and so to the court accompany with the merchant and give diverse present to the governor Pangran Chamarra who be as protector to the king rule all the king be as no body though of year sufficient which present he well accept we desire his order for speedy land of our good which he grant provide that the king officer may be acquaint with what we land that the king may not be wrong in his custom the eight and twenty a letter from master William Adams out of japan be read to all the merchant that they may take notice of the hope of that country a letter of master William Adams from japan it be now conclude upon that in regard the fleming be so strong and almost sole commander of the Moluccas and Banda and that the place here be so unhealthful beside our people dangerous disorder themselves with drink and whore ashore the Hector shall with all speed be dispatch for England and that fourteen thousand sack of pepper shall be provide for the lade of she and the Thomas doubt that if once there shall come news of the other ship expect pepper will be much raise over that it now be we bargain with Lackmoy for two thousand sack of pepper at a hundred twenty seven rial of eight and a half the hundred sack and with Keewee for a thousand sack at a hundred twenty five rial the hundred sack and for three thousand sack more at a hundred and fifty rial the hundred we make trial on shore what a peecull of cloave may weigh by our english weight and find it to be a hundred and thirty two pound subtle good weight the nine of November sir Henry Middleton arrive at Bantam in the peppercorn November 9 the fifteen the governor have earnest request it there muster before the court forty man out of the cleave and Hector thirty out of the peppercorn and ten out of the Solomon in all eighty man which give he good content the fleming deny he it be for the break up of the mahometan Lent the seventeen agree with Keewee for four thousand sack of pepper at sixteen rial ten sack with allowance of three in the hundred base the eighteen here arrive eleven sail of fleming great ship and the Thomas in their company she have get at Priaman only three hundred and twelve bahar of pepper twenty tail of Gold and twenty tail of Gold the two and twenty and hundred fleming with their furniture and their pike-man in bright armour march to the court where they bring themselves into a ring and give three volley of shot the governor send word to they that the king thank they that they have do enough and may depart with their iron hat for so the javan call head-piece the eight and twenty three Holland ship lade for the most with pepper and mace set sail homeward find five more of their ship set sail for Banda and the Moluccas December 4. the globe in Patane find for siam the four of December a dutch ship arrive here from Choromandell by who we understand that they leave the globe in Patane find for siam the eleven the Hector set sail from Bantam for Morough the water place where there be a sweet air and where good refresh of orange and other wholesome fruit be to be have there to attend till the Thomas be full lade the two and twenty the trades-increase and the darling arrive here from Priaman the five and twenty in honour of the birthday of our saviour Christ certain chamber be discharge at the english house in Bantam and be answer with ordnance out of the ship the eight and twenty Kewee the chief China merchant invite sir Henry and myself with all the merchant Kewee a chief China merchant courtesy january 13. to dinner and cause a play to be act before we by scenick of China which be perform on a stage with good pronunciation and gesture the twelve of january the Thomas set sail for England have in her six and thirty English and three indian @. 4 the voyage of captain SARIS in the cloave to the i will of japan what befall in the way observation of the dutch and spaniard in the molucca the fourteen of january 1612. in the morning we weigh out of the road of Bantam for japan have take in here for that place seven hundred sack of pepper for a trial there shee have in she seventy four english one Spaniard one I^pan and five Swarts or indian the fifteen in the morning little wind at west and hale into fourteen fathom we steer east by south pulo lack. and east southeast leave pulo lack on our starboard and eleven or twelve on our larboard side our depth from fourteen to ten fathom go within two island which lie to the eastward of pulo lack. and in the fair way there lie a shall which have not above six foot on the top of it and be not above half a cable length every way and hard aboard it there be ten fathom we come on ground and the next cast on ground as by experience for here we lie three hour beat with a reasonable stiff gale but through God mercy and the extraordinary labour and endeavour of the company get she off but spring a leak that for all night and t^ll ten the next day we continue pump every man my self only except take his turn and all little enough to keep it from increase which make we all to doubt that we shall be enforce to put back again to Bantam to the overthrow of all our man and voyage for japan the carpenter by his diligence have find out the leak make it thite thanks be to God to go clear of this shall keep close to the island for the main be shall the sixteenth we anchor at the water place call be fourteen league from Bantam Tinga jana and some three league and a half to the westward of jaccatra ride between two land which lie off the point two island distant five mile depth ten and nine fathom close to the island but the main be shall I send present to the king to his sabandar and admiral request leave to buy such necessary as we want the eighteen the king of jaccatra send his chief man unto i with thanks for the present and proffer of what his country afford the twenty one we set sail steer near unto the east-most island of the two that be against the water place depth ten and nine fathom and so to sea-boord of all the land east north-east from the water place for the outward-most of they bear east by north northerly and off the norther point of the say island lie a shall which you shall see break distant from the island half a league and have that south of you the east point of java will bear east southerly depth seventeen and eighteen fathom and all the way out from twenty to fourteen fathom but here you shall find a current set east southeast a current which you must allow for as you have the wind in the evening we anchor little wind at north by west the current set we to the southeast upon the shore depth thirteen and thirteen fathom and a half be shoot three league to the east-ward of the east point of jaccatra wind at northwest the twenty two the wind at south-west we weigh and steer east north-east to get deep water and find fourteen fathom the high hill over Bantam do bear west south-west half a point westerly the three and twenty in the morning we deck up our sail the wind at southeast and have sight of a island which lie off Cherribon with three of those high pike hill of java the eastermost bear southeast and Cherrybon south by east latitude at noon six degree ten minute the wind at north northwest the island bear east by north three league and a half off note that you may bold keep between twenty three and twenty four fathom water in the off and in twenty fathom upon java the dark night that be and in the day upon java in what depth you please the twenty four in the morning we have sight of three high pike hill and three other to the eastward like land depth twenty fathom the point of java bear southeast by south and the island lie of it southeast and northwest about nine league off we steer east by south and east southeast latitude six degree ten minute way east twenty eight league the twenty six at break of day we have sight of the island call pulo Labuck bear north-east by east eight league off wind west by north. we steer east by south pulo Labuck depth thirty four and thirty five fathom and about nine of the clock have sight of land bear southeast and southeast by south the island aforesaid bear now north-east by north little wind latitude six degree twelve minute way east and east ^y north twenty two league wind at west the island at four in the afternoon bear west by north nine league off depth thirty four fathom the twenty seven latitude six degree four minute way east northerly twenty eight league depth thirty eight fathom and at three in the afternoon have sight of a island bear north north-east seven league off and at five of the clock sound and have thirty four fathom the twenty eight at four in the morning we have twenty five fathom steer east till noon latitude five degree fifty five minute way east northerly twenty league depth thirty fathom from noon we steer east by south and at four a clock have thirty five fathom the twenty nine in the morning about four wind at west by north we steer east by south but have no ground at forty fathom but at noon fifty two fathom with many overfall latitude six degree nine minute way east by south twenty eight league a current wind at west and west b^ north with a current set to the westward afternoon we sound but have no ground at a hundred fathom and steer east the thirty in the morning latitude five degree fifty seven minute way east northerly twenty eight league and in longitude from Bantam two hundred twenty four league the overfals continue but sound have no ground at a hundred fathom at three in the afternoon we have sight of a low flat island at topmast head bear north-east by north five or six league off full of tree and have eighteen fathom and at next cast eighty five fathom then we steer east by south and at four a clock it do bear north by east half a point northerly three or four league off then we have sight of two other low flat land the one open to the eastward the other to the westward so that this be the middlemost at six at night it bear north half a point easterly we sound again but have no ground at eighty fathom we steer east by south keep our lead in respect of the overfals or rippling which be fearful yet have no ground at sixty fathom the one and thirty at break of day we have sight of the celebe celebe the wester end rise like a island and the outward-most high land bear east by north latitude five degree fifty two minute the east part bear east by north six league off way east northerly sixteen league and a current set to the northwest ward at sunne-setting we take in our sail to keep short of the straits of Desalon by the natural call the straight of Desalon or and keep our lead all night we find first twenty fathom the high land north and so drive into thirty three and forty seven fathom fear a shall which lie two three part of a league from the celebe and at low water the breach upon it may be see on the celebe side it be very dangerous and full of sink ground wherefore we hale over for Desalon side keep a good birth of it have a pike hill which be next to the sea side rise like a island be to the westward than it be north north-east and when it be north than you be thwart of the west end of the shall and then will the island which you leave on your starboard side bear east north-east so that you may be bold to steer out in the midst between the two land and when the pike hill bear north by west then be you thwart of the east end note that the east end of Desalon show like a island and will deceive you till you come to it but have bring the north end of the point east north-east half a point easterly then be bold for you be clear of the shall aforesaid it be about four league between they we come within half a mile of the island of our starboard side go through and the wind take we sudden short we sound but have no ground at fifty five fathom right up and down the first of February afternoon February we be thwart of the point of the island bear south of we and the two land which make the straits lie one from the other north and south distant five small league the second in the morning we have sight of the south part of Desalon south-west by south and the north part west by north eight league off we steer east by north the wind at north by east latitude five degree fifty two minute distant from Desalon ten league the three in the morning the southern end of do bear north-east by east and the island or hammocke north-east eight or nine league latitude five degree fifty seven minute the island north-east half a point northerly eight league way east southerly five or six league and towards night the wind at south and south southeast we steer all night east by north. the four in the morning the wind at north-east latitude five degree no minute at three we see land east by north make it to be Botun the five three or four league of we find the current to carry we to the northward the wind at east by north and the island of the east end of north-east half a point easterly four league off the six at break of day the island north-east by north northerly four league off the wind at north so that these twenty four hour we have get to the east-ward one point the seven at break of day the northern point be north by east and a small high land that lie to the southward six or seven league of Botun southeast and the easter land of Botun east north-east we steer east by north and east but leave the high land to the southward on our starboard side and it do bear southeast half a point easterly then be the point of Botun shut in in a long great island the norther end will be north northwest the i will tinga^asse the eight in the morning we see another island call tinga^asse rise round and flat here we have a current set north-east the wind at north-east by north and north north-east the nine wind at north west by north the point of Botun northwest half a point northerly we have sight of two Curra between we and Botun the Skiffe be send off to they and bring one m. welden one of the expedition company and a Fleming find for Banda the say welden be employ in the king of botuns affair for Banda m. welden a Engl^shman employ in the king of botuns service and have now the command of these Curra latitude five degree twenty minute wind at east north-east we steer north and at night the wind southerly we steer north north-east and from the east point of Botun the land fall away sudden with two or three great bay to the north-westward and three great land which lie to the northward of Botun which make the straits advertisement concern the strait of Botun note to go through the straits of Botun it be not above a league broad and the entrance be on the north-side of the island and if you come from the westward be thwart of the northwest point your course be east north-east and east by north up to the road and no danger but what you shall see but you must leave the three great land to the north-ward of you yet go not between any of they and fall with the west end of Botun go not between the island that lie off it there be two long land but leave they on your starboard side for it be full of break ground between they and Botun but if the wind serve you then hale to the northward of all the land either between Botun and or else to the northward of that too and so you may keep the coast of celebe for it be bold we steer with little wind all night north north-east the ten in the morning the straits of Botun do bear northwest by west and the main island of tingabasse south southeast half a point southerly the eleven at five in the morning the wind at northwest the island west ten league off we steer north north-east latitude at noon four degree eight minute way north north-east easterly a little four and twenty league and off the east point of Botun five and thirty league the wind all night between north and north by west the twelve little wind at north by west latitude four degree six minute way east by nor^h twenty league the thirteen in the morning we have sight of the island Buro be high-land the one point bear north-east by north the i will of Buro and the other north-east ten league off ^he wind at north by west have make to noon seven league of latitude three degree one and forty minute the fourteen in the morning we bear up with the east part of the island to seek for some place to ride in the fifteen and sixteenth of latitude three degree forty minute break off day the northermost part of Buro east by north nine league off little wind at east north-east and north by east the seventeen little wind the east-part of Buro bear east northerly wind at north at noon northwest by north the north part of Botun east by south and three land which we then have in sight at topmast head north-east by north. the eighteen in the morning we be by the eastermost island three league off wind at north northwest it bear north north-east at noon we be within a mile of the shore the Skiffe be send to speak with the country people this island be call Sula we have fifteen fathom the i will of Sula the ship length of the shore and a mile of no ground at a hundred fathom the west part of Buro lie south half a point westerly and north half a point easterly fourteen league the one from the other wind at west the land stretch north north-east the twenty wind at east by north steer north by east of latitude one degree thirty minute way north-east seven league the one and twenty in the morning we be four or five league of a island call halebol by our sailor be a high cop round island the i will of halebol so c^lled by the english sailor by other boam Bachian different in shape from all the rest of the land in sight the wind at north-east and at east have make to this noon a north-east way fourteen league of latitude one degree sixteen minute the point of halebol or Bachian north-east by north four league off and the outwardmost land north a quarter westerly find a current set north-east wind all night at north north-east and north. the two and twenty in the morning we have sight of land north by east it be the island Machian very high land Machian here we have a current set north north-east of latitude at noon no degree one and fifty minute way north seven league variation at sunsetting four degree twelve minute wind at north by east and north north-east the three and twenty in the morning we be three league of the land wind at north north-east seek a place to anchor in and within a quarter of a mile of the shore have forty fathom wherefore we bear up to the south part of the island where we have twenty and nineteen fathom for a cast or two but then no ground we steer from this south point east southeast for so the land lie open off the point of the high round island be four league between the two point but the wester point be a island with three or four other to the eastward which you can perceive till you be very near they then the land fall away north-east and show a large and round sound or bay with land of both side very deep this round hill be Bachian and yield great store of clove misery of war in the Moluccas but by reason of the war they be waste the people not suffer to make their benefit thereof forbear to gather they and let they fall and rot upon the ground be by the fleming and spaniard oppress and wrought to spoil one another in civil war while they both secure in strong fort sit and look on prepare to take the bone from he that can wrest it from his fellow have no ground to anchor in and not able to get to the northward we resolve to stand off all night hope to have a shift of wind to carry we to the island Machian whither we intend the four and twenty in the morning the high land south by east ten or twelve league of the island seem ragged we stand in and a league of the point a small fort of the hollander boam de Bachan be the norther end of the land in our plait call halebol send off the Skiffe to sound and to look for water but return aboard find no water nor place to anchor in wherefore we stand into the bay and present have sight of a fort and town call Bachan the pinnace a head find fresh water in diverse place but steep too into the cod of the bay where the fleming have a fort artificial and warlike build the town hard by it here we come to a anchor saker shoot off the fort have have very uncertain shoal as seventy sixty eight and ten fathom but Ozie the dutch salute we with five piece who I requite with the like number but the king man be then a board our ship we tell he it be do to the honour of his king who send i word that he will have come to visit i but that the dutch entreat he to forbear in this fort be thirteen piece viz. one demy-culuering of ^rasse the rest saker and minion the fleming here resident be more fear of the natural then love which notwithstanding be cause of their better benefit for the natural affoon as we be arrive tell we that they dare not bring we a Cattie of clove but upon their life as we ride here the outwardmost point be south south-west and the other south-west distant from we four league the king send his admiral and diverse of his noble aboard to bid i welcome say that they know of what nation we be by our flag use much ceremonious courtesy wish that we be seat there in stead of the fleming that they may be clear of they their country now almost ruin by these war I entertain they friendly and tell they that our come be to procure trade and to leave a factory among they if their king so please they answer that it be a thing by they much desire but at present not to be grant yet they will acquaint their king therewith the captain of the dutch fort come aboard to visit i by who I understand their force to be but of thirteen piece and thirty soldier the most of they marry the small force of the hollander in Bachian some to the countrywoman and some to dutch woman whereof the fort be fit with eleven able to withstand the fury of the Spaniard or other nation whatsoever be of a very lusty large breed and furnish with few good quality but it seem they follow their leader for no soon be the captaint aboard but the amazon-band follow complain of great misery sit down with our sailor to victual at their first come with small entreaty they have what the ship afford and they return ashore with their captain the three of march we sound with the sk^ffe alongst the east-side of this bay and at the open or go out near to a little island we find a place to anchor in twelve sixteen twenty fathom coral ground without command of the fort. note there be a shall to the southward the length of three cable latitude no degree fifty minute the four the king of Ternata send i a present by his Priest the five variation at sunrising four degree forty eight minute easterly variation 4. degree 48. minute easterly a Moor come aboard with a muster of clove offer to sell some quantity if we will go to Machian this Moor be send by a man of great account of that place who at the present be here wherefore it be think good to stay a day long to have some conference with he his name be key Malladaia and be brother to the old king of Ternata Tahannee be a town upon Machian where the Po^tugals heretofore have have a fort but now there be none neither for they nor the fleming there be the best ride of the whole island but very near the shore yet free of all danger the six we stay to speak with this cavalier who come and promise to go with we to Machian and to bring we to a place there call Tahannee and do put aboard we two of his chief man to be as our pilot thither appoint we to go before and stay for he at a island by the way and within two day he will be with we give we great encouragement of good store of clove he tell i that the dutch give fifty rial of eight the Bahar but they will cost we sixty rial which I willing promise to give he the seven in the morning we weigh anchor and part out of this road call Amasan and by direction of our new pilot steer in west and west by north for the island Machian leave two land which lie four or five mile from the place where we last anchor on our lard-boord side depth two and twenty thirty and forty fathom two cable length of the island the ten we have sight of Machian be a high and copped island bear north-easter and the island Tidore open like a sugar-lofe on the wester side but not so high land as Machian it be shut into the point of the wester side of the outwardmost land of the three that lie in the go out two of they be without the narrow or straight and the three make the straits itself yet there be more land on the easter side but the current set to the southward we anchor in three and twenty fathom a mile of the little island in the straits mouth so that the distance from the straits of to this passage be five league and from the road of Amasane where the flemish fortress stand fourteen league the road of Amasane where the hollander fort stand^^h Geilolo the eleven in the morning we weigh the wind at south southeast and current set to the northward we pass the straits the wind veer to the northwest by north we stand to the eastward till noon than we tack to westward the wind at north northwest and have sight of Geilolo be a long land depth go out nine and twenty and four and thirty fathom and many land to the eastward and east southeast the point of old Bachian lie to the northward of the straits some three or four league leave four land on the starboard side taval Bachar that which make the straits on that side be call taval Bachar and when you be a little without the small island which lie in the straits you shall have eighteen fathom a cast or two and then it will deepen and stand to the north-ward you shall open another island to the westward call Tamata with a rock like a sail a good distance of the point of it and anchor at a island bear north westerly three league from the straits in three and forty fathom a shoal where on the southern point be a shoal have three fathom on the skirt and be dry at low water which shoal reach over to the south part of Bachian we ride half a mile of the shore this island be call taval the wind at north northwest here we stay all the twelve day for Keymalladaia be the place where he appoint to come unto we this island be distant from Machian ten league here we have good store of wood but no water the thirteen our cowper provide themselves of rotta^s for water cask which make excellent hoop and be here of all assize in great abundance the shoal aforesaid now dry bear west by south half a mile of we and another point a mile off north north-east the wind at north. the fourteen for that Keymalladaia come not his servant doubt that the fleming see we to adventure through this passage among the land do suspect he and perforce keep he wherefore we do set sail the wind at north by west and ply up for Machian the norther point of taval and the norther point of lattetatte from whence we set sail bear one of the other west by north and east by south distant six league and the norther end of taval Grochy a great island and the body of Grochie the great island lie the one from the other northwest four league and north northwest from Grochy be four or five small land which cover the main of the great island and be distant from it five league north-ward and there be many land north-east by north call the sound lie clear of all the land between Bachin and Geilolo alias Batta China southeast and northwest and be very broad but have land on the starboard side as you go to the north-ward the channel between Bachian Machian Tidore and Ternata lie north by west and south by east and be six league over in the narrow part the fifteen in the morning we pass between and caia latitude at noon no degree minute to the northward so that Machian be not true place in the plait for that there the equinoctial cut it in the middle and we find it to stand five league more northerly Machian five league north of the line ca^a a island wind at north by east and north by west with a current set to the southward variation four degree fifty eight minute easterly the sixteenth in the morning we be fair by the island of caia the wind at north by east here we have sight of a s^le to the north-ward which by a fisherman we understand to be a Fleming find from Machian to ta^^re with Sago which be a * * some say he top of tree a fort of the hollander call Tabolola root whereof the natural make their bread the seventeen in the morning we be near a fort of the fleming call Tabolola wind at north-east we stand to the southwards the current set we to the north-ward then the wind at East^^y north we steer with the east-most point and come to a anchor at four in the afternoon in the road of hard by Tahanne in fifty fathom within call of the shore have one point of the land south south-west two mile off and another north-east by north one mile and a half off and the ^land caia five league off this night some small quantity of clove be bring aboard the price set at sixty rial of eight the Bahar of two hundred cattee each Cattee three pound five shilling English I receive a letter from key Malladaia from Bachian excuse his stay with promise that he short will be with i in the mean time that he have write to ^he people to help i with all the clove they can the eighteen a Saniaca come aboard and proffer much courtesy two hollander come with he be very inquisitive to know who direct we to this road say the hollander entertainment of we that it must needs be one of the natural and if they know he they will cut he in piece before our face that we do wrong they in come hither this be their country as have conquer it by the Sword they be appoint to return to their fort and tell their captain that if they need aught that we may spare they shall have it for reasonable content before all other because we acknowledge they our neighbour and brethren in Christ but for any property of this country to be more in they then we we take no notice and therefore will ride there and trade with whosoever it please to come aboard so they part threaten the natural which be then aboard that if any do bring clove ahoord we they will put they to death the country people make light of their threat and say they hold we their friend and will come aboard to we buy this day three hundred catty clove for Cambaya cloth and some sell for ready money the nineteen the two fleming come aboard again and begin to note down in their table-book the name of the country people which come aboard whereupon I cause the boatswain to turn they out of the ship and command they to come no more aboard diverse of our company be send to walk ashore to see what entertainment the country people will give they they go up to the town of Tahanne and and be very friendly use they tell our man that the fleming have wrought so with key chillisad^ng Tahanne the king of ternatae son who be new come that he have forbid they to sell we any clove upon pain of death otherwise we shall have have they before the fleming who they find great oppressor of they towards night the prince pass by our ship in his curracurra I send my pinnace well fit with a fair Turkey carpet and crimson silk and gold curtain entreat he to come aboard which he take kind but excuse it say that in the morning he will visit i the one and twenty a oran Caya come aboard and tell i that a Curra Curra of the fleming have search three or four prawe or canoas come aboard we with clove and have take they from they threaten death to they for the next offence and that since our come hither they disfurnish their fort and place their people round about the island that the natural shall not be able to bring we any more spice the spite of the hollander to we and that they have send over a Curra Curra to Tidore to cause two great ship of they to come hither and ri^e by we the one a head the other a stern to beat we out of the road without trade or refresh the twenty two we have s^ght of one of the flemish ship come about the point by reason whereof we have little trade now the people be afraid I receive a present from key Malladaia who as yet be not come the natural expect what will now become of we the fleming have report ashore that they shall see we run out of the road at fight of one of their ship it be the red lion have thirty piece of ordnance anchor a stern of we the twenty four the prince of ternate key chillisad^ng send to tell i that he will come and visit i so all thing be fit in the best manner for his entertainment he come attend with diverse great Curracurras and row thrice round about the ship before he enter at his board of we our ship discharge five piece of ordnance I bring he to my cabin where I have prepare a banquet meet enough to have be set before the king of Ternata himself have he be there with a very good comfort of music which much delight he he promise i to give the people license to bring clove aboard we and request that I will but have patience for a day or two that he may have advice from his brother then be at Tidore I bestow on he diverse present and at part order seven piece for his farewell the twenty five in the morning a curracurra of the fleming come row by our ship scoff at our people and sing a song which they have make in derision of we they often use thereof cause our man just to find themselves therewith aggrieve as also for their row over our can-bodye diverse time endeavour to sink they wherefore I cause the pinnace to be well fit and give order that if at their return they continue their mock of we a Curracurra of the hollander almost sink to r^n aboard and sink they they come sing and scoff according to their custom the pinnace run aboard they with such a surge as that the water come through her side there be in her two of the captain of their fort well fit with shot and dart our man be well provide and have two good fowler in the skiffes head they lay a good while aboard she and will they to take this for a warning and leave off their scoff and mock of we for else they will teach they better manner the next time and so they return aboard with their promise that it shall be no more so towards evening they send one of their merchant unto i with a write from their doctor in droit a write send from the hollander who as we be inform be chief among they in absence of but or block who have come out of Holland general of eleven sail the effect whereof be to let i know that all the people of the Moluccas have make a perpetual contract with they for all their clove at fifty royal of eight the Bahar of two hundred cattee in respect that they have deliver they out of the servitude of the spaniard not without loss of much blood and expense of great wealth will i that I shall not move the people from their obedience which may redound to their great damage they hold the country to be their own as conquer by the Sword also that the natural ought they much money which be advance to be pay in clove answer be return that we will not meddle with their business our come being only to trade with such as desire to trade with we and so dismiss he the twenty seven the fleming enforce the prince to lie with his curracurra a stern to keep watch that none bring any thing aboard we for in our sight he command a Canoa aboard he which be come to we as we think with spice make he return towards night two of the natural bring we some refresh the twenty eight the prince understanding that we take it not well that he ride so near we to the fear of the natural remove and go about a point further off which much discontent the fleming after noon with the Skiffe well man I go to see if I can deal with the prince for a parcel of clove but find he go to the wester side captain block see my Ski^fe go into the bay follow we with his curracurra and will have land where I be but that I will not suffer he which the natural see and that captain block return aboard again without land diverse of the better sort come down to we protest great love towards we and send for and other fruit and bestow they upon the ging. the master of the Clove see captain block to make such speed after we man the long boat for aid but upon a sign give return aboard the thirty the fleming bring the prince to ride by we in his old place towards evening another flemish ship come in call the moon a proper ship of thirty two piece of good ordnance but not above fifty man she come to a anchor so near a head we as that we can scarce wind clear one of the other the prince send unto i to excuse his come back but now we see that he dare not displease the fleming the thirty one diverse harsh deal and discourtesy pass betwixt the fleming and we April the first 1613. the first of April the fleming bring a hundred and twenty of their man ashore which morning and evening do set and discharge the watch with drum Fife and ensign this force they have gather together out of their fort and ship the second I see no more hope of lade and that key Malladaia come not according to promise give order to the master to cause water to be fill and to make ready to set sail with the first fair wind ride of Pelabry at noon observe we find this road of Pelabry to stand in no degree twenty six minute to the northward of the equinoctial variation three degree eight and twenty minute the high land in the island Mechian bear west northwest half a point westerly the five we weigh anchor little wind the current set to the southward we drive to sea be under our foresail and ahead the moon the great ship of the flemish which make a fair shot under our stern which we present answer close a head his admiral expect further but hear no more of they at noon they both weigh and follow we but the wind at south-west have put we so far to the windward as that the natural come aboard with cloave for a time as fast as we can weigh and pay for they the Fleming not able to hinder they also there come a oran Caya aboard who promise we a good parcel of cloave if we will but come near the shore in the morning the six about fifty cattee of cloave be bring aboard in diverse Canoa's but no news of the gallant towards evening I stand near the shore than we be willing but for this occasion we have sight of a we^t ashore the Skiffe be send and speak with the oran Caya who say the cloave be ready and in the dark shall be bring aboard but present a Curra Curra of the fleming pass by put he into such a fear as albeit our people will have waft he yet dare he not adventure so they return Mootiere the seven in the morning we be thwart of Mootiere be distant from the wester point of Machian four league north by east half a point easterly and from it north three league be the island Marro and from that two league Tidore there be passage between these island or on any side of they without danger we have sight of the two fleming to the southwards of we ply after we latitude at noon no degree five and thirty minute wind westerly the eight Marro north by west Marro some two mile of the body of it and one point north by east half a point easterly and the other northwest by north half a point westerly and the pike of Tidore north by west and open the east point of Tidore and the wester point of Bachian they will bear the one from the other north and south and the body of Marro west south-west half a point southerly and the western part of Tidore that you shall see west by north. look well out for in the fair way be a long shoal which lie even with the water at high water the water show whitish and stretch north-east and south-west a dangerous shall between Marro and and have bring the point of the island as abovesaid than it will be east of you at low water you shall see it for it ebb six foot the tide set six hour to the northward and six to the southward but keep close to the island for there be no fear the spaniard fort be on the east-side of Tidore where be deep water shoare-too the spaniard fort on the east-side of Tidore it fall sudden calm so that a great sea do set we into the shore the fort make a shot at we but willing short we answer with one to sea-boord then the fort make two more intend to strike we one between our missen mast and ancient staff the other betwixt mainmast and foremast then they shoot a piece from the top of the fort without sharp we answer that without and present they send off a boat with a flag of truce the sea still set we upon the shore no wind nor ground at a hundred fathom so that we can lay it o^f no way two galley ride under the fort when their boat be put from the shore they shoot their too chase piece but without sharp they come and take a fast a starne our ship there be two spaniard soldier of good rank know to Hernando the Spaniard who we take with we from Bantam send from the captain general of the shore don Fernando byseere to know of what nation we be what we come for and wherefore we come not to a anchor under the king fort. we request they to come aboard they say they be command to the contrary wherefore I will to let down wine and bread unto they in a string from the poop which they fall too lusty in so great a shower of rain as we have see yet will not enter the ship I return answer that I be the subject of the king majesty of great Britain as by my colour they may well discern they say the fleming have many time pass by scot-free by show the like which make they shoot the second shot with sharp at we think we to be Fleming I send they word that my come be to do the best good I can to the friend of the king majesty of Spain but be not mind to anchor here but further a head where if it please don Fernando to come aboard he shall be welcome with which answer they return ashore content sudden it please God to grant we a gale so that we stand alongst the shore the captain general send off the pilot Maior of the galley Francisco Gomes a man of good presence to bid i welcome offer his assistance to bring we into the best anchor place under the fort or elsewhere about the island be dark he bring we to a place about one league and a half of the fort whereas he say no force be and so entreat after supper to be set ashore for that the captain general will dispatch away letter to Ternat^ to the master Campo don jeronimo de Sylva for resolution in all point and so depart the nine in the morning before day find that we be within command of eight piece of ordnance we get up our anchor and remove a league further to the southward where we ride in five and thirty fathom Gomes the pilot come aboard with two spaniard more of good fashion who I bid kind welcome so that they take their lodging aboard they bring with they a present of eatable commodity from their general I return the like to they with proffer of all friendship and assistance that in i lay to supply his want and to accept of cloave for payment desire speedy answer for that I will not stay long there the two flemish ship ply as if they will have come to a anchor by we Maracco a new fort of the hollander but afterward go and rid at their new fort Maracco the ten the captain general send to request i to stay and the next morning he will visit i with the sergeant mayor of ternate who be arrive with a letter from the master Campo give they leave thereby to trade with i for diverse matter and to content i in what I request wherefore I resolve a while long to see what good may be do @. v. further observation touch the Molucca land and their proceed on their voyage to japan the eleven we expect the captain general according to promise and hear nine piece of ordnance to be shoot out of the fort provide for they think very that they be come but it prove to be for the arrival of the prince of Tidore who have be abroad in war and be now return with the head of a hundred ternatans his force be only sixty small shot two brass base and three or four fowler (...) king of ternate his son slay by the tidorian have overthrow key chilly sadang the king of ternate his son who the fleming have enforce over from ternate to Machian to keep the country people from sell of cloave to we for who return back towards ternate after our departure the king of Tydores son lie purposely in wait upon sight of they the tydorian keep themselves behind a point of land send out two small praw to fish in their way who the ternatans espy do present give chase unto the fisherman easy retire the other earnest pursue until before they once think thereof they fall into their enemy hand who spare not one man of a hundred and sixty the prince of ternate himself be one of the number who head the conqueror bring to his wife who be sister to the prince of ternate so slay at their first encounter a barrel of powder which the prince have buy of we at Machian take fire which be the confusion and loss of they all with the prince be slay one of his young brethren and the king of Geilola towards evening come aboard we the sergeant Maior of ternate and secretary of state with the like compliment to those of the tydorian officer request i to come thither and they will do what in they lay for i whereto I consent the rather because it be in my way the twelve the prince of Tidore send unto i to excuse his hitherto not visit of i and to acquaint i that he have some store of cloave which I shall have I thank he and request speedy dispatch they promise i to be aboard again before day wherefore to prevent all treachery we keep double watch match in cock and all thing in readiness this tidorian prince be a very resolute and valiant soldier have perform many dangerous exploit upon the fleming and not long since surprise one of their ship be a man of war then ride not far from this place before day a galley which the spaniard tell we they expect come over from Batta China and be near we in the dark before they be aware we hale she they answer spaniard and your friend and so make to the shore with all speed she be but small of fourteen oar on a side at noon latitude no degree fifty minute to the northward of the equinoctial the thirteen we weigh the wind northerly and a current set out of the southward pass by the fort we give they five-peece which they require diverse spaniard board we with compliment and the prince man say that if we have stay but four and twenty hour long we shall have have good store of cloave but we rather think they intend some treachery against u^ with their galley frigate and Curra curra which by sudden departure we thus prevent come about the wester point of Tidore we have sight of the four flemish ship four ship of Holland ride before their fort of one of they at sight of we shoot off a piece of ordnance as we suppose to call their people aboard to follow we we steer direct with the fortress of ternate come near shorten our sail and lay by the lee and shoot off a piece towards the town without sharp which they ready answer and send off a soldier of good fashion but to as little purpose as those of Tidore have do but little wind our ship sag in and no anchor but at night a gale at south we stand into the sea have lose much by the current of that we have get find it to set to the southward the fourteen the wind at south south-west we steer north northwest and at noon have latitude one degree no minute we have sight of a galley wherefore we cast about but find she to stand away go our course for japan but before we part further from this moluccan coast I think it not amiss to acquaint the reader with a few note that I hold worthy observance touch the trade and state of those land throughout all the Moluccae land a Bahar of clove do weigh two hundred cattee of that country every Cattee three pound five ounce haberdepoiz which make the Bahar to be six hundred sixty two pound eight ounce haberdepoiz subtle for which Bahar of clove the fleming by their perpetual contract as they term it give fifty rial of eight myself for more speedy obtain of lade yield to pay they sixty rial of eight the Bahar which increase of price make they so forward to furnish we that have not the fleming by their force overawe the national imprison and threaten they with death and keep watch and good guard alongst the sea-coast I have in one month procure our full lade the most of these land bear store of clove those of note inhabit yield one year with another as follow that be to say ternate one thousand bahar Machian one thousand and ninety tydore nine hundred Bachian three hundred moteer six hundred Meau fifty Batta China five and thirty the total be three thousand nine hundred seventy five every three year be far more fruitful then either of the former two and be call the great monson it be lamentable to see the ruin that civil war have breed in those land which as I understand at my be there begin and continue in manner follow the Portugal at his first discovery of they find fierce war betwixt the king of ternate and the king of Tydore under which two king all the other land be either subject or confederate with one of they the Portugal for the better settle of himself take part with neither of they but politic carry himself keep both to be his friend and so fortify upon the land of ternate and tydore where to the portugal great advantage have the whole trade of clove in their own hand the hollander plant in (@) Moluccas 1605. they domineer and bear chief sway until the year 1605. wherein the Fleming by force displace they and plant himself but so weak and unprovided for future danger that the next year the Spaniard who while the Portugal remain there be order both by the pope and king of Spain not to meddle with they come from the beat the fleming out of both the land take the king of ternate prisoner send he to the and keep ternate and tydore under their command the Fleming since that time have get foot there again and at my be there have build he these fort viz. upon the island ternate they have a fort call Malayou which have three bulwark and be wall round about second Tolouco which have two bulwark and a round tower wall about three Tacome which have four bulwark and be wall about upon the island Tydore Marieko which have four bulwark upon the island Machian first Tafasoa the chief town of this island where they have four great bulwark wall about sixteen piece of ordnance and about one thousand inhabitant of the natural second Nofakia another town where they have two fort wall about and another fort upon the top of a high hill there which free the road on the other side and have five or six piece of ordnance three Tabalola a town where they have two fort wall eight piece of ordnance and the inhabitant hereof as of the former under their command this place be very strong situate by nature those of Nofakia be esteem no good soldier but be report to take part always as near as they can guess it with the strong but the natural of Tabalola which former dwell at Cayoa be account the best soldier of the land and be deadly enemy to the spaniard and P^rtugals and as weary now of the fleming in these three fort upon Machian there be at my be here a hundred and twenty Holland soldier viz. eighty at Tafasoa thirty at Nofakia and ten at Tabalola which garrison be with the least this island Machian be the rich of clove of all the Moluccae land and according to the general report of the inhabitant yield in the year of the great monson above eighteen hundred bahar of clove upon the island Bachian the fleming have one great fort. upon the island moteer they have four bulwark these civil war have so waste the nationals that a great quantity of clove perish and rot upon the ground for want of gather neither be there any likelihood of peace to be make betwixt they until the one part be utter root out thus leave they to their war I will return to our traffic and show in what manner we trade with the natural for clove which for the most part be by barter and exchange Cotton cloth of Cambaya and coromandell for clove the sort request and price that they yield candakeen of Barochie six cattee of clove candakeen papang or flat three cattee selas or small Bastas seven and eight Patta cheer Malayo sixteen cheer Malayo sixteen five twelve course of that kind eight Betellias or red forty four and forty eight cheer Malayo forty eight and fifty Sarampouri thirty Chelles Tapsiels and matafon twenty and four and twenty white or forty and four and forty the fine twelve course of that kind eight and ten Castilia ten ballachio the fine thirty Patta cheer Malayo of two fathom eight and ten great Potas or long four fathom sixteen cattee of clove Parcallas white twelve Salalos Ytam twelve and fourteen Turias and Tappe Turias one and two of two fathom fifty and sixty those of four and one fathom according rice eight and twenty pound a rial of eight Sagu which be a root whereof the natural make their bread and be their chief food through the whole country it be sell in bunch and be worth there one quarter of a rial of eight a bunch velvet satin taffeta and other stuff of silk of China be very well request here and this shall serve for advice concern the Moluccae land the sixteenth calm till night than a gale at west we steer north northwest the seventeen in the morning wind at east by south we steer north but after variable shift to all the point of the compass towards night we have sight of land to the northward the eighteen calm much rain and contrary wind I therefore resolve to go for the island saiem which be to the westward and there to stay and refresh till the monson will permit i to proceed but instant the wind come to the west so that we stand north and north by east the nineteen little wind at west we continue our course north by east very much ^aine and extreme hot a current to the eastward the twenty in the morning calm and a continual current set to the eastward which we have feel ever since our departure from ternate in the afternoon the wind north a gale we stand to the westward to stem the current in regard of the northerly wind subject to calm and the easterly current we stand in with a great island call Doy to rest and refresh ourselves Doy a great island the one and twenty in the morning we be fair before the say island near the northern point be a low point stretch to the southwards we stand in east by south wind at north by east at nooone the Skiffe be send to search out a convenient place to ride in but the current do set so strong to the eastward as that we can not get a head only discover a bay very large but it have a great shoal lie off the northern point half a league into the sea and have sixty fathom two mile of the shore sand a great shoal but night approach we stand off till morning the two and twenty after sunset we anchor in four and twenty fathom in the bay have have stand in fifty six thirty five twenty six and twenty four fathom the three and twenty I send the Skiffe ashore to seek a convenient place to water in and to pitch a tent for the company to defend they from the rain they find such a place right over against the ship together with a great track of dear and swine but no sign of people the country full of tree and abundance of coker penang and fowl pheasant and woodcock I go ashore the merchant with i a tent be set up our carpenter make falpit very artificial to take swine some fish we take among the rock but cost much labour one pheasant and two wood-pidgeons very large body like hen some of the company stay all night on shore to look for the come of the swine to the trap. the four and twenty we see very large swine but get none this day about half a hour after seven in the morning a strange eclipse of the moon the moon in the full be eclipse in the strange manner that ever any of we have see be obscure three hour and a half before she recover her perfect light which unto we be very fearful the five and twenty our people search abroad bring to the ship great store of coker some fowl and head of Palmita tree which boil with beef be as good as cabbage the eight and twenty the company labour to get in wood and water the Skiffe sound about the shoal and find ten and twelve fathom at the norther point near to it night and day very much rain the nine and twenty and thirty be spend in get aboard our wood whereof we have great store and as good as our billet in England may 1. 1613. the first of May the Skiffe be send to sound to the wester point into the bay and find very deep water land they find the ruin of house and certain brass pan so that we be of opinion that the place have late be inhabit but the inhabitant by the war hunt from their home Doy at the northermost end of Geilolo the twelve we set sail from this island Doy be the north-east most island of Batta China or Geilolo in the Moluccas latitude two degree thirty five minute variation five degree twenty minute easterly have remain here twenty day be seventy one person find for japan and at noon fourteen league north by east of the place where we anchor the thirteen the ship way to noon north by east twenty two league we steer north the wind west variation five degree thirty minute easterly with a strong current set to the eastward than the wind shift to the west by south west northwest east than a gale at west by south and west south-west the fourteen latitude five degree twenty six minute way north by east twenty six league wind west and current as aforesaid clear weather the fifteen latitude five degree fifty six minute way north north-east fourteen league current as former the sixteenth latitude seven degree ten minute way north easterly twenty seven league wind at south-west and west rainy the seventeen latitude eight degree twenty two minute way north twenty four league wind south-west but in the morning at east with rain the eighteen latitude nine degree seven minute way north-easter fifteen league wind at east and east north-east very clear weather the nineteen latitude nine degree forty one minute way north eleven league one three part wind east and east north-east the twenty latitude ten degree forty minute way north half a point westerly twenty league wind east and north-east with help of a current northerly the one and twenty latitude eleven degree thirty six minute way north northwest twenty league wind north-east east north north-east and north-east by east starboard tack aboard the two and twenty latitude twelve degree thirty nine minute way north northwest twenty three league wind east north-east north-east by east and north-east the three and twenty latitude twelve degree fifty seven minute way north by west six and two three part of a league wind southeast calm the four and twenty latitude thirteen degree forty two minute way north fifteen league wind south by east very smooth water the five and twenty latitude fifteen degree twelve minute way north thirty league wind south we steer north westerly note note that we find those favourable wind in the full of the moon the six and twenty latitude seventeen degree six minute way north thirty eight league wind south by west south and south south-west a continual stiff gale and smooth water the seven and twenty way north-east twenty four league wind at west northwest and west with rain thunder and lightning the eight and twenty way north nine league wind west and west northwest the nine and twenty latitude nineteen degree fifteen minute way north nine league wind north-east east west west northwest and south calm and gust the thirty latitude twenty degree twelve minute way north twenty league wind at southeast and east southeast the one and thirty latitude twenty one degree thirty five minute way north by west variation six degree easterly june 1. 1613. thirty league wind east and east by north. variation six degree no minute easterly the first of june we pass the tropic of cancer the sun in our zenith we can not observe way north forty league wind at southeast and southeast by east variation five degree twenty five minute easterly the second latitude twenty five degree forty four minute way north forty two league wind southeast and southeast by south make account we shall have see the land the isle do Reys Magos do Reys Magos about eight of the clock in the morning but as yet see none about four a clock in the afternoon we make land be a very low island bear northwest about three league off wind southeast by east and have it north north-east we have sight of the high-land over the low land there be many little land to the number of ten or eleven with break ground and breach reach over to each island so that we can discern no passage to the westward at night we tack off take in our top-sail and lie close by in our course all night wind very much at south southeast we steer east the land lie alongst north-east and south-west the three we stand in for the land be a high island bear northwest seem to we a most pleasant and fruitful soil as any we have see since our come out of England well people and great store of cattle we purpose to have come to a anchor about the north-east point and sound have sixty fathom have sight of two boat come off unto we we use all the mean we can to speak with they be desirous of a pilot and to know the name of the island the better to be assure where we be but the wind be so forcible as that we can not get in wherefore we stand away northwest and have sight of another island bear west northwest we steer with it and from thence have sight of another island bear north-east half a point easterly some seven or eight league off and come under the wester-most island we discern certain rock that lay off the shore above two mile the one above water and the northermost under-water and be a great way without the other the sea break upon it then the land fall away to the southward round and near to the point you shall open a steep rock that be upon the westside of the island resemble charingcross then we steer northwest with a extreme gale at south by west and south south-west when we have open the island and a current set to the southward at four of the clock we take in our topsail and hale close upon a tack the island be about seven league nortwest of we way to noon north half a point easterly sixteen league way north northwest three quarter westerly twenty league at three a clock in the afternoon we set our course the wind at northwest and northwest by north we steer north-east some two hour then calm and rain variation four degree forty minute easterly variation at sunne-setting four degree forty minute easterly the five way west by north four league and a half wind north north-east we steer northwest starboard tack variation four degree forty two minute the six way north northwest nine league wind east north-east north-east by north and north-east by east little wind much rain variation four degree nineteen minute easterly at night the wind at east and east southeast the seven way north-east by north sixteen league wind at southeast and south south-west than we steer away north-east by north suppose to be off Tonan twenty eight or thirty league the eight in the morning we have sight of a high round island bear east six league off with diver^ other land rise in six or seven part bear west five or six league off have make to this noon twenty two league north-east by north wind at south south-west a stiff gale then we hale over northwest with another island which we find to be four in number be barren and many pick rock then we steer north by east the wind at south by west about three of the clock we have sight of a island with three hill like three round sugar-loves bear east by s. five league off at five of the clock we have sight of a island rise in two part bear north north-east the northern end be a high steep upright point the land fall away to the eastward north-east and at six of the clock the body of it do bear east one league and a half off the wind west we stand off upon a tack north northwest the nine in the morning we have sight of land bear north north-east and six great island on a rank from the island we descry yesternight north-east and south-west and at the northermost end of they all many small rock and hummocke and in the bay to the eastward of the hummocke we see a high land bear east east by south and east southeast or Mashma which be the island call Xima in the plait but call by the natural mashma and the island aforesaid north north-east be call Segue or Amaxay it lie east by north and west by south with many small island and rock on the southern side of they and be distant from the island with the steep point which we do see the eight day south south-west twelve league the wind calm all night yet we get to the northward as we suppose by the help of a current or tide the ten by break of day the outward-most land to the westward do bear north by east ten league off the wind at north-east by north at nine a gale at south we steer north by west and have sight of two hummocke without the point then we steer north northwest and soon after come four great fisher-boat aboard about five ton apiece in burden they sail with one sail which stand like a Skiffe sail and skuld with four oar on a side a excellent kind of oar their oar rest upon a pin fasten on the top of the boat side the head of which pin be so let into the middle part of the oar that the oar do hang in his just poise so that the labour of the rower be much less than otherwise it must be yet do they make far great speed than our people with row and perform their work stand as we do sit so that they take the less room they tell we that we be before the entrance of bear north north-east and the straits of north-east by north and the high hill which we do see yesterday be upon the island call Vszideke which make the straits of where at the norther-most end be good ride and at the south end be the go into Cochinoch to this noon we have make a north-way six league we agree with two of the master of the fisher-boat for thirty rial of eight a piece in money and rice for their food to pilot we into Firando which agreement make their people enter our ship and perform voluntary their labour as ready as any of our mariner we steer north by west the pilot make account to be thirty league of Firando one of the four boat which come aboard we do belong to the portugal live at and be new christian and think that our ship have be the Macau ship but find the contrary will upon no entreaty stay but make haste back again to advise they @. 5 their arrival at Firando the habit rite and custom of the japonian june 11. 1613. the king of Firando and his nephew the eleven about three of the clock in the afternoon we come to a anchor half a league short of Firando the tide so spend that we can not get further in soon after I be visit by the old king foin Sama and his nephew tone-sama governor then of the island under the old King they be attend with forty boat or galley row some with ten some with fifteen oar on a side when they draw near to the ship the king command all but the two wherein himself and his nephew be to fall a stern and they only enter the ship both of they in silk gown gird to they with a shirt and a pair of breech of flaxen cloth next their body japa^ia^ habit either of they have two cattan or sword of that country by his side the one of half a yard long the other about a quarter they wear no band the forepart of their head be shave to the crown and the rest of their hair which be very long be gather together and find up on a knot behind wear neither hat nor turban but bareheaded the king be age about seventy two year his nephew or grandchild that govern under he be about two and twenty year old and either of they have his governor with he who have command over their slave as they appoint he their manner and courtesy in salute be after their manner which be this first in presence of he who they be to salute they put off their shoe stocking they wear none and then clap their right hand within their left japonian manner of salutation they put they down towards their knee and so wag or move of their hand a little to and fro they stoop step with small step sideling from the party salute and cry augh augh I lead they into my cabin where I have prepare a banquet for they and a good consort of music which much delight they they bid i welcome and promise i kind entertainment I deliver our king letter to the king of Firando which he receive with great joy say he will not open it till ange come who can interpret the same unto he this ange be in their language a pilot be one William Adam a english man who pass with a Fleming through the South-sea William Adams his story write by himself you have before by mutiny and disorder of the mariner she remain in that country and be seize upon by the emperor about twelve year before the king have stay aboard about a hour and a half take his leave he be no soon ashore but all his nobility attend with a multitude of soldier enter the ship every man of worth bring his present with he some venison some wildfowl some wild boar the large and fat that ever any of we have see some fruit fish etc. they do much admire our ship and make as if they have never see it sufficient we be pester with the number of these visiter I send to the king request he that order may be take to remove they and to prevent all inconvenience that may happen whereupon he send a guardian be a principal man of his own guard with charge to remain and lie aboard that no injury may be offer unto we and cause a proclamation to be make in the town to the same effect the same night Henrick brower captain of the dutch factory there come aboard to visit i or rather to see what pass betwixt the king and we I do write the same day to master Adam^ be then at Edoo which be very near three hundred league from Firando to let he understand of our arrival king foyn send it away the next day by his admiral to Osackay the first port of note upon the chief island Osackay and then by post up into the land to Edoo give the emperor likewise to understand of our be there and cause thereof the twelve in the morning there be bring aboard such abundance of fish and so cheap as we can desire we weigh and set sail for the Road. the king send at the least threescore great boat or galley very well man to bring we into the harbour I doubt what the cause of their come may be and be send off the Skiffe to command they not to come near the ship but the king be the head-most weave with his handkerchief and will the rest to attend and himself come aboard tell i that he have command they to come to tow our ship in about a point somewhat dangerous by reason of the force of the tide which be such a strong tide that have a stiff gale of wind yet we can not stem it and come into the eddy we shall have be set upon the rock so we send hawser aboard they and they fall to work in the mean while the king do break his fast with i be at a anchor I will have requite the people for their pain but the king will not suffer they to take any thing we anchor before the town we anchor before the town in five fathom so near the shore that we may talk to the people in their house we salute the town with nine piece of ordnance but be not answer for they have no ordnance here nor any fort but barricado only for small shot our ground here be Ozie diverse nobleman come to bid i welcome whereof two be of extraordinary account call Nobusane and Simmadone who be very well entertain and at part hold very great state one stay aboard while the other be land their child and chief follower in the like manner there come continual such a world of people aboard both man and woman as that we be not able to go upon the deck round about the ship be furnish with boat full of people admire much the head and stern of the ship I give leave to diverse woman of the better sort to come into my cabin where the picture of Venus note the danger of idolatry even in popish sense by veneration of image with her son Cupid do hang somewhat wanton set out in a large frame they think it to be our lady and her son fall down and worship it with show of great devotion tell man in a whisper manner that some of their own companion which be not so may not hear that they be whereby we perceive they to be christian convert by the Portugal jesuit the king come aboard again and bring four chief woman with he the king woman their habit they be attire in gown of silk clap the one skirt over the other and so gird ^o they barelegged only a pair of half buskin find with silk ribbon about their instep their hair very black and very long tie up in a knot upon the crown in a comely manner their head no where shave as the man be they be well face hand and footed clear skin and white but want colour which they amend by art of stature low but very fat very courteous in behaviour not ignorant of the respect to be give unto person according to their fashion the king request that none may stay in the cabin save myself and my linguist who be bear in japan and be bring from Bantam in our ship thither be well skill in the mallayan tongue wherein he deliver to i what the king speak unto he in the japan language the king woman seem to be somewhat bashful but he will they to be frolic their music instrumental and vocal they sing diverse song and play upon certain instrument whero^ one do much resemble our lute be bellied like it but long in the neck and fret like we but have only four gut-string their finger with the left hand like we very nimble but the right hand strike with a ivory bone as we use to play upon a cittern with a quill they delight themselves much with their music keep time with their hand and play and sing by book prick on line and space pricksong resemble much we here I feast they and present they with diverse english commodity and after some two hour stay they return I move the king for a house which he ready grant and take two of the merchant along with he and show they three or four house will they to take their choice pay the owner as they can agree the thirteen I go ashore attend upon by the merchant and principal officer and deliver the present to the king present fea and drink of health in japan amount to the value of one hundred and forty pound or thereabouts which he receive with very great kindness feast i and my whole company with diverse sort of powder wild fowl and fruit and call for a stand cup which be one of the present then deliver he he cause it to be fill with his country wine which be distil out of rice and be as strong as our aquavitae and albeit the cup hold upward of a pint and a half notwithstanding take the cup in his hand he tell i he will drink it all off for a health to the king of England and so do myself and all his noble do the like and whereas in the room where the king be there be only myself and the cape merchant the rest of our company be in a other room the king command his secretary to go out unto they gesture at meat and see that every one of they do pledge the health the king and his noble do sit at meat crosslegged upon mat after the Turkey fashion the mat rich edge some with cloth of gold some with velvet satin and damask the fourteen and fifteen we spend with give of present the sixteenth I conclude w^th captain Audassee captain of the China quarter here for his house to pay ninety five rial of eight for the monson of six month he to repair it at present and we to repair it hereafter and alter what we please he to furnish all convenient room with mat according to the fashion of the country this day our ship be so pester with people as that I be enforce to send to the king for a guardian to clear they out many thing be steal but I more doubt our own people than the naturals there come in a Fleming in one of the country boat which have be at the island Mashma Mashma a place of good vent for our commodity where he have sell good store of pepper broad cloth and elephant tooth but will not be acknow unto we to have sell any thing yet bring nothing back in the boat with he but the japon his waterman tell we the truth viz. that he have sell good quantity of good at a mart there and return bar of silver which they keep very secret the one and twenty the old king come aboard again and bring with he diverse woman to be frolic these woman be actor of comedy which pass there from island to island to play woman actor of comedy in japan be also common woman and their price rate bawd in japan as our player do here from town to town have several shift of apparel for the better grace of the matter act which for the most part be of war love and such like these woman be as the slave of one man who put a price what every man shall pay that have to do with any of they more than which he be not to take upon pain of death in case the party injure shall complain it be leave to his own discretion to prize she at the first but rise he can afterward fall he may neither do the party bargain with the wench but with her master who command she be to obey the great of their nobility travel hold it no disgrace to send for these pander to their inn and do compound with they for the wench either to fill their drink at table for all man of any rank have their drink fill to they by woman or otherwise to have the use of they their abominable esteem after death when any of these pander die though in their life time they be receive into company of the best yet now as unworthy to rest among the worst they be bridle with a bridle make of straw as you will bridle a horse and in the clothes they die in be drag through the str^etes into the field and there cast upon a dunghill for dog and fowl to devour the twenty three we have news of two China junke arrive at lade with sugar five thousand chinese do to death for trade in foreign part by he we understand that the emperor of China have then late put to death about five thousand person for trade out of the country contrary to his edict confiscate all their good notwithstanding hope of profit entice these man to put it in hazard have bribe the new pungavas and officer upon the sea-coast which upon the execution of the former be place in their stead the hollander former pass under the name of englishman no^e japonian song of the English the twenty nine a Soma or junke of the fleming arrive at from Syam lade with Brasill wood and skin of all sort wherein it be say that there be Englishmen but prove to be fleming for that before our come they pass general by the name of englishman for our english nation have be long know by report among they but much scandal by the Portugal jesuite as pirate and r^uers upon the sea so that the natural have a song which they call the english Crofonia chew how the english do take the spanish ship which they sing do act likewise in gesture with their cattan by their side with which song and act they terrify and scare their child as the french sometime do they with the name of the lord Talbot july the first of july two of our company happen to quarrel the one with the other and be very likely to have go into the field to the endanger of we all for it be a custom here that whosoever draw a weapon in anger severity for fight and draw weapon although he do no h^rme therewith he be present cut in piece and do but small hurt not only themselves be so execute but their whole generation the second day I go ashore to keep house in Firando the household consist of twenty six person note that at our come we find broad-cloth of fifteen or sixteen pound a cloth to be sell by the dutch in Firando for forty rial of eight which be eight pound sterling the Mat English broad clothes sell by the dutch in japan which Mat be two yard and a quarter but desirous to keep up the price of our cloth and hear that the dutch have great store there I have conference with brower captain of their factory to this effect that betwixt we we shall set rate upon such clothes as both of we have and neither of we in any wise to sell under the price agree upon for performance whereof I proffer to enter into bond to he in the morning he seem to approve hereof but ere night send word that he dislike it excuse himself that he have no warrant from his master to make any such agreement the next morning he ship away great store of cloth to diverse land rate they at base prize viz. at twenty eighteen and sixteen rial the Mat that he may procure the more speedy dispatch of his own and gl^t the place before the come of we Bantam pepper ungarble which cost at Bantam one rial three quarter of eight the sack be worth here at our come ten the peecull which be one hundred cattee make one hundred thirty pound English subtle a taye be five shilling sterling with they a rial of eight be worth there in ordinary payment but seven mass which be three shilling six penny sterling for a mass be as a rial of plate tin the peecull thirty elephant tooth the peecull eighty iron cast piece the peecull six powder the peecull twenty three aloe Socatrina the Cattee six fowl piece the piece twenty calico and such like commodity of Choromandel and of the guzerates as they be in goodness the seven the king of the island Goto not far from Firando come to visit king foin say that he have hear of a excellent english ship arrive in his dominion king of Goto which he great desire to see and go aboard of king Foyne entreat i that he may be permit for that he be a especial friend of he so he be well entertain aboard banquet and have diverse piece shoot off at his departure which he very kind accept and tell i that he shall be right glad to live to see some of our nation to come to his island the king of Goto desirous that our man will come into his kingdom japonian manner of execution whither they shall be hearty welcome the eight three japonian be execute viz. two man and one woman the cause this the woman none of the honest her husband be travel from home have appoint these two their several hour to repair unto she the latter man not know of the former and think the time too long come in before the hour appoint find the first man with she already and enrage thereat he whip out his Cattan and wound both of they very sore have very near hew the chine of the man back in two but as well as he may he clear himself of the woman and recover his Cattan wound the other the street take notice of the fray forthwith seize upon they lead they aside and acquaint king Foyne therewith and send to know his pleasure for according to his will the party be execute who present give order that they shall cut off their head which do every man that list as very many do come to try the sharpness of their cattan upon the corpse so that before they leave off they have hew they all three into piece as small as a man hand and yet notwithstanding do not then give over but place the piece one upon another will try how many of they they can strike through at a blow and the piece be leave to the fowl to devour the ten three more be execute as the former for steal of a woman from Firando and sell she at Langasacque long since two of they be brethren and the other a sharer with they to steal another slave death the manner of their go to execution when any be to be execute they be lead out of the town in this manner there go first one with a pickax next follow a other with a shovel for to make his grave if that be permit he the three man bear a small table whereon be write the party offence which table be afterward set up upon a post on the grave where he be bury the four be the party to be execute his hand find behind he with a silken cord have a little banner of paper much resemble our wind-vanes whereon be likewise write his offence the executioner follow next with his Cattan by his side hold in his hand the cord wherewith the offender be find on either side of the executioner go a soldier with his pike the head thereof rest on the shoulder of the party appoint to suffer to scare he from attempt to escape in this very manner I see one lead to execution who go so resolute and without all appearance of fear of death that I can not but much admire he never have see the like in Christendom the offence for which he suffer be for steal of a sack of Rice of the value of two shilling six penny from his neighbour who house be then on fire the eleven there arrive at Langasacque three China juncke lade with silk the nineteen the old king foin entreat i for a piece of Poldavis which I send he poldavis wear by the King he cause it present to be make into coat which he notwithstanding that he be a king and of that great age and fame to be the worthy soldier of all japan for his valour and service in the corean war do wear next his skin and some part thereof be make into handkerchief which he daily use the twenty a Soma or juncke come from Cochinchina arrive at lade with silk and Benjamin excellent clear and rich the nine and twenty m. Adam arrive at Firando have be seventeen day on the way come from Sorongo we have stay here for his come forty eight day William Adams come unto they the first carrier for not make haste with the letter to Adams be banish by the angry king after I have friendly entertain he I confer with he in the presence of the merchant touch the encouragement he can give of trade in these part he answer that it be not always alike but sometime better sometime worse yet doubt not but we shall do as well as other give admirable commendation of the country as much affect thereunto the thirty in the morning one of the young king governor be by his order cut into piece in the street for be as it be think too familiar with his mother a slave of his die with he for endeavour to defend his master this day there come to Firando certain spaniard of m. Adam his acquaintance to desire passage in our ship for Bantam these spaniard have be belong to a spanish gentleman their general who about a year past be come upon the king of Spain charge from Hispania a intention of the spaniard to discover to the northward of japan to discover to the northward of japan and arrive at Edoo attend the monson to go to the northward which begin in the end of May his company whereof these be two mutiny against he every man take his own way leave the ship utter unman wherefore I think it best to keep they out of my ship the three king Foyne send to know of what bulk our king present to the emperor be also what number of people I will take with i August for that he will provide according for my go up in good fashion both for bark horse and Pallanchins this day I cause the present to be sort that be to be give to the emperor and to those of office and esteem about he viz. @. 7 captain Saris his journey to the court of the japonian emperor and observation there and by the way the seven of August king Foyne furnish i with a proper galley of his own row with twenty five oar on a side and sixty man which I do fit up in a very comely manner with waste clothes ensign and all other necessary and have take my leave of the king I go and remain aboard the ship to set all thing in order before my departure the old king send 100 of japan money for he to spend by the way a Tay be five shil. of our money my set forward towards the emperor court. Fuccate a large and fair town which do and remembrance leave with the master and cape merchant for the well govern of the ship and house ashore during my absence take with i ten english and nine other beside the former sixty which be only to attend the galley I depart from Firando towards the emperor Court we be row through and among diverse land all which or the most part of they be well inhabit and diverse proper town build upon they whereof one call Fuccate have a very strong castle build of fre^ stone but no ordnance nor soldier therein it have a ditch about five fathom deep and twice as broad round about it with a draw bridge keep all in very good repair I do land and dine there in the town the tide and wind so strong against we as that we can not pass the town seem to be as great as London be within the wall very well build and even so as you may see from the one end of the street to the other the place exceed people very civil and courteous only that at our land and be here in Fuccate and so through the whole country whithersoever we come the boy child and worse sort of idle people will gather about and follow along after we cry that be to say you coreans with false heart wonder hoop hollow and make such a noise about we that we can scarce hear one a other speak sometime throw stone at we but that not in many town yet the clamour and cry after we be every where alike none reprove they for it the best advice that I can give those who hereafter shall arrive there be that they pass on without regard those idle rablement and in so do they shall find their ear only trouble with the noise all alongst this coast and so up to Ozaca we find woman diverse that live with their household and family in boat upon the water woman with their household that live in boat upon the water women-divers as in Holland they do the like these woman will catch fish by dive which by net and line they miss and that in eight fathom depth their eye by continual dive do grow as red as blood whereby you may know a dive woman from all other woman we be two day row from Firando to Fuccate about eight or ten league on this side the straits of xeminaseque we find a great town where there lie in a dock Straigh^s of a strange juncke a juncke of eight hundred or a thousand ton of burden sheathe all with iron with a guard appoint to keep she from fire and treachery she be build in a very homely fashion much like that which describe Noah ark unto we the natural tell we that she serve to transport soldier into any of the land if rebellion or war shall happen we find nothing extraordinary after we have pass the straits of xeminaseque until we come unto Osaca where we arrive the twenty seven day of August our gailey can not come near the town by six mile where another small vessel meet we Osaca wherein come the good man or host of the house where we lie in Osaca and bring a banquet with he of wine and salt fruit to entertain i the boat have a fast make to the mast-head be draw by man as our bark be from London westward we find Osaca to be a very great town as great as London within the wall with many fair timber bridge of a great height description of Osaca serve to pass over a river there as wide as the Thames at London some fair house we find there but not many it be one of the chief seaport of all japan have a castle in it marvelous large and strong with very deep trench about it and many draw bridge with gate plate with iron the castle be build all of freestone with bulwark and battlement a fair and strong castle with loop hol^s for small shot and arrow and diverse passage for to cast stone upon the assailant the wall be at the least six or seven yard thick all as I say of freestone without any fill in the inward part with trumpery as they report unto i the stone be great of a excellent quarry and be cut so exact to fit the place where they be lay that no mortar be use but only earth cast between to fill up void crevice if any be in this castle do dwell at our be there the son of Tiquasamma who be a infant at the time of his father decease the son of Tiquasama the (@) h^^re of japan how defeat of his ^ight be leave to the government and education of four whereof Ogoshosamma the now emperor be one and chief the other three desirous of sovereignty each for his particular and repulse by Ogoshosamma be for their own safety force to take up arm wherein fortune favour ogoshosamma at the trial in field two of they be slay the three be glad to save himself by flight he be conqueror attempt that which former as it be think he never dream of and proclaim himself emperor and seize upon the true heir marry he unto his daughter as the only mean to work a perfect reconcilement confine the young marry couple to live within this castle of Osaca attend only with such as have be bring up from their cradle by ogoshosamma not know any other father as it be than he so that by their intelligence he can at all time understand what pass there and according rule he right over against Osaca on the other side of the river lie another great town call sacay but not so big as Osaca yet be it a town of great trade for all the land thereabouts the eight and twenty day at night have leave muster and price of our commodity with our host we part from Osaca by bark towards Fushimi where we arrive Fushimi the nine and twenty at night we find here a garrison of three thousand soldier maintain by the emperor to keep Miaco and Osaca in subjection garrison change every three year their march and weapon the garrison be shift every three year which change happen to be at our be there so that we see the old band march away and the new enter in most soldierlike manner march five a breast and to every ten file a officer which be call a captain of fifty who keep they continual in very good order first their shot viz. Calievers for musket they have none neither will they use any then follow pike next sword or cattan and target than bow and arrow next those weapon resemble a welch-hooke call waggadash then caliever again and so as former without any ensign or colour no ensign nor drum or other martial music neither have they any drum or other musical instrument for war the first file of the cattan and target have silver scabbard to their cattan and the last file which be next to the captain have their scabbard of gold the company consist of diverse number some five hundred some three hundred some one hundred and fifty man in the midst of every company be three horse very rich trap and furnish with saddle well set out some cover with costly fur some with velvet some with stammet broadcloth every horse have three slave to attend he lead with silken halter their eye cover with leather cover after every troop follow the captain on horseback his bed and other necessary be lay upon his own horse equal pease on either side over the same be spread a cover of red feel of China whereupon the captain do sit crosslegged strange ride as if he have sit betwixt a couple of pannier and for those that be ancient or otherwise weake-backt they have a staff artificial fix unto the pannell that the rider may rest himself and lean backward against it as if he be sit in a chair the captain general of this garrison we meet two day after we have meet his first troop have still in the meantime meet with some of these company as we pass along sometime one league sometime two league distant one from another he ma^ched in very great state beyond that the other do for the second troop be more rich set out in their arm then the first and the three than the second and so still every one better than other until it come unto this the last and best of all he hunt and hawk all the way have his own hound and hawk along with he hunt and hawk the hawk be hood and lure as we be his horse for his own saddle be six in number rich trap their horse be not tall but of the size of our middling nag short and well trust small head and very full of mettle their horse in my opinion far excel the spanish jennet in pride and stomach he have his pallankin carry before he the inside of crimson velvet and six man appoint to carry it two at a time their good order such good order be take for the pass and provide for of these three thousand soldier that no man either travel or inhabit upon the way where they lodge be any way injure by they but cheerful entertain they as other their guest because they pay for what they take as all other man do every town and village upon the way be well fit with cook and victual house where they may at a instant have what they need and diet themselves from a penny English a meal to two shilling a meal the diet in japan the diet use general through the country be rice of diverse sort one better than other as of our wheat and corn here the white account the best which they use in stead of bread fish fresh and salt some pickle herb bean radish and other root salt and pickle store of provision wild-fowl duck mallard teal goose pheasant partridge quail and diverse other which they do powder and put up in pickle of hen they have great store as likewise of dear both red and fallow wild boar hare goat kine etc. of cheese they have plenty no butter nor milk eat butter they make none neither will they eat any milk because they hold it to be as blood nor tame beast of tame swine and pig they have great abundance wheat they have as good as any of we be red they plough both with ox and horse as we do near at our be there we buy hen and pheasant of the best for three penny a piece pig very fat and large twelve penny a piece a fat hog five shilling a good beef such as our welsh runt at sixteen shilling a goat three shilling Rice a halfpenny the pound the ordinary drink of the common people be water water drink warm which with their meat they drink warm hold it to be a sovereign remedy against worm in the maw other drink they have none but what be distil out of rice which be almost as strong as our Aquanit^ and in colour like to Canary wine and be not dear yet when they have draw off the best and strong they wring out of it a small and slight drink serve the poor sort of people which through want can reach to the better the thirty we be furnish with nineteen horse at the emperor charge to carry up our king present and those that attend i to Surunga I have a Pallankin appoint for i and a spare horse lead by to ride when I please very well set out six man appoint to carry my pallankin in plain and even ground but where the country grow hilly ten man be allow i thereto the guardian who king foyn send along with we do from time to time and place to place by warrant take up these man and horse to serve our turn a pike sign of authority as the post-master do here in England as also lodging at night according to the custom of the country I have a slave appoint to run with a pike before i thus we travel until the six of September before we get to Surunga each day fifteen or sixteen league Surunga of three mile to a league as we guess it the way for the most part be wonderful even and where it meet with mountain passage be cut through this way be the main ride of all this country highway and be for the most part sandy and gravel it be divide into league and at every league end be two small hill viz. of either side of the way one and upon every one of they a fair pinetree trim round in fashion of a arbour these mark be place upon the way to the end that the hackney man and those which let out horse to hire shall not make man pay more than their due which be about three penny a league the road be exceed travel full of people ever and anon you meet with farm and country house with village and often with great town with Ferries over fresh river and many futtakeasse or fotoquis which be their temple japonian temple priest situate in grove and most pleasant place for delight of the whole country the priest that tend thereupon dwell about the same as our friar in old time plant themselves here in England when we approach any town we see cross with the dead body of those who have be crucify thereupon cross and crucify for crucify be here a ordinary punishment for most malefactor come near Surunga where the emperor court be we see a scaffold with the head of diverse which have be execute place thereupon and by it be diverse cross with the dead corpse of those which have be execute remain still upon they and the piece of other which after their executioner have be hew again and again by the trial of other cattan Surunga a very great city all which cause a most unsavoury passage to we that to enter into Surunga must needs pass by they this city of Surunga be full as big as London with all the suburb the handi-craft man we find dwell in the outward part and skirt of the town because those that be of the better sort dwell in the inward part of the city and will not be annoy with the rap knock and other disturbance that artificer can be without assoon as we be settle in our lodging in Surunga I send master Adams to the court to let the secretary understand of my come and desire of as speedy dispatch as may be word be return that I be welcome that I shall rest i and within a day or two I shall have access to the emperor the seven be spend in fit up of the present and provide little table of slit deal of that country which smell very sweet to carry they upon according to the custom the eight the castle and court of the emperor I be carry in my pallankin to the castle of Surunga where the emperor keep his court and be attend with my merchant and other carry the present before i be enter the castle I pass three draw bridge every of which have a corpse of guard and come up a pair of very fair and large stone stair I be meet by two grave comely man the one they codske the emperor secretary the other the admiral who lead i into a fair room mat where we sit down crosslegged upon the mat anon after they lead i betwixt they into the chamber of presence where be the emperor chair of state to which they wish i to do reverence it be of cloth of gold about five fe^t high very rich set forth for back and side but have no canopy over head then they return back again to the place where before they do sit where have stay about one quarter of a hour word be bring that the emperor be come forth then they rise up and lead i betwixt they unto the door of the room where the emperor be make sign to i that I shall enter in there but dare not look in themselves the present send from our king to the emperor as also those which according to the custom of the country I give unto the emperor as from myself be place in the say room upon the mat very orderly before the emperor come into it come to the emperor according to our english compliment I deliver our king letter unto his majesty who take it in his hand and put it up towards his forehead and command his interpeter who sit a good distance from he behind to will master Adams to tell i that I be welcome from a wearisome journey that I shall take my rest for a day or two and then his answer shall be ready for our King then he ask whether I do not intend to visit his son at Edoo I answer I do the emperor say that order shall be take to furnish i with man and horse for the journey and against my return his letter shall be ready for our King so take my leave of the emperor and come to the door where I have leave the secretary and admiral I find they there ready to conduct i to the stair head where former they have meet i and there I take my pallankin and with my attendant return to my lodging the nine I go to deliver the secretary his present which in no wise he will receive but hearty thank i say that the emperor have command the contrary and that it be as much as his life if he shall take any gift but he take five pound of aloe Socatrina to use for his health I deliver the article of privilege this day to co^skedona be in number fourteen he request to have they abbreviate and make as short as may be for that the people of japan affect brevity japonian affect brevity the ten the article so abridge be send by master Adams to the secretary who show they to the emperor and he approve thereof deny one only which be that whereas the chinese have refuse to trade with the english that in case we shall now take any of they by force that our nation may have ^eave and liberty to bring they into japan and there make sale of the good so take at the first motion the emperor answer the copy of which he bring home and give me^ which after follow that see they deny we trade we may take they but upon conference with the lieger of China the emperor mind be change and will not allow of that article the rest be pass under his great seal which be not of wax as we but stamp like a print and colour red the eleven the present appoint for the mintmaster be deliver he which he take thankful and return to i two japonian gown of taffeta quilt with silk Cotton the twelve master Adams be send to the mintmaster be the emperor merchant and have charge of his mint and ready money a man of very great esteem with the emperor and one that have vow that whensoever the emperor shall die he will cut out his own gut and die with he master Adams carry unto he the particular price of our english commodity as before be specify about noon the same day we depart foe Edoo to the emperor son be furnish with horse and man by the emperor as former the country betwixt Surunga and Edoo be well inhabit we see many Fotoquise or temple as we pass and among other one image of especial note call the description of a image call make of copper be hollow within but of a very substantial thickness it be in height as we guess from the ground about one and twenty or two and twenty foot in the likeness of a man kneel upon the ground with his buttock rest on his heel his arm of wonderful largeness and the whole body proportionable he be fashion wear of a gown this image be much reverence by traveller as they pass there some of our people go into the body of it and hoop and hallow which make a exceed great noise we find many character and mark make upon it by passenger who some of my follower imitate and make they in like manner it stand in the main road of the pilgrimage to Tencheday which be much frequent for night and day rich and poor be com^^^g and go to visit Tencheday pilgrimage to Tencheday m. Adams tell i that he have be at the or temple dedicate to this tencheday to who they make this devout pilgrimage and as he report there be monthly one of the fair virgin of the whole country bring into that Fotoqui virgin dedicate to a idol and there she sit all alone in a ^come neat keep in a very sober manner and at certain time this tencheday which be think to be the devil appear unto she and have know she carnal leave with she at his departure certain scale like unto the scale of fish what question she be will by the bonzee or priest of that Fotoqui to ask Tencheday resolve and every month a fresh virgin be take in but what become of the old master Adams himself do not know we arrive at Edoo the fourteen we arrive at Edoo a city much great than Surunga far fair building and make a very glorious appearance unto we the ridge tile and corner-tile rich gild the post of their door gild and varnish glass-window they have none but great window of board open in leaf well set out with paint as in Holland there be a causeway which go through the chief street of the town underneath this causeway run a river at every fifty pace there be a wellhead fit very substantial of freestone with bucket for the neighbour to fetch water and for danger of fire this street be as broad as any of our street in England the fifteen I give the king secretary saddadona to understand of my arrival request he to let the king know thereof the seventeen I have access to the king and deliver he the present from our king as also certain from myself according to the custom of the country the king keep his court in the castle of Edoo which be much fair and strong than that of Surunga he be better guard and attend upon than the emperor his father saddadona the king secretary be father to codskedona the emperor secretary who year afford better experience he be therefore appoint to have the government and direction of the young king who at our be there we esteem to be age about two and forty year my entertainment and access to the king here be much like to the former at Surunga with the emperor he accept very kind our king letter and present bid i welcome and wish i to refresh myself and his letter and present to our king shall be make ready with all speed the nineteen I deliver saddadona his present this day two and thirty man be command to a certain house for not pay their debt and be in the stock within the house the house in the night time by casualty fire and they be all burn to death towards evening the king send two varnish armour for a present to our King he send likewise a or long sword which none may wear there but soldier of the best rank and a waggadash for a present to myself from Edoo to the northermost part of japan it be esteem two and twenty day journey by horse little more or less the one and twenty we part by boat from Edoo to Oringgaw a town upon the sea side from whence we arrive at Surunga the nine and twenty day and there remain for the emperor letter and present to our King the eight of October I receive the emperor letter direct to our sovereign lord james king of great Britain the true copy whereof be as follow to the king of great Britain your majesty kind letter send i by your servant captain John Saris who be the first that I have know to arrive in any part of my dominion I hearty embrace be not a little glad to understand of your great wisdom and power as have three plentiful and mighty kingdom under your powerful command I acknowledge your majesty great bounty in send i so undeserved a present of many rare thing such as my land afford not neither have I ever before scene which I receive not as from a stranger but as from your majesty who I esteem as myself desire the continuance of friendship with your highness and that it may stand with your good like to send your subject to any part or port of my dominion where they shall be most hearty welcome applaud much their worthiness in the admirable knowledge of navigation have with much facility discover a country so remote be no whit amaze with the distance of so mighty a gulf nor greatness of such infinite cloud and storm from prosecute honourable enterprise of discovery and merchandize wherein they shall find i to further they according to their desire I return unto your majesty a small token of my love by your say subject desire you to accept thereof as from he that much rejoice in your friendship and whereas your majesty subject have desire certain privilege for trade and settle of a factory in my dominion I have not only grant what they demand but have confirm the same unto they under my broad-seale for better establish thereof from my castle in Surunga this four day of the nine month in the eighteen year of our Dary according to our computation rest your majesty friend the high commander in this kingdom of japan subscribe minna Mouttono you yea I also receive the say privilege for trade in * * the Character^ hau^ by some be thought to be those of China but I compare they with China book and they se^med to i quite different yet not letter to compound word by spell as we but word express in their several character as the Chinois use and the brevity manifest I take they character peculiar to japan take they thou reader and judge better if thou can japan the original be leave with master cock the copy thereof with the seal in black here follow the translation whereof as near to the original as may be follow the japonian charter the line to be read downward beginning at the right hand (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) this last be the seal privilege grant by OGOSHOSAMA emperor of japan unto the right worshipful sir THOMAS smith knight governor and other the honourable and worshipful adventurer to the east indies 1 we give free licence to the subject of the king of great Britain viz. sir Thomas Smith governor and company of the east indian merchant and adventurer for ever safe to come into any of our port of our empire of japan with their ship and merchandize without any hindrance to they or their good and to abide buy sell and barter according to their own manner with all nation to tarry here as long as they think good and to depart at their pleasure 2 item we grant unto they freedom of custom for all such merchandize as either now they have bring or hereafter shall bring into our kingdom or shall from hence transport to any foreign part and do authorise those ship that hereafter shall arrive and come from England to proceed to present sale of their commodity without further come or send up to our court. 3 item if any of their ship shall happen to be in danger of shipwreck we will our subject not only to assist they but that such part of ship and good as shall be save be return to their captain or cape merchant or their assign and that they shall or may build one house or more for themselves in any part of our empire where they shall think fit and at their departure to make sale thereof at their pleasure 4 item if any of the english merchant or other shall depart this life within our dominion the good of the decease shall remain at the dispose of the cape merchant and that all offence commit by they shall be punish by the say cape merchant according to his discretion and our law to take no hold of their person or good 5 item we will that you our subject trade with they for any of their commodity pay they for the same according to agreement without delay or return of their ware again unto they 6 item for such commodity as they have now bring or shall hereafter bring fit for our service and proper use we will that no arrest be make thereof but that the price be make with the cape merchant according as they may sell to other and present payment upon the delivery of the good 7 item if in discovery of other country for trade and return of their ship they shall need man or victual we will that you our subject furnish they for their money as their need shall require the discovery of Yeadzo to the northward 8 and that without other passport they shall and may set out upon the discovery of Yeadzo or any other part in or about our empire from our castle in Surunga this first day of the nine month and in the eighteen year of our * * or reign Dary according to our computation seal with our broad-seale etc. underwritten minna Mottono you yea note that oringgaw be a very good harbour for ship where ship may ride as safe as in the river of Thames before London Oringgaw the best haven or road for we and the passage thereto by sea very safe and good so that it will be much better for our ship to sail thither then to Firando in respect that Oringgaw be upon the main island and be distant from Edoo the chief city but fourteen or fifteen league the place be not so well replenish with victual and flesh-meat as Firando be which want only except Oringgaw be for all other matter to be prefer before Firando at my return to Surunga I find a spanish ambassador arrive there from the who only have sight of the emperor a spanish ambassador from the and deliver he his present which be certain China damask and five jar of sweet wine of Europe after the first time he can not obtain access to the emperor his embassage be that such portugal and spaniard as be within his dominion not authorize by the king of Spain may be deliver up unto he to carry away to the which the emperor deny to do say that his country be a free country and none shall be force out of it but if the ambassador can persuade any to go they shall not be stay this come of the spanish ambassador for man be cause by the great want of man they have to defend the Molucca land from the dutch who then make great preparation for the absolute conquest thereof after that the ambassador have attend for the emperor answer the time limit he by his commission see it come not he depart discontent but be at the seaside there be a answer return for he to carry with a slender present viz. five japan gown and two cattan or sword the nine we depart from Surunga at Edoo about a month before my come thither the emperor be displease with the christian make proclamation a proclamation against the christian that they shall forthwith remove and carry away all their church to Langasacque a town situate on the seaside and distant from Firando about eight league and that no christian church shall stand nor mass be sing within ten league of his court upon pain of death a while after certain of the natural be seven and twenty in number man of good fashion be assemble together in a hospital appoint by the christian for leper and there have a mass whereof the emperor be inform command they to be shut up in a house for one night and that the next day they shall suffer death the same evening another man for debt be clap up in the same house be a heathen at his come in and ignorant of Christ and his religion but which be wonderful the next morning when the officer call at the door for those which be christians to come forth and go to execution and those which be not and do renounce the same to stay behind this man in that night space be so instruct by the other that resolute he come out with the rest and be crucify with they in our passage towards Miaco from Surunga we have for the most part much rain whereby the water do so rise that we be force to stay by the way so that it be the sixteenth of October before we get thither be the great city of japan the description of the city of Miaco consist most upon merchandize the chief Fotoqui or temple of the whole country be there be build of freestone and be as long as the western end of saint Paul in London from the quire be as high arch and bear upon pillar as that be where many bonzee do attend for their maintenance their bonzee idol altar offering etc. as the priest among papist there be a altar whereon they do offer Rice and small money call whereof twenty make one shilling english which be employ for the use of the bonzee near unto this altar there be a idol by the native call Mannada make of copper much resemble that of former speak of but be much high for it reach up to the very arch. this Fotoqui be begin to be build by Taicosania in his life-time and since his son have proceed to the finish thereof which be new make a end of when we be there within the enclosure of the wall of this Fotoqui there be bury by the report of the inhabitant the ear and nose of three thousand coreans which be massacre at one time upon their grave be a mount raise with a pyramid on the top thereof which mount be green and very neat keep the horse that Taicosania last ride on be keep near unto this have never be ride since his hoof be extraordinary grow with his age and still stand there the Fotoqui stand upon the top of a high hill and on either side as you mount up to it have fifty pillar of freestone distant ten pace one from the other and on every pillar a lantern wherein every night light be maintain of lamp-oil in this city of Miaco college of jesuit in Miaco the new testament in the japan language the Portugal jesuit have a very stately college wherein likewise be diverse jesuit natural japonian which preach and have the new testament print in the japan language in this college be many japonian child train up and instruct in the rudiment of christian religion according to the romish church there be not less than five or six thousand japonian in this city of Miaco profess Christ beside the Fotoqui before describe there be many other fotoquis in this city the tradesman and artificer be distribute by themselves every occupation and trade in their several street and not mingle together as here with we at Miaco we stay expect the emperor present which at length be deliver to i out of the castle be ten beob or large picture to hang a chamber with the twenty we depart from Miaco and come the same night to Fushimi the one and twenty about noon we arrive at Osaca Osaca here we find the people very rude follow we cry tosin tosin that be chinaes other call we Core and fling stone at we the grave people of the town not once reprove they but rather animate of they and set they on here we find the galley ready which have attend for we ever since our land at the charge of the king of Firando the four and twenty at night we all embark for Firando we embark for Firando November 6. the six of November we arrive at Firando and be kind bid welcome by king foin all this while our people sell little the custom of the country be that without express permission from the emperor no stranger may offer good to sale beside our chief commodity intend for those part be broad-cloath which according to former intelligence have late be sell there at forty rial of eight the mat which be two yard as aforesaid the native be now more backward to buy then before because they see that we ourselves be no forward in wear the thing which we recommend unto they for say they you commend your cloth unto we but you yourselves wear lest thereof the better sort of you wear silken garment the mean fustian etc. wherefore hope that good counsel may though late come to some good purpose I wish that our nation will be more forward to use and spend this natural commodity of our own country so shall we better encourage and allure other to the entertainment and expense thereof @. 8 accident after his return to Firando the settle of a factory there departure for Bantam and thence for England the seven of November I visit the king with present first and after with presence and be kind entertain the eight andrew palmer steward of the ship and William Marnell gunners mate lay ashore all night and in a drunken humour go into the field and fight and wound each other so sore that it be think palmer will hardly escape with his life and Marnell be lame of his hand for ever the nine in the morning very early I go aboard the ship and carry m. cock along with i and call the master and all the officer into my cabin make it know unto they that it much grieve i the indirect course some of they take namely palmer and Marnell who go out of the ship without licence and have wound one a other so sore that the one be in danger of his life and the other a lame man for ever and that which be more the suruiver in danger to be hang if the other die which can not choose but be a great heart grief unto i as also to understand that Francis Williams and Simon Colphax be in the boat go ashore to have fight and John Dench and John winston appoint to do the like and Dench confess it be true and that he see palmer and Marnell fight and go and part they otherwise both have remain dead in the field these matter I tell they be grievous unto i and therefore I will they it may be amend in time otherwise they will dispeople the ship to the utter overthrow of our voyage and deceive the honourable company that have put their trust in we after much contestation each one depart with promise to amend what be amiss and not to offend in any sort hereafter which God grant may prove true I tell they also that foin same the old king have make complaint unto i that if any more come ashore to fight and shed blood in his country contrary to his law he will cause they to be cut in piece for that he will not suffer stranger to have more privilege in that matter then his own subject and at my return to the english house Foyne same the king come to visit i and tell i the piece of Poldavis and a Shash I give he be consume with fire when his house be burn which be a manner of beg two more which I promise he and get he to send of his people aboard with my jurebasso John japan to signify to the company that if any of they come ashore to fight any more the king have give order to cut they in piece and not to suffer any one to return aboard I do this in hope to restrain they from such drunken combat towards night come a Spaniard from call John and bring two letter from Domingo Francisco one for i and the other for m. cock and send i a present of three basket of sugar and a pot of conserve with many no less sugar conserve word of compliment in his letter that he be sorry that our seven man be go away in his absence excuse both himself and the father or jesuite that they have no hand in the matter neither ever speak such word that we be heretic or thief yet say our man be go away from thence three of they in a china or japan Soma for the manillias and the other four in a Portugal vessel but I hold these but word to excuse themselves and put other man in fault for the spaniard love not the portugal neither either of both the japan much less the japan they the eleven I go and visit Nobesane he use i kind and will have have i come to dinner to morrow but I excuse the matter in respect of the much business I have and short time of stay I meet the old king Foyne at his house who desire to have two piece English powder beef and two of pork sod with turnip radish and onion by our cook and send unto he which I cause to be do wind northerly a fresh gale day and night fair dry weather but cold the twelve the two king governor come to visit i at the english house and from thence go aboard the Clove master cock accompany they to signify unto the master and the rest of the company that from hence forward our ship company shall have a care how they come a shore to fight and shed blood for that the law of the country be that they which go out to fight and draw weapon be to die the death and all those which do behold they oblige to kill both party in pain of ruinate all their generation if they do not kill both party the fourteen I send m. cock and my jurebasso to both the king to entreat they to provide i of a dozen seaman that be able to do their labour to go with i for England and for wage I be willing to give they what in reason their highness think fit the king be impeach about other matter so they speak with their secretary who tell they they need not to speak about that matter to the king for that they will provide i a dozen such as shall be fit but that there be diverse vagrant people about town which no doubt will be willing to go yet be not fit to be carry to sea for that when they come there they will serve for nothing but to spend victual and of such the fleming serve their turn without make request unto they and what be become of they or the ship be not know to this day but see that now the matter be refer to they they will look out for such as be for our purpose the eighteen Foyne the old king send i word he will come and visit i and bring the dance bear or courtesan of the country which soon after he do be three whore of the country and two or three other man with they they all dance and make music after the country fashion although harsh to our hear the nineteen the captain Chinesa and George Dura^ the Portugal come unto i severe justice in japan desire i to send to Semidone to procure the liberty of two honest poor man who be like to loose their life for bid a poor knave fly which have steal a little piece of lead not worth three half penny and yet the malefactor be take and put to death and these man in danger to have do the like have I not send m. cock with my ring to Semidone to desire pardon for they for my sake which he grant to procure and do effect it the twenty Samedon the king of Crats send i word he will come aboard our ship so I meet he there he be accompany with both the king of Firando they have five piece of ordnance at their entry aboard and three with shot or bullet be shoot at a mark at the request of Samedon he give i two pike or japan staff with cattan or sable on the end and so they depart with seven piece of ordnance for a farewell one be with shot at the mark aforesaid the twenty two a present be lay out and send to Samedon king of Crats it be deliver unto he at Tomesanes the young king house he be there at breakfast and take in very kind part send i word by m. cock that he be double oblige unto i first in his kind entertainment aboard and now in send he such a present of worth of such thing as his country afford not the like and all without any desert of he only the recompense he can make be that for his sake if ever any of the english nation do come within his dominion he will bid they kind welcome and show they any favour he can the twenty five in the morning betimes the purser and m. Hownsell come ashore and tell i Andrew Palmer the steward depart out of this world about ten of the clock the night past and that the chirurgeon Thomas Warner affirm as he tell i the like many time before that palmer be the occasion of his own death his wound be curable if he will have be rule I will the purser m. Melsham to go aboard and that the master and he shall take order to carry he and bury he on a island as secret as may be in respect we be about to get some japan to go along in our ship which it may be hear of the death of any one will make they the more unwilling the twenty eight a japan be put to death some say for theft other say he be a house-burner he be lead by the hangman to execution one carry a board before he wherein be write the fact he have commit as the like be write in a paper flag over his head and two pikeman follow he with the point of their pike hard to his back to have kill he if he have offer to resist diverse of this place complain that the ship company owe they money and now the ship be ready to depart desire payment which to prevent a great inconvenience I hearken unto and write to the master to inquire aboard who they be that be indebt and what the sum be they owe to the intent to make satisfaction and so to abate it out of their wage now touch a factory to be leave there I have on the twenty six assemble my merchandize counsel where upon these consideration viz. the encouragement we have receive in the Moluccas by private intelligence the dutch factory already plant here in Firando the large privilege now obtain of the emperor of japan the certain advice of the english factory settle in siam and Patane the commodity rest unsold upon our hand appoint for these part and the hope for profit which further experience may produce it be resolve that a factory shall be leave here viz. eight English three japan jurebass or interpreter the settle of a english factory in japan and two servant who be appoint against the come of the next ship to search and discover the coast of corea Tushmay and other part of japan and country thereunto adjoin to see what good may be do in any of they the five of December m. Richard cock December captain and cape merchant of the english factory settle at Firando in japan take his leave of i aboard the Clove with his company be eight English and five other after their departure our company be muster aboard find forty six english five Swarts fifteen japaner three passenger in all sixty nine have lose since our arrival here three English two by sickness one slay and seven which run away to the portugal and spaniard while I be at the emperor Court the name of the english we leave in the factory with m. cock be William Adams entertain at a hundred pound the year into the company service tempest peacocke Richard wickham William Eton Walter carwarden Edward Sares William nelson we return home from japan the wind northerly a stiff gale we set sail be four league from the place where we ride our course south by west half a point westerly latitude thirty three degree fourteen minute note that by exact observation on the shore we find this island of Firando to stand in latitude thirty three degree thirty minute variation at Firando 2. deg. 50. minute easterly we sail alongst the coast of China a great current shoot out between corea and the main of China Sumbor variation two degree fifty minute easterly it be resolve to keep alongst the coast of China direct to Bantam and so we bring aboard our starboard tack and steer away south-west edge over for China the wind at north north-east a stiff gale and fair weather the six latitude thirty one degree thirty nine minute way south by west forty league the seven it blow very much wind a storm at northwest we steer south south-west no observation there we feel the great current which shoot out between the island corea and the main of China which make a very great sea way south south-west half point westerly twenty five league the eight latitude twenty nine degree forty one minute way south-west twenty six league wind northwest a very stiff gale we steer west south-west to make cape Sumbor upon the coast of China the sea very much grow so much wind that it blow our main course out of the bolt rope the nine latitude twenty eight degree twenty three minute way south-west three quarter westerly twenty two league and two three part we sound and have forty nine and forty five fathom Ozie the weather clear and the wind come to the north but we can see no land the eleven no observation way west south-west thirty five league very green water we keep our lead and have forty nine forty three thirty five thirty seven thirty fathom no sight of land yet very clear wind north and northwest by north. the twelve before day we sound and have thirty five fathom Ozie wind north and northwest by north a stiff gale and in the morning esteem ourselves to be near the coast of China we have sight of at the least three hundred sail of juncke of twenty thirty and upward ton apiece whereof two come to the windward close by we but perceive they to be fisherman three hundred sail of small fisherman land of fisher latitude 25. deg. 59 minute we let they pass use all the fair mean we can to get some of they to come aborad but can not prevail wherefore we stand on our course west by south and present descry the land be two land call the land of fisher bear west by north half a point northerly some four league off latitude at noon twenty five degree fifty nine minute way south-west by west fifty league depth twenty and twenty six fathom soon after the wind come to north-east we bring our larboard tack aboard and steer alongst the land south southeast very much wind about seven at night we come fair by a rock a rock which by God mercy we descry by moonlight and lay right in our course suppose to have run from noon to this time twelve league we be within twice our ship length of the rock depth thirty fathom then we hale off south one watch to give the land a birth and after midnight steer south-west the wind at north-east very much wind and continual follow we as the land trent variation 1. degree 30. minute easterly the thirteen latitude twenty four degree thirty five minute variation one degree thirty minute easterly way south-west fifty four league wind at north-east fair weather we steer south-west keep fair by the land lie alongst the main of China some five league off much wind the fourteen in the morning little wind have this night pass have twelve and fourteen fathom than stand off into deep water latitude at noon twenty two degree ten minute way south-west by south one quarter westerly forty two league wind at east north-east latitude 22. de. 10. minute and at eight at night we have fifteen thirteen fathom at nine a clock sixteen twenty seven twenty one and twenty five sandy ground the fifteen in the morning we come among many fisher-boat but have so much wind as that we can not speak with they they make sign to we to keep up to the westward as we think many fisher-boat latitude 21. de. 40. minute our sound the last night to this present be twenty twenty four twenty five twenty fathom three league of the land latitude at noon twenty one degree forty minute way west south-west one quarter southerly fifty two league the wind at north north-east a stiff gale we steer in west northwest northerly to make the land and about two hour after have sight of it but by reckon shall not have be near it by fifty six league so that the distance from Firando hither be less by fifty six league note note that the land which lie alongst the coast of China lie more southerly then in the plait about three in the afternoon we be by a island call Sancha about two league off we steer south-west alongst the land esteem to have run since noon three league west northwest the sixteenth at noon no observation way forty league south-west by south one quarter westerly wind at east with drisling rain latitude 18. deg. 19 minute variation 50. min. westerly the seventeen latitude eighteen degree nineteen minute course south-west by south one quarter westerly forty seven league wind at east variation fifty minute westerly we sound but have no ground the eighteen latitude fifteen degree forty three minute course south-west by south sixty league wind at east a stiff gale and at f^ue at night we have sight of land be a island call pulo Cotan bear west south-west about five league off we steer south-west this island be high land pulo Cotan and lie about twenty league by report from the shoal call Plaxel to the westward of it we sound about eight of the clock but have no ground Plaxel the nineteen in the morning Camboia the main of Camboia be on our star-boord-side about two league off we steer alongst south by east easterly keep the main in sight latitude at noon thirteen degree one and thirty minute way south by west forty four league we steer alongst south south-west make account to be thwart a Varella a Varella Camboia be not so far easterly as it be set in our plait keep about two league of the shore we sound but have no ground at fifty fathom note that this land of Camboia lie more easterly in our plait than it shall for we find south south-west to go alongst the land a fair birth off so that the land here lie south south-west and north north-east have diverse rock like land some one league some league and a half of the main but otherwise no danger that we can see note also that here we find the wind trade alongst the shore for from Firando hither we do go large find the wind to follow we as the land trent the twenty latitude ten degree fifty three minute course south by west fifty four league wind at north a stiff gale alongst the shore and three glass after we have observe we have sight of a small island which we make to be the island at the end of the shoal call pulo and at five glass run we sound and have eleven fathom fine sand two league of the shore pulo or pulo Ceci^ observation true we steer alongst south-west to bring the point of the shoal call pulo a starne then we found about two glass after and have fifteen fathom note that we find jan van book very true for thereby we direct ourselves ever from our set forth from Firando the one and twenty latitude nine degree forty three minute course south-west a quarter westerly thirty four league wind at east north-east a continual stiff gale till noon then calm and find that we be in a tide gird our depth all the last night to this noon be ten sixteen seventeen eighteen twenty one twenty one nineteen twenty twenty nineteen eighteen fathom good ground but have no sight of land the two and twenty in the morning pulo condor latitude 8. deg. 20. min. we have sight of land be a island call pulo condor bear of we about five league off we steer south-west the w^nd at north-east latitude at noon eight degree twenty minute way south-west by west forty league and two three part depth eighteen nineteen twenty two twenty one twenty one twenty two and twenty one fathom we steer south south-west for the land call the seven point the three and twentieh no observe way south-west by south one quarter southerly fifty one league depth twenty twenty two twenty four and at noon twenty seven fathom the four and twenty way south-west half a point westerly thirty three league one three part wind at northwest by north depth thirty seven thirty nine forty three forty and at noon thirty five fathom Ozie ground the five and twenty latitude two degree thirty eight minute course south by east latitude 2. deg. 38. min. one quarter of a league easterly twenty two league one three part the wind at northwest and east by north depth thirty four thirty two thirty thirty four thirty four thirty four thirty five and about four a clock in the morning we make the land be a island call pulo Timon distant from we some five league and at six in the morning pulo Timon the northermost part bear south-west westerly and the south part south south-west half a point westerly we have sight of another island call pulo Tinga bear south south-west westerly pulo Tinga about six league off at noon the six and twenty latitude one degree eighteen minute course southeast by south thirty two league wind at east and east by north depth thirty seven thirty six thirty seven thirty five thirty and twenty seven fathom the seven and twenty course south by east forty league and two three part depth twenty seven thirty one twenty eight twenty nine twenty eight twenty six and twenty four fathom at noon the eight and twenty way south southeast forty league and two three part depth eighteen nineteen sixteen eighteen nineteen sixteen and at noon fifteen fathom sandy ground make account that chinabata be about one league and a half of be low land chinabata or pulo-bato and at the south-west full of tree or bush at six glass afternoon we sound and have twenty fathom Ozie ground steer alongst the land south southeast the wind at north northwest note that those long land on our star-boord-side here and diverse small Iland^ on our lar-boord-side do make the straits of chinabata find it to be true lay do^ne in plat or draught make by jan janson mole a Hollander which he give to master Hippon the plat of jan janson Mol^ and he to the company the nine and twenty a little before noon we perceive the water to be much change a head and therefore doubt it to be a shoal so narrow escape a very great danger ^ee sound and have eleven a dangerous shoal not far from the entrance of the straight of chinabata l^^^tude four deg six min. twelve fourteen fifteen fathom but within half a glass have eight and seven fathom and a half it seem three square sharp to the south-west-ward and so we steer when we have first sight thereof not far from the entrance of the straits of chinabata this shoal lie very dangerous but be true place with his depth latitude at noon four degree six minute course south by west thirty league wind at northwest and north depth twenty thirteen fifteen twenty four twenty seven twenty twenty five twenty eightetne ten ten ten eight and ten fathom soft sand and at eight a clock in the night we come to a anchor in seven fathom the weather likely to be foul and our experience little or nothing the place very f^ll of shoal and before our anchor be a ground we be in six six and a quarter five and a half six and then in seven fathom soft sandy ground than wind at northwest a small gale and rainy the darling sail ^or coromandell de^th o^ sir h. Middleton and loss of the trade increase a sunken ledge of rock the thirtie^h this morning we have sight of the darling ply for Coromandell her company one and twenty English and nine Swarts by they we first understand of the death of sir Henry Middleton and l^sse of the trade increase etc. the weather close we observe not way south south-west half a point westerly fifteen league depth ten thirteen fourteen eleven ten nine eight seven six and a half ten ten six and a half seven five four and a half four and a quarter five five and four fathom hard sandy ground esteem this the shoal describe in mole plat and not that which we make it for this night God merciful deliver we out of a great danger for we pass by a sink ledge of rock under all our sail within a stone cast of the top thereof which be only see above water and have not the noise of the breach upon it waken we we can not have clear ourselves we do let fall our anchor present be in a great tide gird and have seventeen seventeen fathom and a half Ozie ground the one and thirty in the morning as we ride the high land of sumatra be about league of we the high land of sumatra and one island a starne the pass shoal or ledge of rock on the starboard side and three small land on our larboard bow lie three square way south three quarter easterly one and twenty league^ wind at northwest depth ten nine eight seven nine ten eleven twelve fifteen twenty two fathom about eight league of the high-land of java we can not get in because it fall calm january 1 the expedition find ^or England we arrive in Bantam roade the first of january be calm be most spend at a anchor the second have a little wind we set sail and about eight of the clock meet with the expedition and understand that she be find homeward lade with pepper we write by they to our friend in England the three we come to a anchor in Bantam roade find to our great grief no lade in readiness for which I just blame those who I have leave there to provide the same who excuse themselves say that they do not as yet expect i I question with Kewee the chief merchant of the chinese be come aboard to visit i what price pepper do bear and how he will sell. he answer that it be already know ashore that I be homeward find and must of necess^tie lade pepper whereof my merchant have provide none aforehand I may be assure it will rise he say it be then at twelve rial of eight the ten sack but he will not undertake to deliver any quantity at that price I offer he twel^e rial and a half for ten sack but find he so far off as that there be no hope of deal at the present note that of the ten leave in the factory here for the eight voyage at our departure for japan we find now but five live at our return between Firando and Bantam we lose only one the four in the morning I go ashore visit the governor of Bantam and present he with two fair cattan and diverse other thing of worth this day I bargain with Kewee and Lackmoye for four thousand sack of pepper at thirteen rial of eight the ten sack three the hundred and appoint the merchant to hasten the mill thereof all that may be the multiplicity of factory for each voyage cause the price to rise each out-bidding oth^rs for the particular account of their own voyage not without loss to the public the five be spend in reduce the several english factory in Bantam to one government and settle they in one house also order be take that the expense of diet shall be more frugal manage and not spend in rack house abroad or on hangby Swarts at home as of la^e it have be and that the warehouse in the town shall be few in number and better look unto as well it may be the good be with more discretion orderly stow the six in the reweighing of the pepper receive the day before we find most of the sack hard weight and many to want of what the king b^ame do allow wherefore I send for the weigh use he kind entreat he to take a little more care and pain to amend this fault which he promise to do whereto the better to encourage he I appoint the value of five rial of eight to be give he the sixteenth be the sabbath day I stay aboard about two of the clock in the afternoon the town be all on a fire wherefore our Skiffe be well man be present send ashore to help the merchant to guard the good the wind be so violent the whole town of Bantam burn down save the english and hollander house that in a moment of time almost the whole town be burn down the english and dutch house except which it please God of his mercy to preserve the twenty be ashore I procure Lackmoy and launch two Chinesa merchant to translate the letter which the king of Firando in japan have deliver i to carry to our king james it be write in China character and language they translate it into the malayan which in english be as follow viz. to the king of great Britain etc. most mighty king how acceptable your majesty love letter and bountiful present of many worthy thing send i by your servant captain John Saris be unto i I can sufficient express neither the great happiness I esteem myself to be in by enjoy your highness friendship for which I render you many thanks desire the continuance of your majesty love and acquaintance I be hearty glad of your subject safe arrival at my small island from so long a journey my help and furtherance they shall not want to the uttermost for the effect of their so worthy and laudable enterprise of discovery and merchandize great commend their forwardness therein refer their hitherto entertainment to the report of your servant by who I return unto your majesty a unworthy token wish your majesty long life from my place of Firando the six day of our ten month your majesty love friend commander of this island Firando in japan foin sam-masam they can not well pronounce his name for launch say it be * * this come to pass by the China character which in proper name borrow the character of other word of like or near sound and therefore cause often mistake as joseph acosta have observe diverse english and scottish soldier February 1 tide of twelve hour flood and twelve ebb in Sund^ may 16 1614 the concord the first ship set out for the joint stock Foyne Foshin Sam but Lackmoy say as be above write the two and twenty such house as the former fire have spare be now burn down yet the english and dutch house escape again thanks be to God the six and twenty here arrive a flemish ship of a thousand ton from Holland call the Flushing at the island mayo the company have mutine against the captain and have murder he in his cabin but that it please God a scotchman reveal the matter even when they be arm to the exploit so that they be take betwixt the deck with their weapon about they in this ship be diverse English and scottish soldier shee stay not here but towards evening set sail for jaccatra the seven and twenty I go ashore to hasten the merchant diverse of our company be at this present fall sick our ship have now her full lade in the first of February the darling be enforce to return hither and order by common council be take both for her good and present send to Socadanna and after to Patane and siam the thirteen day we get out of the straits of Sunda note that in the straight of Sunda the tide set twelve hour to the eastward which be flood and twelve hour to the westward which be ebb the sixteenth of may 1614 we come to a anchor in the bay of Saldania where we find the concord of London be the first that be set out for the joint stock we find the natural of this place very treacherous at the present make sign unto we of the forcible carry away of two of their people they have wound one of the concord man very sore and whilst we be up in the land they do assault those that keep our Skiffe carry away our grapnel and have spoil those that be leave to tend she but that they take the water the nineteen here arrive a flemish ship find for Bantam the master Cornelis Van harte we remain here three and twenty day and have well refresh ourselves take with we fourteen ox and seventy sheep alive beside good store of fish and beef the beef of Saldania take salt well which we powder there find it to take salt well contrary to former report for ten day after our depart from Saldania we have the wind at northwest and west northwest but then come to south-west so that we may go our course northwest the seven and twenty of September we arrive thanks be to God at Plymouth where for the space of five or six week we endure more tempestuous weather September 27. we arrive at Plymouth and our life more endanger then upon the whole voyage beside since which have have some spare time I have collect certain note in the journal omit and have think good to cause they here to attend the former relation @. 9 intelligence concern Yedzo deliver in the city of Edoo in japan by a japanner who have be there twice that Yedzo be a island and lie on the northwest side of japan and distant from thence ten league Yedzo be a island hairy people that the people be white and of good condition but very hairy all their body over like monkey their weapon be bow and arrow poison the people in the southermost part thereof do understand weight and measure whereof within the land thirty day journey they be ignorant they have much silver and sand-gold whereof they make payment to the japanner for Rice etc. Rice and Cotton cloth of japan be here well request iron and lead be bring to they from japan necessary for the belly and back be most vendible to they Rice transport from japan to Yedzo have yield four for one the town where the japanner have their chief residence and mart be call matchma matchma therein be five hundred household of japanner who likewise have a fort there the governor whereof be call matchmadonna this town of matchma be the principal mart town of all Yedzo whither the natives most resort to buy and sell especial in September for their provision for winter in march they bring down salmon and dry fish of sundry sort and other ware for which the japanner barter which the japanner rather desire then silver people of low stature far to the northward a current to the east north-east the japanner have no settle be or trade in any other town than matchma that further to the northward upon the same land be people of very low stature like dwarf that the yedzo be people of the stature of the japanner and have no apparel but what be bring they from japan that there set a very violent current between Yedzo and japan which come from corea and set to the east north-east that the wind be for the most part as usual they be in japan viz. that the northerly wind begin in September and end in march and then the southerly wind begin to blow chap. 2 observation of the say captain JOHN SARIS of occurrent which happen in the east indies during his abode at Bantam from October 1605. till Octob. 1609. as likewise touch the mart and merchandize of those part observe by his own experience or relation of other extract out of his large book and here add as a appendix to his former great voyage and may serve as a continuation of master Scots premise relation to which be add certain observation of the say author touch the town and merchandise of principal trade in those part of the World leave eighteen man in all viz. five ma^ine^s and thirteen sailor a flemish juncke from Pr^aman ^^wes of sir E^ward M^chelborne the danger from our man of war to our merchant the seven of October 1605. our general Henry Middleton and captain Christopher Coulthurst depart this road for England the eight we kill one of varowes slave which will have fire our house the three and twenty here arrive a junck of the fleming from Priaman by who we understand of sir Edward Michelborne and captain davis there be upon the coast and that they have take a guzerate juncke in the straits of Sunda which come from Bantam find to Priaman the five and twenty we be command to the court upon the report the fleming have make of sir Edward where it be demand whether we know he and wherefore he shall offer violence to the king friend which have do he no wrong it be answer we know a knight so call but whether he be upon the coast or no we know not nor do know the guzerate to be take but by the report of the fleming which we hold fabulous and that upon their better consideration it may prove rather to be one of the fleming ship which set sail two day before the departure of the say guzerate from Bantam whereupon we be will to depart admiral verhagen^et ^et sail for Holland s^r Edward Michelborne come into the road till far proof can be make the six and twenty admiral Vanhangen of Vtricke depart for Holland with two ship more in company by who we advise the company of all matter at large the nine and twenty sir Edward Michelborne come to anchor here in the road of Bantam master Towerson and myself go aboard to he where we have good entertainment nou. 2. 1605. sir Edward set sail for the straits of Pallingban a flemish pinnace upon discovery of the island call Paul Vansoult set sail Decem. 2. 1605 a flemish juncke from Patany general Warwick arrive januar. 2. 1605. a java juncke set sai^e for Tymore fraught by Chineses may 23. 1606. news of the fleming loss of Ternata the fleming pinnace pillage by the king fleet of Bantam the king fleet return june 15. Nockhoda Tingall from Banda mace sell for in Bantam a hundred and fifty rial the Bahar four hundred and fifty ca^tees the fleming return from August 6. the moon eclipse in Bantam October 4. the China quarter burn down the west Friesland beat from Ternata a frigate of the fleming from Soocadanna a earthquake in Bantam December 13. intelligence give by the juncke of ^ore of eleven sail of fleming at Mal^acca may 22. june 5. the fleming discover the viceroy of Goa w^th a fle^t of sixteen sail of ship and he do intimate unto we the take of the guzerate we entreat he that he will not take the China juncke the which he promise we as he be a gentleman he will not the second of November 1605. sir Edward set sail direct his course for the straits of Pallingban the thirteen here arrive a small ship of the fleming from the Moluccas call the little sun the eighteen here depart a small pinnace of the fleming for the discovery of the island call which as it be say afford great store of Gold the four and twenty vansoult set sail for Choromandell the second of December 1605. here arrive three juncke from Pattanny they bring news of the great loss the fleming have have by fire there the seventeen general Warwick arrive here from Patanny where he have take a very rich carrack which come from Mackcan the great part of her lade be raw silk the second of january 1605. here depart a juncke of this town fraught by Chineses for Temore their lade or commodity they carry w^s Brand piece of silver beat very thin of a hand-breadth English iron course Purseline Taffa^^es China pan and bell the twenty arrive a China juncke which sir Edward Michelborne have take and restitution be demand of we the governor and principal ^ be very much offend but by the admiral and sabandar be pacify the Nockhoda of the juncke allege many rich parcel take the three and twenty of may 1606. here arrive a small frigate of the fleming from ternate and bring away their merchant which have be leave there by Bastianson the Spaniard have take away all they have but give every man his liberty they carry the king of ternate for the mannelye and as it be report they purpose to send he for Spain some ten league from jackatra this flemish frigate chance^ to meet with the king of Bantams fleet which pillage they of all which they have save from the spaniard the fleming labour to get restitution but can get none of the javanes the nine and twenty the king fleet return have do veer little against their enemy the pallingbane the fifteen of june here arrive Nockhoda Tingall a cling-man from Banda in a juncke lade with mace and nutmeg the which he sell here to the guzerats for a hundred and fifty rial of eight the Bahar Bantam which be four hundred and fifty cattee he tell i that the fleming pinnace which go upon discovery for ginny be return to Banda have find the island but in send their man on shore to entreat of trade there be nine of they kill by the heathen which be man-eater so they be constrain to return find no good to be do there the six of August the moon be eclipse about eight of the clock in the evening continue for the space of two hour the chinese and javany beat of Pan and mortar during her obscurie in such manner as you will think there be no hell but there and cry out the moon be dead the four of October 1606. the China quarter be all burn down yet it please God to preserve we the same night the carrack of the fleming set sail for Holland her lade be fifteen thousand sack of pepper some raw silk and great store of China Sugar the five the west Friesland arrive here from Ternata whence she be beat by the spaniard she be not above half lade with mace clove and cotton-yarne the nine here arrive a small frigate from Soocadanna the merchant be claes simonson his lade be wax Caulacca and great store of diamond the thirteen about midnight we have a earthquake it continue not long but for the time it be very fearful the thirteen of December here arrive two junke of the fleming from jo^ by who we understand that there be a fleet of fleming be eleven ship before Mallacca the commander whereof be mattele^fe the young the ship name be as follow the Orangia admiral Amsterdam vice-admiral Midleburgh mauritius Erasmus great sun little son Nassaw provincy white lion black Lyon the twenty two of May they come to a anchor before Mallacca with nine ship for their admiral before their come thither have send the provincy and the Erasmus for Achen the five of june they land their man but a little before their land the portugal set fire of one carrack and four junck which be in the Road. in july the provincy and Erasmus come to the fleet at Mallacca the twenty five of August the viceroy with a fleet of sixteen great ship be discover by the little sun which be appoint to keep watch at a island call cape Rochado who immediate come and certify their admiral find he very much unprovided his ordnance and man be ashore but by the portugal call of a council they give the fleming twenty four hour time to get his man and furniture aboard and to fit himself before he come to they thus be ready the fleming weigh and stand out of the harbour to they the fleming stand out o^ the road and meet with the viceroy where they perform a good fight three Portugal ship burn by the flem. and three by themselves the ^lem find the viceroy at the nicubar but they be so strong ashore as they can not deal with they matele^fe depart for the molluscan julius and five ^lem more put to death at Bemermassen a ship call the great sun arrive from Choromandel the place where the fleming have leave factor upon the coast of Chor^mandell the latitude of the country in the month of May much wind a flem. from s. Lucia upon the island of Madagascar Capt Middleton arrive in the consent of Londo^ mattel^^fe arriu^d the coast of ^hina where they begin a good fight which continue two night and one day in which fight be burn the ship middleburgh the Nassaw and three Portugal ship the Orang^a have spring a great leak be fain to put into jor the king be their great friend and assistant the fleet follow he where he remain one month and then set sail for Mallacca again where he meet with six ship of the portugal of the which the fleming burn three and the portugal themselves burn three from thence they depart for the nicubar where they find the viceroy with seven ship but they be hale so close ashore that they dare not deal with they the twenty he arrive here with six ship the twenty nine he depart for the Moluccas the fourteen of May 1607. here arrive a Malaia junke from grese by who we understand that julius a Fleming and five more which depart this road the thirty of November 1606. for Soocadanna be put to death at Bemermassen and all their good take by the king of that place the occasion as it be report proceed from the Fleming who have use certain foul speech of the king which he come to the hear of and thereupon send for the merchant and master and by the way give order to kill they the seventeen of August here arrive the great sun from Choromandell the captain Peter isaacson by who we understand that upon the island of they take a very great ship of the portugal out of who they have eighty pack several sort of cloth eight hundred bade of sugar find for malacca item that in the road of Masulipatan where their factory lie they take a Portugal ship very rich lade with all sort of commodity fit for that coast which be great for their benefit for that they be ignorant what commodity be most vendible there her lade be clove mace nutmeg China taffeta velvet and dammask of the bright colour but no white China Porseline fine and course but your great basin with brim be the best item the Fleming have factory in three several place upon that coast but not far the one from the other viz. at Masulipatan at Pettapoli and Mesulipatan lie in the latitude of seventeen degree it be a place of great plenty of victual thirty two hen for a rial two sheep for a rial a ox for a rial item in the month of May the wind at west it be so extreme hot there that you will think the wind will take away your breath yet can you not by any mean sweat till the sun be down and then you shall sweat very much wherefore in this month they go not abroad in the day time but in the night for there have be many smother the seven here arrive a small pinnace from a island call s. Lucia in the latitude of twenty four degree and a half about a mile from the island of Madagascar where they be force in by a leak in the carrack which depart from hence the four of October 1606. they be foce to throw away three thousand sack of pepper beside other commodity to great value they report unto we that it be a very good place to refresh in the people have no knowledge of coin they buy a fat ox for a tin spoon and a sheep for a small piece of brass it be hard ground and very good ride in seven and eight fathom the fourteen of November 1607. captain David Middleton arrive here in the consent of London the seventeen the flemish admiral matteleefe arrive here from the coast of China wh^r^ he hope to have get trade but can not he proffer they at Canton a hundred thous^nd rial of eight for a gift only but they will not accept it he be there in great danger ^f ^a^ing by six carrack which come out of Maccau of purpose for he they make he cast off his pinnace the which the portugal take he touch at Camboya and pahang but buy nothing but victual the seventeen of December 1607. here arrive the Gelderland from Holland they come between s. Laurence and the main the ship Gelderland from Holland their first place of refreshment be at mayot one of the land of Gomorrah where they set up a fine pinnace it be a good harbour but there be little cattle to be have from thence to calicut where in their way they take a small boat of Meeca lade with Rice and people of diverse nation the town of Calicut lie by the seaside and be think to be five english mile long the Sambrin which be their king come down unto they he be very rich in apparel have a crown of gold over his turban a naked sword in his hand which be the manner there he give the fleming good word offer to let they leave a factory there but they dare not trust he the Portugal be so great with he the twenty seven here arrive admiral Paulus Vande Carle with seven very good ship and one Portugal frigate admiral Paulus Vande Carle with 7. ship they refresh at cape lope gonsaluo which lie upon the coast of guinea where they find very good water and fish they continue here six week have the wind at southeast by east from hence to a island call Annabon upon the same coast. the thirty of march we say they come to anchor in the road of Mosambique let fall our anchor in eighteen fathom the flem. assault the castle of Mosamb^que the castle shoot very hot at we but we answer they not again but make all the speed we can aboard of two great guzerate ship and a frigate which ride hard by we lade with calico course blue cloth with white spot and some with red spot the which for the most part we take out and set the great ship on fire but the frigate we keep the (@) one we m^stred our man find nine hundred ninety five all well and in perfect health the first of April we land seven hundred man and seven piece of artillery viz. eight demy-cannon of brass two demy-culuering of iron and batter upon the castle but to little purpose wherefore we bring our tren^^es so near the enemy as we can heave stone into they and the same night we begin to make our mine but there fall so much rain that we be constrain to give it over here they heave fire-pot down from the wall upon we which scald our man very much and perceive hereof sally out upon we to our great detriment thus have be here six week ashore our man be hurt and sick we bring our ordnance and man aboard have lose in all forty man we set sail out of the road forty flem. slay the castle shoot very hot at we so that they sink the stern mast of our fleet which be a very tall ship and other of our ship have thirty shot through their sail and hull the gunner be a Englishman from hence we go for Mayotto which be one of the land of Gomorrah to refresh our man here we buy six hundred twenty ox thirty five sheep and goat mayot a good place to refresh at to the great comfort of we these people have knowledge of coin and will deal with we for no commodity but rial the king make a decree that no man shall sell we any cattle until the king be sell the which he will not sell we under three rial of eight the piece but his people cattle we buy for a rial of eight the piece but sheep and goat cheap here we muster our man again have be here six week and find ourselves nine hundred and forty strong wherefore it be determine to go again for Mosambique to assault the castle once again but come into the road we find three carrack ride there which be new come from Portugal whereupon it be hold best not to go in again but to ply off and on to see if they will come forth but they do not wherefore we stand away alongst the shore some thirty league of the land for Goa where at a town call seperdowne seperdowne a good place to refresh at we land all the guzerats which we have out of the ship at Mosambique at this place be good refresh and cheap twenty hen for a rial one hundred and fifty egg for a shilling and as much fresh fish as will serve all the ship company for a day for a rial of eight it lie in eighteen degree to the north of the line and be not far from Chau we ride in seven fathom clay ground the people be moor and great enemy to the portugal it afford no merchandise but a little pepper from hence hard by the land of to the north of Goa seven league a carrack take hard by the land of we take a carrack which be come from Lisbon her lade be most rial of eight currant spanish coin all which we take out and set she on fire the captain we take with we his name be jeronymus telbalditto at Goa we remain a month at anchor hope to have meet with the carracke which we have see at Mosambique but they come not wherefore we set sail and go for calicut purpose to have speak with the Sambarine but by reason of ten galley ten galley in the road of Calicut of the portugal the flem. give the sambrine of calicut a present which be come from Goa and lay there we go not ashore fear some treason we send he a present which be two piece of iron ordnance and one piece of brass we send our cask ashore to fill with water but we can find none that we dare drink from hence we shape our course for cape Commerin to look for water but can get none wherefore we direct our course for the straits of Mallacca but find the wind and current contrary we come direct for Bantam have be out of Holland twenty one month and a half the thirty one of December he depart this road with seven ship and one frigate to spend some time in the straits of Mallacca in hope to have meet with the Mackaw ship Paulus Vande Carl^ set sail for the straits of Mallacca Paulus Vande Carl^ return mattaleefe set sail for Holland but can not the four of january 1607. he arrive in the road here leave his ship ride at Poolo Tindoo the five he depart hence for the Molluccas the eighteen admiral matteleefe the young set sail for Holland his lade be twelve thousand sack of pepper four hundred sack of nutmeg sugar ebony wood and some raw silk this year 1608. arrive here many junke of China and other place which I forbear to mention the nineteen of August arrive a flemish ship call the Erasmus from Amboyna a flem. ship from Amboyna have in her some seven hundred bahar of clove which she lade at Hitto the first of September arrive a small pinnace of the fleming from Mackian by who we understand of two ship call the china and the dove be cast away a flem. pinnace from Mackian ride at anchor afore Mackian with very little wind at west which make such a sea that it be not possible for ship to ride there by reason it be foul ground and very deep water as seventy and eighty fathom item that they have take Mackian and taffasal without the loss of a man Mackian and Taffasall take without loss of one man a flem. pinnace for Soocadanna and have leave in each place one hundred and twenty Fleming in like manner they have strengthen the castle at Malayo the ten depart a pinnace of the fleming for Soocadanna to fetch away the merchant who they hear can get in no part of their debt leave there by claw simonson and that they be very sick a flemish ship from Banda the hay from Choromandell the dragon from Priaman a present give the king of Bantam the governor and his jerotoole kill a flem. pinnace from Soocadanna five sail of flem. find for Holland a flem. pinnace from malacca the three and twenty arrive the ship Zealand from Banda half lade with mace and nutmeg her burden be a hundred and fifty last the five and twenty arrive the hay from Choromandell her lade be diverse sort of Mallayo cloth and cloth cherra java the second of October arrive the dragon from Priaman wherein be general William keeling the seven the general go up to the court and deliver the king our king letter with a present which be five piece one basin and Ewer one barrel of powder the thirteen in the morning very early the governor and his jerotooly be kill by the pungavas the sabandar admiral key depatty Vtennagarra etc. who assemble themselves over night at Keymas patty house and beset the court first lay hold of the king and his mother and then they run into the governors court think to have find he in the bed but he be on the backside his bed where they find he and wound he first on the head whereupon he flee to the priest call Keyfinkkey who come forth and entreat they for his life but they will not be persuade but perforce run in and make a end of he the eighteen arrive the fleming pinnace from Soocodanna and bring away their merchant leave the country much indebt unto they the six of November set sail the vice-admiral of Paulus Vande Carle with five sail for Holland their lade be clove mace nutmeg pepper and diamond the eight arrive a small pinnace of the fleming from malacca by who we understand of thirteen sail of ship which rid there and that in their voyage they have take two carracke a pinnace of the fleming for Soocadanna w. keeling^et ^et sail for England he return back he depart he return meet with the Hector in the straits a flem. from Holland which have meet with two english ship in 32. to the north of the cape of cop a flem. pinnace set sail for Mallacca the dragon for England the Hector for Banda two ship and a pinnace from Choromandell three flem. ship for Banda a fleet from Holland be twelve sail seven flem. for the Molluc the nine of November 1608. Samuel plummer depart this road for Soocadanna to remain there the four of December be Sunday in the afternoon our general William keeling depart this road for England in the dragon the six he be force back by foul weather and west-wind the ten he depart from the west the thirteen he return have meet with the Hector in the straits of Sonda they be very weak their man for the most part touch with the scurvy the portugal of Damas have betray their boat at surat take nineteen of their man and nine thousand rial in cloth as it cost there item as they come for Bantam they take a small frigate of Collumba out of which they take eleven pack of cloth contain in all eighty three clothes thirteen piece pouling which be send for the land of Banda the sixteenth of December arrive a small ship from Holland by who we understand of two ship which they meet withal to the north of the cape Bona Speransa in thirty two degree they make they to be english ship but whether they be find they be not certain but the small ship bear the flag in the main-top this ship have be on her voyage eight month and ten day they refresh at one of the land of Comora call pulo Lamone where they have great store of beef and goat for old knife and tin spoon the two and twenty she set sail for Mallacca to their fleet which lie there to will they to give over their siege the three and twenty depart the dragon for England captain Gabriel Towerson the first of january 1608. our general William keeling set sail in the Hector for the land of Banda the seven arrive two ship and a pinnace of the fleming from Choromandell lade with cloth the which some part they have take and the rest buy they have take five prize one a carrack at Mosambique the fifteen of january 1608. depart the great sun and the two ship which come from Choromandell the three of February arrive admiral Willamson verhoofe with twelve sail of good ship from Mallaca the fourteen the admiral with seven ship depart for the molluccoe the nine of march the fleming cause a meeting at the court of all the pungavas to tell the king that they have receive letter from their king which do make mention of peace between they and the portugal a meeting at the court by the flem. procurement wherefore they think good to certify so much unto they to this end that if the portugal shall come thither under colour to trade with they and so set upon they for their country they can not take their part as aforetime they can have do by reason the king of Holland and Portugal be friend where at the javan fall all into a great laughter smoke they that their pretence be to strike fear into they of the Portugal doubt the king will if they come give they peaceable trade which will be the overthrow of the fleming the governor give they no answer but will they to take their course our house escape burn I be send for to the court. the twenty it please God to deliver we from a great danger for a chinese house next unto our Warehouse take fire and be burn down but we escape the one and twenty I be send for to the court by Pangran Areaumgalla the governor I go and carry with i a present which be one piece one Mallee Goobaer one piece morey one piece Mallayo Pintado one bandaleere one roll of match the which he accept very kind he tell i he have send for i hear that there be two man in chain in our house for debt and he will know by who order I keep they I tell he by the order of the king we have take they up and hope that he will not take they from i before I be satisfy my debt or some part and that it be due by they I show their bill he say he think they be indebt but that the king give we leave to chain they up he know to the contrary wherefore he will have they loose but with much entreaty I persuade that he give i leave to keep they till tanyomge which ought four hundred twenty rial and a half shall pay one hundred and bungoone which ought five hundred rial and one hundred sack of pepper shall pay twenty bag of pepper and one hundred rial in money according as he have before agree and give i his bill wherefore he send one of his slave home with i to tell the prisoner thereof will they to resolve and pay i the four and twenty I be send for to the court and the fleming he demand of the Fleming whether it be their country manner to take up a man for debt without tell of the king the Fleming say no whereupon he will i present to let they out the governors order I be send for to the court and will to deliver the chinese up clean forget his promise three day before the which I charge he with but all will not prevail wherefore he send one of the king slave and take they out of the house the which strict course I hold to be take against we by the instigation of the fleming wrought by lackmoye to the end we shall not trust the chinese so that by this course they must needs come to he and he be fit with all sort of commodity from the Fleming will whole overthrow our trade in respect we can trust but at hazard for there be no justice to be have the three and twenty of April 1609. here arrive a small pinnace of the fleming from Soocadanna and Ternata a pinnace of the fleming from Soocadana a pinnace of the fleming for Bemermassin by who we understand that admiral Paul vankerle be take at Ternata the one and twenty of May 1609. a pinnace of the fleming set sail for Bemermassin upon a league make between they and with purpose to search every creek and corner of the island for they have hear there be much gold there and bezoar the which be to be trade for with bead and other haberdasher-ware the six and twenty of August 1609. arrive captain William keeling from Banda have lade there twelve thousand four hundred eighty four cattee one half quarter of mace fifty nine thousand eight hundred forty six cattee of nutmeg which stand they in nine ten and eleven rial the Bahar the Cattee there weigh thirteen and a half of our english ounce the small Bahar mace be ten cattee or one hundred cattee of nutmeg and the great Bahar be one hundred cattee of mace or one thousand cattee of nutmeg so that if a man be indebt unto you ten cattee of mace and will give you one hundred cattee of nutmeg you can refuse it the four of October 1609. captain keeling set sail from Bantam have take in the rest of his lade which be four thousand nine hundred bag three cattee of pepper the Hector set sail from Bantam in the which ship call the Hector I come for England have be in the country four year nine month eleven day certain rule for the choice of sundry drug as also from whence they may be have as follow aloe be a wood so call by we but of the Mallayens it be call Garroo the best come from Syam and Cambaya also from sumatra Potannie Cauchauchene the best be that which be in large round stick and very massy of black colour intermix with ashe-coloured vein in taste somewhat bitter and odoriferous and be burn it become like unto pitch in bubble if a splinter thereof be lay upon a fire-coale for if it be good it will not leave fry till it be quite consume cast forth a most delectable odour Benjamin be a gum call by the Mallayens minnian the best sort come from Syam which be very pure clear and white with little streak of amber colour burrowse yield tyurall call in english Buris worth there a rial the Cattee and here ten shilling the pound it be keep in grease the other sort which be not altogether so white but be also very good come from sumatra and a three sort which come from Priaman and barrowse be very course like horsebread not vendible in England but well esteem in Bantam Civet the best be that which be of a deep yellow colour somewhat incline to the colour of gold not whitish for that be usual sophisticate with grease yet if it be new take it be natural whitish and will in continuance of time become of a yellowish colour musk there be three sort black brown and yellow of which the first be naught the second be good the last best which ought to be of colour like the best spikenard that be of a deep amber colour enclose with one only skin and not one over another as it be oftentimes to be see not over-moist which make it weighty but in a mean have some hair like bristle but not overmany clear of stone lead or other trash intermix and of so strong and fragrant a smell that to many it be offensive and be taste in the mouth it pierce the very brain with the scent and ought not oversoone to dissolve in the mouth nor yet to remain very long undissolue in any hand it must not be keep near to any sweet spice lest it lose the send bezoar there be here of two kind the one bring from the west the other from the east indies whereof the east India bezoar be worth double the price of the other the form of ^oth be diverse some round other long like date-stone other like pigeon egg some like the kidney of a young goat and other in form of a chestnut but all for the most part be ^l^nt at the end not pick and no less variety be also to be see in the colour for some be of light red which be a^ the (@) into Cambaya other of colour like honey many of a dark ash-colour like that of the civetcat but for the most part of a waterish-greene the east India bezoar consist of many peel and scale as it be artificial compact together in manner of the skin and peele of a onion each enclose other bright and splendent as if they be polish by art the one peel be break off the next be more splendent or bright than the former these peel be some thick some thin according to the largeness of the stone and the large the stone be the better for sale this be a certain way to make trial of bezoar take the direct weight of the stone than put he into water and let it stand for the space of four hour then see if he be not crack wipe it dry and weigh it again if it weigh never so small a matter more than he do at the first then build upon it it be not good thus have I prove myself many time in Bantam and have have diverse turn to chalk with a little stick in the middle which have weigh a tail which be two ounce the most counterfeit come from Soocodanna which be upon Burneo these name in the margin be the place from whence they may be have amber there be hereof if you regard the colour many sort as black white brown and gray of all which the black be usual the base and the gray the best of which choose what be best cleanse from filth or dross pure of itself of colour incline to a white and of a ash-colour intermix with vein some ash-colour other whitish be put into a bowl of water it ought to float aloft the which although some which be sophisticate may do yet this be (@) that none which be pure will sink in the water the great quantity come from Mosambique and Sofala of all the chief and principal town for trade in these part with their several name and situation and also what commodity they do afford and what be there desire BAntam a town situate in the island of java Maior stand in the latitude of six degree to the south of the equinoctial and have three degree variation west to this place be great resort of diverse nation in sundry sort of commodity for of itself it afford little but victual Cotton wool and pepper whereof the quantity may be at a harvest which be in the month of October some thirty or thirty two thousand sack each sack contain forty nine cattee and a half China the java alphabet be twen^^^etters the (@) be four and ^en^ ba^^r Ba^tam Cool^c^ of Ba^a^ and each Cattee twenty one rial and a half english a sack be call a timbang and two timbange be one peecull three peecull be a small Bahar and four peecull and a half a great Bahar which be four hundred forty five cattee and a half item there be a coolack by the which the javanes most common deal because they be not very perfect in the use of the beam it contain seven cattee and a quarter and seven coolackes be a timbang water measure the which be one Cattee and a quarter great than the beam there shall be no difference but that the weigh which be always a Chinesa do give his countryman leave to get for according as he favour he can fit they with a great or a small measure at his pleasure deceit in the weigh juncke from coeringin and janby in the fine of janury three ship may find lade of pepper in Ba^tam China cash the best cash in Bantam call Chuchuck java item there come in the month of December and january to this place many juncke and prawe lade with pepper from cherringin and jauby so that in the fine of january there be always pepper sufficient to lade three good ship item the king have no coin of his own but what come from China which be call cash and be make of the dross of lead it be round and thin with hole to string they on a thousand cash upon a string call a pecoo which be of diverse value according as cash rise or fall wherewith they know how to make their account which be as follow ten pecooe be a Laxsau ten laxsave be a Cattee ten ca^tees be a Vta ten vtae be a Bahar item you be to understand there be two manner of way of the string of cash the one call Chuchuck China the other Chuchuck java of which the java be the best for there shall be two hundred cash upon a tack but for the China tack you shall find but a hundred and sixty or a hundred and seventy five tack shall make a pecoo so that you lose two hundred cash upon a pecoo or a hundred and fifty which will rise to a great matter if you deal for much call allowance upon cash profit to be make in engross of cash but by the law of the country they be to be just a thousand cash upon a string or to give which be allowance item upon the depart of the juncke you shall buy thirty four and thirty five pecooe for a rial which before the next year you may sell for twenty two and twenty for a rial so that there be great profit to be make but the danger of fire be great item the weight use to weigh bezoar civit and gold be call a tail which be two rial of eight and a quarter or two ounce English item the weight use in weigh of bezoar civit and gold with the content of their several tailor english commodity vendible in Bantam a Mallaya tail be one rial of eight and a half or one ounce and one three part English item a tail China be 1 7/20 rial of eight or one ounce and one five part english so that ten tail China be six tail java exact item the english commodity vendible here be as follow English iron long and thin bar six rial the peecull lead in small pig for five and twenty or six and twenty piece five rial and a half the peecull powder fine round cornd the barrel five and twenty rial piece square sanguine the piece ten rial of six foot long piece square damask all over fifteen rial of six foot long and a half broadcloth of ten pound the cloth of colour Venice red a Gasse which be three quarter of a yard three rial of eight opium Misseree which be the best eight rial the Cattee amber in great bead one Wamg and a half tail Mallaya six rial of eight coral in large branch five and six rial the weight of the tail Mallaya rial of eight the principal commodity you can carry item in the month of February and March here come three or four juncke from China very rich lade with silk raw and wrought China cash Purseline February and March the time of the come of the China juncke for Bantam and what commodity they be lade wi^h Cotton cloth of diverse fashion and price as follow viz. raw-silke of lamk which be the best a hundred and ninety rial the peecull raw-silke of Canton which be courser eighty rial the peecull taffeta in bolt a hundred and twelve yard the piece forty six rial the courge twenty piece velvet all colour thirteen yard the piece twelve rial the piece damask all colour twelve yard the piece six rial the piece white satin twelve yard long the piece eight rial Burgones ten yard long the piece forty five rial the courge sleve-silke the best make colour three rial the Cattee musk the best two and twenty rial the Cattee sew gold the best fifteen knot every knot thirty string one rial velvet hang embroider with gold eighteen rial upon satin fourteen rial white curtain stuff nine yard the piece fifty rial the courge white damask flat nine yard the piece four rial sugar white the peecull three rial and a half very dry sugar Candy very dry five rial the peecull Purseline basin the piece two rial very broad and fine calico cloth course commodity from China white and brown fifteen rial the courge course Purseline drug and diverse other commodity they bring but because they be not for our country I do omit beniamine aloe to be buy at Bantam beniamine very good and white five and thirty and thirty rial the peecull lignum-aloe eighty rial the peecull alum which be as good as the english and come from China two rial and a half the peecull Choromandell cloth be a principal commodity here the most vendible sort be call Goobares pintadoe of four and fi^e covet fine tappy of saint Thomas Ballachos java girdle alias caine-goolong calico lawn book and make up in roll white item a goob be double and contain twelve yard commodity vendible in Bantam content of cloth chera java which come from Choromandell or six hastaes single item Ballachos course and fine contain two and thirty or four and thirty hastaes but the fine be always long item the fine tappye of saint Thomas six hastaes item mooree be a fine sort of cloth but not very much use here for it be dear and short contain sixteen hastaes at two rial and a quarter item book if they be not cort be two and thirty hastaes item all sort of mallayan cloth be general eight hastaes long wherefore it be call cherra Mallaya item general all sort of Cotton cloth which be broad and of good length general Cotton clothe request in Bantam be well request here item calico lawn white and red be two and thirty hastaes item a hasta be half a yard account from your elbow to the top of your middle finger item the king custom here be as follow the king custom call Chukey be eight bag upon the hundred bag rate pepper at four rial of eight the sack what price soever it bear billa-billian be custom billa-billian o^ Labba be upon six thousand sack six hundred sixty six rial and so high or low according to the burden of your ship if any ship arrive in the road lade with cloth or such like the king be to be make acquaint therewith and with the sort quantity and price thereof before you may land any part then he will send his officer and such sort as he like he will have at the half of your price or somewhat above as you can agree for if you prize your cloth at twenty rial for Corge he will give you but fifteen or sixteen rial a courge but the fleming course have be to give he seven or eight hundred rial at a time for a ship lade to clear they of the duty and trouble but by the custom of the country this duty be upon six thousand sack of pepper six hundred sixty six rial if you lade pepper otherwise to take so many thousand sack of the king at half a rial or three quarter of a rial upon a sack more than the price currant be in the town item if you shall have provide aforehand sufficient lade to dispatch your ship yet you be to pay for this duty as aforesaid or else they will not permit you to lade item Rooba Rooba be a duty for anchorage and be upon six thousand sack five hundred rial of eight item the sabandar duty be upon six thousand sack two hundred fifty rial Rooba item the waigher duty be one rial upon a hundred sack item the jerotoolis or waigher belong to the customhouse their duty be one rial for a hundred sack jortan be to the eastward of jacatra it be call Serebaya it afford of itself victual no custom and great store of cotton-wool and spin yarn there come many junke from jauby who lade be pepper also there be small prawe of the town which go to Banda so that there be some few mace and nut to be have there Mackassar be a island not far from the celebe it afford great store of bezoar stone which may be have reasonable also Rice and other victual great plenty there be junke also which trade to Banda so that a small quantity of mace and nut be there to be have also be a island to the east-ward of Mackassar stand in eight degree and a half to the south of the equinoctial it have of itself great store of rice cotten-yarne slave and course white cloth well request at Bantam the commodity for this place be the small sort of blue and white bead iron and course Purseline Tymore be a island which lie to the eastward of baly in the latitude of ten degree forty minute this place afford great store of Chindanna by we call white Saunders the great log be account best it be worth at Bantam twenty rial of eight the peecull at the come of the junke wax in great cake worth at Bantam eighteen nineteen twenty thirty rial the peecul as the time serve item you must be very careful in the choose of it for there be great deceit therein wherefore you must break it to see whether it be mingle or not the commodity which be carry thither be chopping-knife small bugle Porseline colour taffeta but no black China frying-Pannes China bell and piece of silver beat flat and thin as a wafer of the breadth of a hand item there be great profit make of this trade for the chinese have give to our man which adventure with they thither four for one Banda lie in the latitude of five degree to the southwards of the equinoctial it afford great store of mace and nutmeg oil of mace 4. rial a quart at Bantam 5. or 6. rial a quart with oil of both sort it have no king but be govern by a sabandar which join with the sabandar of Nero and Lentore Puloway Pulorin and Labatacca land near adjoin these land in former time have be under the government of the king of Ternata but at this present they govern of themselves item on these land be harvest thrice a year viz. in the month of july October and February but the gather in july be the great monson Arepootee from Poolo swange alias the devil island come the foul call casuarie the which be call the monson Arepootee item the manner of deal for their price be as follow a small Bahar be ten cattee mace and a hundred cattee nut and a great Bahar mace be a hundred cattee and a thousand cattee nut and a Cattee be five pound thirteen ounce and a half english the price variable item the commodity request in these land be Choromandel cloth Cheremallaw viz. sarrass pintado of five coveyt fine Ballachos black girdle chellye white calico broad cloth stammel gold in coin viz. rose-nobles of England and the low country royalls of eight aloe ophion misseree which be soft like wax item you shall have that there for seventy rial in gold which will cost you ninety in rial China basin fine large and without brim damask of light colour taffeta velvet China box or counter gild gold chain plate cup gild head-piece bright damask piece for shot but not many sword blade brand and back to the point item Cambaya cloth calico black and red calico lawn etc. item Rice be a very good commodity to carry thither the land of the be five viz. Molucco ternate tydore Gelolo Mackean and be under the equinoctial line these land afford great store of clove not every year but every three year the Cattee there be three pound five ounce English the Bahar two hundred cattee item nineteen cattee Ternata make fifty cattee Bantam exact the commodity vendible for these place be Choromandell cloth Cheremallaw but fine and siam girdle Salolos fine Ballachos and chelley be best request item China taffeta velvet damask great basin varnish counter broad cloth crimson opium and Benjamin etc. siam lie in the latitude of fourteen degree and a half to the northward of the equinoctial it afford great store of very good Benjamin and many rich stone which be bring thither from Pegu. item a tail be two rial of eight and a quarter item here be much silver in bullion which come from japan but rial of eight be in more request for two rial and a quarter in coin will yield two and a half in bullion broad cloth stammel colour iron and fa^re look glass be well request all manner of China commodity be there better cheap then at Bantam item the guzerat junke come to siam in the month of june and july touch first at the maldive and then at Tenassere from whence they may go over land to siam in twenty day item at Tenassere there be always five and a half and six fathom water borneo lie in the latitude of three degree to the south of the equinoctial it afford great store of gold bezoar stone wax Cayulacca and at Bemermassin a town situate on this island be the principal trade for the commodity aforesaid item the commodity request there be as follow Choromandell cloth of all sort China silk damask taffeta velvet all colour but black broad cloth stammel and rial of eight item bezoar stone be there buy by the tail which be the weight of one rial and a half of eight for five or six rial the tail which be one ounce and the three part English Soocodanna be a town situate upon borneo in the latitude of one degree and a half to the south of the equinoctial and be north-east from Bantam one hundred and sixty league there be in the entrance of the harbour five fathom and at low water three fathom a falcon short of the shore Ozie ground to this place be great trade in junke and prawe for it yield great store of diamond the which be account the best in the world there be store to be have at all time but special in the month of january April july and October but the great quantity in january and April at which time they be bring down the river call Laue by prawe the manner of get of they be as you dive for pearl the reason why more quantity be get in one month then in a other be for that in july and October there fall so much rain that it rise nine fathom which cause such a stream that they can hardly dive and in the other month there be but four or four fathom and a half which be hold the best depth for their dive item commodity vendible and in request here at Soocodanna be Mallacca pintado very fine Sarrassa Goobares pouling chera java calico lawn China silk light colour sew gold sleeve silk broad cloth stammel all sort of small bugle bugle which be make in Bantam of colour blue and in fashion like a tun but of the bigness of a bean and cost at Bantam four hundred a rial of eight worth at Soocodanna a mass the hundred the mass be three quarter of a rial of eight China cash rial of eight but principal gold without which you can do little for you shall have a stone for one rial in gold which you shall not have for a rial and a half or a rial and three quarter in silver item you be to understand that it be the best course when you be find ^or this place to go for Bemermassen first where you may barter the commodity aforesaid for gold which you shall have for three cattee cash the Mallacca tail which be nine rial of eight as I have be credible inform it have be worth of late year and bring it to Soocodanna you shall put it away for diamond at four cattee cash the tail which be one and three quarter and half quarter of a rial in weight so that you shall gain three quarter of a rial of eight upon a tail but the principal gain must be in the diamond item you must understand that there be diamond of four water which be call Varna viz. Varna Ambon Varna loud Varna Sackar Varna Bessee the first be white green yellow and neither green nor yellow but a colour between both but the white water be the best their weight be call sa-masse sa-copang sa-boosuck sa-pead item four coopang be a mass two boosuck be one copang and one pead and a half be a Boosuck item there be a pahaw which be four mass and sixteen mass be one tail and by this weight they do not only weigh diamond but gold also of China ware raw silk the best be make at lank and be call Howsa worth there eighty rial the peecul taffeta call tue the best make at a small town call Hocchu worth thirty rial the courge damask call town the best make at Canton worth fifty rial the courge sew silk call Couswa worth one hundred rial the peecull embroider hang call Poey the best ten rial the piece sew gold call Kimswa be sell by the Chippau which be a bundle each Chippau contain ten paper and in each paper be five knot sell for three paw two rial of eight and the best have thirty six thread in a knot satin call Lyn the best one rial the piece great basin call Chopau worth three by the rial white sugar call petong the best one half rial the peecull Purseline of the small sort call Poa the best one rial the Cattee pearl box call Chanab the best five rial the piece velvet call tangoiounck of nine yard long five rial the piece sleeve silk call jouncke the best one hundred and fifty rial peecull musk call Saheo seven rial the Cattee cash sixty pecooe the rial item broadcloth call Toloney sasocke which be three quarter of a yard worth seven rial of eight look glass very large call kea worth ten rial the piece tin call sea worth there fifteen rial the peecull wax call la fifteen rial the peecull musket call cauch the barrel twenty rial japon sable call samto worth eight rial the piece elephant tooth the great and best two hundred rial the peecull and small one hundred rial the peecull call Ga: white Saunders call Toawheo the best in great log forty rial the peecull item the custom of pepper inward as one tail upon a peecull and out-ward no custom item it be very straight look into that they carry no munition out of the land in any sort item in the month of march the juncke find for the mannely depart from Chauchu in company sometime four five ten or more together as they be ready item there lade out-ward be raw and wrought silk but far better than those which they carry for Bantam item between canton and the mannely be ten day sail item in the begin of june they return from the mannely there lade be rial of eight and there be not less than forty sail in a year which be find thither there force be nothing so that you may take they with your ship boate. item in this year 1608. pepper be worth in China six tade and a half the peecull and at the same time in Bantam worth two and a half rial the tinbang a note of requestable commodity vendible in japan together with their price there current be mass and canderines each Canderine contain the 1/1^ of a mass viz. broad-cloth of all sort viz. black yellow and red which cost in holland eight or nine gilder the flemish ell two else three quarter be worth three four to five hundred note that cloth of a high wool be not requestable but such as be low shear most vendible fine bay of the colour aforesaid vendible not according as the portugal be but well cotton say Rash bouratt single bouratt double silk Grogarams Turkey Grogarams chamlet Gekepert weersctynen Gewart Twijne velvet musk sell in weight against silver India cloth of sort request satin taffeta damask holland-cloth from fifteen to twenty stivers the flemish ell and not above diaper damask the better it be wrought with figure or branch thread of all colour carpet for table gild leather paint with picture and flower the small work best paint picture they delight in lascivious story of war by sea and land the large the better worth one two to three hundred quicksilver the hundred cattee from three to four hundred vermilion the hundred cattee worth from three to six hundred paint for woman face the hundred cattee twenty eight copper in plate one hundred twenty five flemish weight worth from ninety to a hundred lead in small bar the hundred cattee worth from sixty to eighty eight lead in sheet best request the thin the better one hundred pound flemish to eighty tin in log fine one hundred and twenty pound flemish three hundred and fifty iron twenty five ounce Holland worth four steel the hundred cattee worth from one to two hundred tapestry Civet the Cattee worth from one hundred and fifty to two hundred China root the hundred cattee or peecull worth forty China sow gold the paper three mass three powder sugar of China the hundred cattee or peecull worth forty to fifty sugar Candie the peecul or one hundred cattee worth from fifty to sixty velvet of all colour eight else the piece worth from one hundred and twenty to one hundred and thirty wrought velvet like fabric worth from one hundred and eighty to two hundred taffeta all colour and good silk worth the piece from four and twenty thirty to forty satin of seven or eight else long the piece worth from eighty to one hundred figure satin worth from one hundred and twenty to one hundred and fifty gazen of seven pike or else worth from forty to fifty raw silk the Cattee of twelve pound flemish worth from thirty to forty untwist silk of eight and twenty pound flemish worth from thirty five to forty twist silk worth from eight and twenty to forty drink glass of all sort bottle can and cup trencher platter beer glass salt wine glass beker gild locking-glass of the large sort muscovie glass much salt write table-book paper-booke lead to neal pot spanish soap well request it be sell for one mass the small cack amber in bead worth one hundred and forty to one hundred and sixty silk stocking of all colour spanish leather neat leather with other sort of leather use for glove worth from six eight to nine candique of China worth from fifteen to twenty candique of the same place black the former be blue from ten to fifteen wax for candle one hundred pound flemish worth from two hundred to two hundred and fifty hony the peecull worth sixty Samell of Cochinchina the peecull one hundred and eighty pepper the peecull if there come not much worth one hundred nutmeg the peecull twenty five campheir of barous or borneo the pound hollau from two hundred and fifty to four hundred Sanders of Solier the peecull worth one hundred Callomback wood good and weighty the pound worth from one two three to five Sapon or red wood the peecull from twenty to twenty six elephant tooth the great the better worth from four five six seven to eight hundred renosceros horn the javan Cattee worth thirty heart horn gild the piece three four or five hundred Roch Allome esteem good ware and inquire after that which cost but three gilder have be sell for one hundred gilder but not every man money note that the chinese will common truck for your silver and give you gold of twenty three carracke from fifteen to twenty the ounce silver but some time there come much and other some time little a memorial of such merchandise as be to be buy in japan and the price as they be there worth hemp very good one hundred cattee be one hundred and twenty pound Holland worth from sixty five to seventy eye colour for die blue almost as good as indigo make up in round cake or piece and pack one hundred cake in a fardel worth the fardel fifty to sixty die for white turn to red colour make in farthel or Bales of fifty gautin Malios worth five to eight Rice very white and good case worth the fare eight three five part Rice of a worse sort the bale worth seven three ten part at Saccaio Osacaio and Meacow be the best die for all sort of colour whatsoever your desire viz. red black and green and for gild gold and silver and be better than the chinese varnish brimstone in great abundance cost the peecull seven saltpetre dear in one place then another worth one and a half cotton-wool the peecull ten chap. 3 relation of master richard cock cape merchant of what past in the general absence go to the emperor Court whereunto be add diverse letter of he and other for the better knowledge of japonian affair and late occurrent in those part @. i. the king care unreadiness of we japonian saperstition strange tempest the seven of August all thing be in a readiness our general in company of master Adams the old king send 100 Tai^ in japan money for our general to spend on the way which I put to account by our ^ order as money lend depart from Firando towards the emperor court of japan and take with he master tempest peacocke master Richard wickham Edward Saris Walter carwarden Diego Fernando John Williams a tailor John head a cook Edward Bartan the surgeon mate John japan jurebasso Richard dale Cox Swaine and Anthony far a sailor with a cavaleere of the king for guardian and two of his servant and two servant of m. Adam and so they depart in a bark or barge of the king which row with some twenty oar on a side and have thirteen piece of ordnance shoot off at departure I go to compliment with the two king as be send from the general to give they thanks for provide so well for he for his journey they take it kind and I very think the old king take notice of some of our man evil behaviour this last night for he will i to put the master in mind to look well to they aboard and that I shall have a care on shore that matter may be as well manage in the general absence as when he be here present otherwise the shame will be we but the dishonour he wind a stiff gale at north-east most part of the day but calm all night the nine a japan boy call juan come and offer i his service he speak good spanish ask i nothing but what I please and so to serve nine or ten year and to go with i for England if I please I entertain he the rather because I do find the juribasso Migell which master Adams leave with i to be something stubborn and love to run abroad at his pleasure leave i without any one that can speak a word I buy he two japan garment cost i fourteen master he be a Christian and most of his kindred dwell at only one dwell here who come with he and pass his word for he he serve a Spaniard three year at Manilias the thirteen I show our commodity to certain merchant of Maioco but they buy nothing only their chief desire be to have have gunpowder semidone go aboard the ship to accompany certain strange cavalero and afterward he bring they to see the english house I give they the best entertainment I can the nineteen at night begin the great feast of the pagan pagan feast at Firando be a kind of Candlemas alsoules they invite their dead kindred banquet and make merry all night with candlelight at their grave this feast endure three day and as many night and very strict command be give from the king that every house shall gravel the street before their door and hang out candlelight in the night in do whereof I be not slack and as I be inform a poor man be put to death and his house shut up for disobey therein the China captain furnish i with a couple of paper lantern very decent and I be inform the king will ride about the street and come to visit i so I make ready a banquet and expect they until after midnight but they come not at all on the twenty one and twenty and two and twenty I send present to both the king be inform that it ^as the use of the country of wine and banquet stuff as likewise to Nobesane the young king brother and to semidone the old king governor and Vnagense which be well accept some cavaleros come to visit our house and receive the best entertainment I can give on the three and twenty we make a end of land our gunpowder be in all ninety nine barrel of which I advise the general by letter to reserve convenient store for ourselves if he sell the emperor the rest we land diverse other thing which thing the master think good to send ashore looseness of some because our man begin to filch and steal to go to tavern and whore-house the purser master Melsham and myself dine at Semydones this day and the master and master Eton be likewise invite but do not go he use we kind end of the great feast this day the great feast make a end and three company of dancer go up and down the town with flag or banner their music be drum and pan at the sound whereof they dance at every great man door as also at all their pagoda and sepulcher the four and twenty at night all the street be hang with candlelight for that the young king and his brother mask and dance with nabesone semydone and many other go with a maskarado or to dance at the old king house the young king and his brother be mount on horseback and have canopy carry over they the rest go on foot and the music be drum and kettle as aforesaid and nabesone wind a phife I be inform they mean to visit the english house at their back return so I sit up until after midnight have a banquet in readiness and in the end they return confuse and out of order so I think there be some discontent once none of they enter into the english house captain brower go along by the door but will not look at we and we make as little account of he the seven and twenty we land other three piece of ordnance viz. all whole culverin all which six piece be iron ordnance the old king come down when they be about it and see but twenty man offer they seventy or a hundred japan to help they but very quick in his sight our man get they ashore which he marvel at and say a hundred of his man will not have do it so soon so he send for a barrel of wine and certain fish and give it to our people for labour so lusty the eight and twenty I receive two letter from our general by the governor of shimon^seke date the nineteen and twenty of this month with two other from master peacock and master wickham this governor come not ashore at Ferando but deliver the letter aboard to the master and so go direct for and promise to return hither short also I carry a letter to the old king foin which the say party bring master Melsham and Harnando accompany i the king give a Cattan to master Melsham and another with a spanish dagger to Harnando and give both i and they certain bunch of garlic and give we leave to dry our gunpowder on the top of the fortress offer we of his people to help we if they think good and I receive a land into the english house two and twenty bar of lead and put into our new lodge and hundred a twenty five culverin shoot round and langrell and as we be go to supper the old king come and sup with we be very merry and take such fare as we have in good part the first of September the old king with all the nobility make a maskerado and this night follow go to visit the young king his grandchild septemb 1. a Mask^ with music as aforesaid all the street be hang with lantern and I be inform he mean to visit our english house at return so I make ready for he and stay his return till after midnight but he p^ssed by with the rest of the company and enter not into the house I think there be not so few as three thousand person in company with he which I make account be the occasion he go by because he will not trouble we the second Semydon and other be appoint by the king measure all the house in the street tax for fort our english house be measure among the rest I understand it be for a general task to be pay for make fortress by the emperor appointment I entertain they to content the four we have news the queen of Spain be dead and the king a suitor to the prince Elizabeth of England the six a cavalero call come to visit our english house and bring i a present of two great bottell of wine and a basket of pear I give he the best entertainment I can and he depart content the seven in the morning much rain with wind increase all day and night variable from the east to the south and in the night happen such a storm or tuffon a mighty tuffon or tempest with the strange effect thereof that I never see the like in all my life neither be the like see in this country in man memory for it overthrow above a hundred house in Firando and uncover many other namely the old king house and blow down a long wall which compass the young king house and carry away bough or branch of tree and the sea go so high that it undermine a great wharfe o^ key at the dutch house and break down the stone-wall and carry away their stair and sink and break they two bark as also forty or fifty other bark be break and sink in the road it break down our kitchen wall at the english house which be new make and flow into our oven and break it down and blow down the tile and uncover part both of the house and kitchen and the house do shake like as if there have be a earthquake I never pass night in all my life in such fear foolish superstition for the barbarous unruly people do run up and down the street all night with firebrand that the wind carry great coal quite over the top of house and some house be carry away the wind whirl up the fire which be in they and carry it into the air in great flake very fearful to behold so that the great fear I have be that all will have be consume with fire and I very think it have have it not be for the extreme rain which fall contrary to the true nature of a tuffon be accompany with lightning and thunder our ship ride at a anchor with five cable and as many anchor whereof one old cable burst but God be thank no other hurt do our long boat and Skiffe be both drive from the ship yet both recover again and as it be say it do more hurt at then here for it break above twenty China juncke and the spanish ship which bring the ambassador from the manillea or the twelve two merchant of Miaco come to our english house unto who I show all our commodity they lay by two broad-cloth viz. a stammel and a black merchant of Miaco the best they can find and offer seven japan money the yard also they see our Priaman gold and offer eleven japan plate for one gold but go away without do any thing Francis Williams be drink ashore do strike one of the old king man with a cudgel of many misdemeanour I permit some to pass the pr^sse that the cause o^ so many death in the indies may be find rather to be impute to their own then the element distemper and for a caveat to other which shall send or be send into ethnic region yet do I conceal the most and worst which give he no occasion at all nor speak a word to he the man come to the english house and complain be very angry and not without cause give i to understand that he will inform the king his master how he be misuse by our people he have three or four in company with he who do see he abuse and that he which do it be new go aboard the ship I give they fair word and desire they to go aboard and find out the party and they shall see he punish to their content and to that effect send miguell our jurebasso along with they so they find out the say Williams who will have deny it if the matter have not be too manifest but he stand stiff against it with oath yet the master cause he to be bring to the capstaine in their presence which they see entreat for his pardon know he be drink but he be so unruly that he take up a crow of iron to have strike the fellow in presence of the master use the master in very bad term the thirteen I understand that Foyne the old king of Firando be sick whereupon I send miguel our jurebasso to visit he and to carry a present of one great bottle of the general sweet wine and two box of conserve comfit and sugar-bread offer he my service be very sorry to hear of his sickness and that I will have come myself but that I know company be not please to sick man he take my present in very good part and return i many thanks wish i not to let to ask for any thing we have need of either for the ship or ashore and he will give such order as we shall be furnish the fourteen in the morning betimes the master come ashore and tell i that most part of the ship company have lie ashore all night without ask he leave notwithstanding the great wind which have continue all night and the ship on ground so he will i to let miguell our jurabasso go along with he to seek they out which I be content he shall do and will have accompany he myself but he be unwilling tell i it be needless unruliness of some manner but m. Melsham the Purser go along with he and he find diverse drink and domineer he bestow blow among some of they and notwithstanding the master have command lambart and Colphax to retire aboard yet they stay ashore all day notwithstanding the great need be aboard about ship business diverse japan be hire to help they and lambart and Colphax be drink go into the field and fight lambart be hurt in the arm and remain drunken ashore all night as boles do the like and so have do two or three night before and quarrel with Christopher Euans about a whore the seventeen of September September 17 1613. bastian the bawd angry that his (@) be disturb the king (@) I be give to understand the bastian which keep the whore-house give it out that if I come any more into his house to seek for our people he will kill i and such as come with i whereupon I go and complain to the young king because the old be sick and at my request the king make proclamation that no japanese shall receive any of our people into their house after day light be do upon great pain and that it shall be lawful for i or any other that accompany i to go into any japan house to seek for our man without any molestation and that they themselves shall aid and assist i and if the door be not open at my come I may lawful break they down and a soldier be send to bastian to signify unto he he shall take heed he do not molest or disturb i in my proceed for if he do he shall be the first that shall pay for it this anger our people in such sort that some of they give it out they will drink in the field if they may not be suffer to do it in the town for drink they will although they seek it in the country the six and twenty Novasca come to visit i at the english house and bring i two bottle of wine the king care of good government seven loaf fresh bread and a dish of fly fish and as he be with i the old king come by the door and say he meet two man in the street as he come along which he think be stranger and none of our people wherefore he will that swanton and our jurebasso may go along with one of his man and he will show they to they which they do and find it be John lambart and jacob charke who be drink water at a door in the street as he pass by I be glad the king look so near after they for it cause our man to have a better care of their proceed the seven and twenty m. William Pauling master mate have be long sick of a consumption death and burial of w. Pauling die at the english house whereof I advertise the old king by miguel our jurebasso desire a burial place for he among the christian which he grant i so we put the dead corpse into a wind sheet and coffin it up let it rest till morning then the master and diverse other of the ship company come to the english house to accompany the dead corpse to the grave and then be we give to understand that of force we must transport it by water as far as the dutch house bonse superstition and no less in the people only because the bose or priest will no^ suffer we to pass through the street with the dead corpse before their pagoda or temple so the master send for the Skiffe and convey the dead body by water to the place aforesaid we go all ^y land and meet it and so accompany it to the place of burial the purser go before and all the rest follow after the coffin be cover with a holland sheet and upon that a silk quilt we be follow with many of that country people both young and old and after the corpse be inter we return all to the english house and there make collation and so our people return aboard about ship business but I have almost forget to note down that we have much ado to get any one of these country people to make the grave that a christian be to be bury in neither will they suffer the dead corpse to be convey by water in any of their boat the king command that all the street in Firando shall be make clean good obedience and channel row make on either side to convey away the water the street be gravel and the channel cover over with flat stone which work be all do in one day every one do it before his own house it be admirable to see the diligence every one use therein our house be not the last a do the captain Chinesa our landlord set man a work to do it the thirty certain merchant of Miaco come and have sight of all our commodity and lay out the best stammel cloth we have and offer twelve fathom for it and so depart without do any thing we have extreme wind both day and night so that we think another tuffon have be come for all the fisherman hale their boat on shore and every one bind fast the cover of their house conjure cozen knave for a bose or conjurer have tell the king a week since that this tempest will come our chirurgeon be in his pot come into a house where a bose be conjure for a woman to know of her husband or friend return from sea so when he have do he give he three penny to conjure again and tell he when our general will return for this place which in the end he assure he will be within eighteen day he say he hear a voice answer he from behind a wall both when he conjure for the woman as also when he conjure for himself the second of October the master send i word that some of our ship company be run away with the Skiffe Octob. 2. 1613. seven English viz. five english and two Fleming which be find for England run away to the spaniard viz. John bowles John Sares John Tottie Christopher Euans Clement Locke jasper Malconty and james the Dutchman I be in way to go to the king to get boat to send after they but our dutch jurebasso entertain for ship use come run after i and tell i our people be on the other side make merry at a taphouse which speech cause i to return to the english house and to get a boat for the master to go look they out but they prove to be other namely William Marinell Simon Colphax and John Dench who have hire a boat and be go over to a other island because they can not have swinge to walk by night in Firando so in the mean time our runaways have the more time to run away this night about eleven a clock the old king house on the other side the water be set on fire and quite burn down in the space of a hour I never see a more vehement fire for the time it be think his loss be great the king house burn and as it be say ^e himself set it on fire in go up and down in the night with light cane the coal whereof fall among the mat and so take fire the three I go to visit the old king give he to understand by his governor that I be very sorry for the mischance happen the night past and that I pretend to have come my self in person to have holpen the best I can but that I stand in doubt whether my company will have be acceptable I be a stranger yet assure he that he shall find i ready at all time to do he the best service I can although it be with hazard of my life he return i many thanks say the loss he have sustain be nothing and in return to the english house I meet the young king go to visit his grandfather and before noon we have word that our runaways be at a desert island some two league from F^rando which I make know to both the king desire their assistance and counsel how we may fetch they back again they answer that back they will fetch they either alive or dead yet they will be loath to kill they in respect we may want man to carry our ship back for England I give they thanks for the care they have of we yet withal give they to understand that although these knave miscarry yet we have honest man enough to sail the ship for England in fine the king make ready two boat full of soldier to go after they with full determination to bring they back either alive or dead which I make know to the master who desire very much to go along with they @. 2 lie of or on the devil and uproar about fire deceit of nangasack suspicion feast spanish occurrent the four of October there be report give out that the devil have answer by their oracle to their bose or conjurer that the town of Firando shall be burn to ash this night so that crier go up and down the street all night make such a noise that I take but little rest they give warning that every one shall put out their fire yet God be thank the devil be prove a liar therein devil a liar or belie for no such matter happen the five the old king Foyne same come to the english house where I give he the best entertainment I can he also tell i that our fugitive can not escape take and that he have send out two other man of war after the two former and as I be talk with he about these matter there come a Cavelero and bring he a letter from the emperor court and say that our general will be here at Firando within eight or ten day for that the emperor have dispatch he away before his come from thence the king tell i that the governor or king of call Bon Diu will be here at Firando to morrow tell i it be good our ship shoot off three or four piece of ordnance as he pass by this governor be the empress brother and there be a other japan governor or king in town of a place call seam the seven our master m. james Foster return from and have bring the Skiffe with he but all the man be get into sanctuary in the town so that he can not come to speech any one of they I be inform that miguell our jurebasso deal double both with the master and myself for I send he along to be linguist and assist the master and diverse japan come to i tell i that he both speak with our people and give they counsel to absent themselves once I do perceive how the world go and doubt the privy conveyance of our people which be like to ensue if this Diu the governor be not extraordinary deal withal whereupon a present be lay out afternoon the Diu pass along the street before our english house on foot he be accompany with the young king who give he the upper hand with above five hundred follower after they I go out into the street and do my duty to they and the Diu stand still when he come to the door and give i thanks for the ordnance be shoot off at his pass by our ship I desire pardon of his greatness if I have neglect my duty hitherto which be by mean of the small acquaintance I have in the country but that I mean to visit he at his lodging or aboard his juncke before he go he answer i I shall be very welcome so it be dark night before he come to his lodging at which time I carry the present abovesaid which he accept of in very good sort offer to do our nation any good he can at the court whither he be now find or else where and so of his own accord he begin to speak of our fugitives ask i if he bring they back again whether they shall be pardon all for his sake for this fault I answer he it be not in my power to pardon they but in our general which no doubt except it be one or two which be the chief author of this and other evil which deserve punishment that the rest may easy go free he say that his desire be for pardon for all in general without exception I answer that I know our general will be content with any thing his greatness and the two king of Firando will desire to conclude he tell i that if I will give it under write of my own hand in faith of a christian that all in general shall be pardon for this time and that I will procure the general to confirm the same at his return that then he will send to for they and deliver they into my own custody otherways he will not meddle in the matter to be the occasion of the death of any man I say I be content with any thing it please his greatness to command and so to give the say writing under my hand provide all our man may be bring back and so I return to the english house the dutch come after with a other present but we be before they the eight semidone pass by our door tell i that Diu have a brother in company which expect a present although it be not fit it shall be so much as his brother so upon advice with other I lay by a present for he as follow and go to deliver it the fleming be before i with another captain brower himself be with it he accept very kind of the present offer his assistance to our nation either at court or in the country and soon after he come to the english house himself accompany with many cavalier where they look on all our commodity yet he go away and buy nothing but give i a small Cattan and I give he two glass bottle two galley-pot and about half a Cattee of great clove pick out from the rest of purpose he be desirous to have they for physical matter as he tell i I make he and his follower a collation and so they depart content and soon after Diu and the two king send a cavaleero to i to have i to give it in write under my hand that our runaways shall not receive any punishment for this fact so by counsel of other I condescend thereunto and make a write in promise and faith of a christian they procure their pardon for this time of the general if I have not do this out of doubt we shall never have get they again but the Spaniard will have convey they to the manilly or maluccoe I not doubt but the general will allow of what I have do an^ present after this man be go I have word that the Diu and his brother will go aboard to visit our ship so I send some banquet stuff aboard and go myself and meet they where they be entertain in the best sort we can and Diu give i two cattan for a present and so they depart with seven piece of ordnance shoot off for a farewell but forthwith his brother return aboard again desire to have one of the little monkey for his brother child so I buy one of the master gunner cost i five rial of eight and send he to Diu and be ready to go ashore he be desirous to have i g^e along with he in his boat which I do he have three piece of ordnance for a farewell which as I understand afterward be much esteem off of both brother and be ashore he will needs accompany i home to our english house which I be unwilling of yet he will of force do it so I make he collation again in captain Adam chamber and so he and the rest depart well content as it seem I offer to have accompany he back to his lodging but he will not suffer i and late at night Foyne same the old king send a man to i to know the particular of the present give to both the brother and put it down in writing but for what occasion I know not and I forget to note down how Diu go to the dutch house to wash himself in the new hothouse and from thence it be that he come aboard our ship the nine Bon Diu send one of his man to i to give i thanks for his kind entertainment aboard and by the same messenger send i two barrel of Miaco wine for a present and soon after his brother send another man with two barrel of japan wine with the like ceremony both of they be very earnest to have a prospective glass and in the end I find a old one of master eatons but soon after he return i the say glass with thanks not desire at all to have it the ten two of the governors son of I mean another governor which dwell in the town come to see our english house they be christian I entertain they in the best sort I can and show they our commodity and after make they collation and give they music master Hownsell and the carpenter by chance be here and as we be at it old foin the king come steal in upon we and do as the rest do and see the king and these Langasakians together I will our jurebasso to put out a word for the speedy send back ^f ou^ runaways which they all promise provide that they shall be pardon for this fault as I have former promise which now again I acknowledge the old king desire to have a piece of english beef and another of pork sod with onion and turnip and send to he to morrow the eleven I send Migell our jurebasso to the old king with the beef and pork accommodate as aforesaid with a bottle of wine and six loaf of white bread he accept of it in very kind part have in his company at eat thereof the young king his grandchild and Nabison^ his brother with semidone his kinsman the twelve I go to visit both the king and find old foin asleep but speak with his governor a great feast among the pagan begin this day it be tell i it be like a lent or pasque of the papist and from thence go to the young king and speak with he himself they give i thanks for the kind entertainment I give unto these stranger which they take as do unto themselves and towards night the old king send to visit i and to tell i he understand these people which be depart have take away certain commodity from i and pay i what they themselves tho^ght good and not that which I require I return he answer that it be true that they have do so but I know not whether it be the custom of this country or no for that I be give to understand they use the like course both with Chineses and portugal at and that that which they have take from i be not worth the speak of I be answer that although they do so with the chinese at which be a people de^ended not to trade into japan yet can they not do so to stranger that have free privilege to trade especial here in this place where these fellow have no command nor nothing to do I reply I will come and speak with his highness myself and inform he of the truth and in the meantime return humble thanks for the care he have to use justice to stranger as well as home-born b^n Dius brother injurious to the english and dutch. captain brower send i word that they have take diverse sort of commodity from he and pay he what they listen for it he also send a empty bottle desire to have it fill with spanish wine for that he have invite certain stranger and have none the thirteen I hear three or four gun or chamber go off a China jun^ke for which I think have be do to entertain the king at the dutch house but they be shoot out of a China juncke which pass by this place and so go for and present after the old king send for i to come to dinner to the dutch house and master Eton with i and to bring a bottle of wine master Eton have take physic and can not go but I go we have a very good dinner at the dutch house the meat be well dress both after the japan and dutch fashion dinner with the dutch. and serve upon table but no great drink the old king sa^e at one table accompany with his elder son and both the young king brother for the young king himself be not there send word he be not well at the other table first sit nabesone the old king brother and then myself and next i semidone and then the old king governor and next he zanzebar father-in-law and diverse other cavaleeroe on the other side captain brower do not sit at all but carve at table all his own people attend and serve on their knee and in the end he give drink to every one of his guest with his own hand and upon his knee which seem strange to i and when they have dine all the noble go away and captain brower will needs accompany i to the english house I ask he why he serve these people upon his knee they sit at table he answer i it be the fashion of the country and if the king himself make a feast he do the like for the more honour of his guest and before night the old king foin come to the english house and visit all part and make collation stay a hour talk of one thing and other the sixteenth I be give to understand that two christian be come from so I go to their lodging to see what they be as also to understand some news from our man or fugitive I find the one of they to be a * * George Peter^son a flush Fleming bear in Flushing as he tell i and the other a italian bear in the * * daman Ma^yn a venetian duchy of Venice they tell i that our seven man or runaway be convey away secret in a small bark which be go for Macoro and that they be run to get passage in our ship to return into their country they tell i master Adams know they well and they be very desirous to have go immediate aboard our ship there to have remain because they be seafaring man the Fleming have serve the Spaniard three and twenty or four and twenty year and come a master mate from Agua for the manillias or Ph^llippinas they have good store of money and will have send it aboard our ship or have bring it to the english house but I tell they that in our general absence I dare not presume to give they entertainment yet notwithstanding I will do they any favour I can at his return and so send Migell our jurebasso to the king to let he understand that two such stranger be come to town to seek passage in our ship they be no spaniard nor yet subject to the king of Spain the king return i answer that if they be such as I say they be they be welcome but if they be castilian or portugal he will permit none to stay in this place his reason be for that the spanish ambassador have procure order from the emperor of japan that all spaniard which be to be find in his empire shall retire themselves into the phillippinas but these be no spaniard be out of that number the seventeen betimes the two stranger come to i desire i to accompany they to the old king the better to countenance they which upon good consideration I do they tell i in the way that our fugitive have report at that more will come after they and not any man of account stay to carry away the ship the occasion they say be for that they which have command over they use they more like dog than man add further that if but twenty resolute spaniard will take the matter in hand with a small boat or two they may easy take our ship the old king give we all kind entertainment and ask the stranger many question about the war betwixt the spaniard and fleming in the Moluccas Macow a town of portugal near the continent of China miguell the jurebasso capt. Adam h^s man be suspect of double deal in this case of the fugitive the circumstance I omit the which they say the spaniard be determine to pursue very hot and to that effect have great force prepare they also tell the king they think very all our fugitive be secret convey from seven day pass in a soma that depart from thence for Macow but the king will not believe they say it be not possible that such a man as Diu have pass his word to bring they back shall be find to be false of his promise in fine he be very well content that these two stranger shall stay here and go along in our ship if it please the general to carry they so the poor man return to their lodging wit^ much content and tell i in the way that we may make account we have not lose all our man but recover two that will remain as faithful to the death as the othrr have prove false add further that we need not to wish any worse revenge to our fugitive than the bad entertainment they be sure to have of the spaniard come bare and beggarly as they do in such base sort a eclipse of the moon the eighteen there be a great eclipse of the moon this night it begin about eleven of the clock and endure from the begin to the end (...) hour it be quite darken the nineteen at night about eleven of the clock a fire begin in Firando near unto the young king house fire in Firando the wind be at north-east which if it have so continue most part of the town have be burn but the wind fall variable south-easter and in the end calm yet notwithstanding forty house be burn to the ground and have not our english man bestir themselves lusty many more house have go to wrack for the fire take hold three or four time on the other side the street where our english house be but they still put it out and be very much commend of the king and all other in general the old king foin come on horseback to our door and wish we to put all thing into the gadonge and daub up the door and then it be out of danger captain brower and some of his people come very kind to the english house to have assist we by land or water if need have be it can certain be know how this fire begin but there be speech among the japan that there will be a great fire than any of these it be tell they by the devil and their conjurer God grant it be not do by some villainous ill mind people think to rob and steal what they can lay hold on in time of such trouble and confusion the twenty in the morning I go to the dutch house to visit captain brower and to give he thanks for his friendly visitation and assistance the last night and towards night Harnando the Spaniard and Edward mark return from but can not come to sight of any of our runaway yet it be certain that they be in and a Portugal or Spaniard a great man in about sea-matter tell Edward mark that we shall have none of these man back but to the contrary if all the rest will come and leave the ship empty they will give they entertainment yea and that which be more if they will bring away the ship and all they shall be the more welcome the japan which the king send to accompany Edward mark and Harnando and to look out our people will not let Edward mark budge out a door in the space of one night and half a day after they be arrive there at he go abroad himself and the Spaniard Harnando lie at another place so I doubt some legerdy-maine betwixt they two and be now out of all hope to have any of our people come back I blame the jesuit and the old king like well of my speech and tell i he will take such order hereafter that none of our people shall be carry to except they steal away our ship-boat as the other do of which I advise the master master james Foster and so a edict be set out that no man shall carry or convey away any of our people without make it know unto i and tell the king thereof the three and twenty I be give to understand of a great pagan feast that be to be perform this day and that both the king with all the rest of the nobility accompany with diverse stranger solemn feast the manner thereof meet together at a summer-house set up before the great pagoda to see a horse-race I think there be not so few as three thousand person assemble together as I esteem in view of they every nobleman go on horseback to the place accompany with a ro^t o^ slave some with p^kes some with smallshot and other with bow and arrow the pike-man be place on the one side of the street and the shot and archer on the other the midst of the street be leave void to run the race and right before the summer-house where the king and noble sit be a round buckler of straw hang against the wall at which the archer on horseback run a full career discharge their arrow both in the street and summer-house where the noble sit that neither the present which we send nor we can have entrance and so we pass along the street behold all and return another way to the english house and late at night zanzebar wife brother come to the english house and bring i a present of a haunch of venison and a basket of orange zanzebar himself do accompany he and about ten of the clock in the night the captain Chinesa our landlord come and knock at the door tell i that the king have give express command that every house shall have a tub of water ready on the top of their house for that the devil have say the town shall be burn this night the devil again a liar if the knave belie not their master yet he prove a liar but for all that we get a great tub of water on the top of our house which hold twen^ie bucket of water and man do run up and down the street all night bid every one look to their fire that it be strange and fearful to hear they the four and twenty this report of burn the town be still current and every one make provision to prevent it I make ready fifteen bucket which cost six condrin a piece and fill they full of water and hang they up in the yard and set another great tub by they full of water beside that w^ich stand on the top of the house and give order to make a couple of ladder to carry water to the top of the house and have former provide nine empty wine-barrel full of temper clay to daub up our gad^nge door if need shall require God defend we from any such necessity three or four man do run up and down the stre^tes all night make a horrible noise that every one shall have a care thereof that it be bot^ strange and fearful to hear they the five and twenty the captain Chinesa our landlord be sick send for a piece of pork which I send he and present follow after myself to visit he and carry he a small bottle of spanish wine and while I be there Semedone and our guardian father in law come likewise to visit he the king send i word by miguell our jurebasso that he have a bad opinion of Harnando ximenes our Spaniard and that he go about to have run away when he be last at but that I know be not so for he have free liberty to go when he will without run away another complaint be also make of he that he be a common gamester and have bring on diverse to play and get their money which report I do rather believe then the other and I find by experience these people be no friend neither of Spaniard nor Portugal and love they of the worse because they love they so well and I have almost forget to note down a shame to belie the devil so often that the night pass ill dispose people have think to have fire the town in three place and in one place set a house on fire but it be soon put out and no hurt do but the party that do it be not find out of doubt it be nothing but a villainy of these conjurer and other base people which be give to the spoil hope to get or steal away something when the town be on fire the six and twenty master Melsham be very sick zanzebar come to visit he and put he in mind to take the physic of this country bonze physician and that it will present stop his flax and bring a bonze or doctor with he to administer it master Melsham be very desirous to take it but that first our chirurgeon shall see it and so he give he two pill yesterday two in the night and two in the morning with certain other feed but for aught I can see it do he no good at all God send he his health all our waste-clothe pendant brass shiver and other matter be send aboard and the ship put in order to receive the general another house be set on fire the night pass by villain but soon put out and no hurt do our night-crier of fire do keep such a horrible noise without form or fashion that it be impossible for any man to take rest the captain Chinesa be sick send for some spice cake and a couple of wax candle which I send he as I have do the like heretofore master Melsham now be weary of his japan physic return to our chirurgeon master Warner whereat zanzebar and his doctor take pepper in the nose @. 3 a strange comedy act by king and noble prevention for night-cries and fire return of the general from Court the thirty day the captain Chinesa our landlord come unto i and tell i of a general collection which be make throughout every house in the town to send present of eatable commodity to the king another feast with a comedy for the more honour of a great feast they have to morrow with a comedy or play and so by his counsel with advice of other I ordain two bottle of spanish wine two roast hen a roast pig a small quantity ruske and three box banquet stuff to send to their feast to morrow and before night the young king send one of his man unto i to furnish they with some english apparel for the better set out their comedy namely a pair of stamel-cloath breech I return answer I have none such nei^her do know any other which have notwithstanding if any apparel I have wo^ld pleasure his highness I wo^ld willing give it he and within night both the king send to i to bring master Foster the master and be a spectator of their comedy to morrow the one and thirty before dinner I send our present aforesaid to the king by our jurebasso desire their highness to pardon the master and myself and that we will come to they some other time when there be less people but that will not serve the turn for they will needs have our company and to bring master Eton along with we which we do and have a place appoint for we where we sit and see all at our pleasure and the old king himself come and bring we collation in sight of a^l the people junket and after Semidone do the like in the name of both the king and after diverse nobleman of the king follower make we a three collation but the matter I note most of all be their comedy or play the actor be the king themselves with the great nobleman and prince their play in which the king themselves be author with their great noble the matter be of the valiant deed of their ancestor from the begin of their kingdom or commonwealth until this present with much mirth mix among to give the common people content the audience be grea^ for no house in town but bring a present nor no village nor place under their dominion but do the like and be spectator and the king themselves do see that every one both great and small do eat and drink before they depart their act music and sing as also their poetry be very harsh to we yet they keep due time both with hand and foot their music be little taber make great at both end their act song and music and small in the midst like to a hourglass they beat on the end with one hand and strain the cord which go about it with the other which make it to sound great or small as they listen according their voice with it one play on a phife or flute but all harsh and not pleasant to our hear yet I never see play wherein I note so much for I see their policy be great in do thereof and quite contrary to our comedy in Christendom we be but dumb show and this the truth itself act by the king themselves to keep in perpetual remembrance their affair the king do not send for the fleming and therefore I account it a great grace for we at our return to the english house I find three or four fleming there one of they be in a japan habit cushma corea and come from a place call cushma within sight of corea I understand they sell pepper and other commodity there and I think have some secret trade into corea or else be very likely to have I hope if they do well we can do amiss m. Adam be the man that put they forward unto it and no doubt will be as forward for the good of his own country as for stranger Hernando ximenes be with captain brower and see the two man which come from cushma dutch jealousy and do but ask he from whence they come whereat captain brower be angry tell he he will give he no account thereof and towards night I understand that two spaniard be come from and lodge at zanzibar and send for our jurebassa to come to they but I will not let he go so soon after zanzibar and they come to the english house the one of they be Andres Bulgaryn the genowe which pass by this place the other day and the other be call benito de palais and be pilot Maior of the spanish ship which be cast away on the coast of japan and be the same man which come from to visit m. Adams at his be here they tell i they be come of purpose to visit their friend namely myself first of all with many other word of compliment and then enter into speech of our fugitive say it be not the father as they call they which keep our people secret or go about to convey they away but rather they of themselves bad people who they report to be very bad people in fine I stand in doubt that these fellow be come of purpose to inveigle more of our people to do as the other have do and thereof advise the master to have a care both to ship and boat as also to take notice of any such as go about to keep they company for that it be good to doubt the worst for the best will save itself November 1. 1613. the first of November at night two house be set on fire on the other side the water but fire be soon put out but the villain that do it can not be find I send m. Foster the master a letter advise he to take care of ship and boat as also to look unto the behaviour of our people for that I doubt these two spaniard be but come as spy to see what we do and to entice some other of our people to do as the former do also I advise he how I understand the say spaniard do pretend to invite he to dinner this day but I wish he to take heed they give he not a Hig^ he return i answer that he esteem they such as I take they for and therefore will have a care to the main chance but soon after he come ashore and the spaniard come to the english house and with much entreaty get m. Foster and m. William Eton to go along to dinner with they to Zanzebars and the other two spaniard and Harnando do the like but these two spaniard come unto i and bid i tell the master or any other that go with they forewarn forearm to take heed they do not eat nor drink any thing but such as they do see the other taste before they for that it be no trust of they of which I advise both the master and m. Eton also I send miguell our jurebassa to both the king and other noble to give they thanks for our kind entertainment yesterday Harnando ximenes tell i that m. Adam have good in his hand belong to this pilot Maior the Spaniard and that his chief come be think to have meet m. Adam here and do mean to attend his come to have a account of those matter as also they bring letter of recommendation from the bishop and other father to the other two spaniard or stranger to persuade they to return back to bishop in japan but I think it be not their determination so to do the second some villain set a house on fire in the fish street and it be soon put out and the party escape and it be general think to be some base people or renegado which lie loiter up and down the town and come from Miaco and three be much suspect but no proof as yet find against they but there be order give to make gate and partition over every street in diverse place and watch to be keep at each place and no man be suffer to walk in the night except he be find to have earnest business another villain get into a poor widow house think to have rob she but she make a outcry he flee up into the wood over against the english house where the pagoda be and soon after the wood be beset round about the pagoda be the idol or idol-temple or both with above five hundred man but the thief can not be find at night as we be go to bed there be a outcry on a sudden that thief be on the top of our house set it on fire but our ladder be ready rear both myself and other be not long a go up but find nothing but that all our neighbour house be people on the top on a sudden as well as we and it be to be think it be nothing but a false lar^m give of purpose to see how every one will be find in a readiness yet at that very instant there be a house set on fire but soon quench it be a good way from our english house the night past three house be set on fire in diverse part of the town but all put out at beginning so that no hurt be do so now order be give to take notice in every house what people be in they whether stranger or other order to prevent fire-knave and night-crye and such as be find to be suspect be to be banish out of the country and gate or bar make to shut up the passage or end of street and watch set in diverse place without cry and make a noise up and down street in the night as have be for a time heretofore without either form or fashion yet notwithstanding all this a villain about ten a clock in the night set a house on fire near unto the pagoda over against our english house but he be espy by the watch who pursue he with all speed but he get into the wood above the pag^d which forthwith be beset round about with above five hundred arm man and the old king foin come in person with many other noble man assist in the pursuit yet I very think the villain do run up and down among the rest cry keep thief as well as the best the four the night pass there be fire put in diverse place more one in the town and a other in the country beside the house near we as I say before order be now give to have secret watch in diverse part of the town every night and no man to go out in the night except upon urgent occasion and then to have a light before they to the end they may be see if this decorum be due keep our house burner will play least in sight I tell the king and other hereof above a week past and now it be put in execution the five this morning I receive two letter the one from Domingo Francisco the spanish ambassador date in five day past and the other from George the Portugal the ambassador go over land from thence for and send his servant with the letter unto who I show such commodity as he inquire for and refer he off for other till our general return write he a letter in answer of he the copy whereof I keep his man take like of two piece of fine semian chowters and eight p^eces of white Bastas and pay seven the piece for chowters and two the piece for Bastas there come a spanish friar or jesuite in the boat with the ambassador man and desire to see our ship a jesuite which I will our master to let he and to use he kind which he do for as the old say be it be good sometime to hold a candle to the devil etc. master Eton Harnando and myself dine with Vnagense and be kind entertain the six this day about ten a clock capt. Saris his return from the emperor court. our general and all his company arrive here from the japan court master Adam be in company with he and present the general send i wi^h John japan our jurebasso to visit both the king and thank they for their kindness in so well accommodate he with a boat as also for the care they have of the ship and the rest in his absence and that he will come on the morrow to visit they be now weary of his long voyage they take this visitation kind say they will be glad to see he at their house also certain merchant of Miaco which come from come to our english house and have sight of all our commodity and among the rest take like often piece of cassedy will and make price for they at three the piece which be in all thirty and so send they to their lodging as other merchant before have do the like and so return i money to my content but these send i nothing but a paper and consign i to receive my money of Semidone who be new go out of town on a voyage our general meet he on the way but I return these merchant word that I will have my payment of they or else my merchandise back again but they make answer I shall have neither the one nor other neither will the host of the house where they lodge pass his word for payment merchant of Miaco play the merchant so I be force to go to both the king to seek for justice but first send word aboard that if the boat of Miaco weigh anchor to go away that they shall man out the Skiffe and stay she which they do and make she to come to a anchor again and in the meantime I speak to the king but the young say that semidone be a man able enough to pay i and then I answer and ask he that if Semidone do not whether he will and he tell i no and while we be talk of it old foin same come in and tell i he will take order that I shall have content yet his order have come ^oola^e if our pinnace have not stay they so in the end the host where they do lodge pass his word for payment captain brower and all his merchant come to the english house to visit our general George the Portugal send the general a present of japan fig and chestnut and Nobisana send he a young pork for a present say he will come himself and visit he within a day or two here follow certain letter the first send from the emperor to the prince of Orange the rest from the english in japan and principal from master Cock wherein the japonian affair and various occurrent for diverse year be express the copy of a letter send by the emperor of japan unto the king of Holland by the ship call the red lion with arrow which arrive in the texel the two and twenty of july 1610. i emperor and king of japan wish to the king of Holland who have send from so far country to visit i greeting I rejoice great in your writing and send unto i and wish that our country be near the one to the other whereby we may continue and increase the friendship begin betwixt we through your majesty presence who I imagine in conceit to see in respect I be unknown unto your majesty and that your love towards i be manifest through your liberality in honour i with four present whereof though I have no need yet come in your name I receive they in great worth and hold they in good esteem and further whereas the hollander your majesty subject desire to trade with their ship in my country which be of little value and small and to traffic with my subject and desire to have their abide near unto my court whereby in person I may help and assist they which can be as now through the inconveniency of the country yet notwithstanding I will not neglect as already I have be to be careful of they and to give in charge to all my governor and subject that in what place and haven in what part soever they shall arrive they shall show they all favour and friendship to their person ship and merchandise wherein your majesty or your subject need not to doubt or fear aught to the contrary for they may come as free as if they come into your majesty own haven and country and so may remain in my country to trade and the friendship begin betwixt i and my subject with you shall never be impair on my behalf but augment and increase I be partly ashamed that your majesty who name and renown through your valorous deed be spread throughout the whole world shall cause your subject to come from so far country into a country so unfitting as this be to visit i and to offer unto i such friendship as I have not deserve but consider that your affection have be the cause thereof I can not but friendly entertain your subject and yield to their request whereof this shall serve for a testimony that they in all place country and land under my obedience may trade and traffic and build house serviceable and needful for their trade and merchandize where they may trade without any hindrance at their pleasure aswell in time to come as for the present so that no man shall do they any wrong and I will maintain and defend they as my own subject I promise likewise that the person which I understand shall be leave here shall now and at all time be hold as recommend unto i and in all thing to favour they whereby your majesty shall find we as your friend and neighbour for other matter pass betwixt i and your majesty servant which will be too long here to repeat I refer myself unto they Firando in japan the ten of December 1614 to this day I have not have time to perfe up my old book of account by mean of the dispatch away our people some to one place some to another and then the new build of our house and after that the buy of a juncke trade at Syam and repair of she which be now ready to depart for Syam and have be any time this ten day ride at a anchor at Cochi a league from Firando where your ship ride at your departure from hence expect but affair wind to set forward on her voyage she be call the sea adventure be about some two hundred ton in who master Adams go for master and master wickham and Edward sayer for merchant m. peacock slay in Cochinchina by mean of the death of master peacock slay in Cochinchina and likelihood of cast away Walter Carwaden return back from thence for to this hour we have no news of he ^or the juncke they go in as I have at large advise the worshipful company jesuite banish etc. since your departure from hence the emperor have banish all jesuit priest friar and nun out of japan and pull down and burn all their church and monastery ship they away some for Amacau in China and the rest for manillias Foyne same the old king of Firando be dead Foyne same dead civil war in ja^a^ Osakay and his governor and two other servant cut their belly to bear he company their body be burn and ash entemb by he here be war like to ensue betwixt ogu^ho-same the old emperor and fidaia-same the young prince son to tico-same who have fortify himself strong in his castle or fortress of osak^y have eighty thousand or a hundred thousand man run away and banish man mall-content which be retire out of all part unto he and victual themselves for three year the old emperor himself be come down against he in person with a army of three hundred thousand soldier fushma and be at the castle of fushma their forerunner have have two or three bicker already and many slay on each part all Osakey be burn to the ground but only the castle so master Eton be go to Sackey with his good yet not without danger for part of that town be burn too ozacay burn such a tempest or Tuffon have late happen at Edoo that the like be never see in that place most terrible tuffon the sea overflow all the city drive the people up into the mountain deface and break down all the nobleman house which you know be beautiful and fair so let thus much suffice for news in japan and now for sales of our good the emperor take our ordnance with a good part of our lead and ten barrel of powder and two or three broad-cloathe and a good part of our other broad-cloathe be sell namely black haire-colour synamon-colour at fifteen fourteen thirteen and twelve tay the tattamy but they will not look on a venice-red nor a flame-colour neither be stamel in such request as heretofore they inquire much after white and yellow broad-cloath the hollander have sell most of their broad-cloath at base rate which make we to do the like and for our cloth of Cambaya they will not look on our red blue byram nor Duttis which be the great part of that you leave with we only some white Bastas be sell at fourteen and fifteen mass a piece and Cassedys will Alleias broad pintado Chader pintado with such spot stripe and chequer stuff most look after and sell at profit we have also sell near half our Bantam pepper for sixty five mass the peecull and all the rest have be go before now have it not be for this rumour of war I stand in great hope we shall procure trade into China by mean of Andrea the captain China and two other of his brother which labour in the matter and make no doubt but to bring it to effect hope of trade in China for three ship a year to come and go to a place near Lanquin to which place we may go from hence in three or four day if the wind be good I have write hereof at large to the worshipful company as the like to my lord treasurer some little sickness I have have but now I praise God it be past master wickham master Eton master Nealson and master Edward sayer have all four be very sick but now well recover all except master Eton who be trouble with the flux and a tertian ague God send he his health for I can too much praise that man for his diligence and pain take in the worshipful company affair jacob speck who be think to be cast away in go from hence to the Moluccas be now return to Firando captain of a great ship call the Zelandia with a little pinnace call the jaccatra the cause of his so long miss be for that the ship wherein he go from hence pass to the eastward of the the same way we come yet by current and contrary wind as they say they can not fetch the Moluccas but be drive to the westward of the island celebe and so pass round about it through the straits of Desalon and so back to the Moluccas etc. the chinaes do much complain of the hollander rob and pilfer their junck for as they say they have rifle and take seven the emperor of japan have take some distaste against the hollander for he refuse a present they late send up to he and will not speak to they which bring it hollander distaste by chineis and japan Portugall not accept as he do the like by another present the portugal send he who come in the great ship from Amacau this year to he refuse both the present as also to speak to they which bring it you think at your be here that if any other ship come out of England we may sell our good without carry up any present to the emperor but now I find it to be otherwise for every ship which come in must carry a present to the emperor as a custom neither can we set out any juncke present a custom for every ship without procure the yearly licence of the emperor otherwise no japan mariner dare go out of japan upon pain of death only our own ship from England may come in and go out again when they will and no man gainsay it we can yet by any mean get trade from tushma into corea neither have they of tushma any other privilege but to enter unto one little town or fortress and in pain of death not to go without the wall thereof to the landward and yet the king of tushma be no subject to the emperor of japan we can vent nothing but pepper at tushma and yet no great quantity of that and the weight be much big than that of japan but sell at a better rate I be give to understand that up in the country of corea they have great city and betwixt that and the sea mighty bog corea bogges and sail wagon so that no man can travel on horseback nor very hardly on foot but for remedy against that they have great wagon or cart which go upon broad or flat wheel under sail as ship do so that observe monsons they transport their good too and fro in these sail wagon they have damask satin taffeta and other silk stuff make there as well as in China it be say that ticus-same otherwise call the decease emperor do pretend to have convey a great army of soldier in these sail wagon to have assault the emperor of China on a sudden in his great city of Paquin Paquin where he be ordinary resident but he be prevent by a corean nobleman who poison himself to poison the emperor and other great man of japan which be the occasion the japan have lose that which some two and twenty year pass they have get possession of in corea james Turner the fiddle youth leave a wench with child here but the whore the mother kill it so soon as it be bear although I give she two tay in plate before to nourish it because she shall not kill it it be a ordinary thing here master Foster the master whistle and chain be find and master Adams have it and will be answerable unto he for it I do think to have send you a japan almanac in another letter to the same effect as this date the five and twenty and send by sea-aduenture by way of Syam but forget to put it in yet now come here enclose I pray you let this letter suffice to master George Sa^is your brother and the rest of my love friend and with hearty commendation in general I leave you all to the holy protection of the almighty rest always your ever love friend at command richard cock to the worshipful THOMAS Wilson esquire at his house at the britaine-burse at the strand give these sir my last unto you be of the first of December 1613. date in the isle of Firando in japan and send by captain John Saris in the ship call the cloave wherein I advertise you how unkind the hollander deal with we in the Maluccas since which time there be not any matter of moment to advise you of more than I have touch in another letter to my good lord treasurer the hollander give it out here that it be very likely our east India company of England and that of Holland shall be join all in one which if it prove true it be think a easy matter to drive both spaniard and portugal out of these eastern part of the world or else utter to cut they off or debar they from all trade for you will hardly believe how the hollander already have daunt the spaniard and portugal in these part hollander act in Moluccas especial in the Maluccas where they daily encroach upon the spaniard which be not able to withstand their proceed spaniard and portugal fear but now stand in much fear that in short time they will also take the Philippina from they also the portugal which trade from Ormus to Goa and so for malacca and Macao in China stand daily in fear to be surprise by they one thing there be the issue whereof I can well conceive and that be the rob of the juncke of China daily practise by the hollander in these part the good whereof can choose but amount to great matter hollander rob the juncke of China and suffice to set out and maintain a great fleet which be worthy of consideration and if it shall happen that the king of japan shall fall out with the hollander and debar they from trade into his dominion as it may fall out that he will then be it likely the hollander will make prize as well of japan as chinaes for out of doubt their force at sea in these part be sufficient to do what they lust if they have but a victual place to retire unto and they be of late grow very stout and mock at they which all the world know be their master and teacher and it be very certain that they have get possession of diverse fortress in the Maluccas and those part yet on my knowledge the people of those part do rather incline to the spaniard then to they although at the first they be glad of their arrival by mean of the intolerable pride of the spaniard but now time tell they that the Spaniard bring they store of rial of plate and in their proud humour be liberal which be easy for they to do hollander sea force in respect they have wherewithal to do it but the poor hollander which serve in these part for soldier both by sea and land have such bare pay that it will hardly find they clothing to their back and meat for their belly their commander allege that all the benefit which happen either by reprisal or conquest be for the state and winthebber as they call they so that what will come of this in the end be hard to judge but let these matter pass I be very of opinion that if it be not for the misdemeanour of the hollander we shall obtain a trade in China for our demand be but for three ship a year to come and go jesuit play the factor agent and beggar in these part as by all^ndian ^ndian relation m^y appear fame of the english in the remote east and only to leave factor sufficient to do the business without bring in any jesuit or Padres as they term they which the chinaes can abide to hear of because heretofore they come into these part in such number to inhabit that now they will not endure it and be always crave and beg without shame which be a common say among the pagan one thing there be which put i in good hope and that be the good report and fame which our english nation have get in these part since our arrival which as I be give to uneerstand be come to the knowledge of the emperor of China and how the chief king of japan have receive we and grant unto we very large privilege as also how that the english at all time have hold the castilian as they call they to hard meat both by sea and land these thing the chinaes themselves tell i and that the emperor and other great man in China delight to hear report of our nation but I have almost forget to note down how some China merchant put out a question to i to know if we have a trade in China whether the king of England will debar the hollander from rob and spoil of their juncke which question be doubtful unto i yet I answer they that his majesty will take such order that the Hollander shall not misuse they of late here be come news from Edoo a city of japan as big as London wherein the chief of the nobility of japan have beautiful house force of tempest in japan that by mean of a exceed tuffon or tempest all or the most part of they be deface the whole city be overflowen with water and the people force to fly up into the mountain a thing never hear of before and the king palace be stately build in a new fortress the tile be all gild on the outside be all carry away with a whirlwind so that none of they be to be find the pagan attribute it to some charm or by conjuration of the jesuit late banish but the Papist japonians do rather ascribe it to the punishment of God for the banish of such holy man another matter there be which I think good to advertise you of and that be of a disaster late happen to we in Cauchin-China ill success of some english in Cauchin-China to which place we send a quantity of good and money to the value of seven hundred and thirty pound sterling as it cost in England master tempest peacock and master Walter caerwarden go for merchant in a japan juncke carry the king majesty letter of England with a present of worth for the king of Cauchin-China and arrive at their port of discharge call Q^inham deliver his majesty letter and the present which be take in g^od part and they entertain with kind speech and large promise the hollander see we adventure to that place will needs do the like and take fraught in other junke and be likewise well entertain at first but in the end master peacocke and the chief merchant of the hollander go on shore both in one boat to receive certain sum of money of the king for broad-cloath and other commodity sell he be treacherous set upon in the water and their boat overturn they be kill in the water with harp iron like fish with their interpreter and other follower which be japonians Walter Caerwarden be aboard the juncke escape and come away but from that day to this we can hear no news neither of he nor of the junke wherefore we fear he be cast away the common report both of the chinas and japan be that the king of cauchin-china do this to be revenge on the hollander for burn a town of he and put his people to death without mercy the original grow from a great quantity of false dollar or rial of eight perfidy revenge send to Quinham by the hollander certain year past and there put away for silk and other China stuff with the merchant of that place but the falsehood of the money be espy they lay hand on the holland factor and I think some one be put to death in revenge whereupon the holland ship come on that coast ^^nded their man and burn a town put man woman and child to the sword this be the chief occasion as report go that this mischance be happen now m. peacock be slay because he be in company with the hollander here enclose I send you a japan almanac whereby you may see their order of print figure and character and so I leave you to the holy protection of the almighty rest always your worship to command richard cock from Firando in japan December 10. 1614 December 5. 1615. sir I receive a letter from you by the hand of captain Copendall captain of the Hosiander which arrive here in japan the twenty nine of August 1615. wherein I understand of your safe arrival at the cape Bona esperanza homeward bound^ wherein your worship give i to understand of the loss of some of your company yet I make no doubt but by the grace of God you be safe arrive in England long before this time I send you a letter date the last of November 1614 by the hollander ship call the old Zealand wherein I give you to understand of the death of m. peacocke and Walter carwarden betray in Cauchinchina which be not a little grief to we all beside the loss of the company good this last year past m. wickham m. Adams and myself be find in a juncke which we buy for siam have great storm and foul weather spring leak in she and be fain to bear up for the land leucke where we stay so long and can not stop our leak we lose our monson and come to Firando again this year we have trim she again and at this present ready to set sail again for siam my great hope in these part be that we shall have a trade into China for we have great possibility and I make no doubt but ere long to see a factory establish there by mean that the captain cheny and his brother have make we have have here the last summer great trouble of war betwixt the emperor and fida^a Sama which we do not know whether he be slay or flee but the emperor have get the victory with loss of man of both side the sum of four hundred thousand forty thousand japonian lose in civil war thus have no more news to write I commit you to the protection of the almighty from Firando in japan your servant always to command EDMOND sayer Firando in japan December 4. 1616. worshipful sir my humble duty always remember have so fit a opportunity I can not choose but trouble your worship with these few line I be but new arrive here in Firando of a hard and tedious voyage from siam which go in a junke of the right honourable company m. Adam be master and myself factor in she have buy more good than we can lade we freight a other junke for japan m. Benjamin fairy be principal of the factory of siam think it fit for i to go in this junke for japan for the safeguard of the worshipful company good wherein I take my voyage the year be far spend that we be from the first of june to the seventeen of September between siam and Shachmar with much torment and foul weather have lose twenty of our man with sickness and want of fresh water the great occasion of this first be for want of a good pilot for we have a China pilot which have no understanding of navigation for when he be out of sight of the land he know not where he be nor what course to take then he fall sick be not able to creep out of his cabin I be force with the small skill I have to do my best and with the help of God bring the junke safe to Shachmar where we arrive the seventeen of September have but five man able to stand on their leg come so late to Firando that I can not go this year to siam but the company junke be go with m. wil. Eton and two english pilot who name be Robert burges and John burges your worship servant till death EDMOND sayer Firando in japan February 15. 1617. captain Saris my last letter unto you be the five of january 1616. send by way of Bantam in the ship Thomas which go from hence that year with a other small ship call the advice in which letter I write you at large of all matter which occasion then offeer as also of the receipt of two letter of you the one date in London the twenty four of November 1614 and the other the fifteen of August 1615. since which time the ship advice be return again into japan and arrive at Firando the second of August last pass by which conveyance I receive a letter from the honourable company date in London the thirty of january 1615. wherein they write i etc. capt. George Barkeley there be some which can tell you that captain Barkely lie on his death bed escape a scour of lose six thousand rial of eight and have he die before it be find out pay out for custom of pepper it may be some other man may have have the credit of pay it it be a common proverb that it be a small matter for man which lie at Bantam to be rich if they live but a little time for as the old say be no man die without a heir we have be this year again before the emperor of japan but can get our privilege enlarge but trade only at Firando and and our english ship to come for Firando only m. Edmond sayer go this last year for Cochinchina with a Cargeson of some one thousand eight hundred Tays good and money trade in Cauchinchina unlucky and be ready to come away be cozen of six hundred and fifty Tays by a china and other of who he have buy silk for the worshipful company and weigh out the money attend to receive the silk the money lie by till it come he and a other be in the room where it lay but those false people make a hole through the cane-wall and steal out the money they not see when it be do I be sorry for the mischance but he hope to recover it again this year have leave a man to follow the suit and return back this monson in a China junke with a Cargeson of two thousand plate to bestow in silk and one Robert hawley go with he for mortality sake and m. William Adams go pilot for the chine God send they a prosperous voyage and to recover the money lose our junke the sea adventure make a other voyage the last year to siam m. William Eton go merchant in she and be return again in she thither this year God send they a prosperous voyage the hollander send a fleet of ship the last year from the Moluccas to the manillias to fight with spanish fleet but they keep in for the space of five or six month so that the hollander make account they dare not come out at all and therefore separate themselves to look out for China junke whereof they take and rifle some say twenty five junck fight of hollander and spaniard other say thirty five once they take great riches and all under the name of englishman but in the end the spanish fleet come out and set upon five or six of their ship burn and sink the admiral and two other holland ship the rest escape but the spaniard separate themselves to seek out the hollander the vice admiral of they fall with two fresh hollander on the morning who fight with she all day and make she to run on ground and set herself on fire because the hollander shall not take they the which two ship and one of they which be at former fight come after to Firando with two other great hollander from Bantam to look out for the Amacau ship but miss narrow of she so that five great holland ship the least of they as big as the Clove come into japan this year one of which call the red lion which be she which ride by we at the be cast away at Firando in a storm with a china juncke they bring in for prize but all the merchandise recover although wet the emperor let they make good price of all they send away the black lion for Bantam a ship of nine hundred ton full lade with raw silk and other rich China stuff another call the flush of seven or eight hundred ton be go for the Moluccas full lade with provision and money and the sun a ship of six or seven hundred ton with the gallia of above four hundred ton be leave to scour the coast of China to take what booty they can and return the next monson the Gallias be go out already but the sun attend the go out of the Amacau ship from to be do with she she be go out heretofore but come in sight of the gallia the wind serve she return into again so I think she will hardly go out this year hollander wrong the english name and as I say before they have rob all the chine in the name of englishman which have do much hurt to our proceed to get trade in that place so that we be force to send new supply to give the governor in China to understand that they be hollander which do it and not Englishmen in fine I have advise the worshipful company at large of all of which I make no doubt but you will hear and so I commit you to God rest your love friend assure at command ric. cock the copy of my letter the last year I send you here enclose a piece of another letter of m. cock there come two friar in that ship as ambassador from the viceroy of new Spain with a present for the emperor but he will neither receive the present nor speak to they which bring it but send m. Adams to tell they they shall avoid out of his dominion he have former banish all of their coat and remain still in the same opinion it be say that Fidaia same have promise the jesuite entrance again if he have get the victory and be settle in the empire which if it have take effect out of doubt both hollander and we have be turn out of japan and therefore better as it be also the last year when we set out our junke we entertain a Spaniard call damian Marina and be the same man which think once to have go along with you in company of George peterson this damian be a good helm man and therefore entertain and a other Spaniard call juan de Lievana go with they as a passenger but the junke lose her voyage they return to where soon after arrive the carrack from Amacau and understand that these two man have go in our ship they lay hand of they and put they in chain aboard the great ship condemn they to death as traitor to their prince and country in serve the english their enemy which come to my knowledge I take their defence in hand and by authority from the emperor get they set at liberty to the great spite and heart grief of both spaniard and portugal these two man go passenger in the Hosiander for Bantam etc. we have have extreme trouble in japan by mean of these war in post or transport of our good from place to place to save it I long to hear from you of your safe arrival etc. m. Adams be go again in the junke for siam accompany only with m. Edmond sayer and m. Nealson be very sick but m. wickham and m. Eton well I pray you deliver the enclose to my brother you most assure at command richard cock in japan the ten of march 1610. it be now almost three year last pass since I write your worship any letter and be by mean of the unlooked for and unruly proceed of the hollander against our english nation in all these part of the world not spare we in these kingdom of japan hollander abuse of the english in those part be here publish for knowledge of the eastern affair and occurrent as it be meet in a history but neither be these Nationall but personal crime and do in time and place of pretend hostility and now I hope satisfaction be or sha^l ^e m^de neighbourhood of region religion and custom be easy violate by drink covetousness and pride the three ^uries th^t raise th^se combubustion this history have relate the worth of many worthy hollander if it yield a close-stool for Westarwood as e^^^^ments rather than true dutch or a grain-tub or swil-^ub for some brave brewer and boar that imbrue with noble blood than themselves have prefer their brutish passion to God glory religion and public peace let it be no imputation to the nation which I love and honour but to such ba^er spirit as have like scorbutical humour in these long Voyage^ and their long peace and want of wont employment be breed as disease to their and infection to our body my intent be to present other with their act myself with prayer that all may be amend contrary to the large privilege which the emperor of japan have give we that the japan shall not meddle with we but these hollander this year have seven ship great and small in the harbour or port of Firando have with sound of trumpet proclaim open war against our english nation both by sea and land to take our english ship and good and kill our person as their mortal enemy which be do by one Adam Westarwood their admiral or lord commander as they term he and open proclaim aboard all their ship also they come to brave we before our own door and pick quarrel enter into our house think to have cut all our throat yet wound but two person and have it not be for the assistance of the japaness our neighbour which take our part they have kill we all they be a hundred hollander to one Englishman and not content with this they take our boat go out about our businness wherein there be one Englishman which they carry prisoner into their own house threaten to have kill he put he in great danger of his life by mean of a company of drunken consort which be about he threaten he to stab he with their knife the young man name be Richard king and son to captain king of Plymouth and beside this two other of our bark go beside their ship within the town and harbour of Firando they bend a piece of ordnance against they which take false fire but they shoot at they with musket but miss the englishman and kill a japan yet for all this there be no justice execute against they by the king of Firando although the emperor have command he to do it also may it please you to understand that two of these ship which they bring into Firando this year be english ship which they take from englishman in the indies as also they take two other this year from they ride at a anchor in the road of Patania where we have a factory and not doubt any such matter in which broil they kill captain * * this John jordaine be say in the time of t^^^tie to have be treacherous slay John jordaine our chief precedent for the right worshipful company in the indies with diverse other and carry the ship and good quite away but six of the mariner which be in the english ship which they take escape from they and come to the english house they send to i to have they send back again unto who I answer I will first see their commission how they dare presume to take our ship and good and kill our king majesty faithful subject as they do so than they go to the Tono or king of Firando desire to have their * * and who w^s the happy instrument of th^^r delivery from that which they account slavery but the english english slave as it please they to call they deliver unto they but they have answer they must first demand they of the emperor and look what he ordain shall be fulfil yet in th^ mean time they hold not the englishman to be slave unto they this be the chief occasion which make they to pick quarrel against we to have kill we all but I hope in God his majesty by the solicitation of our right honourable and right worshipful employer will not suffer his true and loyal subject to lose their ship life and good in such order as they ^^e by such a unthankful and thievish rabbie of they which be assemble together in these part of the world who make a daily practice to rob and spoil all both friend and foe and I trust that you yourself will be a solicitor in this so just a cause against so common a enemy this Adam Westerwood their lord commander set my life at sail offer fifty rial of eight to any one that will kill i unchristian uncivil inhuman imm^ne devilish impiety and thirty rial for each other Englishman that they can kill but hitherto God have preserve i and the rest in this place although they wound two or three yet they be not dead and this proceed of their lord commander be tell i secret by some of their own people will i and the rest to take heed of ourselves they also inform i of the noble parentage of their lord commander Westerwood tell that his father be a close-stoole-maker at Amster^am or thereabouts and the best of their captain either shoemaker carpenter or beere-brewer son God bless such a honourable and worshipful generation I mean God bless i from they and so to make a end of this matter I be this year above at the emperor court at Miaco to make complaint of the abuse offer to we within his dominion contrary to the privilege his majesty have give we and I have very good word and promise that we shall have justice and the Tono or king of Firando command to see it perform but as yet nothing do although I have many time earnest sue for it and at my be at court and at the emperor palace portugal and spaniard be there at the same time to do their duty to the emperor as they do every year when ship come there be a Hollander in the court brag of a Hollander which have live in japan almost twenty year and speak the japan language well this fellow in my hear and other begin to extol their king of Holland to be the great king in Christen^ome and one that hold all the other under he little think that we have understand what he say but I be not behind hand to tell he that he need not to lie so loud for that they have no king at all in Holland but be govern by a court or rather they govern he but if they have any king at all in who they may boast it be the king majesty of England who hitherto have be their protector otherways they have never brag of their state at which speech both spaniard portugal and other do laugh apace and so the hollander mouth be stop etc. and now for news in these part may it please you to understand that this emperor be a great enemy to the name of christian persecution especial japan so that all which be find be put to death I see fifty five martyr at Miaco at one time when I be there because they will not forsake their christian faith and among they be little child of five or six year old burn in their mother arm cry out jesus receive their soul also in the town of there be sixteen more martyr for the same matter whereof five be burn and the rest behead and cut in piece and cast into the sea in sack of thirty fathom deep yet the priest get they up again and keep they secret for relic there be many more in prison in diverse other place as also here which look hourly when they shall die for very few turn pagan also this last year before Christmas the emperor have displace one of the great prince of japan call frushma Tay of sixty or seventy Mangocas and turn he into a corner in the north part of japan where he have but a small portion in respect of that be take from he and this must be do or cut his belly it be think there will have be much trouble in japan about it ^^ushma destroy for all frushma subject be in arm and mean to have hold it out to the uttermost have fortify the city of frushma and get provision into it for a long time but the Tay himself and his son be in the emperor court he command they to write to their vassal to lay down their arm and submit themselves to the emperor pleasure or else forthwith to cut their belly so life be sweet unto they and all render unto the emperor and those pardon which have take up arm in the defence of the tay. and the emperor have give his dominion be two kingdom to two of the emperor own kinsman and now this year the emperor have pull down his castle at frushamy which I think be f^^re big than the city of Rochester a very beautiful and gallant thing wherein I see he this year and all the stone be carry to Osackay and that old ruinate castle which Ticus build Tidaia Samma son of Tico sama. and Og^sha Samma pull down must now be build again three time big than it be before so that all the tone or king have each one their task set they to do at their own proper charge not without much grudge they have leave after so many year to return to their own land and now on a sudden be all send for again to come to the court which anger they not a little but they must ^^ll they will they in pain of belly-cutting yet at this very instant here be a secret mutter that Fidaia Samma the son of Ticus Samma be alive and in the dare house at Miaco but I think it have be report diverse time heretofore that he be alive and in other place but prove untrue yet here be some rich merchant at Miaco hereat present which be afraid and be ready to go up on a sudden for fear the emperor shall burn Miaco if it be true he be alive and out of doubt if he be alive it may turn the emperor estate upside down for he be no martial man but a great politician once howsoever it be it can be worse for we than it be etc and as I advise you in my last of the pull down of all the church in japan yet there be some remnant stand in till this year and the monastery of not touch neither any churchyard nor burial place but now by order from the emperor all be pull down and all grave and sepulture open and dead man bone take out and carry into the field by their parent and kindred to be bury elsewhere and street make in all their place where both church or churchyard be except in some place where the emperor have command pagoda to be erect and send heathen priest to live in they think utter to root out the memory of christianity out of japan for there be certain place a little without the city of where diverse father and other christian be martyr in the time of Ogosha Samma where their parent and friend have plant green tree and set up altar near each tree unto which place many hundred go every day to pray but now by command from the emperor all the say tree and altar be quite cut down and the ground make even such be his desire to root out the remembrance of all such matter and in 1618. in the month of November and December here be two comet see over all japan the first rise in the east be like a great fiery beam rend to the southward comet which appear also in these patt and there within the space of a month vanish away the other do also rise just east be a great blaze star and go north-ward and within a month vanish quite away about the constellation of charles-wayne or the wissard in these part do prognosticate great matter thereof but hitherto nothing of moment have happen but the depose of frushma Tay aforesaid but I be ashamed to write you the news the portugal and spaniard report you may guess of their tale of miracle at home and abroad by this and some of they have show i letter to verify it and be of a bloody cross see in the air in England against which a english preacher speak in the pulpit be strike damn which miracle as they term it cause our king majesty to send to the pope to have some cardinal and learned man to come into England for that he mean all England shall turn roman catholic I pray you pardon i for write such foppery which I do to the intent to have you laugh a little yet I assure you here be many portugal and spaniard will not be persuade to the contrary I know not what else to write but I hope by the next ship which come for this place to come towards England where God grant I may find you in good health etc. your worship at command richard cock to the right worshipful sir Thomas Wilson etc. I have here add for the reader profit and delight this map of japan publish by i. HONDIUS chap. 4 observation of WILLIAM FINCH merchant take out of his large journal @. i. remembrance touch Sierra leona in August 1607. the bay country inhabitant rite fruit and commodity this shall have follow next after master Hawkins with who he go into the mogoll country if I than have have it but better a good dish ^hough not in d^est place of serui^e than not at all neither be he altogether bear out of due time which come in due place while we be yet in India and in time also before the mogoll affair receive any late access or better maturity and for that circumstance fail thou shall find it supply in substance with more accurate observation of man beast p^a^^ts city desert ^ building region ^ then almost any other as also of way ware war Christianity at Sierra leona their apparel they be also gallant and fashion-monger town and house their householdstuff and riches their arm their feature and condition circumcision the island which we fall with lie some ten league to the south of the bay the latitude be eight degree it have no inhabitant nor do I learn the name it have some and by report good water and wood for ship some league from the shore be a dangerous breach of a rock scarce at high water to be discern the bay of Sierra leona be about three league in breadth on the south be high land full of tree even to the seaside have diverse Coves in which we catch plenty and variety of fish on the further side of the four cove be the water place of excellent water continual run at which place on the rock we find the name of diverse english man which have be there among the rest of sir Francis Drake which have be there seven and twenty year before Thomas Candish captain lister with other about the midst of the bay right from the three cove lie a sand near about which be not above two or three fathom in most place else eight or ten close to the shore it flow east southeast and high six or eight foot a strong tide of ebb the latitude eight degree and a half north. the king keep his residence in the bottom of the bay and be call by the moor or captain Caran caran caran he have other petty king under he whereof one call captain pinto a wretched old man dwell at a town within the second cove and on the other side the bay captain Boloone Boreas dominion stretch forty league into the land he have tribute of cotton-cloath elephant tooth and gold he have power to sell his people for slave which he proffer unto we and some of they be by Portugal priest and jesuit make christian and have a chapel wherein be write in a table such day as they be to observe holy the king with some about he be decent clothe in jacket and breeches and some with hat but the common sort go naked save that with a Cotten girdle about their waste they cover their privity the woman cover they with a cotton-cloath tack about their middle and hang to the knee wrap round about they the child go stark naked they be all both man and woman race and pink on all part of their body very curious have their tooth also file betwixt and make very sharp they pull off all the hair grow on their eyelid their beard be short crisp black and the hair of their head they cut into ally and cross path other wear it jagged in tuft other in other foolish form but the woman shave all close to the flesh their town consist of thirty or forty house all cluster together yet each have his own cover with ^eed and enclose with mud-wall like our hovel or hog-sty in England have at ^he entrance a mat in stead of a door lock and bolt not fear robbery where the household hold correspondence to the house in stead of a carve bedstead they have billet of wood lay overthwart upon which in stead of a featherbed they spread a mat or two some be so proud that they have their arras hang also of mat about the wall yet most about their bed betwixt they and the wall their other furniture be two or three pot of earth to keep water in and to boil such meat as they can get a gourd or two to fetch palme-wine and a half go^rd for his quass cup earthen dish for their loblolly a basket or two by the wall for his Maria to gather cockle with a snapsack for himself make of rind of tree to carry his provant with his tobacco and pipe and thus be their house furnish when they go abroad each wear one of those snap-sacke on his shoulder wherein he carry his provision and tobacco which in no wise must be long from his mouth with his Do-little sword by his side make by themselves of such iron as be bring they have also his bow and quiver full of poyson-arrowe point with iron in form of a snakes-sting or else a case of javelin or dart point with iron of a good breadth and sharp and sometime with both they be big and (@) set me^ strong and courageous of a civill-heathen disposition they keep themselves for^^e most part unto their own wife of who they be not a little jealous I can not learn ^heir religion what it be they have some image yet know there be a god above for w^en we ask they of their wooden puppet they will lift up their hand to heaven ^ore they know not but how soever it come to pass their child be all circumcise they be very just and true and theft be punish with present death when any die a little thatch shed be set over his funeral hearse under which in earthen pot they continual keep fresh water funeral and in earthen platter set diverse meat stick about they some three or four bone to the south of the bay some forty or fifty league distant within the country their food inhabit a very fierce people which be man-eater which sometime infest they the moor of Sierra leona feed on Rice of which they have no great quantity sow only what be needful in place near to their house where they have burn up the wood not have otherwise so much free ground they sow also another little seed which they call of which they make bread not much unlike to winter-savory seed they have some few hen about their house but no other flesh except sometime they get a fawn of the wild deer run in the mountain not many or some fowl they feed also upon herb cockle oyster oyster on tree whereof they have great store grow on the rock and tree by the seaside but of a flash taste they take much good fish with wave and other device they feed also much on root and plant about their house many plantan-tree gourd potato pompion and guinne-pepper but tobacco be plant about every man house which seem half their food tobacco-pipe^ the bowl of their tobacco-pipe be very large and stand right upward make of clay well burn in the fire in the low end thereof they thrust in a small hollow cane a foot and half long through which they suck it both man and woman drink the most part down each man carry in his snap-sack a small purse call Tuffio full of tobacco and his Pipe the woman do the like in their wrapper carry the pipe in their hand unto their tobacco they add nothing but rather take from it for I have see they strain forth the juice of the leaf be green and fresh before they cut and dry it make sign that otherwise it will make they drink then do they shr^^d it small little fl^sh and dry it on a sherd upon the coal we behold in a certain island near and no where else half a dozen of goat but can not get a tail of one all our time they have innumerable sort of fruit grow wild in their wood whole wood of Limmon tree especial a little on this side the water place near the town fruit wood of Limmons Palmito wine and some few Orange tree their drink be for the most part water yet the man devour much Palmito wine which they call Moy give little or none to the woman it be strange to behold their manner of climb these tree which have neither bough nor branch save only on the top be also of great height and bigness with a with he grasp his body and the tree together and so bear back his body and lift up his with before he he foot it up with such speed and certainty come down again also so orderly bring his gourd full of wine on his arm that it be admirable they have diverse sort of plum one like a wheaten plum plum wholesome and savoury a black one also as big as a horse-plum much esteem have a aromatic savour mansamillias like to a wheaten plum very dangerous as be likewise the bough of the tree full of sap perilous to the sight if it shall happy fly in they have beninganion about as big as a Limmon reddish on the rind very wholesome another fruit call beguill as big as a apple with a rough knotty skin which be pare it eat like a strawberry be like it also in colour and grain of which we do eat many there be store of wild grape in the wood of a woody and bitterish taste they eat the nut roast which fall from the Palmito tree they use small store of pepper and grain this in surgery that in cookery they have certain fruit grow six or eight together on a bunch each as long and big as a man finger of a brown yellowish colour and somewhat downy contain within the rind a certain pulpie substance of pleasant taste I know not how wholesome there grow in the wood tree like beech bear fruit like bean Beane tree of venomous nature wherewith they poison their arrow of which I observe three kind one great and tall bear a cod like a beane-cod which have in it four or five square bean almost like the seed of a tamarind enclose with a hard pill like a shell within which be a yellow kernel a dangerous poison use by the negro to enuenome their arrow they call the fruit Ogon the second be less his cod crooked byas-wise of a thick rind six or seven inch in the bend and half so much in breadth contain five large bean of a inch long the three be large have short leaf like the former the fruit much big on a strong woody stalk thick and massy a little indent on the side nine inch long and five broad within which be five long bean large than the other call by they which they affirm also to be dangerous I see tree like willow bear fruit like pease-cod they have a fruit call Gola which grow up further in the country enclose in a shell it be hard reddish bitter tree Cola a fruit of much esteem about the bigness of a wal-nut with diverse corner and angle this fruit they much set by chew it with the rind of a certain tree then give it to the next and he have chew it to the next so keep it a long while but swallow none of the substance before they cast it away to which they attribute great virtue for the tooth and gum these negro be usual as well to^^hed as horse this fruit pass also among they for money potato Cotton this happie-haplesse-people know none other they plant also potato and high within land Cotton call whereof with a spindle they make a good thread and weave it artificial make cloth thereof a ^^arter broad to make cover for their member and be sew together cambe a wood to die red. jacket and breech they have another wood call cambe wherewith they die their purse and mat red Limon tree the Limon tree much resemble a crabtree and be exceed full of prickle carry a slender leaf like a willow abound with fruit as our crabtree begin to ripen in August and continue on the tree till October whither they bear twice a year I know not plantain tree or reed the tree which bear be of a reasonable height the body about the bigness of a man thigh and seem to be a annual plant and in my judgement may better be account among reed than tree the body not be of woody substance compact of many leaf wrap close one upon another in manner of a artichoke stalk adorn with leaf in stead of bough from the very ground which be for the most part about two else long and some ell broad have a very large rib in the middle thereof the fruit be a bunch of ten or twelve each a span long and almost as thick as a man wrist somewhat crooked or bend inward grow on a leafy stalk on the mid of the plant at the first green grow yellow as they ripen and tender the rind be strip off the substance within be also yellowish pleasant in taste beneath the fruit on the same stalk hang down a leafy tuft sharpe-pointed which seem to have be the flower which I know not whether it have any seed or no. they call this fruit Bannanas and have reasonable plenty they be ripe in September and October we carry some to sea green which lie six week in ripen Guinny pepper Guinny pepper be not plentiful it grow in the wood wild a small plant like or p^icke-wood adorn with little slender leaf bear a small fruit like unto our barbary in form and colour green at f^rst turn as it ripen red but not grow in bunch as barbery but here and there two or three together about the stalk they call it Bangue of their whence they make their bread be speak millet or Panike a small slender herb like grass the stalk full of seed not enclose with any husk the same I think which the turk call Cuscus the portugal yfunde the Palmito tree be straight high knotty only in the rind the wood of a soft substance without bough Palmito tree except in the top those also seem rather reed than bough be all pithy within enclose with a hard rind the leaf long and slender in manner of sword grass or the flag of the bough be from the body of the tree some yard or better in length beset on both side with sharp and strong prickle stand like the tooth of a saw but long it bear a small fruit like to a indian nut as big as a chestnut enclose in a hard shell and streak with thread on the outside contain a kernel of a hard horny substance without taste the people eat they roast and call the tree T^bell and the fruit bell. the manner of extract the wine be this they cut off one of the branch within some span of the head a little open the place by incision and thereto make fast the mouth of a guord which in four and twenty hour will be fill with a clear whitish water distil from the tree of good relish and strong wherewith the people will be drink oyster tree there grow likewise within the bay great store of oyster on tree resemble willow in form but the leaf broad and of thickness like leather bear small knop like those of the cypress from this tree hang down many branch each about the bigness of a good walk flicke into the water smooth lithe pithy within overflow with the tide and hang as thick of oyster as they can stick together be the only fruit the tree bear beget thereof as it seem by the salt-water fish fish they have many of ordinary kind and some which seem to we extraordinary mullet ray thorne-backe old-wife with beetle brow fish like to pike gar-fish cau^llios like mackerel sword-fish with snout a yard long tooth on both side like the tooth of a saw shark dog-fish shark^rs like a shark but have a snout flat and broad like a shovell shoemaker have on each side the mouth pendant like barbel and grunt like hog etc. we catch in a hour six thousand of a kind like bleake of fowl be pelican white as big as swan with a large and long bill hearne curlews fowl booby oxe-eye with diverse strange kind of water-fowle on land be great number of gray parrot as also store of Guinny hen which be very hurtful to their rice this be a beautiful fowl about the bigness of a pheasant with particoloured feather I see also among the negro many porcupine quill with other strange fowl in the wood whereof we know not the name there be store of monkey leap to and fro the tree lion wild beast tiger ounce on the mountain here be elephant but no store we see but three for they be further within land the negro tell we of a strange beast which the interpreter call a carbuncle oft see carbuncle a beast strange if true yet only by night have a stone in his forehead incredible shine and give he light to feed attentive to the least noise which he no soon hear but he present cover the same with a ^lme or skin give he as a natural cover that his splendour betray he not the commodity here be few but be further up viz. gold and elephant tooth which at certain time of the year the portugal get of they for (@) salt bead bell garlic french bottle copper kettles low-prized knife hat l^nen chequer like barber apron latin basin edge-tool iron bar and sundry spec^us trifle but for your toy they will not give gold in this place but victual this diligent observer have take like pain touch Soldania but because we tou^^ there often and have already give many relation we will double the cape and take a little view with he of cape saint Augustine @. 2 of saint Augustine and SOCOTORA like observation with other note take out of his journal this place be rather a bay then cape or point not have any land s. Augustine much more bear out then the rest it lie in twenty three degree thirty eight minute of south latitude have variation fifteen degree forty minute have on either side breach which make it easy to be discern lie some league from the main west south-west right from the bay be deep water to seaward but when you be enter the ground be so sheluie that you shall have one anchor aground on the north in twenty two and your other in above sixty fathom and in some place more inward not two foot at a low water ground and over that deep again near the shore yet all soft Ozie ground the land within a mile or two be high stony barren full of small wood in the bottom of the bay run two river two river the land about they sink sandy land forth these river come so strong a fresh that the flood never still they although it flow at least two fathom wherewith the water be thick and muddy great store of cane come down of which we have see some store twenty or thirty league off at Sea it lie open to a northwest wind the fish we catch here smelt of a foot long and shrimp of ten inch the best fish be on the sandy shore of the low land near which the native catch many with strong net a ledge of rock trend alongst break off the force of the Sea within the wood we find on the low land infinite number of water melon which yield good refresh the river nothing save hurt to one by a allegator the water not also very good but wood plenty the place seem not very populous we see not at any time above twenty together the people Nea^ nakedness the man be comely lusty tall and wel-set of a tawny colour wear no apparel but a girdle make of rind of tree to cover their privity the hair on their beard black and reasonable long on their head likewise which they pleat and frizzle very curious neither have they bad smell on their body behind on their girdle be many trinket fasten with alligator tooth some hollow to carry tallow to keep their dart bright which be their chief weapon of which each carry a small bundle and a fair lance artificial head with iron weapon and keep as bright as silver their dart be make dangerous with hole on each side backward they carry about they certain knife like butcher knife artificial make they therefore regard no iron nor will barter for any thing but silver for which we buy a sheep for twelve penny a cow for three shilling and six penny they ask bead into the bargain for which yet alone they will give nothing save a little milk bring down in gourd excellent sweet and good their cattle have great bunch on their fore shoulder like a sugarloaf in fashion and quantity which be a grisly substance and good meat their beef not loose like that of Soldania their cattle but fast and good little differ from english as also their sheep which have tail weigh twenty eight pound a piece therefore usual cut off from the ewe lest it shall hinder their breed in the wood near about the river be great store of beast as big as m^nkies ash-coloured with a small head long tail like a fox garl with white and black the fur very fine strange beast capt. keeling in his journal call it the beautiful beast bat huge fowl we kill some with piece not be able to take they alive there be bat as big body almost as coney head like a fox with a hairy fur in other thing like bat we kill one who wing extend a ell in length their cry be shrill and loud here be heron plenty white black blue and diverse mix colour many bastard Hawkes bird of infinite variety of colour have for the most part crest on their head like peacock there be store of lizard and chameleon which agree to Pliny description only it be air that they live of air without other meat for have keep one aboard but a day we may perceive he to hunt for fly chameleon they eat fly in a very strange manner have espy her set he sudden shoot a thing forth of his mouth perhaps his tongue loathsome to behold the fashion almost like a bird-bolt wherewith he take and eat they with such speed that a man can ^^arsly discern what he do even in the twinkle of a eye in the wood on the hill be many great spider which spin their web from tree to tree it be very excellent strong silk of a yellow colour as if it be die by art spider silk weaver I find also here great worm in manner of our grub with many leg which be enclose within a double cod of white silk hang on the tree there grow great store of herb aloe and also tamerind tree by the water side here be also store of a very strange plant which I deem a wild cocoanut strange tree seldom grow to the height of a tree of a shrubby nature with m^ny long prickle stalk of some two yard long at the end of each foot-stalke (...) ^afe about the bigness of a great cabbage leaf s^ipt round half the leaf like sword grass from the top thereof among the leaf come forth many woody branch as thick set common with fruit as they can stand one by another I have see forty together cluster on one branch about the bigness of a great Katherine pear and like it in colour be ripe at the first greenish fashion almost like a sheep bell with a rind bear forth near the head flat at the top and smooth within which rind be contain a hard substance almost like the coco-nut-shel in which be include a round white kernel of a hard gri^^ly substance yet to be eat and within that for it be hollow be about a spoonful of pleasant sweet water and cool like milk or that rather of the cocoanut h^re grow also another as big as a pear tree thick set with bough and leaf like those of the bay-tree bear a great football fruit such be the round form stick to a strong (...) by certain seam into four quarter the rind of it be cut green yield a clemmie substance savour like turpentine the rind be very thick with which I find diverse parcel p^^ked together almost like the substance that grow on tree but hard rather like a piece of brown woody agarike be thirteen in number couch neat together within each of which be contain another great kernel of a darkish white colour hard bitter and unpleasant of taste in Socotora the guzerats and English build they house for the time of their stay sleight with stone^ the whole island seem nothing else and piece of wood lay overthwart cover with reed and date branch to keep out the sun for rain in that time they fear not about the head of the river and a mile further into the land be a pleasant valley replenish with date-tree on the east side be Dibree a little town little inhabit except in their harvest of date in this valley the wind blow with such violence in june and july dib^ee that it be strange yet within a flight shoot off towards the town of Delisha strange wind over against the r^ad you shall not have a breath of wind the king of Cushem in Arabia ha^h here four Iles. two abba Socolora about a hundred year since this island be conquer by the king of Caixem or Cushem as the arab pronounce it a king of no great force able to make two or three thousand soldier he have this and the two Irmanas and abba subject to he the two Irmanas or two brethren be stony small barren have nothing but turtle or tortoise not inhabit abba be large have st^re of goa^es and some fresh water not above three or four inhabitant as we be certify the king son Amor benzaid reside at Socotora which he rule during his father pleasure they have trade to the isle of Comoro and to melinde for which he have here two good frigate wherewith they fetch Rice and Melo from the main which be their chief food the arab there their arm the arabian h^re be in manner slave to the Snakee or prince be all soldier and attend on he when he command some of they be shoot moreover every of they wear a kind of woodknife or crooked dagger on their left side without which they dare not be see abroad they have also thin broad paint target their dagger handle and chape the better sort set forth with silver the other with red Latin they be tawny industrious civil in gesture the woman be some of they reasonable white person much like to a sun-burnned country maid in England the man be of stature like we well proportion in their limb wear their hair most of they long apparel bind a cloth or turban about the same like the turk and a cloth wrap about their middle which hang down to their knee not wear usual other apparel except sometime a pair of sandal on their foot fasten with thong carry their sword naked on their shoulder or ha^ging from the shoulder in the sheath by a strap or else on their arm and thus they march up and down they love tobacco but be loath to give any thing for ^t diverse of they fling a Pintado or other cloth in manner of a irish mantle over their shoulder and other make they shirt and surpless of white calico some wear a pair of linen breech under their woman like the guzerates but their woman go altogether in these smock hang down to the ground of red blue or for the most part of a light black colour be die calico and over their head they put a cloth with which when they lust they hide their face make very dainty to be see yet be scarce honest and though the man be very poor and have but to defend necessity yet their woman whereof some keep four five or six as many as they be able be so lade with silver gallantry and some also with some gold that I have see one not of the best which have have in each ear at least a dozen of great silver ring almost like curtain ring with as many small hang in they two carcanet or chain of silver about her neck and one of gold boss about her wrist ten or twelve manillias of silver each as big as one little finger but hollow one about another on one arm almost every finger lade with ring and the small of her leg with silver ring like horselocke and thus adorn they can stir but they make a noise like morris-dancer they be keep close by their jealous husband they delight in crystal amber or coral bead but ha^e little to buy they but will either beg they or make a swap with you in private their child the young child except of a few of better sort go naked till they come to some age they be marry at ten or twelve year old they call themselves musselman that be catholic or true believer according to their false faithless faith of M^homet yea they allege this reason for themselves let jesuite-catholikes acknowledge their own the great multitude of they popish argument of faith and the small number of we all the world say they be of our religion and but a handful of you their diet they eat their meat on a Mat spread on the ground but neither use spoon nor knife hand be the elder in unmannerly manner they drink usual water yet in secret can be content to be drink with wine they make in the time of year some wine of date pleasant and strong thus much for the conqueror they call the conquer caffar misbeliever the native socotoran or if you will heretic and subject they to great slavery insomuch that some remain in the mountain live in a wild liberty like beast the other not suffer to have any weapon they be well shape more swart than the arab wear nothing on their head wear their hair long I suppose never cut stare as if they be fright about their middle they wear a cloth wrap about they make of goat hair or course wool weave by themselves on their foot slight sandal their woman go all in smock of colour calico or course cloth hang to the ground on their head usual nothing in imitation of the arab gallant fashion have Manill as of earth paint or of iron about their arm and leg bead in stead of karkanet paint their face with yellow and black spot loathsome to behold for religion they be mere heathen all of they religion and life most miserable if the arab their enemy be to be credit as the arabian certify we observe no rite of marriage but use their woman in common their natural language be much different from the arabic which yet the most learn they live very miserable and many of they be famish with hunger flesh they be not permit to kill so that they be force to live of fish which they take at sea and by their share of date not have wherewith to buy rice except with the use of their woman body to the gazerates while they remain there such as have the keep of the cattle maintain themselves with the milk I can learn of no merchandise the island yield but aloe and date and as they say on the shore of Aba black ambergreese of aloe their merchandise I suppose they can make yearly more than Christendom can spend the herb grow in great abundance be no other than in all thing agree to that description of Dioscorides in seed aloe or semper-viwm the time and make thereof stalk etc. it be yet all of a red pricklie sort and much chamfer in the leaf so full of a rosinivyce that it be ready to break with it the chief time to make it be when the wind blow northerly that be about September and that after the fall of some rain which be then gather they cut in small piece and cast into a pit make in the ground well cleanse from filth and pave there it lie to ferment in the heat of the sun whereby it flow forth thence they take and put it in skin which they hang up in the wind to dry where it become hard they sell we for twenty rial a quintal which be a hundred and three pound english a hundred and three or a hundred and two pound five ounce and a half date two harvest wine of date but we be after tell that they sell to other for twelve which consider the abundance and easy make may be credible their date tree bear fruit twice a year one harvest be in july while we be there it be a principal part of their sustenance pleasant in taste and when they be through-ripe be lay on a heap upon a skin lie slope whence distil a liquor receive in earthen pot place in the earth and be their date-wine reserve for drink wherewith they will also be drink those date be thus drain they take out their stone and pack they hard into a skin which will so keep long another mean to preserve they be by cut before they be through ripe and take out their stone to dry they these be the best of all and eat as if they be candy whole they will not keep in harvest time in every valley where these tree grow the king have a deputy which see all gather harvest and division and bring to a certain place none dare to touch a date upon pain of death without order or severe punishment where he divide they in three equal part one for the king one for the arab and the three for the caffar which be after distribute several but not alike to each this island have store of Civet cat which the caffar take in the mountain with trap civit cat and sell they for twelve penny a piece to such as will buy they flesh be dear ten rial of eight a cow one goat or two sheep for a rial of eight their cattle good and fast flesh cattle and victual like english beef their goat large and good flesh their sheep small like our english sheep bear course wool of goat and sheep they have great abundance they make very good butter but it be always soft like cream at four penny or six penny a pound goat milk at three penny a quart store of hen but five for a rial of eight or twelve penny a piece in the whole island be not above one or two horse very small of the arabian breed and some camel at Delisha they take much good fish lobster and other on the strand grow cotton plant but few ther^ grow also among the stone a shrubby plant with thick round green leaf as big as a shilling with a fruit like Capers of which it be a kind call Eshac eat in salad a kind of Capers orange there be few and dear exceed sweet Basil and on the shore many fair shell be find with cuttle bone and peerle oystershel which the people affirm to drive thither for there be none find yet shell abundant they be beggar buy what they can beg what they may yet give fair usage their best entertainment be a China dish of Coho a black bitterish drink make of a berry like a bay berry Coho other note and remembrance bring from Mecca s^pped off hot good for the head and stomach and thus much for his discourse of these place to which I think good to add these note take out of his journal November the twenty nine 1607. in thirty four degree we see a monstrous overgrow whale come up close under our stern a huge whale and spout water in great quantity have much trash grow about his head which we judge to be limpet and other shellfish at ^is go down he turn up his tail which we deem near as broad as our after deck estimate he to be at the least one hundred ton in weight barrenness a strange tr^e in Socotora at our first land the people have receive before injurious deal from the portugal which they say have carry some of they away be all ^edde from we for fear to the mountain their town which they have leave be build of stone (@) cover with raft and palme-branche with artificial door and wooden lock near the sea side stand their church enclose with a wall in manner of a churchyard within it a couple of cross and a altar with frankincense wood and gum they say when we come to speech that this be not Socotora but abba Curia which we after find false we walk up two or three mile not see so much as a sprig of green grass but many date tree and one other tree very strange about the height of a man or little better great at the root and less and le^e towards the top where it end almost pike the trunk smooth not cover with bark ^^^ting forth in the top some branch of a long void of leaf bring forth reddish flower which after change into a fruit first green in form and bigness not unlike to the date within which be contain many small whitish kernel bitter as be also the branch full of ra^sinous substance whether this be the myrrh I leave to better judgement they also see another * * of these church and of this whole island see John Ca^tro for they be in time past christian which as all other not of their faith the mahometans call cassar but rude and brutish the easy pray to these arab church with a cross on the top of it @. 3 occurrent in India touch the english dutch portugal and the mogul deal with the English surat he never call c. Hawkins lord ambassador but c. Hawkins for he master Canning and master Edward have no such commission but only letter from his majesty and order from the company etc. the danger which man of war occasion to their countryman honest merchant especial among remote and ethnic people I add not the scandal of their religion and country Portugal treachery and hostility tthe eight and twenty of August 1608. captain Hawkins with the merchant and certain other land at surat where the captain be receive in a coach and carry before the dawne we have poor lodging allot we the porter lodge of the custom house whither the next morning come the customer who search and tumble our trunk to our great dislike which have yet bring ashore only necessary we be invite to dinner to a merchant where we have great cheer but in the midst of our banquet sour sauce for he be the man that have sustain almost all the loss in a ship that sir Edward Michelborne take the captain also of that ship dine with we which when it be there tell we the captain answer that he never hear of such a matter and rather judge it do by fleming but they say that they know certain that they be english deplore their hard fortune and affirm that there be thief in all country nor will they impute that fault to honest merchant this speech somewhat revive we the day after Mede Colee the captain of that ship aforesaid invite we to supper the second of October we embark our good and provision give Shek Abdelreheime a present and get dispatch to depart the customer deny leave till they have search the ship whether she have discharge all her good to ship any new but meet with frigate they suppose they malabar dare not adventure their own river these frigate be portugal which desire one to come talk with they and master Bucke rash do it they detain he and after I and Nicholas Vfflet be ashore master Marlowe and the rest begin to flee the Cockson will have fight which he will not permit but run a ground through ignorance of the channel they be take go on the sandy island by Portugal treachery and the fault of some of themselves nineteen with master Bucke but the gin put off the pinnace and notwithstane the Portugal bullet row she to surat four escape by swim and get that night to surat beside Nicholas Vfflet and myself near twenty mile from the place yet have we resist we want shoot and in number and armour they very much exceed we the four the captain of the frigate send a revile letter to the governor of the town call we lutheran and thief and say we be Fleming and not english charge he on continuance of their friendship to send aboard the captain with the rest of we which Abdelreheime not only deny but in the mogul name command he to render the good and man the five come a captain of one of the frigate which use peremptory word and before the governor stand upon it that the king of Spain be lord of those sea and that they have in commission from he to take all that come in those part without his pass the thirteen the governor call all the chief merchant of the town upon their conscience to value our cloth before carry to his house which they do at a far under rate the governor affirm that he must and will have it the captain deny his consent on the sixteenth we be force to accept for some of our cloth in their hand promise of a little more iniustce cloak and be permit to carry away the rest cause we to leave fifty piece and fourteen Devonshire kersey for the king with nine and twenty other kersey and fifteen clothes for Shek fer keep also the four clothes which we reserve for present for the King we be otherwise molest by a contention betwixt Shek fer and Mocrow Bowcan or Mocreb can about the customhouse that we can not get our good from thence we hear that the portugal sell our good for half that they cost our man be send to Goa the fifteen of December come mo. Bowcan with a jesuite padre Peniero Peniero the jesui^e jesuitical humanity divinity and preach r. careless have long live with the portugal m. bowcans injustice war betwixt dutch and portugal at malacca to this our captain show kindness for hope of his man to the other he give present both deal treacherous in requital the jesuite as it be report by mo. Bowcan himself offering a jewel which he say be worth two hundred thousand rial to betray we this day come to we r. careless a Englishman who have long live among the portugal from who he now flee for fear of punishment for carry necessary to the dutch at Muselpatan desire to be entertain which we do with much circumspection the seven and twenty mo. Bowcan desire great abatement upon our cloth or else he will return it and will we will we abate two thousand seven hundred and fifty mamudy before he will give we licence to fetch up the rest of our good to make sale myself be very ill of the bloody flux whereof master dorchester die of which that Englishman Careless next under God recover i I learn of he many matter as namely of the great spoil do the last year to the portugal by the hollander who lie before malacca with sixteen ship enclose the town with help of other king by sea and land news be carry to the viceroy then before Achen accompany with all the gallant of India have with he a very great fleet of ship galley and frigate and four thousand soldier be command by the king to take Achen and there to build a castle and appoint a Alphandira and thence to go and spoil jor and chastise the Moluccas for give the hollander traffic be mind to root out the holland name in those part for which purpose come two thousand castilian from the manilia Andrew Hurtado then govern within malacca and send word of their present distress andr. Hurtado upon which the viceroy weigh from Achen which otherwise have be spoil whereof the dutch general advertise get his man and artillery aboard and go forth to meet he where after a long and bloody fight with much loss on both side the dutch depart enforce to stop the leak of their admiral likely otherwise to perish the portugal let slip this opportunity and fall to merriment and brag of their victory not look any more for the hollander who have stop their leak at jor port. defeat new rig and return upon the portugal who they find disorder and feast ashore where they sink and burn the whole fleet make a cruel execution and have not the viceroy before send six ship on some other service they have be all here utter extinguish after this fall such sickness in the city that most of they die among which the viceroy be one and short after the governor of the spaniard in the Moluccas so that their strength be lay in the dust and the archbishop make and yet * * at the time when this be write which be to be observe in all this journal malabars annoy the port new fleet disperse remain viceroy this last year the malabarre vex the portugal and take or sink of they at time sixty sail or more this year also be expect a viceroy to come with a strong fleet to drive the hollander out of India this fleet consist of nine ship of war and six for the voyage they be separate in the calm of Guinea and never meet together after two of they come to Mosambique where they be fire of the hollander who also much distress the castle but can not take it and the time of the year require their departure they set sail for Goa to the number of fifteen ship and one pinnace where they ride at the bar challenge the great captain Andrew Hurtado who dare not visit they another of that voyage have advice that the hollander ride at the bar put to the northward where they present land their money and good and set fire of their ship to save the dutch a labour and last the soldier fall together by the ear for the share of the money this fleet depart from Goa sail alongst the coast of malabar spoil and burn all they can meet with there be report of leave give they by the Samorine to build a castle at Chau this month here be also news of a Ormus ship take by the malabarre Ormus ship take and three frigate and short after of a fleet of twenty five frigate from cochen whereof sixt^ene be take and burn by the malabar which the rest escape if miserable spoil be a escape also of fifty frigate and Galiots of the malabar spoil on their coast. in january come other news of thirty frigate which put for Diu rich lade take by the malabar be at this time master of these sea they be good soldier and carry in each frigate one hundred soldier and in their Galiots two hundred the first of February the captain depart with fifty peon and certain horseman about this time be great stir touch the queen mother ship which be to be lade for Mocha the portugal then ride at the bar with two and twenty frigate threaten to carry she to D^^ at length they fall to compound the portugal demand a hundred thousand mamudy for her ca^tas or Pa^^e and after twenty thousand at last take one thousand rial and odd money with diverse present which the mogoll be fain to give they mo. Bowcan give i fair word but the devil be in his heart he mind nothing less indeed then payment of his debt seek also to deduct some other imbesel strike off by new account seventeen thousand of one and forty thousand I think he mean to shift if he can and pay nothing secret depart the town owe much to certain banians who must get it when they can at last I get his cheet for some though with great abatement esteem half better secure then to endanger all the six and twenty of march 1609. it be here report that malacca be besiege with thirty ship of Holland malacca again besiege in succour of which the viceroy assemble all these his northern indian force appoint Andrew Hurtado general be the more crank by news of a new viceroy with fourteen sail to winter at Mosambique mean while a ship of Cambaya which have be at Queda come for Goga which the portugal find without make prize of the customer at that time by new price and reckon portugal take prize all ship which sail without their pass seek to make prize in great part of we I be also in the begin of April take with a burn fever which draw from i much blood beside ten day fast with a little rice and after my fever miserable stitch torment i the next month I be visit again with a burn fever he st^ll c^ls the mogul father the amber other use to leave out the article and so in other the twelve of May come news that melik amber king of Decan have besiege the city of Aurdanagar which have be the metropolitan of that kingdom conquer by the Acabar with two and twenty thousand horse and that after diverse assault the mogoll make show to deliver up the city upon condition that he will withdraw his army some four or five * * a cousin or course be a mile and half English co^e from thence that they may pass with more assurance with bag and baggage which be do they sudden issue forth with all their force upon the unprovided enemy and make a great slaughter but fear he will be revenge on those part which be less able to resist the Canchanna gather great force and demand of surat three hundred thousand m. towards the charge send also for the governor a expert Decan soldier the twenty of june come news of the arrival of five ship at Goa and of the viceroy death Andrew Hurtado viceroy whereupon Andrew Hurtado be choose viceroy be the only stay leave of all those part and report a brave soldier he present give order for ship to be build intend after the break up of winter to make a bolt or shaft with the hollander which be now report to lie before malacca with eighteen ship the Portugal ship in the way have meet with one of this town and find she without bring she with they as prize for go^ where on the bar she be cast away whereupon the governor for canchanna and the customer for mo. Bowcan seize on Tappidas the owner a ba^ian for money owe to they whereby also we lose his debt to we for which we may thank the Portugal great war of and with mogoll the twenty of july Shakstone Selim command can Channa and Manisengo two great commander of he to invade all the kingdom from hence to the south even to cape Com^ri for which a huge army be assemble in resistance of who three great king be combine the king of Decan who chief city be genefro the king of visapor and the king of who^e chief city be Braga^adar who also gather great force make head near Bramport upon the mogoll frontier expect the break up of winter both army lie abroad in tent Ascension lose in August I receive fly news of a english pinnace at gandove which depart thence be again force thither by three Portugal frigate I suppose that it may belong to some of our ship which stand for Socatora may not be able to fetch in and so be force to fall on this coast the Hopewell which prove according it be the ascension pinnace want water wood and victual the master John elmer with five man and two boy the master and four of the company come hither on the eight and twenty but I have no small a^oe with the townsman of surat for bring they into the town they take they from i pretend we be but allow trade indeed fear the portugal till I shall send to the N^b^^ four course off Portugal domineer fear force to which evil be add a worse of the portugal come into the ri^er with five frigate and carry away the pinnace weigh also the two falcon which they have cast by the board and yet a worse report come the five of septemb of the cast away of the as^e^sion the company about seventy person be save which the next day come to surat but be force by the town to lie without among the tree and tomb I be not able to procure leave for the general himself notwithstanding diverse letter of recommendation which he bring from Mocha note what gospel the jesuit preach for convert infidel beside letter from the king himself into the town such be their slavish awe of the portugal two jesuit threaten ^^re faggot and utter desolation if they receive any more english thither that which I can do be to send they refresh and carry they to the Tanke where they be convenient lodge yet among tomb till the governor appoint they a more convenient-place at a small Aldea two course off and with much ado get leave for master rivet master jordan and the surgeon to come hither to provide necessary for the rest I have other trouble by the disorder and riot commit by some of they especial one Thomas Tucker which in drink have kill a calf sacrilegious calfe-slaughter calvish devotion of the bania^s this marriage of captain Hawkins some say be ^ut as a trick on he by false friend and the cause of his disrespect with the mogoll he tell otherwise himself Badur descend of the cambayan ^ a bad neighbour to those part description of surat the castle a slaughter more than murder in India which ma^e i glad of their departure fifteen stay hehind sick or unwilling to go for agra and some return again the six of October come letter from captain Hawk^ns import his marriage with the daughter of a armenian and other in the latter end of the next month for my come to agra in December we stand much in fear of Badur his come upon surat he lie within two day journey with six hundred horse and many foot for which cause the governor cess all man with the entertainment of soldier set upon my head ten man I go to he and tell he that I have twenty english at his command for which he thank i and free i of further charge during this time the banians be force to labour to barricado all the street of the city great watch be appoint at the gate certain piece draw from the castle and from Carode garrison fifty horse which have not suffice have not the governor of Amadanar send one thousand horse and two thousand foot to our succour upon news of which force Badur withdraw to his hold two year before our come have this man sack Cambaya whereof his grandfather have be King the eighteen of january I depart out of surat towards agra will yet to leave some notice thereof before I leave it the city be of good quantity with many fair merchant ho^ses therein stand twenty mile within the land up a fair river some three mile from the mouth of the river where on the southside lie a small low island over-flowed in time of rain be the bar where ship trade and unlade whereon at a spring tide be three fathom water over this the channel be fair to the city side able to bear vessel of fifty ton lade this river run to Bramport and from thence as some say to Musselpatan as you come up the river on the right hand stand the cas^le well wall ditch reasonable great and fair with a number of fair piece whereof some of exceed greatness it have one gate to the greenward with a drawbridge and a small port on the river side the captain have in command two hundred horse before this lie the Medo^ which be a pleasant green in the midst whereof be a maypole to hang a light on and for other pastime on great festival on this side the city lie open to the green but on all other part be ditch and fence with thick hedge have three gate of which one lead to variaw a small village where be the ford to pass over for Cambaya way near this village on the left hand lie a small Aldea on the river bank very pleasant where stand a great pagoda much resort to by the indian indian idol another gate lead to Bramport the three to Nonsary a town ten of where be make great store of calico have a fair river come to it some ten further lie Gondoree and a little further Belsaca the frontier town upon daman a fair Tanke or pond hard without Nonsary gate be a fair tank sixteen square enclose on all side with stone step three quarter of a english mile in compass with a small house in the midst on the further side be diverse fair tomb with a goodly pave court pleasant to behold behind which grow a small grove of Manga tree whither the citizen go forth to banquet some half behind this place stock worshipper of a stock or tre^ be a great tree much worship by the banians where they affirm a dew to keep and that it have be oftentimes cut down and stock up by the root at the moor command and yet have spring up again near to the castle be the where be a pair of stair for lade and unlade of good customhouse within be room for keep good till they be clear the custom be two and a half for good three for victual and two for money without this gate be the great Gondoree or Bazar right before this gate stand a tree with a arbour whereon the fok^ers which be indian holy man sit in state betwixt this and the castle on the entrance of the green be the market for horse and cattle a little low on the right hand over the river be a little pleasant town Ranele inhabit by a people call naite speak another language naite nau^a and for the most part seaman the house be fair therein with high step to each man door the street narrow they be very friendly to the English here be many pleasant garden which attract many to pass there their time and on the tree be infinite number of those great bat great bat their nature which we see at saint Augustine hang by the claw on the bough make a shrill noise this foul the people say engender in the ear on each wing it have a hook and give the young suck the winter here begin about the first of june winter and dure till the twenty of September but not with continual reins as at Goa but for some six or seven day every change and full with much wind thunder and rain but at the break up come always a cruel storm which they call the tuffon fearful even to man on land Tuffon monson which be not alike extreme every year but in two or three at the most monsons here for the south serve in April and September and for Mocha in February and March from the south ship come hither in December january and February and from Mocha about the five of September after the reins from Ormus for the coast of India in November but none may pass without the portugal pass for what how much and whither they please to give licence erect a custom on the sea with confiscation of ship and good not show it in the full quantity to the taker and examiner @. 4 his journey to agra observation by the way and there and of the Decan war there comuariaw Mutta Carode the second of january I depart from comuariaw a small village three cousin from surat to Mutta a great Aldea 7 21.8 to Carode a great country town by which on the north run surat river it have a castle with two hundred horse pa^ans good soldier twenty two to Curka 12 it be a great village with a river on the south side become badur hold in the way 7 be become a castle with a great Tanke and a pleasant grove 23.10 to nacampore a great town under the Pectopshaw in this way on the right hand begin a great ridge of mountain which come from amadanar-ward near which Badur keep hold diverse strong hold thereon that the king with all his force can hurt he these mountain run to Bramport wild elephant Badur on they be breed many wild elephant 24. to Dayta 8 a great town in the midway you pass a stony troublesome river this town have a castle and be almost encompass with a river seat in a fertile soil 25. to Badur 10 a filthy town and full of thief here be make much wine of a sweet fruit call m^wa but I find it not wholesome except it be burn this town be the last of note in Pectopshaws land who be a small king or raiaw a gentile keep on the top of inaccessible mountain which begin at Curka and extend many course he hold two fair city salere and the other salere and city of Berropsha castle impregnable where the mamudee be coin each have two mighty castle which have way to they but for two man abre or for a elephant at most to get up have also in the way eighty small fortress disperse on the mountain to guard the way upon the top of these mountain be good pasture and abundance of grain fountain run thence into the plain the Acabar besiege he seven year and in the end be force to compound with he give he narampore and Badur with diverse other for the safe conduct of his merchant alongst this plain so that he now remain this king friend send present yearly leave one of his son at Bramport for pledge of his fealty he be say to have always in readiness four thousand mare of a strange breed and excellent breed of horse rare Nonderbar lingull sindkerry and one hundred elephant 26.7 to nonderbar a city short of which be many tomb and house of pleasure with a castle and a fair Tanke seven and twenty to lingull 10 a beastly town with thievish inhabitant and a dirty castle a deep sandy way near the town 28.10 to sindkerry a great dirty town in the way the governor of lingull with other as honest as himself will have borrow some money of i but see it prove powder and shot give over and we draw on our cart without trouble on the further side of Sindkerry run a river of brackish water with drink whereof I get the bloody flux which accompany i to Bramport 29.10 to taulneere taulneere a thievish way the town fair with a castle and a river in time of rain not passable without Boat 30.15 to Chupra a great town I rest two day by reason of rain in which time come the governor of nonderbar with four hundred horse without who company I can not have proceed without danger can-canna have be beat and retire to Bramport after the loss of the strong and rich town of joulnapore whereupon the grow so insolent joulnapore that they make road into this way and spoil many passenger rawd mukom stay for refresh Bramport the second of February 6c. to rawd a country village the unseasonable thunder wind and rain with my disease almost make a end of i which make we make mukom the three and four the five to beawle 10c. a great town with a fair castle 6. stay by foul weather 7.16 to ravere a great town 8.10 to Bramport where I pitch my tent in the armenian yard not be able for money to get a house the town be so full of soldier some 2 short of this city lie a fair city and betwixt these two city the camp of can-canna under tent 2 in length have some fifteen thousand horse two hundred fair elephant a hundred piece of ordnance of all size on the north side on the other side within twenty or thirty course the tent and compass of both side lay amberchapon a abash and general of the king of decans force with some ten thousand of his own cost all brave soldier and some forty thousand decanee in so much that the city of Bramport have certain be lose have not the prince saltan and raiaw Manisengo come instant down with great force for at this time he have send to the can-canna to yield up the city upon composition deem he not able to hold it against he this city be very great but beastly situate in a low unwholesome air a very sickly place cause especial by the bad water description of Bramport on the north-east be the castle on the river bank come from surat large and well fortify by the castle side in the river lie a elephant of stone so lively that a live elephant come one day to drink run against it with all his force atificiall elephant and break both his tooth the head be paint red in the forehead and many simple indian worship it some two cousin forth of the city be can Cannas garden call badge the whole way thereto be under shady tree very pleasant within it be diverse fair walk with a stately small Tanke stand square between four tree all shade and enclose with a wall at the entrance without a fair banquete house build aloft between four tree I rest to the twelve for recovery which God send under my tent. two day after my come come news of the sack of ravere ravere sack by fifteen hundred Decan horse with other place near thereto we blessing God for our safe arrival the way now not passable with one thousand horse I be here certify also by a armenian letter of a great overthrow give to the Portugal armada upon the Mallabar coast consist of fifty frigate and two galley Portugal loss which be disperse with foul weather be sudden out of diverse creek assail by the malabar which be attend with spoil fire take the rest flee on the twelve I ride to visit the prince and on the thirteen give he a present find he courteous promise what I desire the prince have with he twenty thousand horse and three hundred fair elephant and with he asaph can with some three thousand and emersee Rastein late king of Candbar with some thousand old soldier and during my abode in the camp come also Raia Manisengo with ten thousand horse all resboot and near a thousand elephant so that all the plain for a great distance be cover with tent very brave to behold with the army come diverse great boat for the transportation of force ^uer water the prince remove I return to Bramport and on the six and twenty he be advance 3 towards the enemy I go to he to take my leave where news come of the overthrow of certain of Manisengos force the first of march the governor of Bramport depart for agra and I with he 12 c. to bar a great village stony and steep way be the passage over the great ridge of mountain which come from amadavarward Barre^ about some 4 of this way lie the strong and invincible castle of Hassere seat on the top of a high mountain large and strong Hassere a strong and strange fort. able to receive as be report forty or fifty thousand horse and on the top be many fair thank and good pasture ground it have have in the day of Badur Shakstone late king thereof some six hundred piece of ordnance the Acabar besiege it a long time circle it on all side and at length take it by composition for it be say that there breed such a innumerable sort of emmet or other small worm in all the water that the people swell and burst with drink thereof which mortality cause he to compound and deliver it be by mere human force invincible the three 11 to Camla a small Aldea stony troublesome way the four Camla magergom kergom berkul to magergom 4 a great Aldea bad way the five 10 to kergom a great village steep way the six 13 c. to berkul a small village the seven 8 to Taxapore a small town at 2c. on this way you pass a fair river call neruor which come from baroche upon the bank be a pretty town and fair castle and under it the ferry place to pass over with camel be a way a c. low on the left hand where be a over-fall and not above three foot in the passage but near a mile over the eight 5 to Mandow 3 c. whereof be up a steep stony mountain have way but for a coach at most Mandow the river of the old town this ridge of mountain extend north-east and south-west on the top at the edge of the mountain stand the gate or entrance of the city over which be build a fair fort and house of pleasure the wall extend all along the mountain side for many cose on the left hand at the entrance some two or three mile distant on the top of a pick mountain stand a strong fort and in other place disperse some ten or twelve more for 2 c. or better within this gate the city be ruin all save only tomb and meskite which remain in great number to this day with some totter wall of great house the old city be from gate to gate 4 c. long north and south but east and west ten or twelve cose and yet to the eastward of all lie good pasture ground for many course aloft on this mountain be some sixteen fair thank here and there disperse about the city that which be now stand be very fair but small in comparison of the former the present describe with diverse goodly building all of firm stone and fair high gate that I suppose the like not to be in all Christendom at the entrance on the south within the gate of the city now inhabit as you pass along on the left hand stand a goodly meskite and over against it a fair palace wherein be inter the body of four king with exceed rich tomb by the side thereof stand a high turret of one hundred and seventy step high build round with gallery and window to every room all exceed for goodly port arch pillar the wall also all interlay with a green stone much beautify on the north-side where I come forth lie a piece of a foot and a half bear in the mouth but the breech be in the ground the gate be very strong with a steep descent and without this six other all very strong with great wall place for court of guard between gate and gate on this side be also a small port but the way thereto be exceed steep all alongst on the side also run the wall with flanker ever here and there among and yet be the hill so steep of itself that it be not almost pos^^ble for a man to climb up on all ^oure to any part of it the first of name th^t take it be c^n john^ ^ p^^an who build the turret and li bury in the pal^ce adjoin with three of his successor this city be build by a in^ll^n some thousand year ago Luneheira so that to man judgement it be altogether invincible and yet be take partly by force partly by treason by hamawne this man grandfather for^ing seic Shakstone Selim who ancestor have conquer it from the indian some four hundred year ago this Shakstone Selim be a very powerful king of Dely and once force hamawne to fly into Persia for aid from whence return with persian force he put he again to the worst who yet hold out against he all his life time as also a long time of ecabars reign fly from one mountain to another without the wall of the city on this side the suburb enter 4 long but all ruinate save certain tomb meskit and goodly seray no man remain in they the way exceed stony and bad at 4 end lie Luneheira a small where we pitch the nine between this and the ruin about 3 of the way be a goodly Tanke enclose with stone and a banquet house in the midst on the south whereof be fair house of pleasure now ruinate from whence go a arch bridge to the banquet house in the Tanke some half a cousin beyond Luneheira on the right hand be four or five fair thank with a great pagode ouglue a very pleasant place the ten to dupalpore 14 good way a small town the eleven to ouglue a fair city twelve long cose this country be call a fertile soil abound with opium here the cousin or course be two mile English the twelve Conoscia opium we make mukom the thirteen to Conoscia 11 good way a little village I inquire the price of opium they give the head three scratch from whence issue small tear at the first white which with the cold of the night turn reddish which they daily scrape not without infinite trouble the head be very small and yield little the fourteen Sunenarra to Sunenarra 8 way much stony and thievish a people call inhabit the hill on the left hand which often ungracious entertain caravans a hundred of they have do the like to a Caffila now have not our come prevent it be a small town short of which be a great Tanke full of wild fowl pimpelgom the fifteen 10 to pimpelgom a ragged Aldea at 4 end of this way lie sarampore a great town with a castle on the south-west side with a fair town-house here be make fair turban and good linen short of this town we meet Caun John a great minion of the king with ten thousand horse many elephant and boat carry on cart go for Bramport on the way also we pass diverse of Manisengos man he have in all some twenty thousand so that it be deem there be one hundred thousand horse assemble the sixteenth 7 to a great country town abound with all sort of grain Berroul delout burrow victual and Mewa wi^e at 4 lie Berroul a great Aldea the seventeen 12 to delout a great Aldea the way for the five last cose thievish hilly stony the other pleasant plain the eighteen 7 to burrow a small town but plentiful of victual except flesh which be scarce all this way the way dangerous the nineteen 7 to Sukesera a small ragged town syrange the twenty to syrange 9 a very great town where be many betele garden the one and twenty and two and twenty we make muckom the three and twenty to cuchenary 8 the four and twenty to Sadura 5 the five and twenty to collebage 7 the six and twenty collebage qual^res Cipry 12 c. to qualeres a pretty small town encompass with tamarind and Manga tree the seven and twenty to cipry seven of surat couse a mile and a half way thievish stony full of tree a desert passage a wall town fair house cover with slate two night before some sixty or seventy thief mistake for a late pass Caravan assail in a dark night one hundred and fifty Potan soldier and fall into the pit they dig for other Norwar ten be slay and as many take the rest flee the eight and twenty to Norwar 12 a desert rascally way full of thief in the wood sit diverse chuckee to prevent rob but the fox be often make the gooseheard one pretty neat meskite and in one place at the foot of the gate a few poor inhabitant we see in this day journey and nineteen fair saray ruinate the town at the foot of the hill have a castle on the top of a stony steep mountain with a narrow stone causey lead to the top some mile or better in ascent strong castle in the way stand three gate very strong with place for corpse guard at the t^p of all be the four gate which lead into the castle where stand a guard not permit any s^rang^r to enter without order from the King the town within be fair and great with a descent thereto be situate in a valley on the top of a mountain very strange as it be report this cliff be in circle some 5. or 6 and wall round with tower and flanker here and there disperse without treason invincible this have be the gate or border of the kingdom of Mandow and have be beautiful and s^ored wi^h ordnance but now be much go to ruin the twenty nine to Palacha 7 the thirty to a strong castle a great town 12 the thirty one to 6 c. a pleasant city with a castle on the east (@) be on the top of a steep pike hill a ruinous build where diverse great man have be inter on the west side be the castle which be a steep craggy cliff of 6 c. compass at least diverse say eleven all enclose with a strong wall at the go up to the castle adjoin to the city be a fair court enclose with high wall and shut in with strong gate where keep a strong guard not permit any to enter without public order from hence to the top lead a stone narrow causeway wall on both side in the way be three gate to be pass all exceed strong with court of guard to each at the top of all at the entrance of the last gate stand a mighty elephant of stone very curious wrought this gate be also exceed stately to behold with a goodly house adjoin who wall be all set with green and blue stone with diverse gild turret on the top this be the governors lodging where be place to keep noble that offend he be say to have three such noble-prison or castle this and Rantimore 40 to which be send such noble as he intend to put to death Rantimore which common be some two month after their arrival the governor then bring they to the top of the wall and give they a dish of milk which have drink he be cast down thence on the rock the three be a castle in the kingdom of Bengala whither be send those noble which be condemn to perpetual imprisonment from whence very few return again on the top of this mountain of be very good ground with three or four fair thank and many other fair building on the town side be many house cut out of the main rock for habitation and sale of good on the northwest side at the foot of the hill be a spacious meadow enclose with a stone wall within which be diverse garden and place of pleasure fit also to keep horse in time of war this castle be the gate or frontier of the kingdom of Dely border on Mandow and be near a mile of ascent the first of April 1610. to Mendaker 9 the second 10 to doulpore within 2 of the town you pass a fair river call as broad as the Thames Mendaker short of which be a narrow passage with hill on both side very dangerous the castle be strong ditch round and have four wall and gate one within a other all very strong with steep ascent to each pave with stone the city be inhabit mostwhat with gentile the castle be three quarter of a mile through and on the further side have like gate to be pass again jaiow agra the three to jaiow 9 the four to agra 9 in the afternoon the captain carry i before the King I here find at my come captain Thomas boy with three french soldier a dutch engineer and a venetian merchant with his son and a servant new come by land out of Christendom in May and part of june the town be much vex with fire night and day flame in one part or other whereby many thousand of house be consume beside man woman terrible fire at agra child and cattle that we fear the judgement of Sodom and Gomorrha upon the place I be long dangerous sick of a fever and in june the heat so exceed that we be half roast alive june the twenty eight arrive padre Peniero a arch-knave a jesuite I shall say who bring letter from the viceroy with many rich present tend only to thwart our affair see how merchant speak the jesuite when jesuite play the merchant in this time mo. Bowcan be complain of by the captain to the king who command Abdel hassan the chief Vizier to do justice but bird of a feather will fly together and mo. Bowcan partly mis-reckoned partly turn we over to a bankrupt bannian so that of thirty two thousand five hundred one m. and a half due he will pay but eleven thousand neither will he pay that present in july come news of the ill success of the king force in Decan who be within some four day journey of amdananager hope to raise the siege thereof be force through famine and drought to make their retreat for Bramport whereupon the city Amdananager lose to the Decan after much misery endure be lose this army consist of one hundred thousand horse at the least with infinite number of camel and elephant so that with the whole baggage there can not be less than five or six hundred thousand person insomuch that the water be not sufficient for they a mussocke of water be sell for a Rupia and yet not enough to be have peril of huge army and all victual at a excessive rate for the Decan army still spoil the country before they and cut betwixt they and supply for victual they out of guzerate and Bramport daily make light skirmish upon they to their great disadvantage that without retire the whole army have be endanger at their return to Bramport there be not to be find thirty thousand horse with infinite number of elephant camel and other cattle dead this month also come news of the sack of potana a great city in purrop potana sack and surprise of the castle where the king treasure lay the citizen fly without make resistance but upon this cavalero present come a great adjoin and take he in the castle the citizen return he send twelve of the chief of they to the king who cause they to be shave and in woman attire to be carry on ass through all the street of agra punishment of cowardice and on the next day as it be say cut off their head all this month also be much stir with the king about Christianity he affirm before his noble that it be the sound faith and that of Mahomet lie and fable Christianity seem to be affect by the mogul he command also three prince his decease brother son to be instruct by the jesuite and christian apparel to be make for they the whole city admire and yet at the same time Abdel hassans judgement be that it be not justice to pay debt to christian in mo. bowcans case whereof again we have reference from the king to he perhaps on like ground as some europaeans think it lawful to make price of the good and ship of ethnike therefore set out man of war so to make the christian name not as a ointment pour out that the virgin soul may be convert and love Christ but as filthy matter run out of rot heart and poison lip yea with force and arm to exoccupate the kingdom of Christ in those part at least let reform professor reform this man-of-warre-profession against innocent that the name of God through they be not blaspheme among the gentile but to return to this dissimulation as since it have to the world appear those three prince be christen solemn conduct to church by all the christian of the city three prince christen english colour display before the mogul to the number of some sixty horse captain Hawkins be in the head of they with s. George colour carry before he to the honour of the english nation let they fly in the court before Shakstone Selim himself the elder be name don Philippo the second don Carlo the three don Henrico and on the nine of September be christen another young prince the acabars brother son son by the name don Duarte the king give daily charge to the father for their instruction that they may become good christian Portugal afraid to come too late October the twelve we be certify by letter of m. jourdaine from surat that thirty frigate of the portugal be cast away on the bar of surat haste before the winter be break up to catch more english many of the man escape and be glad to beg relief at the english door @. v. description of fetipore Byana the way thither of the will or indigo and of diverse mogoll affair city and castle the first of November I be send to buy will or indigo at Byana I lodge that night at menhapoore be a kind of public inn. see stell and crowder a great 7 by which be a garden and Moholl or summer house of the queen mother very curious contrive the second at Cannowa 11 at 4 end be a moholl of the king and at every cose end from agra be erect a stone pillar for 130 to Asmere where lie inter the body of a great moorish saint call Hoghee Mondee Asmere a child-giving saint whereto the Acabar want child make a foot-pilgrimage to beg for issue and cause a pillar at each course to be set up and a moholl with lodging for sixteen great woman at every eight course alongst and after his return obtain three son at 7 c. on this way and 12 from agra be seat the famous city of fetipore build by the fetipore describe and enclose with a fair stone wall which yet stand fresh have four fair and strong gate it be some three english mile betwixt gate and gate in the midst it be all ruinate lie like a waste desert and very dangerous to pass through in the night the building lie waist without inhabitant ruin much of the ground be now convert to garden and much sow with will and other grain that a man stand there will little think he be in the midst of a city to the entrance of the gate from agra some course in length upon a stony ascent lie the ruin of the suburb as also without the south-west gate for two english mile in length many fair building be fall to the ground and on the left hand be many fair enclose garden three mile alongst from the city at the entrance of the north-east gate be a goodly Bazar market place of stone the Bazar half a mile long be a spacious straight-paved street with fair building on either side close within the gate be the king with large stone lodging but much ruin at the head of this street stand the king house and Moholl with much curious building and on the further side hereof upon a ascent stand the goodly meskite of the east it have some twenty four or thirty step of ascent to the gate fair meskite which be one of the high and fair I suppose in the whole world on the top be a number of cluster pinnacle curious dispose the top of this gate may be plain see eight or ten mile distance within be a goodly spacious court very curious pave with free stone about six time the largeness of London exchange with fair large walk alongst the side more than twice as broad and double the height of those about the burse of London the pillar uphold they be of one entire stone and round about be entrance into many goodly room neat contrive opposite to the gate towards the further side stand a fair and sumptuous tomb artificial inlay with mother of pearl and enclose with a grate of stone curious carve over head be rich parget and paint calendar be a order of moorish votary Badwater herein lie the body of a great calendar at who cost the whole meskite be build under the court yard be a goodly Tanke of excellent water none other be to be have through the city but brackish and fret by drink whereof be cause such mortality that the before it be quite finish leave it and remove his seat to agra so that this goodly city be short live in fifty or sixty year space be build and ruinate it be at the first call Sykary which signify seek or hunt but after the Acabar be return from his Asmere pilgrimage and be father of this Shakstone Selim he name it fetipore that be a town of content or place of heart desire obtain fetipore interpret the north northwest side of the city without the wall be a goodly lough for 2. or 3 in length abound with good fish and wild fowl all over which grow the herb which bear the hermodactyle hermodacty^us describe and another bear a fruit like a goblet call camolachachery both very cool fruit the herb which bear the hermodactyle be a weed abound in most thank near agra spread over all the water the leaf I observe not but the fruit be enclose with a three corner shell of a hard woody substance have at each angle a sharp pick prick point and be a little indent on both the flat side like two postern the fruit be green be soft and tender white and of a mealish taste much eat in India be exceed cold in my judgement for always after it I desire aquavitae it be call by the people the other bear a fruit in manner of a goblet flat on the top and of a soft greenish substance within which a little eminent stand six or eight small fruit like acorn divide from each other and enclose with a whitish film at the first of a russettish green taste like a nut or akorne in the midst be a small green sprig naught to be eat Cannowa be a small country town round about which be make very good will Cannowa by reason of the fastness of the soil and brackishness of the water it make yearly some five hundred m. Ouchen 3 distant make very good beside which no town but Byana itself compare with this I remain here to the two and twenty and three and twenty 6 to the king Moholls describe a roguish dirty Aldea at 2 on this way be one of those Moholls before mention it be a square stone building within the first gate be a small court with a place for the king to keep his Darsany and two or three other retire room but none of note within the second court be the Moholl be a foure-square thing about twice as big or better than the exchange have at each corner a fair open Devoncan and in the midst of each side another Devoncan be a Hall which be to be spread with rich carpet and to sit in to pass the time and betwixt each corner and this middlemost be two fair large chamber for his woman so that each Moholl receive sixteen in several lodging without door to any of they all keep open house to the king pleasure round by the side go a fair pave walk some eight foot broad and in the midst of all the court stand the king chamber where he like a cock of the game may crow over all at I remain till the eight and twenty and return to Bachuna 4 back in the way the twenty of December I go to Byana 8 a back way through the field Byana this city have be great and fair but be now ruinate save two saraye and a long Bazar with a few straggle house many fair one be fall ruin and many other not inhabit except by rogue or thief so that many street be quite desolate on the northwest some three or four off be the ruin of a king house with many other fair building the like ruin be to be see on the south-west side over against a town call scanderbade in like distance upon the height of the rocky mountain the way lead up be a narrow steep stony causeway not to be pass on horseback some quarter of a mile the ascent the entrance be through a small wicket pass the lip of the mountain in a narrow gut on the right hand upon the very edge stand a pleasant building where be diverse tomb from each side the way may be make good with stone against million of man pass a mile hence on a fair causeway you come to the king house sometime fair now ruinate where a few poor googer remain in the ruin many tomb and monument yet remain at the foot of the hill towards scanderbade a strong fort. be a pleasant valley enclose with a wall and therein many garden of pleasure this city have be in ancient time the seat of a great Potane king and have have the wall extend on the cliff 8 in length in those place where be any possibility of get up the rock otherwhere over-hanging the fortification on the other side I see not it have be a goodly city inhabit now only with googer which be keeper of cattle and maker of butter and cheese from hence notwithstanding all this strength do the Acabar force Shakstone Selim the tyrant and then lay it waste as he have do Mandow and most of the strong hold which he take the country which afford that rich will which take name of Byana be not above twenty or thirty long the herb will grow in form not much unlike or cich-pease description of will or indigo have a small leaf like that of Sena but short and broad and set on a very short foot-stalke the branch hard and of a woody substance like unto broom it usual grow not above a yard high and with a stalk at the big which be at the three year not much exceed a man thumb the growth and variety of the herb the seed be include in a small round cod about a inch long resemble save that it be more blunt at both end as if it have be cut off with a knife it carry a small flower like that of hearts-ease the seed be ripe in November and then gather the herb once sow dure three year be cut every year in August and September after the reins that of one year be tender and thereof be make notee which be a weighty reddish will sink in water not come to his perfection that of the second year be rich and call Cyeree very light and of a perfect violet colour swim on the water in the three year the herb be decline and this will be call catteld be a weighty blackish will the worst of the three this herb be cut the month aforesaid be cast into a long cistern where it be press down with many stone and then fill with water ti^l it be cover their make of indigo which so remain for certain day till the substance of the herb be go into the water then they let the water forth into another round cistern in the midst of which be another small cistern or centre this water be thus draw forth they labour with great staff like batter or white starch and then let it settle scum off the clear water on the top then labour it afresh and let it settle again draw forth the clear water do this oft till nothing but a thick substance remain which they take forth and spread on cloth to dry in the sun and be a little harden they take it in their hand and make small ball lay they on the sand to dry for any other thing will drink up the colour this be the cause of the sandy foot so if rain fall it lose his colour and gloss and be call Aliad some deceitful will take of the herb of all three crop and steep they altogether to know good indigo hard to be discern very knavish four thing be require in will ah pure grain a violet colour his gloss in the sun and that it be dry and light so that swim in the water or burn in the fire it cast forth a pure light violet vapour leave a few ash about the six of january the king be on hunt be assail by a lion which he have wound with his piece the great mogul in danger of a Lyon with such fierceness that have not a captain of he a resboot tutor of the late baptize prince interpose himself thru his arm into the lion mouth as he ramp against his majesty he have in all likelihood be destroy in this struggle sultan Corom raiaw Ranidas and other come in and among they slay the lion that captain have first receive thirty two wound who therefore the king take up into his own palanke with his own hand also wipe and find up his wound and make he a captain of five thousand horse his thankfulness in recompense of that his valorous loyalty the king manner of hunt be this about the begin of November accompany with many thousand he go forth of his castle of agra and hunt some thirty or forty course round about the city king manner of hunt so continue till the end of march when the heat drive he home again he cause with choice man a certain wood or desert place to be encircle so contract themselves to a near compass till they meet again and whatsoever be take in this enclosure be call the king sikar or game whether man or beast and whosoever let ought escape without the king mercy must loose his life the beast take if man meat be sell and the money give to the poor if man they remain the king slave which he yearly send to Cabull to barter for horse and dog these be poor miserable thievish people that live in wood and desert little differ from beast this month the king be provide more force for Decan notwithstanding the decan^es require his peace offer to restore what they have take caun Asom be send general and with he twenty thousand horse accompany with matrobet Caun another great captain together with infinite treasure with these force go John Frenchman and Charles charke entertain in his service for the war this ch. charke I have speak with since in London after diverse year service journey to labour indian idolatry january the nine I depart from agra for lahor to recover debt and carry twelve cart lade with in hope of a good price the place I pass be twelve course Badeg Sara 10. 12 former a great city still famous for the antiquity of indian Gobins or saint a little ^hort of this place be a fair Deury enclose with a stone wall in which be a Devoncan and round about a little distance in vault or cloister be to be see many pagoda which be stone image of monstrous man fearful to behold but adore by the indian with flower and offering Houdle 13 at the entrance of the be a fair fountain three story and one hundred step pulwooll 12 ferreedabade 12 de 10 on the left hand be see the carcase of old de * * dely. there be say to ^ee four delye within 5 the elder build by raze who by his pond or magician counsel try the earth by a iron stake which he pull outbloody with the blood of a snake which his pondesaid be sign of good fortune the last of his race be raze petrary who after seven time take a po^an king be at last by he take and slay he begin the Potan kingdom they come from the mountain between Cand^ha^ and catull. the s^cond build by Togall Shakstone a Potan King the three little of note the four by shersh^s^^^m where be that tomb of Hamaron call the nine castle and fifty two gate now inhabit only by googer a little short be a stone bridge of eleven arch over a branch of from hence a broad way shade with great tree lead to the sepulchre of Hamaron this king grandfather in a large room spread with rich carpet the tomb itself cover with a pure white sheet a rich semiane over head and a front certain book on small trestle by which stand his sword Tuck and shoe at the entrance be other tomb of his wife and daughter beyond this under like shade way you come to the king house and Moholl now ruinous the city be 2c. between gate and gate begird with a strong wall but much ruinate as be many goodly house within and about this city be the tomb of twenty Potan king all very fair and stately the king of India be here to be crown or else they be hold usurper it be seat in a goodly plain environ with goodly pleasant garden and monument nalero be hence 14 c. about 2 without de be the remainder of a ancient mole or hunt house b^lt by sultan Berusa a great indian monarch with much curiosity of stone-worke with and above the rest be to be see a stone * * a stately obeliske with greek or Hebrew inscription as some affirm suppose to be set there by Alexander pillar which pass through three story be high than all twenty four foot have at the top a globe and a half moon over it this stone they say stand as much under the earth and be place in the water be all one entire stone some say nasordengady a Potan king will have take it up and be prohibit by multitude of scorpion and that it have inscription in diverse part of India the like be to be see and of late be find bury in the ground about fettipore a stone pillar of a hundred cubit length which the king command to bring to agra but be break in the way to his great grief the stone of indiae it be remarkable that the quarry of India special near fettipore whence they be carry far be of such nature that they may be cleave like log and saw like plank to ^eele chamber and cover house of a great length and breadth from this monument be say to be a way under ground to de castle now here remain only googer and there be store of deer we see in the way the reins of diverse place and near the same the reins of a wall 20c. in circuit be a park for game some part of this way be thievish and some report be give out of the king death many ^ with that false alarm be abroad we meet the fosder of de with some 2. thousand horse and foot in their pursuit who burn their town and take they and they whatsoever he can get and the next day at breakfast we be like to be surprise by thief g^nowre 14 c. 14 at the entry whereof be place a Manora with the head of some hundred thief new take their body set on stake a mile in length carmall 14 the way thievish where but for our piece language we have b^en assault on the northwest extend mountain near to lahor from hence with snow on the top Tanassar 14 here be a castle a goodly Tanke and by it pagoda much reverence by all the gentile throughout India pagoda near it also be the sal-armoniake pit sal-armoniake pit Shabad or goobade 10 Amballa 12 h^llowa 14 7 it have a fair Tanke with a summer-house in the midst to which lead a bridge of fifteen stone arch very pleasant from hence be a small river cut to the king garden a corpse distant with a causeway of forty foot bread plant with tree on both side to it the garden be four square each square a in length or better enclose with a bricke-w^ll the king garden some say it be make an. dom. 15^0 rich plant with all sort of fruit and flower rent yearly as I be tell for f^fty thousand Rupias cross with two main walk forty foot broad and eight high with ^a^er run alongst stone channel in the midst and plant on both side thick with fair cypress one of these cawsey be also pave with pe^^e curious inter-wrought at the cross stand a eight square Mohol with eight chamber for woman in the midst thereof a fair tank over these eight other room with fair gallery round about on the top of all a fair ^ounter the whole build curious wrought in stone with fair paint rich carve and pargete and on two side two fair thank in the midst of a fair stone chounter plan^ed round with cypress tree a little distant be another Mohol but not so curious from hence we pass to dorapy 15 13 c. Nicoder 12 c. sultanpoore 11 7 a build if it be finish by Shakstone Selim in memorial of the overthrow give sultan cusseroom his elder son the occasion whereof be this Shakstone Selim upon some disgust take arm in his father life time and flee into p^^rop the cause of the quarrel betwixt ^he Mog^ll and his elder ^on^e where he keep the strong castle of alobasse but come in some three month before his father decease whereupon Acabar give the crown to sultan cusseroom his son but after acabars death Selim by his friend seize on the castle and treasure and his son flee for lahor where he gather some twelve thousand horse all good soldier and mogul possess the suburb twelve day and proclaim king in the kasse and his father in the castle in this place he give battle to Strek feree and distract his three hundred horse and put they to the sword to the second of he come Melec ale cutwall the king b^ing some 20 behind with some two hundred horse beat up the king dr^mmes and glue a brave assault shout God save king Sel^^ upon which the prince soldier fa^rted and flee the prince himself flee only with five horse and get 30 beyond lahor for Cabull which if he have get he will ha^e put his father to further trouble but be to pass a river where he give of gold the boatman grow in distrust and in the midst of the channel leap overboard and swim to the shore where he give notice to the governor of the town adjoin who present with fifty horse come down to the river where the boat be still float embark himself in another and salute he by the name of king dissemble offer his aid and invite he to his house the prince take which the prince accept be lock up with his company and guard till he have send the king word who send G^rmaunabeg to fetch he fetter on a elephant from hence his father proceed to Cabul punish such as he find tar^^e in this revolt carry his son with he prisoner and return by this place where the battle be fight as some say cause his eye to be burn out with a glas^e other say only blindfold he with a napkin tie it behind of (@) enlargement etc. you shall rea^ after in sir t. ro^s journal two ^e^ipore^ and seal it with his own seal which yet remain and himself prisoner in the castle of agra all alongst on both side the way from Cabul to agra a reasonable distance the king cau^ed tree to be plant to shade the way in remembrance of this exploit and call this place ^^tipoore that be heart content as you before hear of the city which for his birth be name so by his father Accubar these as any decay must by the people toil be supply from hence to Hugh M^h^ed^ 10 cancan^a 12 lahor 7 where I arrive February the (@) on the twenty eight arrive here a persian ambassador ally to Shakstone abash gelole a traitor ^o two (@) with a grea^ Caravan accompany he I by they learned that the way to Ca^d^har be now (@) the wa^r^s be end which the Tink^^ gelole have cause who the former year have flee to the persian with some ten thousand turk and have obtain some jaggere near thereto whereof he purpose to make himself king be overthrow and be send for by the persian refuse to come till delude by promise of a marriage he be get to the court and there lose h^s head we hear also of the persian take from the Turk the strong castle of curd after a year siege with other asian and european news @. 5 description of lahor and of the king house there how the mogoll enter India of diverse strong hold strange beast and plant f^nd superstition of the way thief outlaw city building adjoin and intermix prince not subject agra and Echebars sepulchre describe lahor be one of the great city of the east contain some 24 in circuit by the ditch which be now cast up about it and by the king command now to be enclose with a strong wall in the time of the it be but a village multan then flourish till hamaw enlarge this the town and suburb be some 6 thorough the castle or town be enclose with a strong brick wall have thereto twelve fair gate nine by land and three open to the river the street fair and well pave the inhabitant most banean and handicraft man the house all white man of note lie in the suburb the building be fair and high with brick and much curiosity of carve window and door most of the gentile door of six or seven step ascent and very troublesome to get up so build for more security and that passenger shall not see into their house the river Ravee the castle be seat on Ravee a goodly river which fall into Indus down which go many boat of sixty ton or upward for tatta in sin after the fall of the rain be a journey of some forty day alongst by multan seetpore Buchur Rauree etc. this river come from the east and run westerly by the north side of the city upon which within the castle be the king house the king house describe pass in at the middle gate to the river-ward within the city on the left-hand you enter through a strong gate and a musket shoot further another small into a fair great square court with Atescanna for the king guard to watch in on the left-hand through another gate you enter into a inner court where the king keep his darbar and round about which court be atescanna also for great man to watch in in the midst there stand a high pole to hang a light on from hence you go up to a fair stone jounter or small court in the midst whereof stand a fair De^oncan with two or three other retire room wherein the king sit out all the first part of the night common from eight to eleven on the w^lles be the king picture sit crosslegged on a chair of state on his right-hand sultan peruese picture sultan caroone and sultan Timoret his son next these Shakstone Morat and don Shakstone two of his ^rothers the three baptize before speak be son of this late next they emersee sheriff elder brother to Caun Asom of who it be report his estate to be such tha^ of one hundred chief woman which he keep he never suffer any of their clothing after their first wear to be ever touch by any s^ranger but cause they to be bury in the ground there to rot as also that he always have in service five hundred massalgee in so much that whensoever he go from court to his house in agra which be at least a corpse no man remove foot with his torch but stand all alongst to his house next this man emersee Rostene late king of Candhar the picture on the wall of the prince or great man then can can which signify prince of can than cut^up Caun raiaw Manisengo Caun Asom Asoph Caun Sheck feree Kelish Caun and raiaw juggonat who at his death have seven of his friend that burn themselves with he beside one of his sister and a brother child on the left hand of the king stand raiaw bouse who beat away fly than raiaw Ramdas who hold his sword cleriff Caun Caun John jemana or Caun mocrow Bowcan raiaw bossow raiaw ranse maio Kesso and Lala berse note also that in this gallery as you enter on the right-hand of the king over the door be the picture of our saviour opposite on this left-hand of the virgin Mary this Devoncan be very pleasant seat overlook the Ravee from hence pass through a small entire to the west you enter another small court where be another open chounter of stone to sit in cover with rich Semianes from hence you enter into a small gallery at the end of which next the river through a small window the king look forth at his dersanee to behold the fight of wild beast on the meadow by the river on the wall of gallery be draw the picture of the Acabar sit in his s^ate and before he Shakstone Selim his son stand with a hawk on his (@) and by he sultan cusseroom sultan sultan coroome his three son at the end be a small Devoncan where the king use to fit behind which be his lodging chamber and before it all open into a pave court alongst the right-hand whereof run a small Moholl of two story the Moholls each contain eig^t fair lodging for several woman with gallery and window look to the river and to the court all the door of these chamber be to be fasten on the outside and none within in the gallery where the king use to sit be draw overhead many picture of angel picture of angel and Banian dew with picture of banian dew or rather devil intermix in most ugly shape with long horn stare eye shag hair great fang ugly paw long tail with such horrible difformity and deformity that I wonder the poor woman be not fright therewith within this court be a pleasant Devoncan and lodging and the way to another Moholl for the king to pass but none other now to return to the former court where the adee or guard keep their watch there be also on the left hand the new derbar beyond it another small court with Atescanna and pass through another gate a fair large square Moholl call the new Moholl large Moholl for two hundred woman of that largeness that it may lodge two hundred woman in state all several likewise return to the great court pass right on you enter another small pave court on the left hand and into another Moholl the stately of the three contrive into sixteen several great lodging each have fair lodging a Devoncan or hall a small pave court each her Tanke and enjoy a little world of pleasure and state to herself all seat very pleasant upon the river before the moholl of sultan casseroom mother be place a high pole to hang a light on as before the king for that she bring forth his first son and heir in the midst stand a goodly gallery for the king to sit in with such ugly picture overhead as before at the end be draw many portraiture of the king in state sit among his woman one hold a flask of wine another a napkin picture of his woman and their office a three present the peal behind one pankaw another hold his sword another his bow and two or three arrow etc. before this gallery be a fair pave court with stone grate and window alongst the water side at the end a fair marble jounter convexed overhead look over the river beneath it a garden of pleasure behind the king lodging very sumptuous the wall and ceiling all over-lay with pure gold and round alongst the side about a man height some three foot distant be place fair Venice looking-glass three and three each above other and below the these alongst the wall be draw many picture of this man ancestor as of Acabar his father hamowne his grandfather Babur his great grandfather who first set foot into India with thirty of his noble all clad like kalendar or fookeer first conqueror his stratagem which so come to de to secanders court then reign where by his very countenance he be discover yet find mercy and return upon his oath not to attempt any thing during the say secander reign which he perform but after this death he send his son hamawne upon his successor Abram from who he take the whole kingdom yet at length rise up a great captain of the blood-royal in Bengala who fight a great battle with hamawne near Ganges put he to flight and so close follow he that he drive he forth of the kingdom to the persian shaw of who he obtain new force with who come byram Caun can his father for general and reconquer all live after that in security this king die left Acabar very young appoint byram Caun protector who the Acabar come to year cast off and on a Roomery or pilgrimage to Mecca as be say make away with he his son can can or caun of the caunee do also much curb Shakstone Selim the king with his friend and ally be able to make better than a hundred thousand horse Shakstone Selim affirm himself to be the nine lawful descend from the loin of tamerlane the great be the great-grand-child of Babur king of Cabull Tamerlane but to return to the entrance of this Moholl pass forth of that court through a strong gate you enter into the city again this house and appurtenance of Mohols be at the least two english mile in circuit on the east-side of the castle hard without the wall be the garden of Asoph Caun small neat Asoph Caun his garden with walk plant with cypresse-tree diverse thank and jounter as you enter a fair Devoncan support with stone pillar with a fair Tanke in the midst and in the midst of that on four stone pillar a jounter for coolness beyond be other gallery and walk diverse lodging for his woman neat contrive and behind a small garden and garden-house in the midst of the garden be a very stately jounter with fair building overhead and a tank in the centre with large and goodly gallery alongst the four side thereof support with high stone pillar adjoin to this be a garden of the king in which be very good apple but small toot white and red almond peach fig grape quince apple with fruit and flower orange Limmons pomegranate rose stock-gellow-flower marigold wall-flower Ireos pink white and red with diverse sort of indian flower on the westside of the castle be the ferry to pass over to Cabul and so to Tartary or Cascar a very great roadway and the further side of the river be a goodly country infinite number of garden full of rarity exceed two or 3 in length pass the sugar gonge be a fair m^skite build by shecke feree beyond it without the town in the way to the garden be a fair monument for don Shakstone his mother one of the Acabar his wife with who it be say Shakstone selim^ad ^ad to do her name be Immacque Kelle or pomegranate kernel upon notice of which the king ca^led she to be enclose quick within a wall in his Moholl where she die and the king in toke^ of his love command a sumptuous tomb to be build of stone in the midst of a foure-square garden rich wall with a gate and diverse room over it the convexity of the tomb he have will to be wrought in work of gold with a large fair jounter with room overhead note that most of these monument which I mention be of such largeness that if they be otherwise contrive will have room to entertain a very good man with his whole household without the de droware where the nolat or great drum beat be a goodly straight street about three quarter of a mile long all pave at the end of which be the Bazar by it the great beside which be diverse other both in the city and suburb wherein diverse neat lodging be to be let with door lock and key to each hence to the north-east lie the place of hospitality from hence to the southeast the habitation of diverse love etc. the seventeen of May come news of the sack of Cabul by the Potan thief which keep in the mountain 1611. Cabull sack by thief be eleven thousand foot and one thousand horse the governor thereof be at Gelalabade about other affair and the garrison so weak that they be able only to maintain the castle in six hour they spoil the city and retire with great booty the king for better awe of these rebel have place twenty three ombrae betwixt lahor and Cabul and yet all will not serve they often sally from the mountain rob caravans and ransack town the eighteen of August arrive a great Caravan from Persia by who we have news from a armenian which have serve m. boy of the french king death and of affair betwixt the Turk and persian he have destroy the country about Tauris race the city and fill up the well to hinder the turk army Tauris race the merchant by this mean to our grief not dare to adventure beyond Candhar of diverse way in the mogul kingdom to and from lahor and agra and place of note in they relation of the way from lahor to Cabull beyond Cabull 60 run mountain at the foot of which lie the way to Cascar from lahor to Cabull pass the Ravee at 10 stand Googes Seray beyond which 8 Emenbade a fair city thence to Chumaguckur 12 a great town to guzurat 14 a fair city of great trade at 7 of this way you pass the river Chantrow near a corpse over to howaspore 12 to Louvre 15 a city with a strong castle on a mountain the frontier of the Potan kingdom to Hattea 15 to puckow 4 to raulepende 14 to collapanne 15 to Hassanabdall 4 a pleasant town with a small river and many fair in which be many fish with gold ring in their nose hang by Acabar the water so clear that you may see a penny in the bottom to Attock 15 a city with a strong castle by which Indus pass in great beauty to pishore 36 to Alleek Meskite 10 the way dangerous for rebel which be able to make ten or twelve thousand man to Ducka 12 to Beshoule 6 to Abareek 6 to Aleboga 9 by which run cow a great river which come from Cabul way still thievish to gelalabade 4 to loure-charebage 4 to budde-charbag 6 to n. 8 to Gondoma 4 to surcrood 4 a with a small river which look red and make to have a good stomach to Zagdelee 8 to Abereek 8 to Dowaba 8 a great mountain in the way 4 ascent to Butta Cauke 8 to camree 3 to Cabul 3 Cabull it be a great and fair city the first seat of this king great grandfather with two castle and many saraye 20 beyond be chare-cullow a pleasant fair city and 20 beyond gorebond a great city border upon vsbeke 150 beyond Cabul be Taul Caun a city in Buddocsha Cascar you be chaun from Cabull to Cascar with the caravan be some two or three month journey it be a great kingdom and under the Tartar a chief city of trade in his territory be you be chaun whence come much silk purslane musk and rhubarb with other merchandise all which come from China China the gate or entrance whereof be some two or three month journey from hence when they come to this entrance they be force to remain under their tent and by licence send some ten or fifteen merchant at once to do their business which be return they may send as many more but by no mean can the whole enter at once of this see my pilg. l. 4. c. 12. @. ^ go his travel from lahor to Cabul and China Cassimere from lahor to Cassimere the way be as in Cabull way to guzerat from thence north or somewhat easterly withal 16 to bimbar to joagek hately 14 to hately 10 to Peckly 10 to Conowa 12 thence 8 you ascend a mountain call have caunk gate on the top of which be a goodly plain from whence to cassimer be 12 thorew a goodly country the city be strong seat on the river the country be a goodly plain lie on the mountain some 150 in length and 50 in breadth abound with fruit grain saffron fair and white woman here be make the rich pombery which serve all the indian this country be cold subject to frost and great snow near to Cascar but separate with such mountain that there be no passage for caravans imp^ssible mountain yet there come ofttimes musk with silk and other merchandise this way by man and good be fain to be trice up and let down often by engine and device upon these mountain keep a small king call tibbot who of late send one of his daughter to Shakstone Selim to make affinity Nicholas vphet make another way from agra to surat by fetipore scanderbade hindoine another way from agra to surat mogoll nonnigong at the foot o^ a mountain which with other adjoin be hold by two raiaw of no note opposite to these on the left hand begin the mountain of Marwa which extend near amadaver upon these mountain stand a impregnable castle call gur chitto gurchitto a impregnable castle pope of the resboate or indian gentile the chief seat of a very powerful raiaw who neither Potan or the Acabar himself can ever subdue which come to pass by reason that all India have be gentile and this prince have be and still be esteem in like reverence by they as the pope of Rome by the papist and for this cause the raiaw which have be send against he frame some excuse that they may not endamage much his territory which extend hence alongst amadave way a hundred and fifty great corpse and in breadth towards Ougen 200 enclose for the most part with inaccessible mountain and fortify well by art in place accessible he be able to make twelve thousand good horse upon any occasion and hold many fair town and goodly city the way follow by Gamgra prigony be lordship charsoot chief seat of raiaw Manisengo his prigony Ladaney Mousalde banderamde Asmere seat upon the top of a inaccessible mountain of 3 ascent description of Asmere before the mogoll make it his royal residence be a fort invincible the city at the foot not great enclose with a stone wall ditch round the building reasonable fair without the wall be many antiquity among which some 2 towards agra be a very fair Tanke this place be only famous for the sepulchre of Hoghee Mundee a saint much respect by the mogul to who as be say before the Acabar make a Romery on foot from agra to obtain a son before you come to this tomb you pass three fair court of which the first contain near a acre of ground pave all with black and white marble wherein be inter many of Mahomet curse kindred on the left hand be a fair Tanke enclose with stone the second court be pave like the former but rich esteem of a mahometan s. hoghee munde twice as big as the exchange in London in the midst whereof hang a curious candlestick with many light into the three you pass by a brazen gate curious wrought it be the fair of the three especial near the door of the sepulchre where the pavement be curious interlay the door be large and inlay with mother of pearl and the pavement about the tomb of interlaid marble the sepulchre very curious wrought in work of mother of pearl and gold with a epitaph in the persian tongue a little distant stand his seat in a dark obscure place where he sit to foretell of matter and be much reverence on the east-side stand three other court in each a fair Tanke on the north and west stand diverse fair house wherein keep their side or churchman note that you may not enter any of these place but barefoot from hence the way lie to cairo Pagodes jelowre a strong castle Mearta which have a stone castle with many fair turret a fair Tanke and three fair pagode rich wrought with inlaid work adorn rich with jewel and maintain with rich offering Pipera jouge gong settrange Canderupe jeloure this last be a castle seat on the height of a steep mountain 3 in ascent by a fair stone causeway broad enough for two man to pass abreast at the first cousin end be a gate and place of arm there the causeway be enclose with wall on both side and at the 2 end be a double gate at the 3 stand the castle where you must enter three several gate the first very strong plate with iron the second not so strong with place over it to throw down scald lead or oil the three strong plate with pike stick forth l^ke harp iron betwixt each of these gate be spacious court for arm and within the further gate be a fair portcullis be enter on the right hand stand a fair meskite with diverse Devoncans adjoin both to do justice and to take the air on the left hand stand the governors house on the height of the hill overlook all a flightshot within the castle be a fair pagode build by the founder of the castle ancestor of gidney Caun which be indian he turn Moor and bereave his elder brother of this hold by this stratagem he invite he and his woman to a banquet which his brother requite with like invitation of he and he cunning treachery a dowly or dowl be a chair or cage wherein they carry their woman on man shoulder in steed of woman he send choice soldier well appoint and close cover two and two in a dowl who be enter after this manner possess themselves of the port and hold it for the great mogoll to who it now appertain be one of the strong seat fort in the world some half cousin within the gate be a goodly Tanke four square cut direct down into the rock affirm to be fifty fathom deep of clear and good water a little further be a fair plain shade with many goodly tree beyond which on the top of a little pique mountain be the sepulchre of king hassward while he live a great soldier since his death a great saint honour in these part here lie also inter two son of gillould a Potan king of de near to which be a wall which divide the castle near a cousin in circuit a huge snake the whole castle be about 8 in compass nigh whereto be say to keep a huge snake of five and twenty foot long and as big as a man in the waste which the people will by no mean hurt hold it a good fortune for it hurt no man but keep among the bush and briar of this pique mountain this castle be call the gate or frontier of guzurate from hence you come to billmall a great city billmall the foundation of who ancient wall be yet see they have be 24 in circuit many goodly thank also go to ruin by one of which be the founder sepulchre whither the indian resort to worship from hence to Amadabade be a deep sandy desert country Rodeapore in this way have many sepulcher I let pass it and the rest amadabade or Amadavar be a goodly city and situate on a fair river describe enclose with strong wall and fair gate with many beautiful turret the castle be large and strong where reside c^un Asom his son the viceroy in these part the building comparable to any city in Asia or Africa the street large and well pave the trade great for almost every ten day go from hence two hundred coach rich lade with merchandise for Cambaya the merchant rich the artificer excellent for carving paint inlaid work imbroydery with gold and silver at a hour warning it have in readiness six thousand horse the gate perpetual strong guard none suffer without licence to enter nor to depart without certificate Baedur who progenitor be king of Guzurat the cause of this be badurs neighbourhood in his strong hold within 50 of this city to the east where nature with some help of art and industry have fortify he against all the mogoll power and whence some four year since proclaim liberty and law of good fellowship he sack Cambaya with a sudden power combine by hope of spoil of one hundred thousand man which for fourteen day continue possessor there and sharker there be also betwixt this and trage a certain raiaw on the mountain able to make seventeen thousand horse and foot two other raiawe which stand out a excellent race of horse the people call collee or quullee keep in a desert wilderness which secure he from conquest and on the right hand be another able to make ten thousand horse hold in a desert plain a castle impregnable who land be subject t^ gidney Cauns government but these seven year he have deny he tribute and stand on his defence this raiaw be say to have a race of horse not equal in all the east each value at fifteen thousand r. report to be much swift than the arabian and able to continue with reasonable speed a whole day without once draw bit of which he be say to have one hundred mare from geloure to this city be all a sandy woody country full of thievish beastly man and of mankind savage beast lion tiger etc. 30 c. about this city be make will call cickell of a town 4 c. from Amadavar not so good as that of Biana Cambaya be hence 38 sandy woody thievish way it stand by the sea encompass with a strong brick wall Cambaya the house high and fair the street pave in a direct line with strong gate at the end of each monkey the Bazar large about the city be such infinite number of monkey leap from house to house that they do much mischief and untyl the house be ready to brain man as they pass in the street with the stone that fall on the south be a goodly garden with a watchtower of a exceed height on the north be many fair thank it be the mart of guzurat and so haunt by the portugal that you shall often find two hundred frigate at once ride there port. fright violent tide call the boar it abound with all sort of cloth and rich drug the bay be 8 c. over dangerous to pass by reason of the great boar which drown many and therefore require guide skilful ^f the tide in the neape tide be least peril thief also when you be over the channel be not a little dangerous force you if not the better provide to quit your good or in long bicker betray you to the tide fury which come so swift that ten to one you escape not four cose beyond this bay be joumbeser now much ruin and from thence eighteen to boroche boroche a mine of agate a woody dangerous passage in which be many wild peacock within 4 c. of boroche be a great mine of agate it be a fair castle seat on a river twice as broad as the Thames to the mouth of which be hence 12 c. here be make the rich in fineness surpass Holland cloth for fifty Rupias a book which contain fourteen english yard and be not three quarter broad hence to variaw 20 a goodly country and fertile full of village abound with wild date tree tarry or taddie a strong wine Polle medomy a Moor Devil or saint pilgrimage to he miracle as true as which general be plentiful by the seaside in most place whence they draw a liquour call tarry or sure as also from another wild coco-tree call tarry 3 c. hence be surat in a town between boroche and Amadavar lie a great saint of the moor call polle-medomy much resort to out of all place of India for wealth child or what else they desire diverse in the way go with great chain on their leg and with their hand chain together and their mouth lock up only open they for food and when they come before he in this manner of their humble devotion they affirm that present their chain and lock fly open not one return in vain if themselves be not vain in their hope and in these and other like affection which wait on lie vanity forsake their own judge from agra to cannowe be 130 east the city great and unwall seat on a ascent and the castle on the height well fortify certain place of note in the country of purrop cannowe Ganges his beginning and greatness lacanowes oude at the foot whereof ancient Ganges take his course but have now break a passage through the valley some 4 distant notwithstanding as yet a small branch remain there Ganges be within his bound three quarter of a mile broad but with great reins sw^ls over his bark cover the whole vale near 10 it have thirty river of note which fall into it as do he himself into the gulf of Bengala in it be innumerable alagater or crocodile there call murgurmach it have eighteen fair branch thence to lacanowes be 30 a town of great traffic for linen and other merchandise to oude from thence be 50 a city of ancient note and seat of a Potan king now much ruin the castle build four hundred year ago here be also the ruin of Ranichand castle and house whi^h the indian acknowledge for the great God say that he take flesh upon he to see the t^masha of the World holy holy place and indian fail in these ruin remain certain Bramenes who record the name of all such indian as wash themselves in the river run thereby which custom they say have continue four lack of year which be three hundred ninety four thousand and five hundred year before the world creation some two mile on the further side of the river be a cave of he with a narrow entrance but so spacious and full of turn within that a man may well loose himself there if he take not better heed where it be think his ash be bury hither resort many from all part of India which carry from hence in remembrance certain grain of rice as black as gunpowder which they say have be reserve ever since out of the ruin of this castle be yet much gold try here be great trade and such abundance of indian asse-horne indian-asse-horne that they make hereof buckler and diverse sort of drink cup there be of these horn all the indian affirm some rare of great price no jewel comparable some esteem they the right unicorn horn from Oudee to 30 some 30 from whence lie bonarce the principal mart of Bengala good from acab to jounpore 30 seat on a small river over which be a bridge with house like London bridge but nothing so good the castle have be a seat of the Potan king there yet remain two fair meskite with many other ancient monument the house be like those of Amadavar the circuit some 8. or 10 hence come excellent sweet oil carpet hang embroider with silk all sort of fine linen etc. thus much from agra to jounpore this way from thence return that way to agra to alabasse be 110 30 all which be through a continual forest the return from jounpore another way to alabasse to agra alabasse castle a mighty castle the town and castle stand on the further side of Ganges pleasant seat call ancient pray and be hold one of the wonder of the east diverse Potan king have seek to build here a castle but none can do it till Acabar lay the foundation and proceed with the worke. it stand on a point or angle have the river on the southside fall into Ganges it have be forty year a building and be not yet finish neither be like to be in a long time the Acabar for many year have attend this work by report twenty thousand person and as yet there continue work thereon some five thousand of all sort it will be one of the most famous building of the World in this castle Shakstone Selim keep when he rebel against his father the outward wall be of a admirable height of a red square stone like agra castle within which be two other wall nothing so high you enter through two fair gate into a fair court in which stand a pillar of stone fifty cubit above ground so deep place within ground that no end can be find which by circumstance of the indian seem to have be place by Alexander or some other great conqueror who can not pass further for Ganges Alexander pillar pass this court you enter a less beyond that a large where the king sit on high at his Dersane to behold elephant and other beast to fight right under he within a vault be many pagode be monument of Baba Adam and mama Havah as they call they and of their progeny with picture of Noah and his descent the indian suppose that man be here create or keep here at least for many year mon. of Adam and Eve and of the creation pilgrimage and holy-water affirm themselves to be of that religion whereof these father be to this place resort many thousand from all part to worship but before they approach these relic they wash their body in Ganges shave their head and beard thereby deem themselves cleanse from all their former sin out of this court be another rich pave where the king keep his derbar beyond it another whence you enter into the Moholl large divide into sixteen several lodging for sixteen great woman with their slave and attendant in the midst of all the king lodging of three story each contain sixteen room in all eight and forty lodging all wrought overhead with rich parget and curious paint in all kind of colour in the midst of the low story be a curious Tanke in this Moholl be a tree which the indian call the tree of life be a wild indian fig tree for that it can never be destroy by the Potan king and this man ancestor strange tree which have seek to do it by all mean stocking it up and sift the very earth under it to gather forth the sprig it still spring again insomuch that this king let it alone seek to cherish it this tree be of no small esteem with the indian in the water side within the Moholl be diverse large Devoncans where the king with his woman often pass their time in behold pay his tribute to Ganges between they and the water side at the foot of the wall be a pleasant garden shade with cypress tree and abound with excellent fruit and flower have in the midst a fair banquet house with privy stair to take boate. from hence in October or November when the great frost be past you may pass by boat for Bengala but the passage be dangerous 4 down be two castle opposite on the bank harrayle and Gussee seat on two hill raise by industry build by the from alabasse to menepore be 20 alongst the river Ganges at 2 on this way be a sumptuous tomb for this king first wife mother to sulian cusseroon and sister to Raia Manisengo who upon the news of her son revolt poison herself from hence pass Ganges be a more direct way to jounpore to Chappergat be 12 here be one of the fair sara^es in India a fair like a goodly castle then a inn to lodge stranger the lodging very fair of stone with lock and key able to lodge a thousand man a man can scarce shoot from side to side with a arrow near to it be a fair br^dge both build by one man the way perilous for thief itay face worship itay be thence 12 ancient the seat of a Potan king but now ruin on the height of the hill cut steep down be seat a strong castle double wall have at the entrance the figure of a man face which the indian much worship pour abundance of oil upon it to amedipore be 43 a plentiful country full of good sara^es for caravans much indigo call Cole of a gross sort be make in th^s way which be spend in India or transport for Samercand and those part none pass into Christendom except mix with that of Biana hence to agra be 7 pass close to the city land lie easterly from lahor with their lord alongst the Ravee easterly lie the land of raiaw bossow who chief seat be tem-mery tem-mery 50 from lahor he a be mighty prince now subject to the mogul a great minion of Shakstone selim. out of this and the adjoin region come most of the indian drug grow on the mountain spikenard Turbith Miras Kebals gunlack turpentine Costus etc. this Raia confine the king land easterly border to he be another great raiaw call tulluck-chand who chief city be Negercoat 80 from lahor and as much from Syrinan in which city be a famous pagoda Negercoat call or Durga unto which world of people resort out of all part of India it be a small short idol of stone idolatrous pilgrimage and cruel devotion cut in form of a man much be consume in offering to he in which some also be report to cut off a piece of their tongue and throw it at the idol foot have find it whole the next day able to lie I be afraid to serve the father of lie and liar how ever yea some out of impious piety here sacrifice themselves cut their throat and present recover the holy the man the soon forsooth he be heal some more grievous sinner remain half a day in pain before the devil will attend their cure hither they resort to crave child to inquire of money hide by their parent or lose by themselves which have make their offering by dream in the night receive answer not one depart discontent they report this pagan deity to have be a woman if a holy virgin may have that name yea that she still live the devil she do but will not show herself diverse moor also resort to this peer this Raia be powerful by his mountain situation secure not once vouchsafe to visit Shakstone selim. on this raiaw easterly confine another call a mighty prince his chief seat calsery about a 150 from agra his country hold 500 long north and south 300 broad calsery populous able to raise upon occasion five hundred thousand foot but few or no horse the land plentiful in itself but send forth little to the eastward of this raiaw betwixt and Ganges lie the land of raiaw a mighty prince and very rich report to be serve all in vessel of massy gold his country 300 long and one hundred and fifty broad his chief seat Serenegar the mountain call Dow Lager Serenegar dow Lager upon which in time of winter fall such extreme snowes that the inhabitant be force to remove into the valley yet do I not think that any of these land extend northerly above forty degree but the height of the mountain cause this extremity of cold this raias land extend within some 200 of agra extremity of cold part within 50 of Syrinan very plentiful on the further side of Ganges lie a very mighty prince call raiaw Rodorow hold a mountainous country his chief seat Camow his territory extend 400 long and not much less in breadth Camow abound with grain have many goodly city thence come much musk and here be the great breed of a small kind of horse call gunt a true travel scalecliffe beast gunt a race of horse to climb hill this prince be puissant in foot but have few horse or elephant the mountain not require the one and the cold exclude the other his land think to reach near China to the south of this Raia thwart the stream of Ganges be seat another Raia Mugg very powerful in horse foot and elephant in his land be the old rock of natural diamond rock of diamond which yield he no small benefit his land extend east somewhat south 700 from agra beneath he among the stream of Ganges keep a Potan prince of the dely-king race who the king can subdue by reason of the stream and land of Ganges he confine upon purrop and make often inroad upon the king land enforce Shakstone Selim to maintain a frontier army hence to the mouth of Ganges all be the king land only in the mouth the Portugal outlaw hold a small fort and do much mischief live in no form of subjection to God or man port-outlawe on the further side of Ganges be the mighty king of arracan enjoy a large territory and infinite number of small bark eastward from he be the kingdom of siam behind it Oua and jangoma between Tanassar and arracan be the kingdom of Pegu the land now lie waste see of Pegu Flo^i^ his relation before to the south be the kingdom of Queda malacca etc. on the sea-coast of Beugala this king have two chief port Ougolee tyrannize by the portugal and Pipilee pass which and the land of Orixa you enter into the land of Goloconda on who Shakstone Selim make war and have forcible take much of his land his chief port be Masulipatan and his royal seat Braganadar and Goloconda that late build along the sea side towards the cape be the mighty king of bezeneger under who the portugal hold saint Thome and Negapatan but be not suffer to build a castle but I let pass these neighbour indies and return to agra the mogul royal residence agra have not be in fame above fifty year be before acabars time a village who remove as you have hear from fetipore for want of good water description of agra and the castle it be spacious large populous beyond measure that you can hardly pass in the street which be for the most part dirty and narrow save only the great Bazar and some few other which be large and fair the city lie in manner of a halfmoon belly to the land-ward some 5 in length and as much by the river side upon the bank whereof be many goodly house of the nobility pleasant overlook which run with a swift current from the north to the south somewhat easterly into Ganges the castle upon the bank of this river stand the castle one of the fair and admirable building of the east some three or four mile in compass enclose with a fair and strong wall of square stone about which be cast a fair ditch over it draw-bridge the wall be build with bulwark somewhat defensible regalled with a counterscarp or front without some fifteen yard broad within this be two other strong wall and gate to the castle be four gate one to the north by which you pass to a rampire with great piece another west to the Bazar call the cichery gate within which over against the great gate seat of justice be the Casi his seat of chiefe-iustice in matter of law and by it two or three murderer very great one three foot in the boar and fifteen long of cast brass over-against this seat be the cichery or court of roll where the king viseer sit every morning some three hour by who hand pass all matter of rent grants land debt etc. beyond these two gate you pass a second gate over which be two raiaw in stone * * it be say that they be two brother resboot tutor to a prince their nephew who the king demand of they they refuse and be commit but draw on the officer slay twelve and at last by multitude oppress be slay and here have elephant of stone and themselves figure singster or whore attend some say they be there as a court of guard of woman of which be here two or three hundred daily by succession Tessillam be a gesture of humiliation the king derbar who be slay in the king derbar before the king eye for be overbold in speech they sell their life brave in remembrance of which they be here place pass this gate you enter into a fair street with house and munition all alongst on both side at the end of this street be a quarter of a mile you come to the three gate which lead to the king derbar always chain all man but the king and his child there alight this gate be to the south call Acabar drowage close within which be the whore child many hundred of which attend there day and night according as their several turn come every seven day that they may be ready when the king or his woman shall please to call any of they to sing or dance in his Moholl he give to every one of they stipend according to their unworthy worth the four gate be to the river call the Dersane lead into a fair court extend alongst the river in which the king look forth every morning at sunrising which he salute and then his noble resort to their Tessillam right under the place where he look out be a kind of scaffold whereon his noble stand but the address with other await below in the Court here also every noon he look forth to behold Tamashan or fight of elephant lion buffle kill of dear with leopard which be a custom on every day of the week Sunday except on which be no fight but Tuesday on the contrary be a day of blood both of fight beast and iustice man the king judge and see execution to return to the three gate within it you enter into a spacious court with Ates^anna's round about like shop or open stall wherein his captain according to their degree keep their seven day Chockees a little further you enter within a rail into a more inward court with in which none but the king addee and man of sort be admit under pain of swack by the porter cudgel which lie on load without respect of person be enter you approach the king derbar or seat before which be also a small court enclose with rail cover over head with rich Semianes to keep away the sun where aloft in a gallery the king sit in his chair of state accompany with his child and chief Vizier who go up by a short ladder forth of the court no other without call dare to go up to he save only two punkaw to gather wind and right before he below on a scaffold be a three who with a horse tail make havoc of poor fly on the right hand of the king on the wall behind he be the picture of our saviour on the left of the Virgin within these rail none under the degree of four hundred horse be permit to enter on the further side of this court of presence be hang golden bell that if any be oppress and can get no justice by the king officer by ring these bell when the king sit he be call and the matter discuss before the King but let they be sure their cause be good lest he be punish for presumption to trouble the King here every day between three and four a clock the king come forth and many thousand resort to do their duty each take place according to his degree where he remain hear of matter receive of news by letter read by his Vizier grant of suit etc. till shut in of the evening the drum mean while beat of his elephant yearly present of his treasure in this castle etc. see capt. Hawkins former relation of other thing see that which follow in sir t. roe journal and instrument play from a high gallery on the next building opposite his elephant and horse pass by in brave fashion do their Tessillam and be peruse by officer to see if they prosper in the castle be two high turret over-lay with pure massy gold which may be see from far one over his Mohol the other over his treasury after his go in from the derbar in the evening some two hour after he come out again sit forth in a small more inward court behind the other close to his Moholl into which none but the and they also with ticket to be renew with every moon be permit to enter where he drink by number and measure sometime one and thirty and run over mix also among severe judicature from this court be his privy passage into a curious garden and to his barge by which he often pass the river to a other garden opposite it be remarkable that both in court and here in these garden no courtier or gardener be tie to attendance but by their seven day turn some add * * a write book entitle a discourse of agra and the four principal way to it I know not by what author except it be nic. Vphlet that the city have no wall but a ditch round about not broad and dry also adjoin to the ditch without the city be very large suburb the city and suburb be one way seven mile in length three in breadth the noble man house and merchant build with brick and stone flat roof the common sort of mud wall cover with thatch which cause often and terrible fire the city have six gate the adjoin river be broad than the Thames at London on which be many boat some of one hundred ton but these can return against the stream most of the noble man house be by the river side from agra to lahor six hundred mile the way be set on both side with mulbery-tree description of Acabars Tomb. king acabar sepulchre be 3 distant from agra in the way to lahor nothing near finish as yet after ten year work it be place in the midst of a fair and large garden enclose with brick wall near two mile in circuit be to have four gate but one of which be yet in hand each if answerable to this foundation able to receive a great prince with a reasonable train alongst the way side be a spacious Moholl for his father woman as be say to remain and end their day in deplore their decease lord each enjoy the land they before have in the king time by the pay or rent of five thousand horse the principal so that this shall be to they a perpetual nunnery never to marry again in the centre of this garden stand the tomb four square about three quarter of a mile in compass the first enclosure be with a curious rail to which you ascend some six step into a small square garden quarter in curious thank plant with variety of sweet adjoin to which be the tomb round with this gardenet be also four square all of hew stone with fair spacious gallery on each side have at each corner a small beautiful turret arch over head and cover with various marble betwixt corner and corner be four other turret at like distance here within a fair round coffin of gold lie the body of this monarch who sometime think the world too little for he this tomb be much worship both by the moor and gentile hold he for a great saint some ten or twelve foot high you ascend by stair to another gallery like but narrow to the former as be also the rest that follow contain only three of those turret between corner and corner here in the midst be his wardrobe for a memorial the three story have but two of those middle turret on a side the four one the five have only the corner turret and a small square gallery the tomb be not finish at my departure but lay in manner of a coffin cover with a white sheet interwrought with gold flower by his head stand his sword and target and on a small pillow his turban and thereby two or three fair gild book at his foot stand his shoe and a rich basin and ewer every one approach near make his reverence and put off his shoe bring in his hand some sweet smell flower to bestrew the carpet or to adorn the tomb at my last sight thereof there be only over head a rich tent with a semiane over the tomb but it be to be inarch over with the most curious white and speckled marble and to be seel all within with pure sheet-gold rich inwrought these four last turret also enclose the sepulchre be of most rich curious marble and the ground underfoot pave with the like there be in continual work about this and other building about it the Moholl and gate not so few as three thousand the stone be bring from a rich quarry near fetipore which we have say may be cut in length and form as timber with ^awes and plank and ceiling be make thereof chap. v. the nine voyage of the indian company to the east indies in the james whereof be captain m. EDMUND Marlowe of Bristol and the master JOHN DAVY which write this journal February 1611 the ten of February 1611. we depart from the down upon our voyage the thirteen at night we anchor within the i will of wight where we stay till the one and twenty of the same month and then set sail and turn out at s. Helen point the same day at noon we have Dunnose north from we three league off the dragon before we and the hos^ander and the Solomon put in the needle April 11. 1612. they cross the equinoctial the eleven day of April 1612. by observation we be under the equinoctial line and in longitude from the meridian of the lizard six degree twenty minute west this night the variation be five degree thirty seven minute from north to the east the twenty seven the variation of the needle be fourteen degree seven minute this day at noon we be in latitude by observation nineteen degree forty minute the longitude from the meridian of the lizard eleven degree twenty four minute west these twenty four hour we sail two league south by east here we see a island southeast from we fourteen league this island I see when I be with sir Edward Michelborne this island be like Coruo the latitude be twenty degree thirty minute the longitude eleven degree thirty minute west from the lizard this seem to be the isle M^rtin Vaz the variation of the needle fourteen degree thirty minute this island rise ragged upon the easter end stand a little pike but the island be round like Coruo east north-east from this island be another island or two in sight seven or eight league off the seven and twenty of june at nine of the clock at night we see the land of saint Laurence in latitude by judgement four and twenty degree eight minute and longitude from the cape of good hope five and twenty degree no minute the variation be fifteen degree and ten minute the eight and twenty in the morning the variation of the needle be fifteen degree no minute in four league of the shore between the headland of the bay and the land before the bay be no ground in seventy or eighty fathom this night we anchor in the bay of saint Augustine in five fathom by the south-land they anchor in the bay of saint Augustine this day we weigh and come in by the river with the ship the one of our anchor lay in five and thirty fathom and the other in ten fathom you may ride in shoald water off each side if you will for this channel of deep water be but narrow here no sea can come to hurt you because the shoalds and land break it off it may well be call a harbour for the goodness of the place we spend twenty day in this Bay the eighteen of julie in the morning we set sail for Bantam julie 18. they depart from the river of saint Augustine and we steer off west by north from the river to go to the northward of the land an^ in this course you have no ground with the lead for it be all steep home to the shore of the other side for when you have twenty fathom within the land you be hard by the stone but by the land and shoald be fair shoald from seven to thirty fathom and no ground the gut between the hill be east by south from you you go right into the road or east the eighteen at noon we be in latitude three and twenty degree five and forty minute and longitude from the cape of good hope two and twenty degree eight and fifty minute east and two league of the next land here the land be all white by the water side the nineteen they sail towards by the outside of the i will of saint Laurence in the morning the variation be fifteen degree no minute and then the ship be from the near land twelve league and the latitude by judgement three and twenty deg five and fifty minute at noon the latitude by observation four and twenty degree one and thirty minute and longitude from the cape of good hope two and twenty degree two and twenty minute east these four and twenty hour we sail upon a right line south-west by south twenty league this night the variation be fourteen degree thirty minute the four and twenty of September in the morning we see the isle of Nintam which be in latitude one degree thirty minute September 24. isle of Nintam the sound between the two great land be eighteen league from Priaman and eleven league from the shoalds before Tecou beware you come not near these shoalds by night but rather he short three or four league till daylight and then when you see three hommocke that will rise up like three land have a special care that you have one at your bolt-spreet end to give warning of any spot in your way for there be corral^ods that you may easy perceive your course from this sound of the two great land of Nintam to go for Tecou or Priaman be east north-east to the ^hoalds aforesaid but when you come through the sound keep your lead go and come no near the south great island then sixteen fathom for towards the eastside be shoalds and a breach off the norther-iland also as you shall see upon your larboord-side go in for your better know when you draw near the shoalds of Tecou set the three hommock which be like three land but be upon the main for it be low land by they and when you have they north-east and by east you shall begin to meet with they and when the say land be north north-east you be pass they but be very careful every where for it be all bad ground hereabout before you pass the high land of Manancabo which be in latitude four degree thirty minute or thereabouts the six and twenty we anchor in the road of Priaman where we find the Thomas and we stay there to recover sick man fourteen day they arrive in the road of Priaman in sumatra and then the Hector and we do set sail for Bantam the latitude of Priaman be in fifty minute southerly the variation four degree ten minute the road be behind the second island in six fathom upon which island you have fresh water and wood the bar of Priaman be fast by the eight of October the ship come down by the Hector where we stay for she to go for Bantam and in the morning set sail October 8. the three and twenty we come into the road of Bantam with the james and the Hector the four of November 1612. we weigh from the road of Bantam they arrive at Bantam November to go for coromandel by the straight of Sunda but the wind and stream be so much against we that we be force into the straight of Sunda again to fit our ship be much weather-beaten the eleven of December we anchor again by pulo panian December 11. and go to work to rummage our ship to take in ballast the ten of januarie be ballast water and fit januarie 10. the straight of malacca March they be put back to Bantam we set sail for the straight of Mallaca but be late in the monson stream and wind both against we with much toil to ship and man we ply seventy league from Bantam and can get no far from the ten of this moment to the first of march whereupon our hope be then past for that and take advice among ourselves we conclude to water and wood and so to return for Bantam and to proceed without sumatra the eleven be fit with wood and water we bear up for Bantam the second time june 5. 1613. the five of june 1613 at noon in latitude 12. degr no minute and longitude from the salt hill 23. degree no minute west here you shall see plain that we have be carry with the stream four degree thirty minute which be ninty league for whosoever he be that shall sail down from Bantam a special note or up he shall find such uncertain sail if he look not well to the variation of the needle that he may well miss his expectation for the arrival at his port. for there be neither english nor Hollander that can find any way how to deal with those stream but only by the variation they descry the land for that will help much in ten or fifteen league if it be careful observe here we see the land it be so low that you can see it before you see the pagoda or pagan church and we be when we see the land four league off you may be bold with your lead in fifteen fathom by night upon the coast and by day in ten fathom but take heed you have a sure man at the lead for it will shall sudden for after you come to have thirty fathom you will come present to shall water for it be like a well and the ground Ozie your course along the shore be north and by east to paleacate and so up to Masulipatan this land be about Negapatan Negapatan here we steer north north-east all night in three and twenty and seventeen fathom three or four league the variation thirteen degree ten minute you shall in twelve degree of latitude sure see the land the six at noon we anchor in the road of paleacate in eight fathom sand there be a middle ground they arrive at paleacate where you have but five fathom and six seven eight within that again the mark for the road be the round hill by the other hill west northerly and the hollander fort south-west and by west as we ride the variation be thirteen degree ten minute the latitude thirteen degree thirty minute the eight at noon we be in latitude fourteen degree forty minute we sail since we weigh the last night twenty three league the depth five and twenty and three and twenty fathom the course north and by east but the lead be our guide under God the nine at noon in latitude fifteen degree thirty minute here you have the land in sight but not the high land of Petepoli these four and twenty hour we sail seventeen league north in fifteen and sixteen fathom and this high land be a pagodie or pagan church you may if you will hale in with it into five fathom when the hill be north northwest but you must go off east for it for we do so but beware in go off for a lowness of sand and come no near it than twelve or thirteen fathom a good note till you be sure past it this high land be from the high land of Petepoli six league they anchor in the road of Petepoli the ten we anchor in the road of Petepoli in five fathom sand this new high island north northwest from we and the platform of palmtree upon the island east north-east easterly and the bar northwest and by north from we all the sea-cost be low land the latitude fifteen degree two and fifty minute the variation thirteen degree fifty minute perfect and full the nineteen in the afternoon we set sail when the factory be fit the merchant which we leave there a factory with nine man erect at Petepoli be master George Chausey and our purser with seven man more to keep our house and good the twenty calm you go east southeast nine league in seven or eight fathom and then north northwest fear not in five fathom or less after you be about the point for it be low land a great tree a chief mark for to know the road there be but one great tree big than any of the rest to know the road by that must you bring west and by north from you and you shall have three fathom and a quarter soft Ozie and ride three mile of the land the one and twenty we anchor in the road of Masulipatan where we find a ship of Holland they arrive at Masulipatan here we be well entertain here we do stay about six month to wit until the sixteenth of january and then we weigh and go for Petipoli where we arrive the nineteen of the same and stay there to take in the good and merchant till the seven of February they return from Petepoli for Bantam they arrive at Bantam they set out for Patane june 10. 1614 and then we set sail for Bantam and keep the same course which we do before down all the way up we arrive at Bantam the twenty of April 1614 where we stay till the ten of june 1614 and then set sail for Patane the ten of june 1614 at noon we have sight of the island nine league from Bantam our go be from five six seven eight twelve fourteen and so to four and twenty fathom at this time our course be north north-east after you be clear off the road the wind from the east southeast the latitude southerly five degree four and forty minute the eleven at six of the clock in the morning we be by the two land that lie north from Bantam in five degree of latitude by sumatra in twenty fathom which be the sure course out and home here you must be careful to look well out for two sand that lie even with the water from six in the morning we sail seven league north north-east in sixteen fifteen fourteen and thirteen fathom and be now from Bantam seven and twenty league north and by east near the wind from the east to the south southeast from twelve in the night we sail eleven league north in ten and eleven fathom Ozie but when you pass the riff you have hard sand the latitude four degree twelve minute southerly beware by night go not without ten fathom nor within to the main to less than six or seven and so be bold with a sure man at the lead for that must be the best Pilot. the twelve in the morning from eight degree easterly we sail seven league north north-east in eight seven six and five fathom and be with the second riff from the second in the morning to eleven in the morning we sail seven league north north-east by judgement but the stream do set so fast in that we force to anchor in four fathom and a quarter less the riff land in sight but not Lucapara here must especial care be have when you come with the land off the riff that be the isle Lucapara twelve league short of Lucapara and forty eight league from Bantam that you come not within six fathom till you see Lucapara for it be very uncertain ground full of pit and for a warning to avoid it beware you bring not the riff land last mention south-west and by south but keep off in seven fathom till you see Lucapara and then you need not fear for the island be bold two league off but remember you must leave it to the eastward of you and when you see it fear not five or four fathom for that be the depth you may be bold in with the main of sumatra but in the best towards the island be five and a half and six fathom the stream set north northwest and south southeast it have six foot water the flood come from the southward and the ebb from the northward the thirteen we rid still with very uncertain weather the fourteen we come with the island and main and put through between they in five fathom and a half and at noon we have island east north-east a league from we for so near be the deep water then steer north till the point be northwest and by west in five or six fathom the distance be four league keep the island south southeast from you for about it be very uncertain ground then the next reach lie north northwest near but keep sumatra side and not Banca although you have deep water for Banca side be rock and sound depth sumatra be Ozie and you may be bold in this first reach and you shall have nine ten eleven twelve eighteen or twenty fathom till you come with the high land of Banca which at Lucapara will show like land then shall you see land Banca be a great island beside the great island of Banca three league before you and sumatra side fall in with a bite and all flat ground wherefore come no near than seven and no far off then nine fathom but rather for advantage hale near unto the flat of sumatra in six or five fathom here be the channel and narrow here go tide strong one way aswell as the other the fifteen the next reach lie northwest by north eight league and we be with it six degree east the sixteenth the next reach lie northwest and by west and west northwest down to Palimbam point but keep near sumatra in six or seven fathom for Banca side be not good point although it be deep water yet there be many rock towards the end of the great island of Banca this reach be seventeen league long to the town of Palimbam the hill monpin upon the northern end of Banca and the hill monpin be north from you which stand upon the norther end of Banca then be the road of Palimbam south south-west from you your depth ten fathom off sumatra side the distance between the island and sumatra at this end be six league in my judgement keep sumatra side by night or day in seven fathom till you have the norther end of Banca east southeast for a riff that lie off the norther end two league and then will your latitude be one degree one and twenty minute southerly and four league of Banca but you must alter course to bring it thus for when Banca be north-east and by east then you must steer north north-east and north as lead and discretion shall guide but go not with less than ten fathom by night the seventeen at noon one degree ten minute southerly the i will of pulo Tuio here you sail north in eight or nine fathom Ozie and here you see that i will of pulo Tuio without you here by reason we have it calm we anchor in nine fathom here the stream do set west south-west and east north-east the eighteen here your course be north north-east seven eight nine and ten fathom and when you have the two northermost land in the off southeast from you than be pulo Sio northwest and by north. and be thus it have two hill with a valley in the midst and two little land by it and when it be south-west it show round like the mewstone the nineteen this island have water and wood but none inhabitant the latitude of this island be forty minute south the twenty now your depth must be from fifteen to twenty in and off and your course north to Linga the land be fair in sight go not off by any mean rather anchor here be hard ground now your course to Bintam be north and by west near but go not without four and twenty nor within twenty and that will bring you in sight of the round hill of Bintam which have in latitude one deg ten min. and be the fair way the hill stand in the middle of the island the one and twenty now your course for pulo Timon be north northwest pulo Timon and north by west have always sight of land I mean land and your depth be twenty nineteen and eigh^eene fathom Ozie the latitude of pulo Timon be two degree forty seven minute northerly or much thereupon the two and twenty from pulo Timon to pulo Capas be thirty six league north by west near in eighteen pulo Capas nineteen twenty and twenty two fathom and when you have the land west of you then have you thirty six fathom close by the island if occasion serve you may go between the land and the main in a fair channel these land be in the latitude of four degree fifty two minute northerly the four and twenty from pulo Capas to the other land which be so many that you can tell they the course be northwest by north fourteen league and then the norther end of the isle be distant from the souther end nine league the depth be twenty two and twenty four fathom the five and twenty now your course to Patane be west northwest forty eight league go no further of the land then twenty league nor no near than twelve or thirteen league unless you have occasion to anchor the land be bold and high after you pass sixteen league west northwest there be no more land till you come to Patane but only one rock and you may if you will go between the main and it this rock be fourteen league short of Patane the thirty we anchor in the road of Patane in three fathom and a half where we do ride till the first of August they arrive at Patane Sangora and then set sail for Sangora to trim our ship this Sangora be a very good place under two land fast by the main and from Patane fourteen or fifteen league the three of August 1614 we come to a anchor in the road of Sangora under the easter-most island of the two August 3. 1614 and there we trim our ship well and come away the nine of September arrive at Patane the next day follow where we stay till the six of October to take in the good of the globe to carry they for Bantam the nine of October we set sail from Patane be find for Bantam hold the same course back that we come forth and the nine of November we arrive safe at Bantam we rid there till the seven and twenty of january to lade our ship and to fit all thing for our voyage home for England the nine and twenty we set sail from thence and within some hundred league from Bantam homeward find die our captain master Edmund Marlowe they return for England the death of capt. Edmund Marlowe a excellent man in the art of navigation and all the mathematics the first place at which we anchor be the bay of Saldanha where we stay for our consort the globe which arrive there the next day follow the nine and twenty of April 1615. we come to a anchor in the road where we stay till the seventeen of may. and then be well fit in both our ship we do set sail for Santa Helena where we safe arrive the three of june and ride there till the seven in the morning then we set sail together for England where God be praise we safe arrive the three of August 1615. chap. 5 a ruter or brief direction for ready sail into the East-India digest into a plain method by master JOHN Davis of limehouse upon experience of his five voyage thither and home again @. i. nautical observation of place betwixt the lizard and saint Augustine in the i will of saint Laurence first the lizard have in latitude fifty degree ten minute the cape finisterre in Galicia have in latitude forty three degree twenty minute and longitude from the meridian of the lizard two degree thirty six minute west the island of Lancerota have in latitude twenty eight degree Lancerota forty minute and longitude from the lizard five degree twenty four degree west the variation of the compass six degree six minute from north to east and when you be in the latitude of thirty three degree thirty minute and chance to have five degree twenty minute of variation you may assure yourself to be north north-east from the say island and your course be south south-west to go with it canaria the grand canaria have in latitude twenty seven degree forty minute and longitude from the lizard six degree thirty minute west the variation be six degree from north to east likewise in the latitude thirty degree thirty minute when you have five degree and fifty minute variation you have the say island south and by west from you the island of saint Marie be the eastermost of the Azores have in latitude thirty seven degree and longitude from the lizard fourteen degree west the variation of the compass one degree forty minute from north to east but when you be in the latitude of thirty degree thirty minute come homeward and find five degree variation and will see the land in your course go north-east for saint Marie but it be better to go more northerly and so you shall be sure to see some of they for the variation be much upon that rate in the north-east course till you come in with the land the latitude of sal which be one of the land of cape Verde be ten degree thirty minute sal. and longitude from the lizard twelve degree twelve minute the variation three degree thirty minute from north to east Bonavista be from six league Bonavista the midway between the meridian of cape Verde and these land in the latitude of nine degree you have two degree fifteen minute of variation to the eastward and the ne^rer you be to the main land the less variation but when you come in five degree of latitude if the ternado do not meet with you before there you shall begin to have they which be wind blow everywhere but if you will pass the equinoctial use what diligence you may the best course to pass the equinoctial line in ply to get from these unhealthful and troublesome wind but keep yourself so that you may be but south and by east or south southeast from mai^ because it may be in your mind that your much go to the eastward will be a help when you stand over with the general wind but you may there spend much time and get little advantage now assoon as you have the wind at south southeast and be in two or three degree of the line stand away with it for if you may pass the line in ten degree of longitude from the lizard your variation will be six degree ten minute from north to east and you shall feel neither the east southeast stream to hurt you nor the northwest and by west stream that set over to the west indies but if the wind do hinder you much fear not to pass the line in fourteen degree of longitude from the lizard your variation will be in that place six degree forty five minute and be pass make your way to the southward as speedy as you may but if the wind be at east north-east or east as many time it will be do not go to the eastward of the southeast and by east although in your mind it be the best course for if you do you shall find the wind at southeast and south southeast and it will bring you down to your south course again although you have spend so much time as in your south course will have carry you without the tropic into the variable wind way which be in twenty six or twenty eight degree for it be great odds when a man may sail thirty six league in four and twenty hour and will sail but four and twenty close upon a wind for when you have bring yourself into the variable wind way it can be long before you have a slent to get up to the cape of good hope where you shall note that your variation will increase in run south from the line for when you come in twenty degree to the southward you shall have fifteen degree of variation and more to the westward fourteen whereby if you note it well increase of variation in run southward of the line the i will of Fernando de Loronha you shall perceive that in these part between the tropic I mean it keep no method in east or westing as it do without they as you may see at the isle de Loronha the latitude whereof be four degree south and longitude from the lizard nineteen degree twenty minute west the variation be there eight degree ten minute from north to east if you come there to ride the road be upon the north-east side but it be ^ll ground in some place the depth nine eight and seven fathom water sandy ground with a stone or rock here and there this land rise like Paul steeple and that land like the steeple will be when you be in the road south south-west from you there be much break ground and land by the i will itself here be good refresh and good water but dangerous land for the sea to sink your boat and drown your man the portugal of Fernamburo have some few slave here that make Cotton and keep their cattle they have guiney wheat there grow the island of Santa Helena have in south latitude sixteen degree the i will of Santa Helena and longitude from the lizard four degree thirty minute east and from the cape of good hope twenty three degree thirty minute west the variation be seven degree thirty minute from north to east this island be one of the best for the bigness thereof for the refresh of man that I know in the sea it stand so healthy and have so good a road for ship as a man can (@) the road be open to the northwest side right before the chapel you may ride in twel^e ten nine eight or seven fathom water good ground and no danger but what you see a long the shore the island be little but very high land a man may see it eighteen league off upon it be all thing fit for a man comfort come with it in distress if you will see this island you have the wind always at southeast or thereabouts therefore keep yourself in the latitude of sixteen degree ten minute or fifteen degree and run west upon that height and you can miss it whether it be day or night you need not fear but this you may assure yourself that in your course from the cape of good hope there be nothing that will wrong you I mean no stream nor current for I have see that myself three time come from the cape the southeast wind will tak^ you in thirty degree and sometime before and will carry you to the northward of the equinoctial line the bay of Saldanha Saldanha which be the bay where we do common anchor outward find have in latitude thirty four degree twenty five minute and longitude from the lizard twenty eight degree east the variation thirty minute from north to east for the know of the land hereabout Saldanha it be all high land but common when you come from the westward it be foggy and dark upon it so that you shall see the breach of the shore before you can come to make it or know it if you see the land when you be in the off rise like a table and other round hill by it one like a sugarloaf bring this table east by south and then stir so see till you come close under the land for this course will bring you in with the point of the souther land go into the road now when you see the point itself which be low land you shall see the i will of penguin but keep yourself near the point then to penguin island because there be sink rock all towards the island keep your lead go for towards the point you shall have ground at fifteen fathom and then you may be bold to go by it in ten fathom water then the road be southeast by east from this point in six fathom or five if you listen the table will be south south-west the middle of it and the sugarloaf south-west half westerly the worst wind for that road be from the northwest to the north-east here be good water and fresh victual when the people come down with it there be fresh-fish in the river to be have at sometime of the tide with a seine it do high sometime five foot water and sometime six sometime more and sometime less between the coast of brasil and this road the compass have twenty degree variation and more or less as you be to the northward or south for the more you be to the southward the more you have and to the northward the less but in thirty three degree thirty minute the high variation between brasil and the cape of good hope you have the high variation twenty one degree from north to east and longitude from the lizard seven deg thirty minute or from the cape of good hope thirty five deg thirty minute west now when you come in eleven degree no minute of variation you may assure yourself if your variation be good you be three hundred and thirty league short and it will keep a good method in decrease after the rate of thirty or eight and twenty league to a degree for when you be in two degree of variation you shall be eight and forty or fifty league short and when you have forty minute and can see the land you be but ten league off now if you can see the land close by the water side before you can see the other high land the fog hang upon the shore and be in thirty four degree of latitude you may see white sandy way close by the water side your course be to the point if they bear east southeast from you and be near the shore be north-east for these white sandy way be almost three league short of that point go into the road and fast by the point to the south-west from the say point go for the road the two point do lie north-east and south-west and then the land towards the cape lie southeast and by east and south southeast so likewise the land lie to the northward off the bay north northwest and south south-west penguin island and this point lie north and by west and south and by east connie island to the northward of this island be a island call connie island and it lie in latitude thirty three degree twenty seven minute and north northwest from penguine i will this cony isle have bad ground about it but you may go between the main and that island if you will anchor this i will upon the westerside have a dangerous ledge of rock lie of it to the Seawar^ the main all along the shore be bold but what you may see chapman chance chapman chance have in latitude thirty four degree ten minutue and be a harbour which lie within the south-west point under a little hill like Charing cross close hang by the seaside of the south south-west-side of the land like a table stand in the very bottom of the Bay this be a very good harbour for the ship for the main land of the cape will be shut in upon the westerside of the land and there be good ground and a good depth to ride in as ten nine eight seven six or five fathom this harbour be not past ten mile over land to Soldanha from it and a man may come away with that wind that you can come forth withal from Soldanha wherefore when any shall have be there with a ship they shall better know it we go not in with our ship because we be all fit to go about before we do know it to be a harbour for we do suspect it by chance stand in with a scant wind and be towards night our captain master Edmund Marlowe send one of the master mate in the pinnace to see whether it be a harbour or not have little wind and by that time he come in with it the sun be down so that he can not see and take that notice he will for quick return to the ship cape Falso have in latitude thirty four degree thirty minute and be distant from the cape of good hope nine league east southeast cape Falso between these two cape there be a deep bay and before it there be a rock even with the water but it lie near the cape of good hope in this bay be the great river call Rio that run far up in the land there be good refresh as the hollander report Rio for they have be there with their sh^ps here at cape Falso be no variation that I can find by observe south from it no variation^ cape Aguilhas the land lie to the cape east southeast from the cape of good hope and be distant six and twenty league no danger be to be see but a bold shore along the coast and so it be bold sixty league to the eastward for so far I have sail to the eastward of cape Das Aguilhas the land lie east northerly for one hundred league the very cape Das Aguilhas have in latitude thirty four degree fifty minute south and be very low land but there be high land to the eastward of the last name cape you may have ground with your lead in seven or eight league of the land for one hundred league east at seventy sixty sixty five fifty five fifty forty fathom sandy black ground upon your lead which will help you much in come home if you can observe the variation nor latitude the variation of cape Das Aguilhas be no degree thirty minute from north to west and at the cape of good hope the compass be vary from north to east five and twenty minute assoon as you be to the westward of cape Das Aguilhas you shall have Ozie and deep water whereby you may see that this will help you well in dark weather to know how the land be from you and how to hale in with the cape of good hope when you sail into the east India from the cape of good hope you must be very careful in your course for till you come up to have seven or eight degree of variation you shall find it sometime very uncertain shout of stream that will set a man sometime one way sometime another as I have often find it to be so and have have none other mean to help myself but by the variation which be very sure if you be careful in observe the great benefit of the variation but after you pass eight degree of variation you shall not need to sear the stream if you be find to the eastward for the stream or tide do set between the variation aforesaid and the cape now if you find between the cape and this variation of seven or eight degree that you do not alter it to your ship run east for this be your fit course if you be find for Bantam or within for any place of the i will of saint Laurence till you come up to the variation aforesaid as you may chance at five or six degree assure yourself you be wrong with it for the variation will increase by the rate of nine and twenty or thirty league to the i will of saint Laurence I mean these league in east from the Meridian and not the course you sail by for if you sail north-east and by east and you shall have thirty six league for one degree and half east or longitude which will alter one degree of variation and the more northward your course be the less variation you have note as you shall plain understand for in five and twenty of latitude in sight of saint Laurence you have sixteen degree no minute and run north by the land to the river of saint Augustine you shall have but fifteen degree in the latitude of twenty three degree and thirty minute which be plain that it be less to the northward then to the southward so likewise up to the eastward in the latitude of eleven degree no minute the high variation be twenty three degree forty minute and in the latitude of thirty three degree no minute the high variation be twenty seven degree ten minute as I have see and observe myself and in my judgement in ten league east and westing of the same meridian as hereafter shall more plain appear in their due place @. 2 a note for find out of the river of saint Augustine in saint Laurence of diverse small isle in the way thence to Achen and of many port and passage in and about sumatra this river of s. Augustine have in latitude twenty three degree thirty five minute and longitude from the cape of good hope twenty three degree twenty minute east the variation be fourteen degree fifty minute from north to west but when you go for it seek the land in the latitude of twenty four degree twenty minute because in the latitude of twenty five degree ten minute there be dangerous fall for rock and shoald which I have see and in this latitude twenty four degree twenty minute you have the variation fifteen degree forty minute the shore bold but what you see before you and the coast lie south and north by a meridian compass without count the variation or meddle in this place with it but steer north and north and by east as discretion will guide you by the land then come along the shore in twenty four degree ten minute you shall see a head-land which have upon it a round hill of white sand and be like a castle with some few tree by it this head-land be short of the bay thirteen league and your course be north and by east and north still no danger till you see the isle and shoald before the bay and in the country you shall see a land rise like unto Westminster hall and a gut between two high land like Dartmouth the river be between these two hill when you come with the isle and shoald and will go into the northward of they the river of s. Augustine in the i will of s. Laurence you may be bold of the shoald in seven fathom if you will loof in by they but anchor not by they for it be bad ground with coral that will cut your cable in sunder if you ride but little time there but rather hale east up for the channel come from the river where you have Ozie by the main in twelve fourteen or twenty fathom water and you shall find deep water in along to the river till you come fast by the two hill and Westminster hall within the point on the west northwest side there you may choose your road from twenty fathom to twelve eleven ten nine eight seven six or five fathom but it be Ozie ground without the two headland and sand within this river lie from the isle without shoald east and be distant five league here be good fill of water and wood very good victual buy you pay silver for that they desire most the people be of a reasonable disposition but you need not to trust they nor none else where you come but stand always upon your guard while your boat go into the river to fill water you shall have a very good ox for four shilling and a goat for one shilling English and as good as you have in England the man of this place be tall and well make the cape of s. Sebastian the cape of s. Sebastian have in latitude twenty five degree forty five minute and longitude from the cape of good hope twenty five degree no minute the variation of the compass sixteen degree forty minute from north to west here upon the southeast side be a very good place for refresh as the hollander report much upon the latitude of twenty four degree no minute it be name Santa Lucia for as they have report to i there be a race of the portugal leave there Lucia a good place of refresh they say the ship ride very secure and have above nine or eight fathom water sandy ground and a island or two before it and this must be much better for ship find up or down than the river of s. Augustine because it be upon the head of the island the i will of s. Mary the i will of s. marry upon the east side of s. Laurence have in latitude sixteen degree thirty minute and longitude from the cape of good hope thirty one degree no minute the variation nineteen degree fifty minute from north to west this island be inhabit and there we have hen lemon and other refresh good water but never a harbour all road you may ride off the west side before a town of twelve or sixteen house the depth of water be twenty fathom more or less the distance from this island over to the main be ten league to the north northwest from this island be a great bay that lie sixteen league deep west north west in from the souther-side of the bay there be good ride under a little island and in from that upon the main there be a river of fresh water and there be likewise water and wood upon the i will by the road you may ride in twelve ten nine or eight fathom but you have need to sue your anchor for it be so soft Ozie that your anchor will come home here you have Rice in abundance hen and some cattle the people have war one side of the bay with the other trust these people not too far for treachery it be a place of very uncertain and contagious weather for rain thunder and lightning as ever I come in and very unwholesome for we lose many man here but if distress urge a man to it you may unlade a ship or do any business by the island with stand upon your guard and use the people friendly as the hollander have be drive unto the latitude of this bay be fifteen degree forty minute but if you go with s. Marie first you can miss it for it be the next bay upon the main unto the island the name of this bay be Antongill the ba^ of Antongil we do ride here in the first east indian voyage for the merchant of London in the year 1601. from December to march and then we go for the east indies the latitude of the isle roque Piz be eleven degree no minute the i will roque piz. the high variation and longitude from the cape of good hope forty one degree no minute of the great circle east here in the sight of these two land we have the high variation of the compass which be twenty three degree thirty minute now south from this place as near as I can judge by sundry time go up and down we have likewise the most variation that be if you be in the latitude of twenty seven or twenty eight degree than you have twenty six degree no minute if you be in thirty three degree no minute of latitude you have twenty seven degree twenty minute of variation and this you may see in my voyage in the james begin in February 1611. and end the three of August 1615. the shoalds call Baixos Chagas have in latitude six degree no minute and longitude from the cape of good hope fifty three degree thirty six minute east Baixos Chagas the variation be nineteen degr fifty min. from north to west these shoald be very dangerous there be three or four land and other dry sand we be twenty four hour upon and among these shoalds there be in some place coral in other some sand sometime ten fathom and by and by six fathom the best water the ship have be four fathom but God be thank we have no hurt to any one of the ship we be clear by keep the isle south south-west from we for upon the north north-east side it be that we find the way out if they have be well lay in our charts we have miss they in the channel of Maldina the compass vary 17. degree and at the cape sixteen degree the land of Nicubar lie off the north end of sumatra the land of Nicubar have in north latitude seven degree ten minute and longitude from the cape of good hope seventy three degree no minute east the variation be seven degree five minute from north to west if you go with these isle of Nicubar as you come from the westward when you come within fifty or forty league you shall meet with overfal or the run of some tide which will make you mistrust shall water but we find none with o^r lead when we sound many such you shall pass I think they be the stream come from the bay of Bengala among these land there be no danger but what you see you may be bold to water and fit your sel^es here the people will not come aboard your ship but will buy and sell in their canoe farther into the northward be more land as in eight degree lie a island call Ilha de Sombrero Somb^ero because upon the souther-side the land be like a hat under this island be good ride and the people will come to your ship from the other land to the eastward for there be many land Achen which be a city upon the west northwest side of sumatra in sumatra have in latitude five degree forty minute and longitude from the cape of good hope seventy four degree forty minute east and the variation be six degree twenty five minute from north to west you may ride in seven or eight fathom or at low water in five or six it hie five foot upon the bar your road be to the east ward of the castle and a round hill in the country southeast from you the ground be Ozie where you ride there be h^gh land upon the westerside of the town the hill which be southeast of you be call the hill of Pedir because there be a town of that name under it twenty five league from Achen before the road in the off be five or six land the pepper of this place be better than the pepper of Bantam at Pedir pepper be to be have but little else the land lie from the road of Achen forty or fifty league east and west and if you will go for the straight of malacca there be no danger till you come to the eastward of the isle jarras but a fair depth at twenty five or thirty fathom water the isle jarras the tide set as much one way as the other at these isle jarras you may see the high land of malacca but here about sumatra be all low land and your variation here about the equinoctial be all one as I say before when I speak of the high that there be within less variation then without in the latitude of fourteen or fifteen degree for when you have seven degree fifty minute in the off you be much upon seven degree thirty minute longitude from Bantam and that distance you be in for longitude from Bantam when you be under the equinoctial line and have six degree thirty five minute of variation so that much upon that rate of thirty one league in the off of east or westing will alter one degree of variation or one degree and a half of longitude and within you run forty league or two degree this I have find by experience both within and without go home from Bantam if you be at Achen and will sail for Priaman which be a town upon the west side of sumatra and have in latitude no degree fifty minute south and longitude from the cape of good hope seventy seven degree forty minute east the variation four degree forty minute from north to west the sure way be this to the eastward of Priaman there be land in the south latitude of one degree and thirty minute which be call the isle of Nimtam the isle of Nimtam your course be to go with these land and come not between the main but keep the sea till you see those land keep in one degree twenty minute of south latitude and you shall sure fall with the north end of the big now this great island be the big of the two be twenty league long very near and there be many little land near it and when you be with this island go up by it for it be the bold of the two but have your lead go now and then to prevent danger yet I have find the least to be ten fathom water when you be shut within these land your course be east by north eighteen league but sail not by night but whole rather and sail by day now although Priaman and this island do lie east by north and west by south yet your best way be to direct your course east north-east and north-east by east among and than you shall see three hummock in the main before you can see the low land and then have sight of they you may go in till you see the low land of the main but look well about you shall water and bank of stone for when these hill come to the north-east from you there be shall water and bank of stone but you may borrow of they with your lead in seven fathom then be you six league from the road of Priaman and your course east southeast or southeast by east with your lead go now and then for the know of the road of Priaman when you have the hill north and west from you you shall see many land to the southward but the first will show white and none of the rest so that island lie west south-west from the road three league and the land in the country above Priaman be high and like a saddle in the midst this high land bear from the road north-east and by east I set it down with this notice because there be four land before the road within which you ride and may mistrust to go within these land when you come from the west northwest because they will not be open but show like a pair of breech till you have bring they east north-east from you then will they begin to open for there be good go in between they leave two on the one side and two on the other but come not near that little uttermost i will by the main for there be all flat ground but keep in nine or eight fathom till you come with the other three isle that lie in a row and then go into the southward of the norther of these three land and under that island be the road the road of Priaman wherefore be bold of it in five or six fathom because it be but narrow between that i will and the river run from the town to wit much upon the breath of the Thames at Blackewall upon this i will under which you ride be a well make artificial by those that have use to water there it be a good road when you be in but more your ship sure the people here be covetous and still beg for one thing or other yet they use we very well and bring we hen and such victual as the place afford here be good trade from java with junke for their pepper they bring they salt which be very scant upon this side of the island and about September and October there come every year a guserate with Cotton cloth to serve this side of the island st^re of gold in sumatra storax and lade away pepper and carry away some gold for gold be more plenty there then silver as we may plain see by the countrie-people for they be very desirous of rial of eight here be some Benjamin to be have and very good storax with other commodity Tecou Tecou be seven league from this road but it be shoaldie water and ill for ship because they must ride far off but prawe and such small vessel as the country people use be fit and will bring all their commodity unto you into Priaman road after they know a ship to be there ten league many land be to the south of Priaman to the northward of Priaman there be no land three or four league off but to the southward coast be full of land along till you come into two degree and a half or latitude the coast lie from Priaman two degree twenty minute of latitude south your course be south when you set sail from Priaman you may go within those land by the road because by the souther island lie a shall close by the off side your depth be five and six fathom in go down to the southward keep the main still and go not without among those land for it be all ground and shoald but sail not by night till you come into the latitude of two degree thirty minute for as you pass by the high land that be distant from the road of Priaman thirteen league it be very dangerous keep yourself in twenty or thirty fathom water off the main and look well about you when this high land come towards the east between that gut of high land as you pass like Dartmouth be the town of Celledai I have have by go near those land here about thirteen league from the aforesaid road but four fathom water and have see the stone under the ship and have go but little in again towards the main and have have sixteen fathom and twelve fathom water wherefore there be no fear by the main land keep your lead go then be clear off these land your course be south and by east by the main till you come to two degree thirty minute and then the land lie to three degree ten minute southeast and then southeast and by south to four degree and so to five degree no minute by the same course the land be very high and bold here in five degree no minute in five degree and thirty minute lie the isle of Engano the i will of Engano but there be no anchor by it for I have seek to anchor but it be rock and deep water but if you have any occasion you shall find in the latitude of four degree a very good road ten minute a very good road under a island fast by the main where you may ride in seven fathom and no danger but what you see but may bold turn into the road if the wind ^e at southeast Ozie ground here you may have wood and water if you have need but beware two league west south-west from this island it be very dangerous shall in the sea the water break much upon it wherefore keep in by the island and give the point a birth but you can go between the main and this isle with a ship because it be narrow and shoaldy water this road or harbour be name by the country people celebar celebar we do ride here with sir Edward Michelborne thirteen day to do some business you shall never with a southeast wind miss some juncke of java or of some other place ride there the land to the northward in the country be high but by the seaside reasonable not very low neither this high land in five degree twenty minute be call Manancabo and be extraordinary high the course alongst the shore be south southeast easterly till you come to see a little island fast by the main that lie in six degree no minute or much thereupon here you shall see a round hill in the country east from you which will be north when you come with the three isle by the point of sumatra that lie east one from the other the salt hill then shall you have the salthill east and by south from you when this hill be north and the distance from the three island lie east and west to the three salt hill which be three island that lie south and north one from another to be ten league the land of sumatra from the little island to the other three island lie east southeast and be distant four league this land be not very high but in the country it be high land the depth by this land be four and fifty fathom and by the three east and west island there be sixteen fathom water and further up you have thirthie fathom when the round hill be north from you now you must understand that ^eere as you go upon the coast of sumatra be more island than a man can number but if you will go into t^e road of Marrough you may bold bear in among those island that lie north-east and by east the road of Marrough till you come to the main land of sumatra where you shall have twenty or thirty fathom and no danger but what you see now when you come in with the main four league west south-west from this head-land which be call Marrough you shall have all to the northward of you low land and many island but you must go east southeast unto the head-land of sumatra for this road of Marrough be along the shore from the three little island fast by the main till you come almost to the point that make the straight of Sunda you may anchor in twenty or twelve fathom water Ozie ground a fair birth off there be good refresh and river all along the shore the land be very high here in from the road but if you come with the three salt hill or island that lie south and north one from the other which be distant as I say before from the three east and west island by sumatra ten league and will go for this place of Marrough steer in with the high land north when you be to the eastward of the south salt hill and you go right with it for the land above it be like a barn and none thereabout like it you may be bold every way hereabout for there be no danger but what you see with your eye no where without the straits mouth in the very straight or narrow between sumatra and java side which you will if you go to the westward of the three south and north island you need not fear although you see three rock stand three mile west from the salt hill for you may come fast by they or put between any of those island three rock three mile w^st ^rom the salt hil^s the depth will be much about twenty or thirty fathom the course from the head-lan^ of sumatra w^ere the three east and west island be be east north-east with the point or head-land of sumatra that make the straits entry the coast of java l^eth from the point of Talimbam down to seven degree almost of southerly latitude where be many island on this side the lie of ^ome part of the coast of ja^a the souther salt hill be in eighty one degree (@) longitude from (@) cape of good hope south-west and north-east and you have ground with the lead at thirty or forty fathom in some place but a little without the point of Palimbam you may anchor in twelve fathom Ozie ground the latitude of the southeast salt hill be six degree ten minute the longitude from cape of good hope eighty one east the variation three degree twenty minute these salt hill stand near java than sumatra by two league you may see both mane at one time if it be clear and you be in the midway the land of java be high within the country and low by the waterside the stream in the straight set twelve hour one way and twelve hour the other but most strong for you can bear a head with a hard gale at some time wherefore go off on one side and anchor it make no matter on which but if you chance to go in by sumatra side keep near sumatra by a good deal then to the island till the island be east and by south from you for there be a rock under water which break at low water a rock under water that lie west and by north from the island sumatra be bold to you can keep off the land and so be side also the way to Bantam when you be about the point of Palimbam be by the land east south and southeast and by east with your lead go till you see a flat island c^lled pulo panian pulo panian which be distant from the point of nine or ten league when you come to this island you may go without it or within it at your pleasure but keep your lead go and come not near than five or six fathom off that island then if you look in upon the main you shall see a round hill in the country bear south or between that and south south-west this hill stand right over the town of Bantam if you have it south south-west from you go in with that course till you come to see five island together right from pulo panian your road be by these five island call pulo lima pulo Lima. where you may ride in what depth you will under four fathom Ozie ground it high five foot water in the road wherefore when you choose to ride remember the tide for otherwise you may be on ground at low water the variation be three degr^ i^ Bantam Road^ the variation in the road be three degree from north to west here be many island in this road round about you @. 3 the way from Bantam to the straight of Palimbon upon the east-side of sumatra of Banca straits of Sincapura and with other place when you weigh from Bantam roade you go north-east by east four or five fathom till you come with the point of the main where it come to bear southeast by south you have very shall water upon that spit of hard ground wherefore keep off betimes before you come near in four or five fathom there be a good big island on your north northwest as you go from Bantam which you may leave on your larbord side in go from the aforesaid town and your depth be five or six fathom here will the land towards the straight make like a island because you have lose sight of the low land here in your north north-east course a long bed of small island you have a long bed of small island in your way and low withal but bold for there be eighteen or twenty fathom water among they Bantam bear south-west by south westerly from these island their latitude be from five degree to five degree thirty minute when you be at the norther end of these island go north north-east and north over for the coast of sumatra and in your course your depth will be thirteen twelve ten nine eight seven sumatra six five four and a half fathom and than you shall see the low land of sumatra the tree I mean and your ground under your lead will be Ozie the latitude about three degree thirty minute south now when you come in with a riff of hard sand hereabout and have in your north and by west course four fathom and a half note note it well and hale off again east north-east into your old depth which be from ten to seven fathom or five of sumatra your course north by west and north northwest to hold the coast from five to ten fathom but go not without ten fathom neither by night nor day for the coast be bold in six fathom but if you go from Bantam north a shall you must look very careful about for a shall that lie in that course from the aforesaid town of the road till you have sight of the two island upon the coast of sumatra that lie three league from that main land and than you have no more island by sumatra till you come in three degree of south latitude and there shall you fall with lusapara-falsa lusapara-falsa which be the first of those four land at the south south-west end of Banca and look out very well for they in go your north by west course as the depth will guide you from five or six to nine or ten fathom Ozie ground when you have sight of these four island you shall see much break ground by they and among they very shall water here likewise you shall see two round homocke of a good height and though they seem to you to stand upon the main of sumatra the isle of Banca yet they do not so but upon the island of Banca the aforesaid four island have three degree no minute south latitude when you come to have these island east from you your shoald will be five and four fathom and your course north and north by west till you have the southermost isle southeast by east from you then you go north north-east by Banca in eight and seven fathom for the island of Banca be steep when you come with these island keep sumatra side for the bold side the channel be in breath three mile now in edge to the other side you shall go from eight fathom into three fathom then have you hard ground on that side and Ozie ground on sumatra side this course of north north-east be but one reach or three mile before you go north again here at the narrow the tide set north and south and run twelve hour one way and twelve hour the other when you be pass the bank or shoald by these island your depth be ten and nine fathom than you sail three league north by the land the next reach lie north by west and the depth in the best be fifteen fathom and when you draw near to the high land upon the north side of the island of Banca your course be north northwest and the best depth twenty fathom it be very flat and shall here upon sumatra side this course of north northwest and northwest by north continue nine league then you sail twenty league northwest by west the depth will be four and twenty fathom the latitude in this course be one degree eight and thirty minute south when you have the north-end these island southeast by south from you it will show like break island but as you go keep off the main because it be shall still your next course be north ten league in ten nine eight and seven fathom here you have sight of three or four island to the northwards of the great island but no sight of the main land the latitude here be one degree five minute south then your course be north-east by north with a round island and other little island by it this round island be like the Monston of Dartmouth the depth ten nine eight and seven fathom and latitude about forty minute south pulo Sio this isle be call by the country people pulo Sio but linscot call it pulo powe here you may have water and wood if you need then your course be to go without from hence north northwest pulo Linga and the depth be fifteen or sixteen fathom and the distance from pulo Sio to Linga be thirteen league at the souther end of Linga be many island and there be at the norther end also many lie under the equinoctial line this island of Linga lie under the equinoctial line as we find by observation where the charts make it to lie almost a degree in south latitude it be full of island and sink ground hereabout here we find the tide to run south southeast and north northwest the depth in the off be twenty fathom Ozie ground your course be north by west fifteen or sixteen league where you shall see eight other island but in your go beware of the tide eight island and keep in fifteen or sixteen fathom water and Ozie ground the latitude of these eight island be fifty minute north. here you may likewise have wood and water among these island these island and sancken ground continue to one degree ten minute of north latitude the tide run twelve hour the flood from the northward and ebb from the southward the depth twenty fathom here along by these island be fourteen fathom till you come up to the isle of Bintam the isle of Bintam which have in latitude one degree ten minute north upon the southeast side of this island be bold shoald from fourteen to nine fathom yet have a round hill in the midst of it and it be a great island than any that be near it upon the easter point I come over in seven fathom the tide of the norther side set west by north. and when you be pass this easter point you be open of the straight of Sincapura the straight of Sincapura here the tide set east from the straight of Sincapura thence you go north-east and by north seven league with a strong stream against you for a island call pulo Tinge upon the coast of jor in latitude two degree twenty minute north you may see the round hill of Bintam even with the water pulo Tinge for their distance twenty league and the course be north by west here we see a island call pulo Timon pulo Timon and the other island by it be call pulo lore leave two round hill upon it and pulo Tinge where we ride have a pike hill upon it their latitude be two degree thirty minute and two degree forty minute the coast of jor be bold from pulo Tinge when you have make the straight of Sincapura jor. and will go for jor your course be northwest by west but beware of the current you may be bold in sixteen eighteen twenty or five and twenty fathom and good ground to anchor from pulo Sio steer southeast for a island call pulo paccadoure pulo paccadoure distant from pulo Sio eleven league in latitude one degree no minute south it be a ragged island and have by it two little land the depth be fifteen fathom be sure to keep in that depth and you shall go without danger from this ragged island your course be southeast by east nine league to a other island call pulo pagadure and your depth be fifteen or sixteen fathom pulo Pagadure in that course be very careful for Banca upon this side be all rock and breach in some place eight or nine league off and so it be without you again all bad ground then from this island your course be southeast by east to a island call pulo Calasai or the mariner island and their distance be forty league when you see this island of mariner lie short of it pulo Calasai because you can anchor by it for foul ground your depth from this island to the other be fifteen fathom from this mariner island you may see the high land upon Banca bear west by north from it and be distant fifteen league Banca the head of Banca lie from this i will south-west by west nine league sail not by night by any mean when you see this island for if you go never so well by your compass the stream will deceive you and put you to the eastward of a island call Chinabata Chinabata your course be to go between Banca and these land because it be all rock to the eastward like steeple this i will of Chinabata and pulo Calasai lie south and north one from the other and be distant thirteen league your course between Banca and Chinabata be south south-west look to the stream and borrow of Banca in this place in twenty or twenty five fathom the distance between they be ten league the rock in the off be call pulo pelican from which straight to the coast of sumatra the course be south-west by south till you have shoald off the main and go as you do outward from Bantam keep the shoald of sumatra in seven or eight fathom till you draw near the straight of Sunda I have hereunto add like nautical observation I suppose write by Thomas clayborne leave the censure and use to the more skilful he entitle they certain principal note gather by my own experience in my three voyage into these part wherein the true course and distance with shoald and rock be show and on which side you may leave they as hereafter follow note the souther-most salt hill lie in six degree no minute of south latitude and if you be find for Bantam you may go betwixt the salt hill or on either side of they if need be but most man go to the south of they if you be south from the southermost salt hill about two league or less your best course to Palimbam point be between the north-east by east and the east north-east the distance betwixt the salt hill and that point twenty league in that course you shall leave the island that make the straits of Sunda on the larboard side and that island be five league short of Palimbam point from point your course be east southeast about three or four league with pulo Pangam then leave that island on your larboard side and be clear of it you must steer east southeast about two league more then south south-west and south by west about one league and that will bring you into Bantam road where you may come to a anchor in three fathom soft oze certain note from Bantam ride to the land of the maluccaes with the course and distance as hereafter follow from Bantam ride north-east by north two league than east by north and east north-east two league and that will bring the low point to the eastward of Bantam bay south from you about one league but come no near that point then three fathom then east and east by north four league and then you shall have fourteen fathom and shall be near five land with white sand without they and a ledge of rock east from they about half a mile these you must leave to the north-ward of you from these land your course be east southeast with the eastermost island of jacatra from the eastermost island of jacatra which be the norther-most from this island your course be north-east by east four or five league than east thirty league then look out for a sand that lie about three league from the main and if it be clear weather you shall see a low island to the north of you but you may go either between the island and the sand or between the sand and the main but the best way be to go three league to the southward of the island then east by south and east seventy league and that will bring you in sight of Madura note if you be four or five league from the west end of Madura you shall have thirty three fathom and be five league of the easter end you shall have forty one or forty two fathom all alongst this coast you shall have Ozie ground from the west end of Madura your best course be to steer east by north while you have bring yourself in the latitude of six degree and then keep yourself in that latitude if it be possible and so by God help you shall go clear between the shoal of celebe and another shoal that lie south south-west from the shoal of celebe the southermost point of the shoal of celebe lie in six degree from the south point of the shoal of celebe your course be east north-east with the straits of celebe the distance between they be thirty league from the straits of celebe to Ternata the principal island of the Maluccas upon a straight line the course be north-east distant about two hundred league if you be mind to go for the Moluccas then from the straits of celebe your course be north-east by east and north-east thirty league and that will bring you into a straight between two land namely celebe and Cambyna the distance between these two land be five league in the middle between they note you shall have thirty eight fathom sandy ground but this be to be note when you come between these two land you can sail by night for it be dangerous the straits of s. Thomas while you be clear of the straits of s. Thomas distant from this place aforenamed twenty league so that you must go upon several course as hereafter follow first north-east by north six league than north north-east eight league than east and east by north ten league and this will bring you into the straits of s. Thomas which straits you shall hardly perceive until you come very near they for they be narrow and one land shoot in a other the go through be east about one league and the least water you shall have in run of that league be eleven or twelve fathom in run of those twenty league afore-named you shall be land-locked and shall see six or seven sand dry with the rimme of the water most of they will be on your larboard side but this course aforenamed by God help will carry you clear of they all from the straits of s. Thomas your course be north-east by east and east north-east fourteen league and that will carry you into the sea but not out of the sight of land then north north-east thirty eight league and then look out for a small island and a shoal that lie north northwest from that small island you must bring that small island east from you about two league or seven mile then steer north by east and north north-east five league than west northwest and northwest by north two or three league than north-east by north four or five league and that north-east by north course will carry you between two shoal that lie in two degree no minute south latitude the distance between they be not one mile and they be dry at low water you shall have fourteen fathom between they when you be clear of these shoal and be within one league of that land the straits of Bengaia which that north-east by north course do carry you unto than you must steer east southeast about two league than north-east by east with the straits of Bengaia which lie in one degree twenty minute to the south of the equinoctial this straight lie north-east by north Machian and so you must go through Bachian from the straits of Bangaia to Machian the course be north-east by east distant seventy two league Bachian lie in no degree thirty minute to the north of the equinoctial and be near this island if it be clear weather you shall see all the Clove land which show like high pike hill in the midst of they you may steer with any of they at your pleasure if wind and weather serve for there be no danger lie near they note of Botun BOtun be a great island and a high land the long part of it lie north north-east and south south-west upon the north north-west part or end of the island there be a river of fresh water if a man be at the norther end of Botun and be mind to sail to the king town his course be between the south by west and south south-west and so shall sail along the land twenty league as it be up a river betwixt two land Botun to the eastward and Cambyna to the west distance between they four league in some place but three in some place but two league and in some very narrow in this course afore-named nine league short of the king town there be a shoal a dangerous shall not very big yet dangerous and dry at a low water now to know when you be near it you shall see a round hill upon button near the water side that hill and the shoal lie east by north and west by south one from the other you must leave that shoal on your larboard side from this shoal your course be still between the south by west and south south-west to go with the narrow straits four mile short of the king town this straight be one league through and about half a mile broad the course be south south-west through and it be no great matter for the course in that place so you keep the ship in the middle which be best for there be no ride in the narrow by reason of the swift tide that run there he that go through must take his tide with he to drive he through for light there be never any wind there the land be so high over the mast on both side but you may anchor two league short of this narrow and ride well by God help in thirty fathom sand so when you be through this straight you must steer south south-west one league to go clear of a point of land that you must leave on your larboard side and be clear of that point you must hale up south southeast about four mile if the wind will give you leave and then you may come to a anchor in eight and twenty fathom hard sand near a flat island then you shall see the town of Botun upon the side of a hill from you about one league the road of Botun lie in five degree fifteen minute of south latitude the road of Botun be in five degree fifteen minute of south latitude from Botun ride west south-west four league than south-west and south-west by south five league than west by south and west thirty league and that will bring you to the straits of celebe from the straits of celebe to the island of Banda upon several course as follow first east seven and thirty league than east by south fifteen league the north-east half a point to the northward about seventeen league and that will bring you into the latitude of five degree ten minute and then your best course be east north-east with Buro distance between that and Buro sixty three league Buro Amboyno Banda from the south part of Buro to the south part of Amboyno be eight and twenty league from the south part of Amboyno to Banda the course be east south east distance about thirty league Banda lie in four degree forty minute your go in be between the high mountain call Gunappi and the great island of Banda the hill be on your larboard side and the great island on your starboard side chap. 7 a journal of the ten voyage to the East-India with two ship the dragon and the Hosiander accompany with the james and Solomon but those for other voyage and in they three hundred and eighty person or thereabout write by master THOMAS BEST chief commander thereof @. i. observation in their way to surat February 1. 1611. the first of February 1611. we set sail from Gravesend and anchor in Tilbury hope march 22. the two and twenty of march at noon latitude observe fifteen degree twenty minute at two of the clock in the afternoon fair aboard maio. Bonavista and maio lie south-west by south maio. distant some twelve league note that the north northwest and the north part of maio be all foul ground and due north from the high homocke a great ledge of rock there lie a great ledge of rock from the land some five or six mile off and a mile without the rock you shall have twenty fathom water on the westside of the island you may borrow in twelve or fifteen fathom till you come into the road where we anchor in four and twenty fathom the eight and twenty in the morning we come close by a island the latitude of it be twenty degree thirty minute and longitude from the meridian of maio one degree fifty minute east we do not land upon it but come within two or three mile of it I take it there be hardly anchor to be find there may be some refresh in it wood there be and there may be water for on the souther part of it there be a fair plain plot and it be very green we can not find ground come within two or three mile of it from this island east north-east another island two or three high white rock june 28. they dep^rt from Saldanha some seven or eight league lie another island and from the first island east by south or east southeast lie two or three high white rock some four or five league off the eight and twenty of june we all set to sea we stay in Saldanha ride one and twenty day and buy for the three ship nine and thirty beef and a hundred and fifteen sheep with a little brass which we cut out of two or three old kettle the sheep we buy for small piece of thin brass worth some penny or three half penny a piece the beef with the brass ^ut off kettle to the value of twelve penny for a beef it be a place of great refresh for beside the beef and mutton there be great plenty of good fish and fowl of many sort great store of fat deer but we can kill none very excellent river of fresh water and a healthful and good air I land eighty or ninety sick man and lodge they in tent eighteen day and they all recover their health save one that die from the seven of june till the day of our departure from Saldanha be the eight and twenty of june we have nothing but fair weather the sun very warm and the air very sweet and healthful we be a hundred league east from cabo Aguilhas note before we find any current and then find it strong July 31. the isle juan the one and thirty of july latitude observe seventeen degree eight minute and longitude twenty degree seven and forty minute the wind at south fair weather at four in the afternoon we see the island juan from we east southeast distant four league in bigness so much as we see and I think we see all of it for length some three or four mile very low and rise like rock off the west-end a mile or two from it we see a breach but we can not get ground with a hundred and thirty fathom sound with our pinnace or skiff the latitude of it be seventeen degree no minute very certain observe and in our judgement well lay in our plait both for latitude and longitude it be a most sure sign of be near this island juan sign of the isle juan if you find or see great store of foul from have the island north-east to southeast we see much fowl some white their wing top or paint only with black and some black fowl August 1 the first of August north north-east thirty league latitude fifteen degree one and forty minute longitude one and twenty degree two and twenty minute the second north-east by north one quarter north six and twenty league latitude fourteen degree five and thirty minute longitude one and twenty degree eight and fifty minute the three north-east by north one quarter north two and twenty league latitude observe thirteen degree five and thirty minute and longitude from the cape twenty two degr thirty minute the wind at south southeast partly calm note note that come this course from the isle we have not meet with any current whereby it be evident that the current which run to the south-west very strong aboard the main from the latitude of fourteen degr south do not run in the off twenty league from land at four in the afternoon we see land east north-east and north-east by east from we some twelve league off have on the easter-part of it a very fair sugarloaf hill this i will be call mal-ilha mal-ilha one of the isle of Comoro and be one of the isle of Comoro also at the same time we see the island Comoro bear of we north northwest and north by west high-land the four at six in the morning we be fair aboard the south southeast end of mal-ilha and hale in with the hand to have find some place to anchor in when we be some eight or nine mile from the shore we see the ground under the ship shoald-water but not less than eight or ten fathom water the Hosiander be two mile within we she find not less than four or five fathom but her boat be in three fathom then we send off both our Pinnasses which keep shoalding on a bank of eight ten and twelve fathom be from the bank half a cable length no ground in a hundred fathom at the north-end of this mal-ilha there be a fair big island high land and may be some five or six mile about and from this little island to the main land of mal-ilha may be some eight or nine mile full of rock two of they of good height a great ledge of rock now the bank or ledge of rock for so it be lie all along the westside of mal-ilha and continue until the little high island before mention bear southeast of you and then it end here I have sixteen fathom fair white sand fish ground and thus be at the north-end of this ledge and the little island bear southeast you may steer in with land keep the island fair aboard and within the rock or break ground and mal-ilha you shall see a bay wherein there be good anchor the dutch ship have be there six or eight sail of they together that year they be here when they assault mozambique six or eight ship of Holland at mal-ilha two of my man now in my ship be then in the ship now to the eastward of you as you come in from the bank or ledge of rock you have likewise a great shall and the offermost end of it lie from the little island north-east or north-east by east but from the island at least five or six mile and no ground between that we can find in forty or fifty fathom in fine all the north-side of mal-ilha be very dangerous but the channel mention without danger for we stand in as far as the little island but the wind be fair southerly we can not lead it in for I will have anchor in the bay if I can have get in for a mile to the westward of the bay be a town the people good and great refresh as beef goat hen lemon Coco nut of each great store and good water the aforesaid fleet of hollander in this place recover the health of four or five hundred man in five week in those part there be no place of great refresh than this now the best way to come to this place be to come by the southeast side of the island mal-ilha have latitude twelve degree thirty minute and longitude three and twenty degree two minute variation fifteen degree twenty minute this island be well name mal-ilha for it be the most dangerous of any place that ever I see mal-ilha nex^ to Comoro it be the next to Comoro on the southeast side of Comoro and be distant some twelve or fourteen league the first of September at the break of the dawn we see the land east from we some three or four league off when we see the land September 1 sight of land I be short of my reckon eighty or ninety league which I judge to proceed of some current from the coast of melinde set to the east neither from the latitude of Socatora to daman can we see the sun to know that variation the three at seven in the morning we command two boat of the country by shoot four piece to they to come aboard of we and they tell we that the church and castle and town which we see and now do bear of we southeast by south be the town of daman out of these two boat I take two man which undertake to carry the dragon to the bar of surat with promise that they will not bring i into less than seven fathom water the five a boat of surat come aboard of we with jaddow the broker which have serve captain William Hawkins three year and sir Henry Middleton the time of his be here and the customer brother and three or four other all which continue with we till the seven day and then at four in the afternoon we come to a anchor at the bar of surat they arrive at the bar of surat the bar have latitude one and twenty degree ten minute variation sixteen degree twenty minute or sixteen degr seven and twenty min. here I come to a anchor in eight fathom and a quarter at high water and at low water six fathom and a half nepe tide but in the spring tide it will rise here in the offing for so have I find three fathom and three fathom and a half the eleven Thomas kerridge come aboard and signify their kind entreaty and much welcome to the people and bring with he from the justice and governor of surat a certificate under their seal for our quiet and peaceable trade and intercourse with they and also a letter of relation write by sir Henry Middleton which he leave with the mocadan of Swally the same day we return he again with Hugh Gittins @. 2 their act with the mogul subject and fight against the portugal settle a factory and departure to Achen the thirteen of September sixteen sail of Portugal frigate put into the river the two and twenty it be determine by counsel that we shall send a post to agra to the king so signify our arrival and to require his answer certain whether he will permit we trade and to settle a factory otherwise to depart his country the thirty this morning I hear of the take of master Canning the purser and William chamber whereupon I cause the guzurat ship to anchor fast by i thereby to stay she till I may see and hear how all stand on land also we stay a bark of rice be inform that it belong to the portugal of Bassare and from Bassare she come in fine I take out of her twelve or fourteen quintal of rice and give they thirteen penny a quintal for it after I have the ship I write to the chief on land that they shall send i all my man with the value of all the good which I have land which be perform I will then deliver their ship wi^h all their people and give time till the five of October to return i answer by which time if they do not than I will dispose of ship and good at my pleasure some ten of the chief man of the ship I take into my ship in the ship there be some four hundred man or four hundred and fiftie^ the six joffer come aboard accompany with four chief man and many other he bring i a great present he come to entreat of trade and release of the ship which I hold the ten I leave the bar of surat and come to the road of Swally and anchor in eight fathom at high-water it be from the bar of surat some ten or twelve mile north. the seventeen the governor of Amadavar come to the waterside the nineteen I land have aboard of my ship four man for pledge the governor of Amadavar come to Swally the one and twenty I conclude with the governor and merchant for trade with they and settle a factory in any part of their country the article agree upon and seal by the governor of Amadavar and the governor of surat and four principal merchant and to be confirm by the seal and firm of the great mogoll within forty day after the former seal or else to be void for the settle of trade and factory in the city of surat Cambaya Amadavar Goga or in any other part or part of this country within the great mogul dominion witness under our hand and seal the one and twenty of October 1612. 1 that all which concern sir Henry Middleton be remit acquit and clear to we that they shall never make seizure stoppage nor stay of our good ware and merchandize to satisfy for the same 2 that they shall procure from their king the great mogoll at their proper cost his grant and confirmation of all the article of agreement under the great seal of his land and shall deliver the same unto we for our security and certainty of perpetual amity commerce and deal with they within forty day after the seal hereof 3 that it shall be lawful for the king of England to keep and continue his ambassador at the court of the great mogoll during the time of the say peace and commerce there to compound and end all such great and weighty question as may any way tend to the breach of the say peace 4 that at all time upon the arrival of our ship in the road of Swally there shall be proclamation in the city of surat three several day together that it shall be free for the country people of all sort to come down to the water side there to have free trade deal and commerce with we 5 that all english commodity shall pay custom according to the value or price that it bear at the time that it be put into the customhouse after the rate of three and a half the hundred 6 that all petty and pedler wear be free of custom provide that it exceed not in value ten rial of eight 7 that we shall have ten for our Manuda carry from the water side to surat and after the same rate back again and for cart we be to repair to the Moccadam of Swally to send for surat and at surat to repair to the broker for cart down again 8 that if any of our man die in those part that then neither the king nor governor nor under officer shall make title or challenge to any thing that to the dead belong nor demand fee nor any kind of tax nor custom 9 that if all our man die here in these part between the time of the come of our ship that then by some office thereto appoint just and true inventory notice and knowledge be take of all such money good jewel provision apparel and what else to our nation belong and the same shall safe preserve and keep and deliver to the general captain or merchant of the first ship that shall after here arrive and to receive a discharge from the general captain or merchant to who such good and money shall be deliver 10 that they secure our man and good upon the land redeem all such both good and man as shall happen to be take upon the land by the portugal and shall deliver both man and good again to we free of all charge or the value of our good and man instant 11 that as in all kingdom there be some rebel and disobedient subject so in our nation there may be some pirate and sea-rover which may happen to come into these part and here may rob and steal if any such shall happen then will not we by our trade and factory here be liable or answerable for such good so take but will aid they with our best mean that be so grieve by justice to our king for redress and restitution unto they 11 that all such provision of victual as shall be spend during the time that our ship shall remain here in the road of surat and Swally shall be free of custom provide it do not amount unto above a thousand dollar in money 13 that in all question of wrong and injury that shall be offer unto we and to our nation that we do receive from the judge and those that be in authority present and speedy justice according to the quality of our complaint and wrong be do we and that by delay we be not put off and weary either by time or charge the fourteen I land the present for the great mogul and bring it to the tent of the governor of Amadavar who take notice of the particular also of our king letter to their king to advertise their king thereof which do I return the present to my ship again according to agreement with the say governor for I have tell he that unless their king will confirm the article conclude on and likewise write our king a letter I will not deliver the present nor our king letter for if he refuse so to do than be he not a friend but a enemy and to the enemy of my king I neither have letter nor present also the same day the former finish I deliver our present to the governor of Amadavar and another to his son the fourteen of November 1612. the Cafila of frigate come in sight of we some two hundred and forty sail I have think they have come to fight with we but they be the fleet of the merchant man find for Cambaya and every year there come the like fleet all portugal from the south coast to wit from Goa Cha etc. to go to Cambaya and from thence they bring the great part of the lade which the carack and galleon carry for Portugal by which may appear the great trade that the portugal have in these part notice of four galleon the fight between four portugal galleon and we of these fight see a large relation in my pilgrimage lib. 5 cap. 7. @ 4. the portugal have four great galleon and some twenty six frigate they lose in these fight their quondam credit and one hundred and sixty or as other five hundred man and english trade settle maugre their foroe nathaniel salmon of Leigh be master of the hosian ler. the seven and twenty I receive letter from master Canning and Edward Christian both signify of the come of four galleon to fight with we and that they be ready ride at the bar of Goa the fourteen of November the nine and twenty master Canning come aboard and the Portugal fleet come in sight of we yesterday draw near up with the flood and at two in the afternoon I do set sail and at four I be about two cable length from the vice-admiral fear to go near for want of depth and then I begin to play upon he both with great and small shot that by a hour we have well pepper he with some fifty six great shot from he we receive one small shot saker or minion into our main mast and with another he sink our long boat now be night we anchor and save our boat but lose many thing out of it the thirty assoon as they day give light I set sail and steer between they bestir ourselves with our best endeavour put three of their four ship on ground on the sand thwart of the bar of surat at nine I anchor this morning the Hosiander do good service and come through also between the ship and anchor by i upon the flood the three ship on ground come off we set sail they at anchor and come to they and spend upon three of they one hundred and fifty great shot and in the morning some fifty shot and at night we give the admiral our four piece out of the stern for a farewell he give we one of his prow piece either a whole or demiculuering which come even with the top of our forecastle shoot through our Davie kill one man to wit William burrell and shoot the arm of another this day the Hosiander spend whole upon one of the ship which be on ground and from the enemy receive many shot (...) which kill the boatswayne Richard Barker night be come we birth ourselves (...) mile from they and anchor and at nine of the clock they send a frigate to we which be come near come drive right on the half of the Hosiander this frigate be sink with the shot as Mr. salmon the actor be author unto i and eighty of her man be take up drown December 1. 161^ the portugal give over the fight madafeldebar and be discover by their good watch they make to shoot at it the first cause it to set sail the second go through their sail and so they take their leave their purpose doubtless be to have fire we if they have find we without good watch the first of December 1612. we ride they not come to we nor we to they they may without danger of the sand have come to we not we to they this day I call a counsel and conclude to go down to have a broad channel hope also that the galleon will follow we the second we go down some six or seven league but they follow we not the three at flood we ply up again and anchor fair in sight of they the four in the morning we weigh and stand away before they in the afternoon they give we over and stand in with the land again and at night we direct our course for diu. the five (@) night we anchor some four or five league to the eastward of Diu in fourteen fathom fair aboard the shore the nine we come to madafeldebar and anchor in eight fathom it be from Diu some ten or eleven league and lie near east and by north a fair coast no danger but that you see your depth if near Diu fifteen sixteen when halfway twelve fathom than ten and nine not less it be a fair sandy bay and on the westside of the bay be a river that go far into the country and this place be some five or six mile short to the westward of the isle of mortie the fifteen in the morning we depart from madafeldebar to go to Mohar only to discover the bay because some that be there in the ascension report it to be a good place to winter in at four of the clock in the afternoon we anchor in the bay of Moha which be from madafeldebar nine or ten league Moha or or mea. east north-east have find the coast and channel very good depth ten fathom no danger but what you see I send our pinnace on land where present we have twenty good sheep at three shilling a sheep the best we have this voyage the sixteenth in the morning I send our pinnace on land where we find few people but the ruin of a great town the seventeen in the morning the general of the camp send to i four man to entreat i to send unto he one of my man that he may talk with i the one and twenty iland and have much conference with the general of the camp he much desire that I will land two piece of ordnance make many and great promise of favour to our nation but I refuse he he present i with a horse and furniture and two agra girdle and I present he a vest of stammel two piece two bottle of aquavitae and a knife the two and twenty we see the four galleon come towards we and at nine at night they anchor within shot of we the three and twenty in the morning by sun we weigh and begin with they and continue fight till ten or eleven then they all four weigh and stand away before the wind and so go from we for they sail large much better than we we follow they two or three hour and then anchor this day I spend upon they a hundred thirty three great shot and some seven hundred small shot in this fight John hackwel be kill with a great shot the four galleon anchor from i some two league the four and twenty by sun rise I weigh and go to the four galleon and by eight begin our fight and continue it till twelve and this day shoot two hundred and fifty great shot and one thousand small shot by this time both side be weary and we all stand into the sea and steer away south by east the four ship follow of we at two or three of clock they lay it about and anchor now I begin take knowledge of our powder and shot and find more than half of our shot spend and of the hosiander have now spend on the four ship six hundred five and twenty great shot and three thousand small shot be from the land some four or five league six hundred and five and twenty great shot spend on the four galleon and three thousand small sho^ we meet with a sand whereon there be some two or two fathom and a half and it lie from Moso southeast or thereabouts the end of the say sand I go over it in nine fathom and then be the two high hill which be over Goga near north of we upon this sand be the ascension cast away the shoald be something fast between the land and this sand be nine and ten fathom we continue steer south with a ebb at low water we anchor in eight fathom the tide set at east north-east and west south-west by the compass at twelve at midnight I weigh wind at north northwest and steer south southeast depth twelve and fourteen fathom at four steer east southeast at six steer east still twelve fathom half a fathom more or l^sse at nine we meet with a bank seven fathom five or six cast then present ten twelve fourteen then the wind shorten on we we lay southeast and about twelve see the land of daman east southeast the high land to the southward of daman southeast by east and be over this sand we have present fourteen fifteen seventeen twenty fathom at two be high water we anchor in seventeen fathom fair in sight of land daman east southeast the high land to the southward southeast by south at eight at night we set sail half tide calm still fifteen and sixteen fathom anchor all the ebb the six and twenty at nine of the clock in the morning we set sail in the afternoon anchor off the bar of surat the seven and twenty in the morning we be three or four mile short of Swally and about twelve of the clock we anchor in the road of Swally in the afternoon Thomas kerridge and Edward Christian come aboard the six of February the come to Swally as a private letter February 6. therefore I refuse to receive it be jealous it be a counterfeit require the chief man of surat to come down and deliver it to i with those right that to it belong the eleven the sabandar his father in law Medigoffer and diverse other come to Swally I receive the great mogul his for confirm of peace and settle a factory in surat etc. Anthony starkie send over-land for England he be poison and his India^ by two friar in the way he leave these coast shape his course for sumatra and java basaim chaul-dabul and deliver it to i with profession of their king love to our nation the fourteen we land all our cloth three hundred and ten elephant tooth and all our quicksilver the galleon come within some three or four mile of we the sixteenth I land Anthony starkey to traverse home over-land for England with letter and advertisement of our good success the seventeen I receive all my good from surat at night I set sail take my leave of these coast it fall calm and I anchor note that in the land of Cambaya it flow Southwest and north-east the eighteen I set sail again come fair by the galleon they all weigh and follow i some two or three hour and then we depart without shoot a shot on either side .. the nineteen thwart of basaim we take three malabar which have nothing in they we take a boat from one of they the twenty still we be fair aboard some five league off and come along the shore in fourteen eighteen twenty fathom water at night we be fair over-against Chau see both town and castle the one and twenty in the afternoon we be fair aboard Dabull and here be aboard three juncke all of Calicut lade with coker the two and twenty the Hosiander in the morning send her boat unto two juncke at twelve of the clock we be at the rock which lie at the northward of Goa Goa ten or eleven league and lie from the main six or eight mile two or three of these rock be high than the hull of any ship at six we be thwart of Goa which be easy know by the island which lie at the mouth of the river and upon the island a castle from daman till you come to Goa the shore be very fair no danger and fair shoald not without sixteen or seventeen nor within ten fathom good anchor all the coast. and all this coast from daman to Goa lie near south and north we steer along the land the four and twenty we see a fleet of frigate some sixty or eighty sail a fleet of frigate find to the southward here norther latitude thirteen degree half a minute the high land by the water side leave we and the land begin to be very low and fair shoalding sixteen or seventeen fathom some three or four league off in the afternoon we come into a bay a prize take where all the frigate and three or four galley be and fetch out a ship lade with Rice all the portugal flee in their two boat and also there be two frigate aboard of she so that all good thing they carry away with they the five and twenty we romage our prize find nothing but rice and course Sugar of which we store ourselves and take out both high mast and what fire we can and at night sink she take out of her all the people twenty or five and twenty all moor the six and twenty we meet with a little boat of Maldina lade with coker find for Cananor into which I put all the people of the prize only eight I keep for labour Cananor one of they a pilot for this coast. at twelve we be thwart of Cananor latitude eleven degree the seven and twenty we be shoot a little past Calicut and be thwart of Pannaire Calicut at noon latitude ten degree thirty minute the eight and twenty in the morning we see cochin cochin which make itself by the tower and castle and in latitude nine degree forty minute or thereabout note that from Goa to cochin we never have above twenty fathom be sometime four or five league from land and be three four and six mile off ten or twelve fathom from latitude eleven degree shoalding thirty minute to cochin very low land by the water side but up in the country all along high land note that short of cochin four or five league mark of land you shall see a high land in the country somewhat like a table but round aloft and to the northward of this round hill high long hill or mountain all this day we run within six or eight mile of the land in nine ten twelve fathom the nine and twenty calm latitude eight degree some six league off they anchor before a place of great refresh no ground in forty or fifty fathom the thirty we anchor in fifteen fathom some six and twenty league short of cape against a little village and present six or eight canoe come aboard and bring we all provision water hen etc. the name of this place be * * our mariner usual call it bring joha February 1 the king name Travancar the one and thirty all the day the people come to we with hen and other victual the first of February the people come with provision and the king send a messenger to i to know whether I will trade with he which if I will he offer to lade my ship with pepper and cinnamon the four the people still come to we with provision at two of the clock in the afternoon we set sail from all the night I anchor the five in the morning we set sail be fair aboard cape comorin and here meet with a fresh gale of wind at east by north which split our fore-top-saile and main bonnet yet a Canoa with eight man come aboard i three or four league from land in the afternoon come another Canoa here we be trouble with calm and great heat many of our man take sick myself one of they the eight we come again into the road of the thirteen we set sail from note that this place give good refresh with plenty of water and the people harmless and not friend with the portugal from this place to the cape all the people that dwell by the water side be christians and have a Portugal Friar or priest that dwell among they all the night we anchor some four of five mile from the two rock which lie off the cape in eighteen fathom the two rock lie five or six mile from land the fourteen in the morning I set sail wind at east and ply to windward we have a little current to the southward note that the coast of malabar even from daman to cape comorin be free of danger variation at cape Comerin fourteen degr latitude seven degree thir^ie minute and longitude from the cape of good hope fifty six degree thirty min. a very dangerous sink rock and fair shoald on all the coast from cochin to the cape more neale sixteen eighteen twenty fathom fair by the land and five or six league of no ground after you come within five and twenty or thirty league of the cape the variation at daman be sixteen degree thirty minute and half way to the cape it be fifteen or thereabouts and here at the cape it be fourteen and the cape have latitude north seven degree thirty minute in the afternoon we run off open of the cape and find much wind at east southeast which give no small hope of go to the eastward till the end of the monson which will be the five of April or thereabouts as the indian report so I bear up and anchor four or five league within the cape in twenty fathom fair by the two rock right off from these two rock lie a sink rock which be very dangerous and be some two mile without the foresay two rock if you come within twenty fathom you shall be in danger of they but safe and free of danger be not to come within four and twenty or five and twenty fathom here we stay nine day the isle of ceylon the eight and twenty in the morning at six of the clock we see the isle of ceylon east southeast of some eight or nine league little wind at south latitude observe seven degree north. at four of the clock we be fair aboard the land depth thirteen fifteen sixteen fathom at eight stand off till day little wind at south be from the land five or six league no ground in sixty or seventy fathom march 1 Columbo in six degree thirty minute the first of march all the morning becalm in the afternoon a sea-turne at northwest and west at six of the clock we be fair aboard Columbo the latitude whereof be six degree thirty minute or near thereabout depht four and twenty five and twenty fathom three league off the twelf^h we stand in with the land and anchor in four and twenty fathom wind at southeast and south I send my boat on land four league to the north of gall and after some stay a woman come to talk with a indian that go out of our boat she tell he that we shall have there no provision but say she will go and tell the man which we desire afterward two man come to my indian and tell he that we shall not have anything there for that our nation have sometime take a boat of they but it be the hollander and not our nation the fourteen in the morning at six of the clock the southermost point of ceylon call Tenadare who latitude be five degree thirty minute and lie from gall east southeast some ten or twelve league bare east north-east some five league off a sand lie some two league of the shore the seventeen we be near to one of the sand that linscot write of it lie from the land two league we have five and twenty fathom when we stay upon the land right against this sand be a high rock like a great Tower the land lie here east north-east captain best his entertainment at Achen the twelve of April at noon we come to a anchor in the road of Achen in twelve fathom April 12. they anchor in the r^^d (...) k^ngs pre^ent but you may ride in ten or eight fathom your best road be to the eastward of the castle and river mouth the thirteen I land the merchant the king not be in town the fifteen the king come and send his chap to i for my land bring by a eunuch and six or eight more and also the xabandar to who we give a hundred and twenty m^m with they the same day I land and two hour after my land the king send i present in victual I have present upon my land send the king two piece for the custom be at land to present the king with some small thing and he requite it by several dish of meat the seventeen the king have send a elephant with a basin of gold for our king letter I ride to the court accompany with forty of our man all admit into the king presence and after many compliment the king return the letter unto i for to read it our king letter re^d to the king of Achen and so the substance of it be deliver unto he in his own language the content please he very well the day well spend the king tell i he will now show i some of his pleasure and cause his elephant to fight before we and after six of they have fight than he cause four buffle to fight before he which make a very excellent and fierce fight their fierceness be such that hardly sixty or eighty man can part they fasten rope to their hinder leg to draw they asunder and after they some ten or twelve ram which likewise make a very great fight and so continue till it be so dark that we can not see any long the king present i with a banquet of at least four hundred dish with such plenty of hot drink as may have suffice a drunken army between nine and ten at night he give i leave to depart send i two elephant to carry i home but I ride not on they they have no cover on they the eighteen I go to the court again the king so appoint where we begin to treat of the article former make by his grandfather and m. james Lancaster and come to the matter of have all good both bring in and carry out free of custom we end without conclude any thing the nineteen the ambassador of siam come to visit i the ambassador of siam come to visit i of this you may read in m. Floris his journal English broad clothes well sell in siam gold of less esteem than the value thereof in siam hollander call or call themselves English tell i of the three englishman that come to the king of siam and of their great entertainment and joy of their king to receive a letter from the king of England and that it be some thirty month since they also tell i how joyful their king will be if our ship come to his coast tell i what great quantity of cloth of Portugal which be english cloth will sell in their country the colour most in request stammel and red with some other as yellow and other please light colour as at surat they also tell i that their king have make a conquest over the whole country of Pegu and so be now the great king of this oriental part except the king of China and have under he twenty six petty king and in the war be able to make six thousand elephant their coin be all silver their gold be less esteem than the value thereof in their country be great store of pepper and raw silk he say that the hollander have their factory who they call english at Patane which be a excellent port the entrance twelve and fourteen fathom likewise siam be a good port and be near unto the king court then Patane those that do go to the city of the king always come to this port of siam and from this port of siam to the king court be some twenty day journey by land I move the ambassador for his letter to the king which he promise i and also for his letter to the governor of port in favour of our nation when we shall come upon those coast and last change coin with he give of our english coin and receive the king coin of siam I have after this often intercourse with these ambassador the twenty I go to the court but speak not with the king whereupon I send to the king deputy and complain of my dishonour and of some abuse by the xabandar offer unto i he promise that I shall have present redress and that he will inform the king thereof which according he perform the same day the twenty one the king send two officer unto i to signify that at all time I may repair unto his court with free access and pass all the gate without stop or attend for his crest and likewise remove the xabandar and appoint i the gentleman who the king send vice-embassadour into Holland to attend and accompany i at all time to the court and elsewhere at my pleasure the four and twenty I write unto the court and have access unto the king who give i all content and promise the ratify of all the article former agree upon by his predecessor and m. james Lancaster so after diverse compliment he take leave and send i home present after my return a elephant to attend i a sign of most honourable esteem and to carry i whither soever it please i to travel and this be a sign of the honourable esteem that they hold of the party to who they send their elephant for none may have a elephant nor ride on they but those who the king do honour the second of May the king invite i to his fountain to swim and I be with he it be some five or six mile from the city may 2. 1613. and he send i two elephant to carry i and my provision and have wash and bathe ourselves in the water the king present i with a exceed great banquet with too much rack all to be eat and drunken as we sit in the water all his noble and great captain be present our banquet continue from one of the clock till towards five at which time the king release i and half a hour after all stranger and present after follow himself the fourteen certain portugal come into Achen which come from malacca with a embassage from the governor to this King the wind short they land three league to the eastward of the road of Achen Edward Christian captain of the Hosiander this day I send the Hosiander to seek the bark which come from malacca make Edward Christian captain in she the seventeen in the morning the Portugal bark be bring unto i aboard the dragon but before she come aboard the king send two messenger to i to desire i to release both she and that which may be in she which I refuse to do answer that I will not release she until I have see both the bark and that which be in she but will they to tell the king that in honour of he whatsoever he require I will do for he afterward the bark come and by Edward christian I be inform that there be some four or five fardel in she and that nothing be meddle withal that be in she wherein be certify I come on land and find my merchant to be at the court who by and by after come in inform i of the king great displeasure for take the Portugal bark in his port protest by his god that he will make they all prisoner if the bark be not release the king have intelligence of my come on land present send for i and on the way to the court as I be go I meet a gentleman that come from the king to desire i to release the bark but I tell he I will first speak with the King in fine I come to the court and present be bring before the king where after much discourse at the king request I give he the bark and all that be in she with which he be much please captain best honour with a noble title by the King and give i a honourable title to wit which signify the honourable white man require his noble to call i by the same name and further to acknowledge his thankfulness to i he sell i his Benjamin at my own price namely at twenty tail the Bahar it be worth thirty four and thirty five profess by general term his love and much esteem of i will i to ask whatsoever I will of he I require only his letter of favour unto Priaman which he most willing promise of his mango whereof himself do eat he give i to eat and likewise to carry to my lodging and so I take leave and depart the seven and twenty Gavy come to Achen by who I receive letter from our merchant at surat letter from surat with the copy of the great mogul june 1613. and also a copy of the king send they from agra bear date the twenty five of january and the seven year of the great mogul reign confirm all that be pass between the governor of Amadavar and i the seventeen of june 1613. come there a merchant of the hollander into Achen from Masulipatan and have be eight month on his journey he tell we of the death of captain Anthony Hippon who die in Patane and of m. brown master of the globe who die in Masulipatan and that they have be evil deal with at Masulipatan the four and twenty I receive of the king his present for the king of England namely his letter a cryse or dagger a Hasega four piece of fine calicut lawn and eight camphire dish see this letter transcribe as a rarity for the reader out of m. copelands journal which be minister in that voyage and follow in the next chapter july 1613. the factory of the hollander destroy in jor. he depart from Achen the three of july the king armada arrive and have be but twenty day from the coast of jor to Achen in jor they take the factory of the hollander and make a prey of all their good and bring hither prisoner of the hollander some twenty or twenty four the seven I receive the king letter for Priaman and the chap for my departure the twelve I take my leave in Achen and come aboard the thirteen in the morning I set sail and come near the great westermost island open of the northermost gut in the same i will we find fair shoald twenty fathom clean ground sand a good birth from the land this depth with clear ground continue almost to the end of the island so that on the east side of this island there be very good anchor and on the island great store of wood but be near the great island to the eastward of this we can get no ground between these two great land be the best and safe course go on or out to the road of Achen likewise to the eastward of the eastermost island but that be out of the way note that from the twelve of April to the midst of june we have much rain seldom two day without rain with gust and much wind from the fifteen of june to the twelve of july very much wind very sore stress always at south-west and west south-west and west @. 3 trade at tecoo and Passaman their go to Bantam and thence home the three of August we be in sight of Priaman nine or ten league off it bear from we north-east by east Priaman it show with two great high hill make a fair swamp or saddle between they both we see also tecoo the high land on it it be not more than half so high as Priaman land tecoo and rise something flat then we see also the high land of Passaman which lie some seven or eight league to the northward of tecoo even midway between Passaman and Priaman Passaman which mountain be very high and rise like in Sicily they arrive at tecoo the seven in the afternoon we come to tecoo and anchor on the east side of the three land in seven fathom the souther-most i will bore west south-west the middlemost west north-west the northermost north and half east a mile from the land the nine I land my merchant and in the afternoon I land with the king of Achens letter the eleven I call a counsel for send the Hosiander for Priaman with the king letter which depart the next day and return the eighteen and be send to Bantam the five and twenty there come in a juncke of Bantam the owner chinese they confirm unto i the death of sir Henry Middleton death of sir h. Middleton the trade perish with the loss of most of the man of the trade increase and main mast which break with force she down to she and that now she be go from pulo panian to Bantam that three hundred chinese die in work on she the eight and twenty my boat and man return from Passaman have be well entreat and bring with they the scrivane of the place to deal with i with who I deal and go through the fourteen the governor call i on land be set with all the chief I come to he and after much talk agree for the price of pepper money eighteen dollar the bar lastage eight penny the bar canikin thirty the bar seilar thirty five the bar they indent for present to sixteen great man the thirty Henry long come from Passaman and give i knowledge of the sickness of master Oliver and diverse other dead whereupon I send my Shalop to fetch both he and all other of my man away and to surcease my factory there the one and twenty of October the Hosiander return the merchant from Bantam write to i that they have ready thousand bag of pepper all which if it please i to come thither I shall have or as much thereof as shall seem good unto i at thirteen dollar the Timbane out of these and many other consideration I present call a counsel wherein we conclude that the dragon shall go for Bantam and the Hosiander shall stay in the road of Teco upon the sale of surat good all which be put aboard of she I depart from the road of Teco the thirty of October in this road I have stay eleven week and buy one hundred and fifteen or one hundred and twenty ton of pepper and bury of our man five and twenty all which either die or contract their death at Passaman and not at Teco and certain Passaman be a very contagious place have we not attempt trade at Passaman they have be either all or the great part of they now live therefore I do with all our nation never to attempt the send of our man to Passaman for the air be so contagious there and the water so evil that it be impossible for our people to live there the thirty in the afternoon I set sail from Teco he depart from Teco at six at night we be thwart of the offermost of the three land all night we steer south south-west the eleven of November they arrive in the road of Bantam we arrive in the road of Bantam in four fathom one quarter less the twelve I call the merchant aboard and conclude on the price of pepper at thirteen dollar the Bahar which be six hundred pound of our weight the four of march at eight at night I set sail from Saldanha have buy here with a little copper which at ten penny the pound may be worth some three pound ten shilling four hundred ninety four sheep four beef nine calf on the day of our come to sea the people bring we more than we can buy or know what to do withal we bring to sea eighty sheep two beef and one calf the four and twenty north northwest half west till nine ten league and a half then west till six in the morning twelve league they see Santa Helena then we see Helena from we west northwest some eight or nine league off I find the latitude of it to be sixteen southerly also we observe at noon and it have longitude from the meridian of the cape of good hope twenty two degree at three of the clock we anchor in the road right against the chapel while I be at saint Helena another road at Santa Helena better than the former I send my boat to the westward to find a short way to the Limon tree and to bring down goat and hog with more ease for from the chapel to the Limon tree be a most wicked way and even a day work to go and come in fine in seek they find some three or four mile to the south-west a fair valley which lead direct up to the Limon tree it be the great and fair valley from the chapel and either the next or the next save one from the south-west point from the chapel the best water here in this valley be better water and more clear then at the chapel the road all one for ground and depth here at this valley it be much better be then at the chapel both for get of all provision and for water it be from the chapel some three or four mile and be from it the four valley or swampe and from the point to the westward of it the second so that you can miss of it it be here much better ride then at any other place on the island from this place you may go up to the Limon tree and down again in three hour here we get some thirty hog and pig and some twelve or fourteen hundred lemon in eight or ten day a man may here get two hundred hog and many goat lie on land of purpose to kill they the variation be here seven degree thirty minute the four of june 1614 we see the lizard north from we some four or five league off and now our longitude from the cape of good hope be twenty seven degree twenty minute the lizard and two degree carry by the current so tha^ the difference of longitude between the cape of good hope and the lizard be twenty nine degree twenty minute or very near thereabouts note that this day three month at night I do set sail in the road of Saldanha yet notwithstanding our short passage have be from Santa Helena but two month and nine day the one half or more of our company be lay up of the scurvy and two dead of it yet have we plenty of victual as beef bread wine Rice oil vinegar sugar and all these without allowance come sudden out of long heat into the cold seem (@) be a great cause of the scurvy note that all our man that be sick have take their sickness since we fall with flores and Coruo for since that time we have have it very cold especial in two great storm the one with the wind a^ north and north north-east the other with the wind at south-west from the cape of good hope to the land of flores and Coruo I have not one man sick the variation four or five league off the start be nine degree thirty minute little more or less they arrive in the Thames the fifteen we come into the river of Thames it be that day six month since we come from Bantam in java bless be God chap. 8 certain observation write by other employ in the same voyage master Copland minister ROBERT Boner master NICHOLAS withington merchant @. i. remembrance take out of a tractate write by master Patrick Copland minister in the former voyage in the tropic be seldom or no storm but a smooth sea with soft gale fly fish be frequent as big as a small whiting they fly twice the length of a ship turnado gust within two degree of the line cause all thing special clothes to smell they have ninety or a hundred sick the rest weak before they come to Soldania the bay of Soldania and all about the cape be so healthful and fruitful as may grow a paradise of the world it well agree with english body for all but one in twenty day recover commendation of Soldania as at the first day they set forth they have then in june snow upon the hill the weather warmish the country be mix mountain plain meadow stream the wood as if they be artificial plant for order there be free stone to build with plenty of fish and foul wild goose partridge and duck antilope dear Rivers they have thirty nine beef one hundred and fifteen sheep for a little brass cut out of two or three old kettle for the sheep worth one penny or one penny half penny the piece the beef twelve penny the people be love afraid at first by reason of the unkindness of dutch which come there to make train oil who kill and steal their cattle and at our return more kind their person and their apparel of middle size well limbed very nimble and active they dance in true measure all naked only wear a short cloak of sheep or seal skin to their middle the hairy side inward a cap of the same and a kind of rat skin about their privity some have a sole on their foot tie about their neck be adorn with greasy Tripes which sometime they will pull off and eat raw when we throw away their beast entrails they will eat they half raw the blood loathsome slaver bracelet about their arm they have of copper or ivory with many ostrich feather and shell the woman habit be as the man they be shamefaced at first but at our return homeward they will lift up their rat-skinne and show their privity their breast hang to the middle their hair curl copper with they (@) gold iron silver their house little tent in the field of skin movable at pleasure their language with double the tongue in their throat there be a high hill call the table over-covering all the adjoin territory one hundred mile the table porcupin quill some go and discover many bay and Rivers the negro behave themselves peaceable at Sinon yet seem of little or no religion they cut their skin like Baal priest one seem by make price to be commander the guzerates take sea-coal to carry for a wonder to the mogul the Portugal fleet be two hundred forty sail of frigate merchant find for Cambaya which furnish the carrack four galleon with twenty five or twenty six frigate the admiral be when the sabandar persuade he to keep between we and shore he answer proud Portugal pride that he scorn to spend a week provision on his man in hinder we be able to force we to yield in a hour they have all red colour display after three fight they man a frigate the first fight with six or seven score best man to fire we which be all sink medhaphrabad be now ruin by the mogul war which sometime have be a fair city and wall here be a castle keep by the ratspuche medhaprabad in which at that time a strong rebel to the mogoll be besiege by the nabob with fifty or sixty thousand people in his campe. the nabob have a stately and spacious tent cover above with cloth of gold beneath spread with Turkey carpet the general will not stir till he have take the castle he send a horse and two vest wrought with silk and gold to our general and four vest for four other they have store of good grape yet none but rasin wine the three and twenty and four and twenty of December in view of the whole army we have a second fight and force they first to cut their cable and then flee from we the second place of fight be better of sail than we I ride to surat in a coach draw with ox which be most ordinary m. copelands journey hence over-land though they have store of goodly horse here in the way be the goodly spring and harvest together that ever I see the field join one green as a meadow the other yellow as gold ready to be cut their grain wheat and Rice they have excellent bread all along be goodly village full of tree yield taddy like new sweet wine much strengthen and fat surat have stone and brick house fair square flat-roofed goodly garden with pomegranate pomecitron taddy or palme-wine lemon melon fig continue all the year with curious spring of fresh water the people be grave judicious neat tall goodly clothe in long white calico or silk robe the sabandar assure we that we have kill of the portugal above three hundred and fifty we hear after that there be spoil and kill above five hundred the general send letter by land and the messenger with his indian be poison by two friar homeward but a second letter be deliver to a mariner which come to their hand the twelve of April they anchor in the road of Achen where the king welcome our man the Arancaia come ride in a tent on a elephant back 1613. with two or three of the king boy for he be attend with boy abroad woman within hold a basin of gold to receive the king letter our general follow with forty or fifty man after the letter and present deliver the king tell we we shall see some of his pastime and call for his cock which after they have fight about once or twice they take they up bathe they pick their feather and sow up their wound after a hour thus spend in cockfighting his ram fight very fierce then his tame elephant more cruel then his buffle most stomackful final our antilope wherewith our general have present he who fight best please he he all this while drink tobacco in a silver pipe give by his woman which be in close room behind he after this supper be serve in by young boy of fourteen or fifteen year in swasse a mettle half copper half Gold this supper continue from seven till almost twelve in which we have four hundred dish with hot drink the next day the king send the general a elephant to ride on and appoint one of his chief Arancaias to attend he always they have continual free access grant without the king Creese which be use as a sceptre and promise to ratify the article agree upon by his predecessor and sir james Lancaster the second of May all sranger be invite to a banquet six mile off for which purpose two elephant be send for our general here be all the dish bring by water the boy hold the dish with one hand and swim with the other so do they carry the strong drink also whereof when they have taste which they must of all they throw the rest into the river it continue from one till five in it be five hundred dish well dress our general weary with sit by the king thus long in the water be dismiss a hour before the rest the captain of the dutch house take there his bane either with hot drink or cold sit so long in the water soon after die the second of june they be entertain with a fight of four elephant with a wild tiger tie at a stake which yet fasten on their trunk and leg make they to roar and bleed extreme this day we be tell that one eye of a noble man be pluck out for look on one of the king woman wash in a river another gentleman wear a Shash have his head round cut so far as that be too large some he be say to boil in scald oil some be saw a piece other their leg cut off or spit alive or empale on stake the twenty five be before the king a fight of wild elephant elephant which will quick kill each other but that some tame be make fast to they which draw they back sometime eighty or a hundred man help they se^ one wild between two tame to tame they he send the king a letter for paint and write most stately a Creese etc. for a present the letter be thus english sirie sultan king of king renown for his war and sole king of sumatra and a king more famous than his predecessor fear in his kingdom and honour of all border nation in who there be the true image of a king in who reign the true method of government form as it be of the most pure mettle and adorn with the most fine colour who seat be high and most complete like to a crystal river pure and clear as the crystal glass from who flow the pure stream of bounty and justice who presence be as the fine gold king of Priaman and of the mountain of gold viz. and lord of nine sort of stone king of two sombrieroe of beat gold have for his seat mat of gold his furniture for his horse and armour for himself be likewise of pure Gold his elephant with tooth of gold and all provision thereunto belong his lance half gold half silver his small shot of the same a saddle also for a other elephant of the same mettle a tent of silver and all his scale half gold half silver his vessel for bathe of pure gold his sepulchre of gold whereas his predecessor have all these half gold half silver his service complete of gold and silver a king under who there be many king have take the king of arrow all the country of Priaman tecoo barouse be subdue by he be now under his command seventie elephant and much provision carry by sea to make his war at arrow where God give i more victory than any of my predecessor this great king send this letter of salutation to JAMES king of great Britain viz. England Scotland France and Ireland to signify the great content he have receive by his highness letter deliver by the hand of Arancaia pulo Thomas best his majesty ambassador at the receipt whereof his eye be surprise with a celestial brightness and his spirit ravish with a divine joy the open thereof render a savour more fragrant than the most odoriferous flower or sweet perfume in the World for which cause I the great king of sumatra do profess myself to be of one heart of one mind and of one flesh with the most potent prince JAMES k. of England and do earnest desire that the league begin may be continue to all posterity and herein I take my great felicity there be nothing in the world more pleasant or joyful to i and for a testimony of my desire that the league and amity begin may be continue betwixt we I have return this letter unto your majesty make also my prayer unto the great GOD for the continuance of the same and it shall be my great honour to receive memorial from so great a potentate and so remote a nation and for a pledge of my love and honour and continuance of our league I send your majesty a Creese wrought with gold the hilt thereof be beat gold with a ring of stone a Assagaya of swasse half copper half gold eight purs^an dish small and great of camsire one piece of sour stuff three piece of calico lawn which your majesty accept as from a brother I shall rest satisfy and much honour and so with my prayer to the great GOD creator of heaven and earth for your majesty long life with victory over your enemy and prosperity in your land give at our palace of Achen the 1022. year of Mahomet by the account of the moor this king of Achen be a proper gallant man of war of thirty two year of middle size fall of spirit description of the king and Court strong by sea and land his country populous his elephant many whereof we see one hundred sixty or one hundred eighty at a time his galley and frigate carry in they very good brass ordnance Demicanon culverin Sakar minion etc. his build stately and spacious though not strong his court at Achen pleasant have a goodly branch of the main river about and through his palace which branch he cut and bring six or eight mile off in twenty day while we continue at Achen sumatra be very mountainous and Woodie the people courteous weep at our departure leave little without his chop stranger may neither come at he nor depart from he he desire the general to commend he to the king of England and to entreat he to send he two white woman for say he if I beget one of they with child and it prove a son I will make he king of Priaman Passaman and of the coast from whence you fetch your pepper so that you shall not need to come any more to i but to your own english king for these commodity july the twelve we take leave of Achen the nine of August they go on shore at tecoo here they stay eleven week buy one hundred twenty tun of pepper the air and water at Passaman naught bury twenty five man which get their death at Passaman for tecoo be healthful pepper grow most at Passaman and the country about I have think good also here to add a word or two take out of the journal of Nathaniel S^lmon master of the Solomon the sabandar counsel the admiral Nunha Cunha to cause his frigate to ride betwixt the shore and we so to keep we from water which he refuse yea m. Canning which have be take by they be deliver at our house in scorn they profess this their only fear and care lest we shall run away the three that be drive a ground have there perish but for their frigate jan. 3 out of the fire-frigat be take up eighty four man drown the dragon in these fight have spend six hundred thirty nine great shot and we three hundred eighty seven @. 2 note take out of m. Robert boner journal who be then master in the dragon the first of February have receive in all provision for so long a voyage we set sail from Gravesend and the same day at ten of the clock we anchor in the hope depart from Gravesend the general wind blow betwixt east southeast and southeast ternadoe April the thirteen we have the general wind note that you shall seldom meet with the general wind till you come in two or three degree to the southward of the line and then when you come to meet with the ternadoe as you shall be sure to meet they in two or three and sometime in four degree to the northward of the line you must be very diligent to ply to the southward for therein lie the main of your good or bad passage and likewise for the health of your man or they be very unhealthful and for pass the line order it so by your course from maio that you may pass the line betwixt seven and ten degree of longitude from the lizard but covet not to come within six degree for fear of the calm upon the coast of Guinea this endanger and much hinder the dragon and Hector in the three voyage as you may read ^n the relation thereof and not without ten degree of longitude from the lizard if it be possible for fear of meeting with the west northwest stream that set alongst the coast of brasil and so into the west indies and so pass the line in seven eight or nine degree to the westward of the meridian of the lizard you shall not fear the flat of brasil for the general wind will blow at the east southeast and at southeast so that you shall make a south south-west way common and so keep the ship good full that she may go through for there be loss of time in hawk of the ship cross by the wind therefore give she a fathom of the sheet note he that come out of the sea find in for the of bay of Soldania let he keep himself between thirty three degree fifty minute and thirty four degree twenty minute of latitude so shall you be sure not to come much wide of the Bay if see the land you find it high than you be to the south-west-ward of the bay if low sand hill then know that you be to the northward of the bay of Soldania Soldania but fall with the high land to the southward of the bay which be betwixt the cape and the bay the land lie north northwest and south southeast from the cape seven league and then it trent away north-east and south-west towards the point of the sugarloaf some four league and from this point of the sugarloaf lie penguin island but keep fair by the point for two mile from penguin island lie a shoal it be from the point to the island some seven or eight mile north and south and so borrow on the say point at eight or nine fathom your course southeast and east southeast until you bring the table south south west and the sugarloaf hill south-west and by west and so you may anchor in six and a half or six fathom as you will and then will the point of the land by the sugarloaf bear from you west northwest and penguin island north northwest some three league off and the point some two mile off the latitude of the bay of Soldania I mean of the point go in be thirty four degree five minute the variation of the needle be forty minute easterly when you come in with the land hereabout although it be thick fear not for the land be bold within a cable length I be of opinion that the current near cape Das Aguilhas set southerly not past fifty or sixty league of the land current near cape Das Aguilhas and therefore be find to the eastward off the land sixty league after you be to the eastward of cape Das Aguilhas so shall you find no current the land lie from the cape ninety or one hundred league east northerly and not as in the card east north-east Ino be a low ragged island about four mile in length lie south southeast and north northwest this island have latitude seventeen degree thirty minute note and longitude from the cape of good hope nineteen degree forty minute etc. we have no ground at one hundred fathom we can perceive no danger from it only at the south southeast end of it lie a small breach about a mile off therefore fear not to haule in sight of it be find this way for if you shall haule over for the main you shall be mighty trouble with a strong current set to the southward and there be likewise many dangerous bank whereon many portugal have lose their ship wherefore before you haule not much to the westward of this isle Ino for you may very bold haule in sight of it without danger and so shall you not meet with the current the eight and twenty day of November we receive a letter from m. Canning four galleon and 30. frigate and our purser concern four galleon of war with thirty sail of frigate which be come to fight with we and this day we see they some two league to the southward of the bar of surat this day the sabandar of surat come aboard to view we as we judge be a friend to the portugal Sabander a spy but the more he look the worse he like we have all thing ready etc. the nine and twenty day at two in the afternoon we set sail and stand with the four galleon and frigate which be come within some two league of we this day we begin our fight the first which we meet withal be the vice-admiral we give she such a welcome as that she be glad to haste unto the rest with all speed night be near and our long boat sink at our stern with a unluckey shoot we anchor three of the ship aground the thirty day early in the mourn we set sail and stand with they and after some hour sight put three of the galleon ashore on the offermost sand and then we stand into deep water and anchor their frigate be straight aboard the ship aground and shoar they up with their yard or else I think they have never come off assoon as the flood come we weigh but they be afloat ere we can get to they we fight with they till it be dark and have one man kill and another hurt the first day of December 1612. we ride within a league one of the other always we have think they will have come to we we have go to they three several time but they be not so hasty I think they have more mind to go for Goa again the nineteen day there come a second messenger from a great lord of the great mogul from a place call the castelet which place this great man lie in camp against send our general word that if he will but come thwart that place with his ship to grace he he will be a swear friend unto the english for ever the general hear that he be a great man in favour with the king resolve to go spend a day or two with he to see what his desire be the twenty day we anchor thwart of the camp be close by the seaside for the castle besiege butt upon the sea they in the castle be a company of rebel and rover on the Sea the one and twenty day upon the receipt of good caution for his person our general land and at three return to ship the two and twenty day we see the four galleon and frigate again in sight have be at Diu for more fresh soldier to have a bout more with we at night they anchor within a mile of we the three and twenty day by day light we be under-sail and stand with the admiral and so fight till two of the clock at which time they cut their cable and begin to run the admiral have receive a shot under water but the help of the frigate bring she upon the carine present and stop it and so for this time flee all the camp stand by the seaside look on we within a league or two mile of we for a great commander do there just by we besiege a castle hold by rebel and pirate and be willing spectator of this sea-fight Portugal fain to fly the four and twenty day we stand with they again and fight with they till two or three of the clock in the afternoon they flee and be light ship and clean go from we one man kill and no more hurt praise be God for all his mercy note that we have spend six hundred eighty great shot the number of shot spend in our five fight and three thousand small shot out of the dragon and some sixty barrel of powder their admiral have thirty eight piece and the rest thirty by ship very good ordnance this night we steer for surat southeast to haule without the sand south from some six league off lie the first spit on which sand the ascension be lose the fo^rth day of February 1612. we set sail and stand to the southward wind at north northwest the five day be some eight league short of cape comorin we meet with the wind at east very much wind so that we plain see there be no go to the east-ward the easterly monson not be do here we anchor at a point of the land from which point the land trent away east southeast with the cape of comorin and distant eight league but beware how you come near this point sink rock for thwart of it four mile off lie two sink rock close by the edge of the water and lie in the stream of twenty or twenty two fathom wherefore keep off in twenty eight or thirty fathom and fear they not but be sure that you keep within thirty five or forty fathom for the current set off south with the maldine and be calm some Portugal ship have be drive to the maldine and be in great danger you shall know this point from the which these two sink rock lie by this thwart of the point lie two big rock a good height above the water a league right off from the eastermost of the dry rock lie the two sink rock where we read the two dry rock do bear from we southeast and by east four mile of the northermost here the people will come aboard of your ship every day with provision as hen and hog with linnesse in their little canoe the five and twenty day at four a clock the cape of comorin do bear north northwest some four league off note for the cape of comorin for longitude latitude and variation note that the cape it sel^e be very low land with two craggy rock lie a little from it but up in the country high ragged land the cape of comorin have latitude seven degree fifty minute and longitude from the meridian of the cape of good hope fifty seven degree twenty minute east the variation be fourteen degree thirty minute westerly we have very fair shoald off from it twenty four fathom four league of sand from the cape the land trent away east north-east I do think that the gulf of Cambaya be the worst place in all the indies for w^rmes and therefore the ship which go for surat many worm at surat must have good provision the bar of surat have latitude twenty one degree ten minute and longitude from the cape of good hope fifty three degree thirty minute easterly variation sixteen degree fifty minute westerly latitude of Swally be twenty one degree twenty minute variation seventeen degree no minute the road of Achen have latitude five degree forty minute south and longitude from the cape of good hope of seventy three deg thirty four min. east the latitude longitude and variation of Achen and from the cape of comorin about sixteen degree twenty minute east the variation be six degree thirty minute westerly as you ride in the road one high great island will bear north of you distant some six league and the two other big land will bear from the west south-west to the northwest and by west anchor hold good in the westerly monson you shall have many time very much wind with g^sts of rain but you shall ride very well there go a small current to the eastward and westward in manner of a tide but not so certain and height and fall some five or six foot water the king love our general exceed well in so much that he make no sport but he command some one of his noble to go for the Arrankaia Putee for so have he name he so that all the city through be he call by that name and all our man by the common people very kind entertain more than ever any stranger heretofore have be in steer north northwest from the little island which lie south-west and by west seven league from Priaman island we see a shall bear from the say little island southeast and by south five mile off we send our boat to it who find it but three fathom rock from this shall the homocke of tecu bear north and by west wherefore be find for tecu keep off so that the homocke may bear north or north and by east and fear not note for the road of Tecu the homocke be two round (@) stand upon the low-land close by the seaside at two a clock we see the three little round land of tecu which land you must ride under they bear of we north and by east some four league off we steer north keep the land open on our starboard bow note that by good look out you shall perceive any danger by this it will show itself in white spot for otherwise the sea be of his perfect colour as in the main ocean at night we anchor within two league of the two outermost land of tecu in thirty fathom the land bear north and by east and the homocks north easterly note the homocke do stand some three league to the northward of the land of tecu variation of tecu be 4. degr. 40. minute northeasterly there be in all three of they but the northermost of the three homocke do not show itself so perfect as the other do the seven of August in the morning weigh and ply in the wind at the north north-east of the land we see a shoal bear from the two offermost land of Tecu south-west and by south four or five mile off right in the fair way we send our boat to it and find it but two fathom and a half be a rock of two cable length long this be the unluckey rock whereon the princely trade receive her destruction as we understand by those people a ledge of rock the rock whereon the trades-increase be bruise about eleven of the clock we anchor on the easter-side of the uttermost island in nine fathom soft Ozie praise be God ride under this outward island of the three we see a breach bear south half easterly and another south and by east some three or four league off which breach as you come for this place you must leave betwixt you and the shore wherefore keep this outer island north and by east or north north-east and fear nothing but beware when you come within two league of this island for south-west and by south two league or five mile off lie the rock whereon the unhappy trade ground wherefore keep this island north and by east and upon life fear not your depth as you come near the island will be from thirty to ten nine and eight fathom soft Ozie you shall have nine fathom within your ship length of either side of the island the nine day some people come aboard we find they very base and subtle the eleven day the Hoziander depart for Priaman to show they likewise that we have bring the king letter of Achen without the which you can trade note that as we ride here upon the poop we see the four land of Priaman bear southeast and by south some seven league off this day at nine of the clock we sail into the inner road which be betwixt the main and the innermost island half a mile from the main and a cable length from the island your depth four fathom soft Ozie our depth in be twenty two foot be half tie it highe and fall some five or six foot water the tide as I perceive run twelve hour north northwest and twelve hour contrary to the northward of all the land in come in you shall have four fathom and a half but keep near the inner island for from the main on that side lie a shall the land be all of one bigness be half a mile a piece in circuit they will bear from the south-west and by south to the northwest your best water be on the Ilan^ dig a well and present water come thus much out of master Boner the rest you have before in captain best @. 3 extract of a tractate write by NICHOLAS WHITHINGTON which be leave in the mogul country by captain BEST a factor his adventure and travel therein the eleven of April 1612. we cross the equinoctial foul weather eight day together wind and rain Soldania sheep be hairy the b^e^es large and most lean the people Negro woolly pate flat nose very straight o^ body the man have but * * captain Saris tell i that some have two testicle but those the base and as the one stone gallant affirm to he be slave the other mark with this note of gentry one stone a piece the other be cut out when they be young apparel with a skin about their shoulder which reach down to the waste the skin of a rat^e before their member another on their bum else naked some cap of leather close to their pate and shoe-sole to their foot much broad and long than their foot their arm very small lance with head artificial make bow and arrow of little or no force they be very expert in throw their dart wherewith they kill many fish in the sea they wear about their neck gut of sheep and ox smell which be hungry they eat and will scramble for our garbage like dog and eat it raw and foul the six and twenty of july they have sight of saint Laurence the thirteen of August cross the equinoctial temperate weather on the thirty they see snake in the sea in eighteen degree and a half one and thirty min. white water at nineteen fathom the first of September they see land the second anchor against daman town inhabit and conquer by portugal the flux infest they all that remain on land at surat master aldworth be sick forty day stranger here present any inhabitant of fashion who he visit and they return present notwithstanding sir Henry Middleton take their ship in the Red-sea yet they promise we good deal consider else they must burn their ship say mill jeff one of the chief merchant of surat and give over their trade by Sea impossible it be to have any trade at surat by reason of Portugal frigate in the river mouth therefore the general repair with his ship to Swally whence he may by land go and come without danger the three of October Sheke shuffe governor of Amadavar chief city of guzerat come to surat pride go before the fall and so to Swally and agree upon article master Canning have be take by the portugal but the viceroy command to set he ashore at surat say let he go help his countryman to fight and then we will take their ship and the rest of they altogether but the p^rser make and escape and so come to we on land master Canning be set on shore at surat according to promise and so go aboard and the same day be the twenty nine of October fleet of portugal the first fight the four Portugal galleon with a whole fleet of frigate come in sight the general after word of encouragement meet they and never shoot one shot till he come between their admiral and vice-admiral give each a broad side and a volley of small shot which make they come no more near for that day the other two ship be not as yet come up and the Hosiander can not get clear of her anchor the second and shoot not one shoot that day in the evening all come to a anchor in sight of other and the next morning renew their fight the Hosiander brave redeem the former day do nothing the dragon drive three of they on ground and the Hosiander dance the hay about they so that they dare not show a man upon the hatch in the afternoon they get afloat with the flood the three and fight till night then anchor and lay still the next day the next day after the dragon draw much water and the bay shallow remove to the other side of the bay ride at mendafrobay where all that time Sarder cham a great nobleman of the mogoll with two thousand horse be besiege a castle of the razbooche which be before the mogoll conquest the noble of that country now live by robbery he present our general with a horse and furniture which he again give to the governor of Goga a port town to the west of surat the last fight after ten day stay here the portugal have refresh come thither to our ship sarde cham counsel to flee but the general chase the portugal in four hour drive they out of sigh^ before thousand of the country people sarde cham relate this to the king after the castle raze to his admiration w^ich thought none like the portugal at sea the seven and twenty of December they return to Swally have lose three sailor and one man arm shoot off Portugal confess of they a hundred and sixty some report three hundred and odd Nicholas Whithington factor master Canning send to agra the thirteen of january I be entertain factor and find to the company in four hundred pound the ship depart the eighteen of january the galleon neu^r offer one shot Anthony starkey be send for England master Canning be seventy day on the way between surat and agra with many trouble set on by the enemy who shoot he into the b^lly with a arrow and another english man through the arm and kill and hurt many of his pion he be cure before his arrival at agra two of his english^ell ^ell ^ut with he and return leave two musician only to attend he the nine of April he arrive the ten present the king with our king letter and a present of little value he ask if our king send that present who answer it be send by the merchant the king grace he with a cup of wine from his own hand and refer he to moracke chan. one of the musician die and be bury in the portugal churchyard who they take up and bury in the highway but upon complaint be compel by the king to bury he there again threaten to turn they all out of his country and their bury body out of their churchyard after this master Canning write of the fear he be in to be poison by the jesuit m^ster Canning poison by the jesuit and therefore desire that I may come up to assist he which among we at surat be conclude the nine and twenty of May 1613. he die and so master Keridge go the two and twenty of june I shall have be send by the way of Mocha to England but the master of the ship which go say it be impossible except I be circumcise to come near Mecca the thirteen of October 1613. the ship return and our messenger take notwithstanding their late pass at the bar of surat by the portugal armada of frigate worth a hundred thousand pound with seven hundred person go to Goa this be like to be their overthrow here for no Portugal may pass without a surety nor in nor out merchant of surat be by this mean impoverish and our good leave in our hand with which we go to Amadabar John alkin which have run from sir Henry Middleton to the portugal come now to we Portugal peril tell we of diverse their town besiege by the and other neighbour moores in so much that they be fain to send away many hundreth of banians and many other that dwell among they for want of victual three bark of which come to surat and diverse other to Cambaya their weakness in fight with we cause all this Robert Claxon of the dragon flee to Portugal for fear of punishment and come to we with a Almaigne which have be slave in Turkey Robert johnson come to the portugal and thence intend to we pass through the country be persuade by another english man which be turn Moor fugitive and renegado and live there and be circumcise and receive seven shilling six penny a day of the king and his diet at the king table but eight day after his circumcision he die Robert true the musician in agra not agree with master kerridge go to the king of Decan and carry with he a german for interpreter offer both to turn moor true have in his circumcision a new name give with great allowance from the king with who he continue but the German former cut in Persia now think to deceive the Decan but be not entertain he return to agra and serve a french man and go to mass again Robert Claxon also turn Moor at the Decan court have good allowance but not content come to surat and provoke pity with seem penitence but get some forty and odd pound under pretence of buy commons give they the slip and return whence he come so there be four english with the Decan and diverse Portugal moores the seven and twenty of October 1613. we receive letter from Mesulopatan of master Gurney write by captain Marlo of the james of their arri^all and trade a description of his journey by land through the mogoll country hire shoot for guard against thief from surat I go to Periano three course to cosumbay a little village 10 10 a pretty city on a high hill compass with a wall a great river run by as broad as Thames diverse ship of two hundred ton and odd there ride best calico in the kingdom store of Cotton to Saringa 10 to carron 10 to Boldia a less city than but fair build a strong wall and three thousand horse under Mussuff Chan to Wassach a river 10 where Mussuff be ready to fight with the razbooche or Radgepoots that lie on the other side the river the chief of these of the race of the old king of surat to Niriand 14 c. a great town where they make indigo to Amadabar 10 chief city of guzerat near as great as London wall with a strong wall situate in the plain by the river side store of merchant moor christian heathen commodity be indicoe cloth of gold silver tissue velvet not comparable to we taffeta Gumbuck colour baffatae drug etc. Abdalachon governor a man of five thousand horse pay I go from thence to Cambaya seven course to Barengeo a course be a mile and halfa English where every Tuesday the cafily of Cambaya meet and so keep company for fear of thief hence sixteen course to Soquatera a fine town well man with soldier depart at midnight and about eight of the clock next morning come 10 to Cambaya in November we ride to serkeffe three course from Amadabar where be the sepulcher of the king of guzerat a very delicate church and fair tomb which be keep very comely much resort to visit they from all part of the kingdom a course off be a pleasant house with a garden a mile about by the river side which Chon chin naw the great of the mogoll nobility build in memorial of the great victory which he get of the last king of guzerat who he take prisoner and subject his kingdom the battle be fight in this place no man dwell in this house but a few poor man keep the orchard we lodge one night in it and send for six fisherman who in half a hour take we more fish than all our company can eat the eight and twenty of November we have news at Amadabar of three english ship arrive at Lowribander the port town of negar Tutta chief city of sinda Tutta m^ster Aleworth be agent a french jesuit at Amadabar make poor by the portugal imbarkement beg of our agent who give he ten Rupias I be send thither and the the thirteenh of December come to Cassumparo where I overtake a Caphilo travel to radenpare six day journey on my way fourteen to callitalowny a fair castle thirteen 7 to Callwalla a pretty village which Ecbar give to a company of woman and their posterity for ever to bring up their child in dance etc. they do this in our Caravan a town of common woman every man give they somewhat and then they open ask if any want a bedfellow the sixteenth 8 to Carrya where be a well man fortress and the eighteen ti^l which for fear of thief we stay for another caravan to Deccanaura our camel steal and a man slay the nineteen 10c. to Bollodo a fort keep by newlock Abram cabrate for the mogoll who that day come with a hundred sixty nine head of the coolie a rob people the twenty 13 to Sariandgo a fort. the one and twenty 10 to radempoore a big town with a fort. here we stay to provide we of water and necessary for our desert journey and the three and twenty travel 7 and lay in the field meet a caravan rob of all from Tutta the four and twenty 12 c. dispee one of my pion to Lowribander with a letter which promise to do it in ten day but I think be slay the five and twenty 14 c. lodge by a well of water so salt salt water that our cattle can not drink it the six and twenty 10c. to such another well there give our camel water not have drink in three day the seven and twenty 14 lodge in field the eight and twenty 10 to a village call negar Parkar in this desert we see great store of wild ass red deer fox and other wild beast the nine and twenty we stay and meet with a other rob within two day journey of Tutta the thirty we depart from Parkar which pay a yearly tribute to the mogul Anarchy worst tyranny all hence till Inno half a day journey from Tutta acknowledge no king but rob and spare at pleasure when any army of the mogul come against they they fire their house and flee into the mountain their house be make of straw and mortar like bee-hive soon rebuild they take for custom what they please and guard passenger be loath any but themselves shall have the rob of they we travel 6 and lay by a Tanke or pond of fresh water the thirty one 8 and lay in the field by a brackish well the first of january we go 10 to Burdiano many be sick of this water we provide we yet of it for four day and travel more the second 18 all night the three in the afternoon till midnight 10 c. the four 12 here I fall sick and vomit by reason of the water the five 7 and come to three well two salt one sweetish the six to Nuraquimire a pretty town 10 here our raddingpoore company leave we we remain two merchant myself five of their servant four of i with ten camel five camel-man this town be within three day of Tutta and seem to we after our desert a paradise we agree with one of the ragy or governors kindred for twenty lary twenty shilling to conduct we who depart with we the eight and we travel 10 to gundaiaw where we have be rob but for our guard the nine we be twice set on and force to give each time five lary we come to Sarruna Sarruna within 14 c. of Tutta of these thing see m. peytons voyage a great town of the razbootche with a castle whence it be 14 to Tutta we visit the governor Ragee Bouma elder son to sultan Bulbul who late captive by the mogul have his eye pull out and two month before this have escape now live in the mountain and cause all his kindred to revenge this Ragee be kind to i as a stranger ask many question of our country make i sup with he give i wine till he be stare a Banian here tell i abuse of sir rob. Shirley how sir Robert Shirley have be much abuse by the portugal and governor at Lowribander his house fire man hurt in the night and arrive at Tutta thirteen day journey thence use he unkind he advise to get this Ragee to guide we tell of the great trade of Tutta the chief that he have see and that a ship of three hundred tun may come to Lowribander we hire the Ragee for forty lary with fifty horseman to the gate of Tutta and on the eleven depart from Sarruna 5 and lay by a river side at two in the morning we depart and he lead we a contrary way and come about break of day into a thicket where he make we unload treacherous robbery than cause we to be find and take our weapon from we sudden hang the merchant and their five man with their camel rope fasten about their neck with a truncheon strip and throw they into a hole they make in the earth nich. Whithington rob and send a by-way he take from i my horse and eighty Rupias send i and my man 20 up the mountain to his brother january the fourteen where I continue two and twenty day shut up February the seven order come to send i to Parkar to the governor of their kindred rob again to send i to radingpoore but I be rob by they in the way of all my clothes and all I have February the twenty eight we beg for our victual find the inhabitant charitable for my horse which not be worth the take they leave i I can get but four mamoody or four shilling but chance on a bannian of Amadabar who I have know I be relieve with my man we be five day between Parkar and Raddingpoore 1614 whither I come march nineteen I come to Amadabar April the second be absent one hundred and eleven day thence I go to Brodia Barengeo thence 16 to large river 10. to Cambaya then the large river 7. course broad yearly swallow many hundred to Saurau on the other side the river be a town and castle of the razbootche the sixteenth of April I travel 25 to the seventeen pass that river and 10c. to Cassimba the eighteen 13 to surat concern sinda no city be by general report of great trade in the indies than Tutta the chief port Lowribander three day journey from it a fair road without the river mouth clear of worm which about surat especial and in other place of the indies after three or four month ride if it be not for sheathe will hinder return the port and road of sinda be free in two month from hence by water they go to lahor and return in one down there be these commodity Baffitas stuff lawn indigo course not so good as Biana good may be convey from agra on camel to bucker twenty day which be on sinda river thence in fifteen or sixteen day aboard the ship one may go as soon from agra to Sinde as surat but there be more thieve which the mogoll seek to prevent inhabitant of sinda be most razbootche banians and boloche in city and great town razbootch the governor be mogul the country people be rude naked from the waist upward with turban contrary to the mogoll fashion their arm sword buckler and lance their buckler great in fashion of a beehive in which they will give their camel drink and horse provender their horse good swift strong which they ride unshod most desperate they back they at twelve month old the mogoll say the razbootch know as well to die as any in the world they eat no beef nor buffoll but pray to they the banians kill nothing Banian there be thirty and odd several cast of these that differ something in religion and may not eat with each other but all burn their dead when the husband die the wife shave her head and wear her jewel no more so continue till death funeral burn of the rasbut wife when the rasbut die his wife accompany his body go to be burn in her best array accompany with her friend and kindred and music and the fire be make at the place appoint compass the same twice or thrice bewail first her husband death and then rejoice that she shall now live with he again after which embrace her friend she last sit down on the top of the pile and dry stick take her husband head in her lap and b^ds they put fire which do her friend throw oil and other sweet perfume on she she endure the fire with admirable patience loose and not find I have see many the first in surat the woman but ten year old and a virgin he a soldier slay in war from whence his clothes and turban be bring home she will needs burn with his clothes the governor forbid she which she take grievous bid they put to fire present her husband be a great way before which they dare not till her kindred entreat with a present give the governors licence to her exceed joy the husband kindred never force this but the woman hold it a disgrace else to their family they may choose but few do but then must shave their hair and break their jewel and thenceforth be not suffer to eat drink sleep or company with any body and so continue till death if after purpose to burn they leap out of the fire her father and mother will bind she and throw she in and burn she perforce but this weakness be seldom the boloche be of Mahomet religion they deal much in camel boloche most of they robber by land and on the river murder such as they rob when I be in sinda they take a boat with seven italian one Portugal Friar the rest slay in fight this be rip by they for Gold there be very honest of they in guzerate and about agra banian marriage be make at the age of three year and under sometime they make mutual promise if two pregnant woman prove to have one a male the other a female banian marriage but always one of their own cast and religion and of the same trade as a barber etc. when they be three or four year old they make a great feast set the two thus espouse on horseback a man behind each to hold they in their best clothes accompany with the braman or priest and many other according to their state and so lead they up and down the city where they dwell and then to the pagoda or church and after ceremony there do come home continue certain day feast as they be able be ten year old they lie together of which they give this reason not to leave they wifeless if their parent die and leave they parentlesse their braman keep their pagoda and have alm or tithe esteem marvelous holy marry and follow occupation good workman apt to learn any pattern they eat but once a day and wash before and after meat all their body as also after urine or stool John mild^all * * see before his letter a Englishman have be employ with three English young man which he poison in Persia to make himself master of the good but he be likewise poison yet by preservative live many month after but swell exceed and so come to agra with the value of twenty thousand dollar tither therefore I go may the four 1614 from surat come to Bramport where sultan perue lie situate in a plain the river of surat run by in a great breadth have a large castle hence to agra twenty six day between surat and agra be seven hundred course 1010. english mile which I travel in seven and thirty day in win^er wherein it almost continual rain from surat to Bramport be a pleasant and champion country full of river brook and spring between Bramport and agra very mountainous not passable for a coach hardly for camel by Mando be the near way there be high hill and strong castle in the way many town and city every day journey well inhabit the country peaceable and clear of thief Mildnall have give all to a Frenchman to marry his bastard-daughter in Persia and bring up a other jesuite the jesuite have a very fair church build by the king and a house the king allow the chief seven Rupias a day and the rest three with licence to convert as many as they can which they do but alas it be for money sake for when by the fact of the portugal they be debar of their pay their new convert bring they their bead again say they have be long without their pay and therefore will be christian no long the Portugal not deliver the good take in surat the king cause the church-doore to be lock up as they have continue ever since so the Padres make a church of one of their chamber where they say mass twice a day and preach every sunday in persian first to the armenians and moor after in portuguese for themselves the italian and greek these tell i the particular of mildnal good who give all to a french Protestant himself a Papist which he deny be put in prison after four month all be deliver the second of march 1614 ten galleon two galley sixty frigate fight between agminere and agra every ten course which be a ordinary day journey a Seralia or place of lodging for man and horse and hostess to dress your victual if you please pay a matter of three penny for both horse and meat dress between these place 120 at every course end be a great pillar erect and at every ten course a fair house build by Ecbar when he go on pilgrimage from agra to Aggimere on foot pilgrimage say his prayer at every course end these house serve the king and his woman none else this king lie in Agimere upon occasion of war with Rabna a Razboch who have now do homage and peace be between they Ganges I ride to the river Ganges two day from agra the banians carry the water of Ganges many hundred mile thence and as they affirm it will never stink though keep never so long by agra run a large river geminie agra agra be a huge town the wall two course in compass fair and high that ever I see well replenish with ordnance the rest except nobleman house fair seat by the river ruinous the anncient royal seat be fatipoore twelve course from agra now decay between these two the sepulchre of the king father to which be none that ever I see to be compare and yet the church of fatipoore come near it build by geometry as be the other the four and twenty of May 1616. we in our return enter the bay of Soldania where be diverse english ship outward find the Charles unicorn james globe swan the general be Benjamin joseph the fifteen of September be arrive at Dover chap. 9 the eleven voyage to the East-India in the Solomon begin in the year of our lord 1611. after the account of the church of England and end in the year 1613. write by RALPH Wilson one of the mate in the say ship February 1. 1611. the first of February 1611. we set sail from Gravesend be four ship the dragon the james the Solomon and the Hosiander be count as three several voyage the james the nine the dragon and Hosiander the ten and we in the Solomon the eleven the reason be because we be direct to several part of the East-India in our course between the isle of the canary and the isle of Capo Verde we must steer a more westerly course then that which the plait lay down without they be Portugal plait which lie it a quarter of a point more than the truth be a new island discover in 19 degree 34. minute southerly the isle of Martin Vaz the seven and twenty of April we in Solomon descry a island in the south latitude of nineteen degree four and thirty minute and it bare from we southeast one three part southerly fifteen league off this i will be a place which in my opinion yield water and fish in great abundance the sea-fowle be so many that our people in the gallery of our ship may strike they down they be so tame to the eastward of this i will lie two land more the one about the bigness of the first the other a great i will by these isle we find a current which set to the northward the eight and twenty of june we depart from Soldanha I will advise they which go forth of Soldanha bay with the wind at east or southeast to get off some pretty distance from the land before they hale up to the southward for if they do otherwise the high land will take their wind from they and if a man shall be becalm he shall very much be trouble for most common thereabouts you shall meet a mighty western Sea second the stream set to the shoareward if the wind have be at the north northwest west of south-west and three the shore be neald to so that a man can anchor the six of October we meet a great current set to the northwards October 6. when we be within one degree of the equinoctial the twelve we meet with a great deal of rubbish as cane sty and many other thing which usual be on the shore about sumatra the sixteenth drive by our ship rubbish as rock-weed cane branch of tree the husk of Coco nut and such like the seventeen at noon drive by we a bed of rubbish which be at least two mile long it lay north northwest and south southeast and drive off west south-west the eighteen in the morning we descry land they descry sumatra Illaba^ or Celeber which lie by Celeber in the i will of sumatra which town of Celeber stand about three degree of southerly latitude the seven and twenty we have a current set to the southward the nine and twenty the salt hill or i will bare east north-east sixteen or eighteen league from we the first of November at six of the clock at night we be shoot within the salt i will November 1 the second at noon come between the land of java and a ragged i will which lie to the westward of the point of Palymbam we meet a great tide run out so fast that we can scarce stem it with a stiff gale of wind and afterward the wind flake so we chap to a anchor and then I find that tide to run three league and a half in a watch here I have note that the tide or stream keep no course but in the day time set out and in the night time in this day at noon the point of bare north-east by east three league of we from thence to the road of Bantam be five league south southeast one three part easterly so the longitude of Bantam be a hundred forty five degree two minute the latitude six degree ten minute the variation three degree this longitude of a hundred forty five degree and two minute be somewhat to easterly for the road of Bantam but for the first fall with the land for a hundred forty four degree be the true longitude for Bantam from the island of flores the eighteen nine sail of hollander come into the road and the other two excellent refresh at the i will do Mascaren^as which go out the day before come with they to pulo panian they have refresh themselves at the isle Mascarenhas which stand in one and twenty degree and a half of south latitude of which place they give singular commendation for great plenty of refresh which they find there the seven of march at five of the clock in the afternoon march 7. in the latitude of twenty degree four and thirty minute we descry land which bare north-east half a point northerly nine league off the southeast part be somewhat high but fall down with a low point the wester part be not very high but flat and smooth towards the end of it and fall right down this i will be very f^ll of shoald and break ground the souther and wester part a i will discover in twenty degree four and thirty minute for we discover neither of the other side by all likelihood it seem to have good refresh on it the longitude of this i will be a hundred and four degree from flores but by my computation a hundred and seven degree but in these course we rely not altogether on our reckon use as much diligence for the find out the true longitude as possible we may it be a main point to give we light to other help the ten we have sight of the jand of Diego Roiz the fourteen in the morning the island of Diego Roiz the i will of Cyrne or mauritius we descry land which be part of the i will do Cirne which the hollander call the i will of mauritius there be a island that lie from the main isle four league off and two other small isle ten league off we found a league and a half off but find no ground at forty fathom when you be thwart of the road the hill with three pike will bear southeast the sixteenth at six of the clock in the morning we descry the i will do Mascarenhas the isle Mascarenhas there be a breach which lie four mile off and lie three league long and here be very good refresh the isle mauritius have longitude ninety nine degree latitude twenty degr fifteen minute the i will do Mascarenhas have longitude ninety seven degree and latitude one and twenty degree no minute the second of April 1613. about seven of the clock it begin to lighten April 2. 1613. continue with such mighty great flash as I never see the like until eleven and then it begin to rain or pour down mighty and on a sudden become flat and calm and in less than a quarter of a hour a har^ g^le at south-west blow for the time which be not long as much as it do before at north-^^st by these two contrary wind the sea grow so exceed lofty that our ship strike into (@) sea abaft as if the gallery will have fly off about twelve of the clock the wind vee^ed to the south and on a sudden up at the north-east again our sail be split so as we h^ld till morning the (@) of june we descry the i will of Ascension june 10. the i will of Ascension this i will have shoald lie on the wester part at lea^^ two mile off the (@) and twenty we have a great ripple of the sea in the seven and twenty degree of north latitude which come out of the easter-boord like a fresh out of a river like many (...) whirlwind August 6. the six of August we have great ripling or overfals of the Sea the fourteen day be in thirty eight degree fifty nine minute north latitude we have great ripling of the sea which make a noise as if water have run out of a sluice they come out of the north-east chap. x. a journal of all principal matter pass in the twelve voyage to the east India observe by i WALTER payton in the good ship the expedition the captain whereof be m. CHRISTOPHER Newport be set out 1612. write by WALTER payton @. i. their come to saint Augustine Mohelia and diverse part of Arabia the seven of januarie we set sail from Gravesend for the east India in the good ship the expedition of London be about the burden of two hundred and sixty ton ^ which carry in she fifty six person beside the persian ambassador and his follower who have in number fifteen which we have order to receive into our ship to be transport in^o the k^ngdome of Persia at the cost and charge of the worshipful company aforesaid the name of the ambassador and his people be these sir Robert Shirley the ambassador Teresha his lady a circasian sir Thomas powel Tomasin his lady leylye a persian woman morgan powel gentleman captain John Ward Francis bubb secretary John Barbar apothecary John herriot musitioner John Georgson goldsmith and Hollander Gabriel a old armenian nazerbege scanderbege molhter all persian the six and twenty of April 1613. in the morning we fall with a part of the land of Aethiopia whereunto close adjoin be a island of small compass call connie island be a very low land connie island and environ about with many dangerous rock to seaward and stand in the latitude of thirty three degree and thirty minute the wind take we short we be enforce to come to a anchor betwixt this island and the main where we have very good ground in nineteen or twenty fathom water here we send our schiffe ashore to the island where we find penguin wild goose and other fowl and seale-fish in great abundance whereof we take for our refresh as much as we will by a carve board we perceive the hollander have be there who make great store of the ^raine oil of the seal as it shall seem for their necessary spend outward find they leave their implement wherewith they wrought and a grea^ copper cauldron stand upon a furnace full of train all which we leave as we find thus have spend two day at a anchor and the wind favour we to proceed we set sail from hence for the thirty day by God grace we arrive at Saldanha where we find ride at a anchor six ship the bay of Saldanha whereof two english namely the Hector and the Thomas the other four be hollander all find homeward here we water and refresh ourselves very well with reasonable store of that country sheep and bullock which we buy and fresh fish which we catch with our Sayne the ten of May 1613. the peppercorn arrive here at Saldanha also find homeward shee have be long out be not very well fit with necessary which we supply out of our small store so much as we can spare who also dispatch and be ready to set sail with the first fair wind which be on the fifteen of May from whence we set sail all together out of the bay take our leave each of other according to the common fashion of the sea cape do arecife variation six deg nine min. direct our course for saint Augustine and in our way we have sight of cape do arecife be part of the main land of Aethiopia and stand in the latitude of thirty three degree twenty five minute the compass vary there six degree and nine minute which be on the four and twenty of this present the fifteen of june we have sight of saint Laurence island and on the seventeen day we come to a anchor by port Augustine of purpose to search the sound and way into the bay before we enter because there be none in our ship well acquaint therewith port s. Augustine which be do we enter and come to a anchor on the eighteen day in ten fathom water but our ship ride in forty fathom here we have wood and water and great abundance of fresh fish which we take with our Sayne sufficient to have satisfy half a dozen ship man if they have be there but for flesh we can get none of the country people they be as it seem fearful of we who come to we once and promise to bring we cattle the next day in the morning which I think be rather in policy to carry away their cattle wherein they employ themselves in the mean time for they never return to we again we march up into the wood with about forty shot to see if we will have meet with any of they to buy some of their cattle but we find none but empty house make of cane house make of cane where we perceive that people have be not long before by the fire which be yet burn and scale of fish which have be broil thereon also we perceive the foot and trace of many cattle which have be there not long before so we return empty as we come this port Augustine stand in the latitude of twenty three degree and thirty minute the variation of the compass be fifteen degree forty minute fifteen degr. 40. minute variation the entrance into this port resemble Dartmouth and to go in there you must bring that which be call Westminster-hall be not unlike north-east by east of you and so steer in due east borrow a little to the southside of the bay where you shall have sound thirteen nine eight and seven fathom water good ground till you be shut within the shoal and then you have deep water until you come to the road and then you have seven eight and ten fathom water but if you go in too far behind the hill on your larboard side which resemble a old barn than you shall have thirty five or forty fathom from hence we set sail on the three and twenty of this present direct our course for the island of Mohelia the three of july 1613. we have sight of a island call juan be to the eastward of Mohelia some nine or ten league and bear from it east and by south also this day we come to a anchor at Mohelia betwixt break land which lie on the souther side and the island Mohelia island near unto Comoro great store of refresh here we have great store of refresh and very cheap for we buy five bullock in truck of one Levant sword also we buy goat hen pine cocker nut Plantanes orange lemon and limb for trifle or little money one rial of plate we pay for a bullock or else ten piece of four penny halfpenny and so we buy about forty one head of cattle beside other refresh aforesaid the five the inhabitant of this island be chief moor but there be arabian turk and other nation among they and be in war with the people of juan and Comora land near adjoin they tell we that the king of Mohelia die the same day that we come into the road and phanehomale his son succeed in his place be as yet but of tender year be to reign under protection of his mother queen his brother-in-law come down as chief man accompany with diverse other man of sort to speak with we who bid we very kind welcome the largeness of the Portugal tongue both he and many other of the same island do speak reasonable good portuguse language by reason whereof I have great conference with they and be resolve in any thing I demand they build bark upon this island and trade with they alongst the coast of melinde and Arabia with slave and fruit whereby they furnish themselves with royal of plate and other necessary also I think they have some trade with the portugal but they will not be a know thereof because we shall not suspect any treacherous deal among they they tell we that we be very welcome and that the whole island be at our command but if we have be portugal they tell i that they will have put we all every man to the Sword but howsoever I hold it not good to repose too much confidence in they the king brother show i a letter of commendation of the place leave there by a Hollander which be write in dutch and withal desire we to leave another to the same effect thereby to specify their honest and kind deal towards we and to show it unto other of our nation which shall come thither after we to which we consent and I make they a write according which be seal by the captain of our ship express therein our good entertainment and the price of victual but nevertheless with such a proviso that our nation shall not trust they any further than in their discretion they shall think requisite for their own safety they speak a kind of morisco language which be somewhat difficult to learn and our continuance there short so that I only take notice of these few word follow which be sufficient to call for victual and fruit when portuguse language be want and to speak to any of the country people who understand not the portuguse viz. Gumbey a bullock buzz a goat a hen Tudah orange Demon lemon Mage water sirrah a kind of drink Quename a Pine Seiavoye cocker nut figo Cartassa paper Sinzano a needle Arembo bracelet Soutan the King this island stand in the latitude of twelve degree ten minute Mohelia in 12. deg. 10. min. and in the road be good ground in forty fathom water from hence we set sa^le on the ten day have water and refresh ourselves very sufficient God be thank direct our course for the island of Socatora the nineteen we pass under the equinoctial line and on the twenty five day we have sight of land which we suppose to have be cape guardafuy which lie at the entrance of the red sea and so think to steer for Socotora find it not whereupon we be enforce to bethink ourselves where to go that we may shelter ourselves from the cruelty of the winter in those part and also to refresh we again so we determine to sail for the land of the body whereof lie in the latitude of about eighteen degree to the northward of the equinoctial the land of over against the waist of Arabia foelix in our way we never have other weather than fog which be so thick that we can not descry half a english mile before we be a thing usual every year in july August and part of September in all this time both the sun and the star be so obscure that we can not help ourselves any way by observation but God be our guide at length we grope out the land by our lead well perceive the colour of the water to be change white and many yellow grassy weed swim thereon we sound still as we sail and our first ground be forty three fathom so as we neere the land our sound lessen to twenty two fathom where we anchor in very good ground but can see no land although we hear the rut of the shore not to be far off until the next day which be somewhat clear weather and then we send our Skiffe ashore to see if they can discover a place of more security for our ship to ride in but by reason of the great sea which come roll into the bay there go so great a siege that they can not come near the shore and therefore return as they go only they have descry a situation of fair house build of stone hard by the sea side which prove to be the cit^e of doffar in Arabia doffar a city on the coast of Arabia when God have send we a little clea^^ weather we perceive a high cape land on the wester side of the bay the which we discover with our Skiffe at the second time of her go to be a very good road for all wind except from east to the south by east God make we thankful for thither we warp in our ship although with much toil of our man be distant six or seven league from the place where we be August 3. a small village the three of August we come to a anchor in the say road and go ashore with our Skiffe at a little village call Resoit stand close by the sea side the inhabitant thereof be arabian and for the most part fisherman who give we very kind entertainment and tell we all concern the country that we desire also the chief governor of doffar come down to we who name be meir hahamud madoffar and bid we very kind welcome and present we with three bullock sheep goat Sugarcanes hen and coco-ntus and such like for requital whereof we present he again with a fine piece of damask double lock which be great by he esteem he desire our friendship as much as we desire he and give we license forthwith to come ashore when we will also he give order to have a market keep at this little village of Resoit purposely for we to buy any kind of victual which the country do afford their cattle be both dear and lean and their fresh water be very scarce and bad and very hard to come by so that we be enforce to hire people to bring it down to the sea side in skin pay therefore twenty four shilling sterling for every five pipe fill before our departure from hence meir hahamud madoffar desire we to leave a writing of commendation in his behalf specify the good and kind entertainment we have receive there which be grant and I make it in parchment begin with great letter the effect whereof be correspondent to the other write before leave at Mohelia also sign by the captain and the governor send we three note by he sign to the end we may send they in several ship if they shall happen to come upon that coast as we do perforce whereby he may know our ship from other and to give they entertainment according this cape Resoit stand in the latitude of sixteen degree sixteen degree thirty eight min. and thirty eight minute to the northward of the equinoctial line and be good anchorage in five and a half or six fathom water the eight and twenty we set sail from hence direct our course for the coast of persia. still coast alongst the arabian shore for there be our chief hope fix in set the lord ambassador ashore by reason of the * * for captain Hawkins come away in distaste and deny trade the english wrong by the mogul in often break promise as before be show force ^rade at the red sea on his subject which after lest the sea and merchandize shall be shut up to they procure the privilege obtain by captain best especial see the english able to withstand the portugal who sea-force hold the guzerats in marine subjection and make they afraid of trade with englishman the i will Macyra in 20. degr. 10. min. variation cape (@) news and advise we hear and receive at the cape Bona esperanza our expectation be frustrate both of surat Dabull and all other part thereabouts the second of September we sail close by a island lie alongst the arabian shore call Macyra the body of which stand in twenty degree thirty minute north latitude the variation of the needle be twenty degree ten minute the four day we pass the eastermost part of the arabian land call cape rasalgat stand in the latitude of twenty two degree and thirty four minute and nineteen degree twenty minute variation @. 2 their come on the persian coast the treachery of the baluch the ten of September cross the gulf we have sight of the coast of Persia septemb 10. our ship be in the latitude of twenty five degree and ten minute the variation of the compass eighteen degree thirty minute and be some seven league o^f from the shore we send our Skiffe with sir Thomas powel accompany with two of the ambassador persian together with Albertus our linguist of purpose to discover the country and to seek some convenient place to land his lordship a small village baluch where when they come to a little village call Tesseque they speak with camel man and other of the country people by who they understand that that country be call getche Macquerona and the inhabitant baluch all live under the government of one king name Meirza who chief residence be some five or six day journey from hence at a port call guader and they further tell they that all that country of Macquerona pay yearly tribute unto the king of persia. also they understand our intent to land the ambassador tell we that by melick Meirza his conveyance his lordship shall have safe conduct from guader in nine day to Chirman and from thence to spahaun in Persia in eleven day so we sail alongst the coast and send our Skiffe again ashore on the eleven of this present with sir Thomas powel and other accompany as before both to inquire further of the country and to see if they can hire a p^lot to direct we for guader because we know not how the coast do lie and they light on a place call about one day journey from the other place before where we find the like news and report of these people to agree direct with the former all commend the port of guader to be our best place of land whereof we be very glad to hear present set down our determination with God leave to sail thither with all the speed we may although we have no pilot. and in our way on the thirteen of this present in the morning we espy come from the eastward two great boat call terada two great boat call Teradas sail alongst the shore towards Ormus whereupon to the end we may have a pilot out of they we man our Skiffe sufficient of purpose to bring they to our ship if entreaty do fail perforce yet without any intent to have offer they the least discourtesy or to have send they away ungratify but when our Skiffe come up to they in stead of answer our man ha^les they weave our Skiffe to leeward with a naked Sword wherefore our man think to fear they and to make they amain their sail shoot off a piece at random towards they for answer whereof they discharge another piece at our Skiffe with half a hundred of arrow to boot which our man perceive ply all their musket at they again but our Skiffe not able to hold way with they sail be constrain to leave they and return to our ship again with one man very dangerous hurt with a arrow in his breast although after recover now we aboard perceive our Skiffe to be too weak and return again without they present hoist out our long boat and send she after they we follow with our ship so near to the shore as convenient we may with safety for it import we much now to speak with they whereby we may avoid the spread of their scandalous report of we in that country which may have frustrate our chief hope in land the ambassador there be the place whereon we most depend especial consider how destitute we be of any other place if this shall fail by reason aforesaid so our long boat fetch the terada up drive they into a bay from whence they can not escape which strike such a fear into they that they desperate sail so far into the bay that one of they be cast away upon the shore one of the terada cast away and the other near upon follow have not our man save she from the breach thereof all the baluch for the most part leap overboard whereof some of they narrow escape drown and other take in again by our man be bring with the Terada aboard our ship be only nine baluch leave of about twenty six who when they come aboard perceive they to be of gu^der we tell they only nine baluch save that we be sorry for the loss of their other Terada and that we mean they no harm but only to speak with they whereof they be glad to hear for th^y think we have be as merciless as themselves impute their loss unto their own folly then we tell they that we be find to guader to land a persian ambassador there and that we will entreat the master of the boat who name be Noradim to pilot our ship thither and we will content he for his pain to which know himself not to be free by denial he yield conditional that we will let the Terada and his man proceed in their voyage for muscat which we think not (@) for f^^re of clamour and news to be spread about the gulf of our be there among the portugal but rather to carry the Terada with we to guader thereby to make manifest our good deal towards they the p^lot perceive himself to be urge between fear and friendship in the end agree of who we make very much and in our way to guader have mu^h conference wi^h he and his man both concern the state of the country and king and touch the passage of the ambassador into Persia through the same their answer report and speech all concur with the former in a manner confirm our hopeful intent without any dislike this Terrada be about the burden of fifteen ton her lade for the most part be victual of those part as rice date and wheat and such like they have a Portugal pass which they show we September 15. think at the first we have be portugal the original whereof I translate out of the portuguese language because it may be know in what subjection the portugal do keep all these country people without which pass they be not suffer to sail to nor fro upon pain both of loss of life ship and good the copy whereof follow viz. the castle of Antonio Pereira de Laserda captain of the castle of and the jurisdiction of the same for his majesty etc. a Portugal passport by sea show how al^ those part be awe at sea by they moor guzarat and other a Baluche all those to who these present shall be show know that I have think good to give secure licence unto this of the burden of fifty Candy the master whereof be Norradim a Moor and Baluche and a dweller in guader of the age of fifty year and carry for his defence four sword three buckler five bow with their arrow three caliver two lance and twelve oar that in this manner follow declare she may pass and sail from this say fort to soar Dobar Mustmacoraon sinde cache Naguna Diu Chau and cor. in go she carry good of Conga as raisin date and such like but not without dispatch first out of the custom house of this say fort which shall appear by a certificate write on the backside hereof and to perform well the say voyage she shall neither carry nor bring any prohibit good viz. steel iron lead tobacco ginger cinnamon of Seilon and all other thing whatsoever prohibit and not tolerate by the regiment of his majesty and in this manner shall the say Terrada make her voyage without let or hindrance of any general captain or other of the say signory fleet or ship whatsoever which she shall happen to meet withal and this shall be of force and sufficiency for one whole year in go and come if it be expire then to serve other so long time as the make hereof give from the say castle of this sixteenth of November ann. dom. 1611. i Anthonio notary of this say factory have write this etc. seal and sign ANTHONIO PEREIRA the certificate write on the back side hereof be this viz. register in the book of certificate in folio 32 and so forward sign anth. the seventeen of September we sail by high ragged cliff whereto close adjoin be a good water place September 17. at a village call juane as Norradim tell we be about fifteen league distant from the port of guader juane a village to the westerside thereof which bear north of you also upon this day in the evening we arrive at guader and anchor at the port mouth until the next day in the morning guader where about thirty boat come out of guader to fish some of they come to speak with the baluch which we have aboard but what they say be speak in Baluche language and therefore not by we understand so betimes this morning we clear our Balucha pilot with his boat and man and tell he that when he will come aboard again he shall be satisfy for his pain and so he depart be very well content therewith and present after the ambassador send one of his persian name Nazerbeg ashore in our Skiffe with a message to the chief governor concern his land and pass through that country into Persia who by the way be meet with the governors boat come aboard our ship into which Nazerbeg be take out of our Skiffe and go with they ashore to perform his message according to direction be accompany with many people unto the governor tent. where he have deliver his message to the say governor in the persian language which be as well understand there as their own be very much make of and kind entertain the answer of which message by the governor be that although that country of Macquerona be not the king of Persias the country of M^cquerona be not ^he king of Persias yet they do acknowledge a kind of dutiful love unto his majesty and that they have be tributary unto he and his predecessor for many year past as they be now at present also he further say that the king of Macquerona be the king of Persias slave with such like feign and trap compliment and the ambassador shall be as welcome as if he be in the persian land only tend by treachery to allure his lordship ashore as by the event it appear this answer be return by Nazerbeg he have to accompany he aboard and to confirm the same with addition about a dozen of the ancient man there of baluch who when they come aboard our ship salute the ambassador with great submission both in their governors behalf and in their own some of they offering to kiss his foot tell his lordship that he be the happy man alive in come thither to that place for but one day past the viceroy be come down with a troop of man to visit a saint and therefore his lordship shall be conduct with more safety through his country from the danger of rebel and thief which be beeweene guader and Persia either to Chirman or Sistan and so to spahaun also that the viceroy will furnish his lordship with camel and horse and other necessary requisite and that he will accommodate he with all the mean he have in his power and moreover say that they much rejoice to have such fit opportunity to show their unfeigned love towards the king of Persia and withal he shall be dispatch from guader if he will in two day at the further and tell we for our ship we shall have both water and other necessary whatsoever we need September 18. they bring then with they three bag of bruise date be about three hundred pound weight with two goat and send aboard the say fish-boat that every one of they shall send two fish upon the governors account aboard our ship who do according so that what with their exterior show of unfeigned love and kindness towards we together with all man speech of who enquiry be make as aforesaid agree so jump one with another we be thorough persuade without any kind of distrust that they mean we as well as they say especial the lord ambassador be exceed well conceit of they be joyful to arrive in Persia in twenty day and we not sorry in bring to perfection our long desire hope but God from who divine knowledge the secret of no heart can be hide know their contrary meaning towards we for have not his mercy exceed his justice we have be consume and it never can have be know what have be become of we ship nor good for hereupon the ambassador resolve and fit all thing in a readiness and on the nineteen of this present which be the morning follow send both his money treasure and all his carriage ashore with the baluch boat that come aboard for that purpose very early also they bring a message from the viceroy and governor that they have provide a tent for his lordship and all his follower near adjoin unto their tent and therefore he may come ashore so soon as he please all thing be ready into which tent all the ambassador good be carry and by his order some of his follower be appoint to remain with they until his lordship shall come ashore himself intend to have follow the same day in the afternoon at four of the clock he send the viceroy word that he will then come and in the mean time our Skiffe go ashore with empty cask to bring fresh water aboard wherein go the ambassador persian and three or four other of his follower to see the land of the good and careful carry of they into the tent and at the land thereof the country people demand if the ambassador have no more good than those to bring ashore to which answer be make that there be all except jewel and such like thing which shall be bring when himself do come other baluch stand by baluch perfidy reply to each other among themselves that it be no matter for there be enough for the soldier which Nazerbeg overhear and understand yet conceal it for that time although it possess he with a jealous conceit and as he say afterward that nevertheless he have no power to continue in the same by reason of such equal correspondency of all matter pass before but be somewhat more attentive unto what shall be say afterward among they and can hear nothing contrary unto honest deal Hodge comal until at length meet with one Hodge comal who God have make a instrument to disclose their devilish project unto we he understand the particular of their bloody intent by he reveal at which Nazerbeg be somewhat amaze and angry with the man that he do not tell he of it before the good be bring ashore also the hour appoint of the ambassador come ashore draw near which make he fear lest he shall have come ashore before he shall get to our ship to forewarn he but as God will have it our Skiffe be yet a fill of water by the sea side where when he come he tell our man that there be treachery plot against we ashore and withal wish they to row he aboard our ship with all the speed they can and so be bring aboard immediate although not one eight part of a hour too soon for both the ambassador and all his follower together with the captain of our ship and all the chief of we who be willing to grace his lordship all we may for the honour of our country stand in the ship waste ready to go ashore but Nazerbeg bring these news September 19 we be not half so hasty in our proceed he tell we what have pass the chief effect whereof be this the great treason of the people of Guade^ reveal that the viceroy and governor do entice so many of we as they can ashore of purpose to cut our throat which be do they mean to have set upon our ship and to have make spoil of all and further that they be all rebel to the king of Persia be present death for any once to name the king of Persia in that place also that they have make enquiry of every particular man in our ship both of our place profession and estate for they have consult and conclude upon the massacre of we all except the surgeon musician woman and boy with determination to have put all the rest to death without mercy now God be thank although we understand of their intend plot so sufficient whereby we be forewarn to prevention thereof by arm ourselves we know under God protection we wer^ abl^ to defend we from receive any injury aboard notwithstanding their great store of boat and m^n they have at that instant about fifteen hundred shot fifteen hundred shot of the enemy beside other yet we be to seek how we may procure again his lordship good and his three man which be ashore in their custody for performance whereof God that have thus miraculous deliver we from their tyranny likewise open our understanding in so much that we obtain all according to our own desire in this manner follow viz. whereas they expect the come ashore of the ambassador his follower and our captain and we accompany together we present send Nazerbeg ashore again with direction what he be to do and to tell the viceroy that the ambassador be not very well and therefore defer his come till the next morning which be Monday the twenty day of September also to request the viceroy and governor that they will send two or three of their boat very early for he the woman and the rest of his company because the ship-boat be too small and withal that the ambassador do expect to be receive by some man of sort from the viceroy to come in the say boat in regard of the king of Persias honour who person he do represent this message be well deliver take effect and wi^ling grant be make for performance thereof which business Nazerbeg have finish he be to go to the tent where the good be and to bring out of one of the trunk two bag of money contain two hundred pound sterling with some other thing of worth if convenient he can without be spy because they shall not suspect that we have discover any of their villainy also we give he order to return instant and to wish the three man to stay still in the tent till the next morning and they shall be free all which be do according and not only the say money bring away but also a trunk wherein be the lady Shirley apparel notwithstanding the baluch demand why that Trancke be bring aboard again answer be make that therein be the lady night-cloathing and that it shall be bring again the next day and s^ pass on for currant now the ambassador make account that if he can but get one great trunk more wherein be thing of moment and charge with his say three man to lose the rest without care and for the better bring to pass hereof without suspicion we fit overnight a great chest and a close-stool bo^nd and maled up together with cord very fast and handsome which be fill with billet rubbish and stone to make they heavy to be leave in the place of that trunk which shall be bring aboard and the three man shall come forth of the tent with each of they their instrument of music in their hand and for excuse if the baluch shall demand why they bring that trunk aboard again answer shall be make it be one of the merchant and it be mistake likewise if they demand why the man come aboard again answer shall be make that his lordship do send for they to accompany he ashore with their music so all be ready the next morning very early we perceive the three boat come aboard to fetch his lordship according to promise present man our Skiffe and send she ashore to put our plot in execution whereby we hope to catch they in the same snare that they have lay for we and in the mean time we receive the three boat of man into our ship with entertainment requisite wherein come about forty or fifty person but not above seven or eight of any reckon whereof our friend Hodge comal be one the rest slave and fisherman we keep they in talk and much conference of b^-matters to pass away the time because our Skiffe may return before we do meddle with they among which talk one of they earnest request we as from the viceroy that we woul^ carry our slurbow ashore with we ^e be very desirous to see it so we smooth they in their desire and not long after we espy our Skiffe return with her success which God be thank fall out prosperous for they do not only bring the three man and the trunk but also one chief man of the baluch who Nazerbeg entice aboard and so soon as he be enter into the ship he with the rest desire to see our gun-roome wherein he know by intelligence we have all our firework they stand in much fear thereof especial of our slurbow with the fiery arrow which fall out fit for our purpose for we have mean to have send they down thither to take away their knife which they wear by their side so all the chief of they be go down into the gun-roome long knife wear by their side and our ship fit with every one of we our weapon in our hand we divide ourselves some above the deck some betwixt and other as be needful in the gun-roome to lay hold of the traitor so soon as the word shall be give to take away from they their long knife all which be do in a instant without any disquietness or resistance then we begin to parley with they upon plain term lay open to they their bloody intent September 20. also tell they that their life lay in our hand and they be now themselves catch in the same snare which they have plot for we and that if we serve they right we shall cut they in piece as they have determine to serve we all which they like stony-faced Mahumetans deny so we keep six of they which be the chief these baluch be Mahumetans with two of their boat the rest of the crew we send ashore be all for the most part naked rascal except one to who we deliver a message in particular to tell the viceroy an^ governor that unless he will send we aboard all our good and thing we have ashore without one pennyworth diminish we will carry away those man we have aboard for satisfaction this message be deliver to the viceroy and governor they present send answer back again by the same messenger we send that if we will release the baluch than they will send we all our good again and with many lame excuse will make we believe they mean we no hurt whereupon present in the sight of the messenger we clap they all in iron and write one letter to the viceroy and the prisoner write another both tend to one effect in the persian language threaten the life of those prisoner if they do not send we all our good as aforesaid and that without delay within the space of two hour at the most to which purpose we set up the run glass before the messenger depart out of the ship because he shall make the more speed back again by these sharp mean we urge they forthwith to return all our good again in very ample manner as we desire which be receive into the ship we free both the man and boat and send they away according to promise only one name malin-simsadin who by Hodge comal be discover to be a good pilot for sinde and Cambaya we keep with we for the same purpose they stay a pilot for sinde conditional to reward he according to his desert thus with God assistance to who be always endless praise for our happy deliverance we have dispatch all this intricate business by six of the clock in the evening be the twenty day of September and set sail from hence the same night with our new pilot and Hodge comal who come aboard from among the curse crew to save his life for sinde because we will be sure to avoid all ensue inconvenience there which they may attempt by their future circumuention and in our way to Sinde we have much conference with Hodge comal our good friend of who company we do much esteem he be bear at Dabul but his father be a persian by his profession he be a churchman of that sect and have some skill in chirurgery and physic for which use he be resident in the governors tent and by this mean he overhear all that pass and excuse his come aboard for certain ointment which our surgeon have promise he he tell we that when he hear of their intent his heart be full of bemoan compassion to think that we shall come like innocent sheep to the slaughter of such butcherly bloodsucker and therefore he perceive well that God will have he reveal it and he further tell we that to his knowledge they have betray three ship before in the like manner and that they be all rebel to the king of Persia deny to pay the tribute which both they and their ancestor have former do wherefore the king of Persia have levy a great army of soldier not far from guader of purpose to come upon that country the next winter this country Macquerona be border close upon the persian land be part of the main continent of Asia Macquerona guader port in 25. degree and guader port stand in about twenty five degree of north latitude and the variation seventeen degree fifteen minute good anchorage between four and five fathom the one and twenty of September at night our Baluche pilot bring our ship in danger of a shoal where we be enforce to chop to a anchor till the next morning the four and twenty at night as we lie a hull because we be not far from cape Camelo there pass close by we a Portugal frigate find for sinde which at the first we suppose to have be a galley and therefore arm ourselves for defence @. 3 their come to divulginde land the ambassador seek trade and cross by the slanderous portugal go to sumatra and Bantam and return the six and twenty we come to a anchor right before the mouth of the river sinde with direction of a pilot the mouth of the river sinde in 24. degree 38. minute in the mogul dominion variation 16. degree 45. minute which we have out of one of the fisher-boat which be fish there we ride in a foot less than five fathom water the river mouth bear east and by north in very good ground and be in the latitude of twenty four degree and thirty eight minute to the northward of the equinoctial line the variation be sixteen degree forty five minute hereupon the same day the ambassador send two of his people ashore to speak with the governor concern his lordship come ashore and to tell he his intent to have passage through that country into persia. which governor name Arah Manewardus be of diul be very willing to welcome the ambassador and to show he all the kindness he can for the love he profess to the king of Persia both in his royal entertainment and passage through his country or jurisdiction and send a principal man aboard we accompany with five or six more to welcome his lordship with many compliment assure he of kind entertainment so present there be boat send for from diul to carry he his people diul and his good ashore which come on the nine and twenty of this instant upon which day we be clear both of he and he both in number and health as when they first enter into our ship and for his farewell eleven piece of ordnance be shoot off from our ship also Simsadin our treacherous Baluche pilot we set ashore at the same time be entreat of the gusurat notwithstanding his desert to have be set in the sea in that he will have cast we away twice whereof once by himself and another time by his devilish counsel give to another pilot which we have of the fisher-boat here at the ambassador depart out of the ship the captain deliver he a fine piece double lock to present the governor of tata a great city one day journey from diul tatta a great city one day journey from diul both city stand in the great mogul dominion also we entreat his lordship that he will send we word how he find the country and whether we may have trade there or not and withal deliver his lordship a note in writing what we chief desire they copy whereof do follow that our come hither to this port as it be purposely to land your lordship so withal we have bring certain commodity and money to the end if we obtain safe protection for quiet and peaceable trade we may make sale of such and so much of our commodity as shall be fit otherwise we desire but leave to refresh and so depart likewise if the governor please that we may settle a factory here we also desire it and although now we be but slender provide yet hereafter we will bring such store and sort of commodity as shall be most require and convenient vent in this port. the commodity we now have bring be these viz. elephants tooth fine piece lead in bar morse tooth tin in bar some rial of plate the thirty of September the ambassador have audience with the governor of diul concern all his business unto who he show the king of Persians as also the king of Spain pass a Portugal Liedger in diul his slander of the English think thereby to satisfy and resolve the jealous doubt of the portugal liedger there who report upon intelligence from Ormus that don Roberto Shirley be come forth of England with three ship into the indies of purpose to steal but they peremptory deny credence to any write he show they say it be neither their king hand nor seal for if it be they can not be ignorant thereof consider they know it so well and further say it be counterfeit whereat the ambassador be much move to impatience and reply again unto they say that it be mere folly to show they any king hand or seal for they have no king and therefore can not know it and that they be a waste nation only subdue and bring under subjection perforce by the king of Spain and be servile both to he and his subject notwithstanding the portugal be not daunt but stand stiff in their former opinion and say that he have two ship more in the indies then Arah Manewardus speak in the ambassador behalf rebuke they sharp for such unseemly contradiction of the persian ambassador and so conclude absent the portugal out of the room afterward the ambassador make a speech unto the say governor and assembly concern the admittance of we into his port to trade according to direction give his lordship from we as aforesaid which be very kind embrace of the governor with willingness to do therein what he may all inconvenience understand for which purpose he will the ambassador to send for one or two merchant from aboard to confer with he upon the same whereupon the ambassador write a letter unto we by two of his people who come aboard our ship on the second of October 1613. in the morning by which letter we perceive his lordship proceed in our desire business with the governor with assurance for our safe go and return be in such good sort and fashion that our hope be great in establish a trade there if not a factory especial to make sale of the small quantity of good which we now bring joseph Salbancke and Walter Payto^ wherefore master joseph Salbancke and myself fit ourselves with the advice of the captain and other in our ship and go ashore in one of the country boat the same morning about eight of the clock our ship ride about four or five mile from the river mouth from whence we have fifteen mile to the city diul where the ambassador be so that it be late in the evening the same day before we land and in our way we meet with a Portugal frigate find for Ormus which I see go to carry news of our ship be there because none of their ship which be daily expect shall come till we be go this frigate come close by our ship and take view of she and so depart now when we be land there come three or four portugal unto we demand if we have bring any good ashore and such like question to who we make no reply make show that we understand they not because we may understand they for our advantage if occasion serve Portugal slanderous policy then there come another Portugal who speak the dutch tongue very perfect tell i many thing concern the people and country all tend to disgrace in a idle and frivolous manner think thereby to dissuade we from desire trade there not long after the officer of the customhouse come and conduct we up to the castle where the governor dwell who we think will have speak with we that night but do not because it be so late yet the officer be for the most part banians and speak good portuguse search every part about we for money not leave so much as our shoe unsearched which be do and perceive we to take it strange they pray we to be content for it be the order of that place to which I answer that although the portugal may give they cause to ordain so ^ad a fashion yet english merchant do not meazle like hide money in their shoe but notwithstanding we be therewith content then the governors servant come to we excuse it likewise say that he be displease thereat and so they bring a great light and direct we from the castle unto the house where sir Robert Sh^rley the persian ambassador do lodge to who we find ourselves very welcome and lodge there all the time of our abode in diul expense free the portugal see we land and hear that we be to treat with the governor about the settle of trade there the malice of the portugal do nothing all this time but like envious and lie malignant spread clamorous and scandalous speech in disgrace of our king nation and country report that we be thief and not merchandizer but live chief by rob of other nation on the sea the three of October in the morning the governor send the ambassador word October 3 that in the afternoon he will have speech with we in the mean while we have intelligence that the portugal be labour all they can with he and other to prevent our entertainment both by offer he gratification if he will refuse we and by threaten to be go if he do receive we allege as before that they will not trade where thief do trade nevertheless according to our expectation the governor send for we and withal command four great horse gallant trap to be bring unto the ambassador house for his lordship sir Thomas powel master Salbancke and myself also a certain company of his servant they go to the castle in honourable fashion to conduct we to the castle also all the ambassador follower go with he each of they carry a halberd on their shoulder thus we ride through some part of the city wherein the people in every street come flock to see we they have of long time hear talk of englishman but never have see any before now for we be the first that ever come into that part of the country their entertainment at the castle when we come to the castle we be receive very orderly and direct through some spacious room where soldier be stand on each side as we go in rank clothe all in white linen from head to foot up to a high turret wherein the governor and some other be set who at our entrance arise and salute we bid we kind welcome then we all sit down together round upon the carpet which be spread upon the floor according to their fashion then the governor again say we be very welcome and that he be glad to see Englishmen in those part and proceed to further talk concern our business and tell we whereas we desire trade the portugal will not consent that we shall drive any trade or have to do where they be threaten to be go if he do entertain we notwithstanding if he can be assure of a great benefit to arise by our trade then by they he will not care if they do forsake he for he do well affect our nation but in the mean time he have farm the custom of that port from the king this king be the great mogul unto who he stand find for the payment of certain sum of money yearly for the same whether it come in or not it behoove he careful to be circumspect in order those business whereby to avoid the king highness displeasure which unhappy may fall out to his utter overthrow and undo and then he begin to tell we further that the custom of the portugal trade together with their mean in let out their ship to guzerates and Banians amount unto a leck of Rupias yearly which be ten thousand pound sterling then he demand of we a Rupia be two shilling or somewhat more and a leck be 100000. what sort of commodity we have now bring and the quantity of each also what store of money all which we answer he a little more or less and withal tell he that although now we bring but small quantity yet we can furnish that port at our next return with any commodity whatsoever the portugal do bring and such a quantity of each as we shall perceive requisite and fit to be vent there of this he like well and ask in what time we can return from our country thither again we answer he in about twenty two month so he conclude say that in regard of our small stock the portugal will both laugh at he and we if we shall be entertain now wherefore he wish we to defer it until our next come and in the mean time he will give we a writing under his hand and seal thereby to assure we of entertainment at our next come conditional that we come provide as aforesaid and we to leave he another writing to assure he that our ship shall not molest any of the king of Mogors ship good nor subject which we agree unto withal request he that although he will not receive we whereby to establish a trade now yet that he will permit we to make sale of those good we now have which in no wise he will grant for fear of offend the portugal allege as before then we desire he that we may have water and other refresh for our money and we will depart so soon as we can for this he say that so soon as we do send he our writing aforesaid he will both send we another and give order to his officer for the same but he will not have the portugal to know thereof so we see no remedy demand of he what sort of commodty he will have we bring thither also what commodity that country do afford who answer these viz. broad cloth of diverse price and light colour as stammel red Green and sky-colour and Blewes and azure etc. elephant tooth iron tin lead steele spice Mony these commodity be to be carry for sinde commodity to be have there indigo of lahor indigo of cherques calico all sort pintadoe of all sort and Cambaya commodity of all sort with many sort of drug then we take our leaf of he and part return to the ambassador house again where I frame a letter and send he according to our promise sign by m. Salbancke and myself and receive another from he likewise which be in the persian language much like the Hebrew letter backward the english whereof be interpret to we by the ambassador as follow viz. whereas here arrive at this port of diul in the kingdom of Mugore one english ship call the expedition whereof be captain Christopher Newport and merchant joseph Salbancke and Walter peyton to land don Robert Shirley the king of persian ambassador who desire grant of trade in this port be under my government which willing I will have grant but only for prejudicial inconvenience ensue for they bring not merchandise sit in quantity to begin such trade neither the portugal by who trade at present I reap benefit will consent thereto threaten to be go if I do receive the english nation so that thereby I shall have be leave destitute of all trade whereof those sum of money do arise yearly which I be find to pay unto the king majesty and in default therein I shall put in hazard his highness displeasure to my utter overthrow and undo yet notwithstanding for the love I owe unto the king of Persia by who ambassador I be request and the affection I bear unto the english nation together with the faithful performance of their writing leave with i under their hand and seal of the two merchant aforesaid which be not to molest or meddle with any of the say king ship good nor subject in the time of this their voyage in the ship aforesaid I have give they this writing under my own hand and seal hereby promise the english nation that if they will come like themselves so fit that I may advantage myself more by they then by the portugal infallible assurance of entertainment to trade with such reasonable grant of privilege as we shall agree upon date in diul the three day of October 1613. sign Arah Manewardus seal with ink the four of October we receive the write from the governor together with order to his officer for our water and refresh and then we hasten to return aboard our ship again and a little before our departure the ambassador fall into discourse with we about the procure of a from the king of Magore and withal wish master Salbanck to go along with he for agra which be the chief place where the great mogoll keep his court and he will warrant we that he will procure the same in very short time especial now at this so fit a opportunity offer both in regard of his business with the mogoll as also the willingness of Arah Manewardus to entertain we at this port which opportunity be let slip we shall never obtain the like his lordship protest and vow to do his best endeavour therein and show himself a true heart english man towards his country howsoever the company of merchant he say do conceit he and further that master Salbanck shall be a eyewitness of his constant and faithful proceed therein to do the merchant good in obtain the say not only for diul but also for any other part in the mogoll dominion an^ also shall bring it for England over-land himself all which be ground upon some rea^on and master Salbanck have be in those part before he be willing to undertake provide he may have the consent of the captain myself and other in the ship to which purpose the ambassador write a letter to the captain persuade his consent thereto and send it aboard by we so we part from diul this day in the afternoon and when we come to the river side to take boat there flock about we many of the country people also there come down to we about a dozen of the envious portugal who begin to talk with we in dutch as before demand of we many frivolous question which when I have answer I speak in their own language because the banians which be there present may understand and tell they that they be a shameless and lie people in spread of so many devise scandal and slanderous report of our nation unto who they know themselves much inferior in many respect and that they do it only in malicious policy because they will not have we to trade in the indies as well as they also I tell they that if they do not contain themselves within the compass of better peace reform themselves hereafter both in their saying and do they shall be all root out of the indies and a more honest and royal nation place in their room then one of the chief of they single out himself and answer thus that they have enemy too many already and therefore they desire no more and as for scandalous speech they do not deny be urge thereunto for not long pass off from surat they have a ship take by english man as they suppose to which I answer they that it may be rather the hollander so they conclude in the end very pliant and sociable wish that we may trade in all part of the indies with they and they with we like neighbour and friend and that there be some agreement make betwixt our king and they for the bring to pass thereof thus they take their leaf of we in very kind manner we part the six we arrive aboard our ship again where it be agree upon that master Salbanck shall go as aforesaid with the ambassador for agra wherefore he fit himself think to have go ashore the next day and in the mean time the captain send the purser and his man to buy fresh victual and provision for the sea who when they come to the city be by the governor present turn back again as they go and express command by proclamation upon pain of death the country people shall bring no more english man ashore these sudden and strange alteration make we much to marvel for we can never know the certainty whereupon it grow or what shall be the cause all the time of our be here at sinde they depart from sinde we can never understand of any trade se^led at surat for if we have we may have take other course the ambassador have above seven month journey from sinde to spahaun in Persia by Caravan or if he procure to travel otherwise than it be one month less the nine we set sail from hence direct our course with God leave for sumatra the twenty of November we come to a anchor in the road of Priaman where we go in betwixt the two northermost little land November 20. Priaman and anchor close by the northermost of they both in five fathom water and in the mean time we beat the price of pepper at Priaman and bring it from two and twenty rial to seventeen rial a Bahar first penny at which price we buy two bahar which be bring aboard our ship but the governor although we have present he with a piece will not suffer we to take a house nor to buy any pepper ashore unless we will bestow some twenty present upon the officer and merchant there the two and twenty we receive a letter from captain christian out of the Hosiander at tecoo earnest wish we to come to tecoo with our ship so soon as we can and we shall not fail to lade so much pepper as we determine and that in short time and because we be not well acquaint with this place captain christian send one of his master mate name Richard hall to pilot we into the road by reason of many dangerous shoald that lie about tecoo the eight and twenty we come to a anchor in tecoo road in four fathom water tecoo where Richard hall return aboard the Hosiander and be trouble with the flux die the same night now we be come to tecoo find all thing contrary to our expectation for whereas before our come hither the country people offer their pepper to captain christian after twelve and thirteen rial a Bahar in truck of surat commodity they now demand two and twenty rial rea^y money refuse to truck with he at all for commodity also here they demand as many present as they of Priaman beside seventy two rial of plate for anchorage so that we be now worse to pass then before and time not permit we to make delay we grow into short term with they and tell they that although we do not buy a Cattee of pepper there we will not agree nor yield unto their unreasonable demand and withal I frame a letter as from the captain by he firm and consign to the chief governor show he that they do not use our nation so well as we do expect at their hand both in regard of their unjust demand of present which we do not usual give by compulsion but either for affection or deserve and also their unreasonable delay the performance of their promise fall out to be so uncertain that we can not account they to be merchant-like deal for our ship have stay there diverse time three four or five month only depend upon their post promise to have their full lade which may have be as well dispatch in one month with that small quantity of pepper which they have this letter be english by the hosianders linguist name John a indian December 2 1613. who speak the language very well unto the chief governor who hereupon give present order that we may buy pepper of any man that will sell. and withal send a messenger aboard our ship to wish one of we to come ashore and it shall be weigh there but we doubt their delay accept not thereof and therefore send he word again that we can not stay so long as to weigh it ashore if they will bring it aboard and weigh it we will give they eighteen rial a Bahar for their pepper and two rial upon each Bahar for the custom and governor be just twenty rial conditional they will bring it aboard otherwise we will not stay so they linger somewhat long before they come we set sail make show to depart which the governor perceive forthwith send another messenger who speak the portuguese language indifferent well to entreat we to come to a anchor again and we shall have as much pepper bring aboard immediate as we will lade which we do and they come as fast with prawe lade of pepper as convenient we can weigh it and so continue for the space of three or four day till they have bring about some two hundred bahar and then begin to slack their bring which we perceive and fear to spend overmuch time here lest we shall lose the season of the monsons we depart for Bantam December 8. the eight of December we set sail from tecoo where we leave three of our man in the Hosiander their necessity so require in our course to Bantam for the most part we sail within sight of sumatra the sixteenth at our entrance into the straits of Sunda be the sixteenth of this present we meet with the dragon find homeward by who we write home they arrive in Bantam Road. the seventeen we bring our ship to a anchor in Bantam ride where we present go ashore to provide her lade on the nine and twenty we make a end of lade our whole compliment january 2. the second of january we set sail from Bantam for England not have lose one man by sickness in all our voyage hitherto for which God make we thankful also this day as we be go out by pulo Pan jan general Saris in the cloave come from japan we meet with general Saris in the cloave come from japan for who letter and the delivery of four chest the captain cast anchor again also we spare he two of our man namely Mortimer pretty younker and Thomas Valens one of our carpenter mate whereof they stand much in need for they have not one carpenter leave alive thus have also dispatch these business with the cloave we set sail once again for England on the four of this present march 21. the bay of Saldanha the one and twenty we come to a anchor in Saldanha bay where we have sheep and bullock reasonable store beside great abundance of fresh fish which we catch with our Sayne in the river April 9 on the nine of April we depart and then we have prosperous wind which continue until we come in the latitude of about three degree to the northward of the equinoctial line may 11. which we pass under on the eleven of May find our ship then to be in two and twenty minute north latitude hereabout many of our man begin to fall sick some of the scurvy and swell in their leg the ten of july we come to a anchor in the down in safety God be ever praise after this twelve voyage the order of that reckon be alter because the voyage ensue be set forth by a joint stock and not by particular and proper ship stock factory as before but promiscuous and general accountable to the whole society of which all be not come to our hand such as I have that which thence be meet for the public view give I thou chap. 11 extract of the journal of captain NICHOLAS downton who be employ chief commander in the second voyage set forth for the join stock in the east-indies by the governor deputy and committee of that society wherein be relate their happy success against the viceroy and all the indian sea force of the portugal by force and cunning attempt their destruction @. i. their come to Soldania Socatora Swally disagreement between the mogoll and portugal and the nabob and we the ship employ be the new-yeeres-gift admiral of burden six hundred and fifty ton the Hector vice-admiral of five hundred ton the merchant hope of three hundred ton and the Solomon of two hundred ton master William Edward be lieutenant and cape merchant and commander of the Hector master Nicholas ensworth cape merchant and commander of the merchant hope master Thomas Elkington cape merchant and commander of the Solomon master Peter Roger minister Martin bring Arthur spaight Matthew molineux and Hugh Bennet master of the four ship assist with diverse mate the first of march 1613. we set sail on Wednesday the fifteen of june 1614 we anchor in the road of Saldania and be welcome with a great storm John barter by along fever bereave of his understanding be sudden miss and by former speech of he it seem that he make himself away while every one be busy in moore the ship and none look after he the sixteenth we get all in readiness for erect our tent which be that day effect and a guard place for their relief on the seventeen we land half our cask to be trim and season Choree the saldanian present i with a young steere the eighteen we land more of our beer cask to be wash trim and season and supply the want of our man labour about our boat also this day Choree the saldanian depart from we carry with he his copper armour and javelin with all thing belong to he promise to come again to we the three day after but he never come again Choree and his copper armour the nine and twenty I send George Downeton on land to observe both the latitude and variation of this place in regard of the great difference in our variation we have find between my former voyage in the peppercorn and this present voyage the latitude he find be thirty four degree and no odd minute and the variation one degree and forty five minute by a azimuth be westerly variation note for the variation at the Bay whereas for the most part all former have make ea^^erly variation this night we dissolve our tent and bring all our thing aboard and make ready our ship against the next day to depart which we do accord the six of August we come to a anchor in the bay of saint Augustine in saint Laurence island but on sight of our come the inhabitant abandon the place that we can have no speech with they we cut straight timber for diverse use and afterward we get some refresh of they on the twelve we set sail the nine of September we anchor in the bay of Delisa in Socotora the next day we go on shore to salute the king who be ready with his troop to give i entertainment and tell i of the war at present in India the mogoll and king of Decanie join to root the portugal out of the country the reason whereof be this ship be the their take of a ship which come from jedda in the red sea wherein be three million of treasure he also inform i of captain best then great fight with the portugal with other news of those part here I procure what refresh we can get and buy of the king aloe two thousand seven hundred twenty two pound and on the fourteen depart the second of October we have sight of land be on the coast of Decany near Dabul we find great hindrance till by observation we be teach to stay the ebb and ply the flood the twelve we again weigh and ply the flood and anchor the ebb till the fourteen day in the evening and then anchor two mile and a half short of the bar where present come a fleet of frigate be fourteen sail and anchor near we discover themselves by their light be dark but see our readiness by the light out of our port Portugal frigate dare come no near unto we so we ride quiet all night the fifteen early in the morning we weigh with the land-turne and approach somewhat near they they also weigh and stand to the southward and we hold on our course by the bar towards south Swally south Swally where soon after we arrive after much strive against contrary wind assoon as I anchor I send master molineux in his pinnace and master spooner and Samuel squire in my gellywatte to sound the depth within the sand master molineux take a channel in which in our former voyage we have but five foot at low water but now find three fathom water and master spooner find that where our boat can not pass former by reason of shoald he have now seven and eight foot water in the afternoon I see people ashore send my pinnace to they suppose some of our merchant have be come from surat but find otherwise to be some people of cogenozan send down to discover what nation we be cagenozan two of which come aboard to i by who I understand further of their war with the portugal they besiege Damon and Diu and that Mocrib can be general of the mogul force against Damon and also to my grief I understand that he be governor and as viceroy not only over surat but also over all the country near about it I esteem he to be the great adversary to our nation and one that most favour the portugal this be my settle conceit by former experience I understand of the health of master aldworth and the rest to who I write to hasten his presence and send it away by baly ball together with the other servant of cogenozan the sixteenth in the morning early I send my purser and pinnace on land to buy such commodity as I suppose may be bring who about ten a clock without buy any thing for our turn return with master aldworth our chief merchant at surat and in his company one Richard steel who come by land from Aleppo to surat m. A^dworth and steele master aldworth strive to persuade i that mocrib can the nabob be our friend and that now be the best time by reason of their war with the portugal for we to obtain good trade and all privilege that in reason we can demand and for that both he and all the country people do so much rejoice at our come therefore of necessity can not but give we royal entertainment I like all their hopeful word yet ever wish some other in his place and that Mocrib can have be further away of who I rest still in doubt that we shall have no free trade but according to his accustom manner and to see and to be privy to all that ever past and restrain all other which then I take to be a injury force by he to cross we and not by the direction of the king which in time though too late we be better advise and notwithstanding the remembrance of his name give he by the king Mocrib which be as much as his own bowel and Chan which be as much as great lord the signification of Mocrib chan. yet I be too much delude by be persuade that his state in favour of the king stand totter and may easy be make subject to any disgrace by any complaint of thing do contrary to the will or humour of the king which make we somewhat too bold and thereby prejudice to our business when we find he opposite to our w^ls and as we think contrary to reason I inquire of the state of our business and the health of our people master aldworth inform that Paul Canning and diverse other be long since dead Paul Canning and Thomas kerridge agent at the mogul court. and that Thomas kerridge have long since reside at court in his room and that there be no more factor but only himself and William Bedulph at surat the seventeen in the morning I call a council to advise of all thing here to be effect and who fit to send to agra to remain as liedger there and then enter into the six interrogatory article include in the second article of our commission require master aldworth direct answer to every question shall be demand the first in what favour Paul Canning be with the emperor and his council and how he carry himself in the business at court that be commit unto he he answer that at his first come to court jesuit courtesy he be well respect by the emperor until such time as the jesuite make know he be a merchant and not send immediate from the king but afterward he be neglect as himself complain and for his carriage there master aldworth say that for any thing he know it be sufficient and well the three then demand whether needful to maintain one as liedger at court his answer be not only necessary but also by the king require that one of our nation do reside there and therefore fit to be a man of good respect for prevent and right any wrong that may be offer by the jesuite our adversary as also by his direction may stand in great stead for the buy or sell of commodity the six concern the charge of he that shall reside at court he say to be about three hundred pound by Paul cannings estimate but somewhile after when his write come to be search his estimate be find to be five six or seven hundred pound question be make whether it be fit master edwards shall proceed under the title of a merchant according to the strictness of the company commission his opinion be by master cannings experience that then he will not be respect by the King the mogul little respect merchant the four and twenty in the morning cogenozan come down to the waterside with a great train as their manner be rest himself in my tent till my land unto who I repair a^h^are accompany with all the merchant and a good guard of halberd shot and pike I have a coach to carry i up from the boat to a place near the tent and at the instant when I alight from the coach he come forth of the tent address himself to meet i and after salutation return into the tent and sate down and before any other conference begin he be let to know that there be a present to be deliver he for the nabob which be present bring in viz. one case with six knife two pair of knife six sword blade six spanish pike present for the nabob or governor one comb-case one look glass one picture of Mars and Venus one picture of Paris in judgement two muscovie hide and one great gild case of bottle full of rich and strong water then for himself I cause a present to be deliver he which be six knife in single sheath four sword blade two pike one comb-case one looking-glass one picture of Moses one case of bottle in regard of the promise of the nabob to our people that what cogenozan shall do he will perform I therefore move for the enlarge of our privilege for the lessen of our custom especial at baroch to have a Bazar or market by the waterside that we may buy beef for the people eat in regard that other flesh be not good for they according to the king give his answer be that if I will assist they against the portugal the nabob will do we all the favour that in his power lie but for the custom of baroch it be out of his power for the king have let it to another by rent and can not be help a Bazar we shall have but for bullock and kine the king have grant his to the banians for a mighty sum yearly to save their life banian superstition in sum we find nothing that he have power to grant we yet willing to leave i in content wish that I will send some of my merchant along with he to the nabob that our business on both side may be consider on and receive answer accord from each other I send along with he master aldworth master ensworth who desire to go up because he be not well master Dodsworth master mitford and other which when they have access to the nabob two or three day after he wo^ld know again their demand which be as aforesaid then he desire to know if we will go with our ship to fight against Damon for he and then he will do we any favour but that be answer that we can in no wise avouch the do thereof for that there be between our king and the king of Spain then he demand if we will go to the bar and ride there and fight with they that shall come to prejudice they that we can neither covenant to do for it be a breach of the peace between our two king as aforesaid then he answer that if we will do nothing for he he will do nothing for we diverse of the principal merchant of the town come to move our merchant that I may give way to the nabob his reasonable request and though I do grant for satisfy his mind yet I may do what I listen and that they all know the frigate may for all my ride at the bar come in and out on each side i answer be return it be unfit for i to halt but whatsoever I promise I must maintain though it be to the loss of my life and all under my command and that I will not be hire to fight with the portugal which be contrary to my king commission unless they give i first cause not for the world neither will I be withhold from fight with they if they provoke i not for his wealth which difference it seem he take small notice of but that we refuse to fulfil his desire he be much move and in all thing cross our proceed all that he may insomuch that he have almost quell all former conceive hope of happy commerce in this place continual devise what to do or what course to take this mean fail we as I see no likelihood to the contrary I make inquision of Gengomar and Castelletta also of Gogo but can hear small incouragent for transportation to seek better deal so with doubt we rest perplex a long while yet return to our business at the ship the seven and twenty in the morning Nicholas Vfflet go ashore find all the people of Swally depart thence in the night he demand the reason they tell he that the nabob have express command they so to do as also the people from the tent whereupon he inquire further thereof be certify that our merchant be stay at surat and that attempt to pass over the bridge they be perforce withhold and receive some store of brow by the guard thereto appoint by the nabob with who in company to attend upon they the gunner boy and his companion former suppose to have be run away be also well beat and withhold as the rest the one and thirty we begin to take in fresh water because our stay here be so uncertain not know how sudden our departure may be this day Thomas Smith the master boy be swim about the ship ravenous fish have most of the outside of his thigh bite away by a great fish which pull he under the water yet he come up again swim to the ship side and get up to the bend where as soon as he be come up he present sound then the chirurgeon bring he into the gunner room to see what may be do for his recovery but the issue of blood have be so great that they can not revive he but present die and towards night be bury ashore the second of November towards night master aldworth and master elkinton come down from surat where they have leave master ensworth very sick they declare unto i their proceed with the nabob as former and of their reconciliation with large promise of future good respect with free trade throughout all their country this hard measure hitherto offer we by the nabob I can attribute unto any hatred or ill will bear to our nation but his own doubt and fear of we lest I shall join with the portugal against he which fear be the more increase in he in that I will not agree to fight against Damon and his suspicion and doubt be the more increase by a knavish device in the subtle and lie jesuite who take occasion by my denial voluntary without cause jesuite trick to fight against the portugal at Damon or otherwise they pretend a letter from the viceroy to give notice to the nabob that unless he make peace with they that both he and the english his friend shall join together and come against surat which devilish device do we much hindrance in our business by the nabob continual doubt which he make of our friendship towards they and beside unfortunate by their extreme unkind usage master aldworth in the midst of his haste and think to qualify their rigorous course and yet altogether ignorant of the practice of the jesuite in threatning-wise wish they to take heed that by their ill usage of we they do not force we to join with the portugal against they which prove a kind of confirm the jesuit former report from the viceroy as altogether make against we likewise he forbid all trade with our people aboard which at first we likewise think have proceed out of his troublesome humour to cross we but afterward we be advise the contrary by Thomas kerridge his letter who declare that he and all seaport governor have express commandment from the mogoll not to suffer any trade with we till they have make choice of all strange thing that we bring and they to buy they for the king use and to send it unto he the three I call a council concern our business viz. how far we may proceed in their aid against the portugal and examine our commission in that point also we appoint the merchant for the several place of employment aswell those that be to stay here as those also that be to proceed on the voyage the good that be at surat of the twelve voyage come aboard which be of indigo sixty Bales and Cotton yarn eleven pack the sixteenth whereas my desire be to have be ashore among our merchant to have bear some stroke in the order of our business at surat and the rather consider the turbulent headstrong and haughty spirit of ever strive to sway all thing according to his own will and distasteful to other which without private respect aim at the common good who better discretion have be enure to more humility but the estate of our business so uncertain partly by the uncertainty of the nabob and people here and partly in regard of the portugal which we daily do hear be arm we beside I understand the nabob make question of restitution of the good take by sir Henry Middleton in the red sea at under rate as they say though I know they have good for good to a half penny yet not know what may come of it I think best to keep myself near my charge and refer all thing ashore to the care of such merchant in general as be of my council and in who for most part I have constant affiance the two and twenty I finish my letter for Persia viz. one for the company one for sir Robert Shirley and another for advice to Richard steel the three and twenty Lacandas the banian come down with news of some discontent or hard speech that have pass between the nabob and the merchant rude deal but now that they be reconcile and friend the cause be for that master edwards will not let he see the present which at last he be drive to yield to all the chief merchant write unto i several that there be a certain report that the viceroy be arm against we it please God to call to his mercy master ensworth and Timothy wood both in a hour John Orwicke Robert young and esay but set forward to provide such clothes and Cotton yarn as we former agree on nabobs gift the five and twenty master Edward write i of the come of three great man with seven firmanes from the in who presence the nabob bestow on he eight hundred and fifty mamudy ten fine Bastas thirty topseele and thirty allizaes he further give to master Elkington and master Dodsworth ten topseele and a cloak to master aldworth and another to master Elkington master Dodsworth have have one before he promise free trade in all place under his command and good refresh for our people aboard the seven and twenty John crowther come from surat who advise i that the chief merchant have choose he to accompany Richard steel into Persia crowther and steele go to persia. and therefore come to take his leave of i and to fetch his thing from aboard this day master Edward write to i by Edmond Aspinol for fifty elephant tooth and indifferent choose in their size and bigness for there be a banian merchant in price for they all if they can agree which tooth the same day be send up to he the six of December the nabob Mocrib Chan seem now to be ashamed for that he have not since my arrival here show i the least taste of courtesy present to the general and therefore be desirous to excuse himself entreat master Elkington to accompany aboard the great banian that bring our tooth and Lacandas the banian merchant of the juncke of the king of Cushan who he make choice of and entertain by reason of his former familiarity with our people to buy among they such commodity as they have to sell viz. sword blades knife looking-glass by they he send i a present of two Corge of course Bastas ten fine Bastas ten topseele ten cuttonies and three quilt certify i that the nabob be mind to come down to see i within two or three day at the most at their go ashore I give they five great shot news of the viceroy preparation against the english they tell i that the nabob hear from Goa that for certain the viceroy be prepare to come against we with all the force he can make to fight with we likewise that the nabob request i that I will waft a ship or two of he of the coast for two or three day be find for the red Sea but I answer that have once put off from the coast the wind be adverse I can not recover it again but if he will further our dispatch that we may be ready in convenient time then will I do any thing reasonable the nine the nabob son come to the waterside but will not come aboard whereupon I go ashore to he who against my land send a horse to fetch i he will i to sit down upon the mount with he which I do then he command part of his horseman to show i some pleasure upon the sand by warlike chase each other after the manner of Decanie from whence they be then he desire to hear some ordnance go off and I give he eleven shot military sport on horseback he at present will drink no wine but be depart he send for it and for a fowl piece which he find in the hand of one of our people both which I send he with a bowl to drink his wine @. 2 the portugal force act attempt fight with the english and disgraceful repulse the sixteenth master Elkington write i that the nabob tell he that the Portugal frigate have burn Gogo with many gonge or village thereabouts and ten great ship one whereof be the Rehemee and one hundred and twenty small vessel Gogo burn and diverse ship and that he be displease at i for not shoot at they when they pass by we which do renew his suspicion of our friendship with the portugal to all which master Elkington answer he yet he can not rest satisfy the three and twenty come two boat more for lead twenty two Portugal frigate this day we see twenty two frigate who in the night come to anchor between we and the river mouth where they ride most part of the next day the four and twenty in the morning we see four boat come down the river towards we who see the frigate return two frigate chase they up the river but see they can not fetch they up go ashore and fire two or three poor house and take away two or three head of cattle and so return back to their company who in the afternoon go up into the river together the five and twenty in the morning early we see five or six frigate under sail a hour or two after we perceive a small boat under sail stand towards we but be present chase by two frigate the man in the small boat run she aground and forsake she so that the frigate can not float where she lay the tide ebb so fast therefore they depart without do any further harm unto she the six and twenty in the morning I send the hope to the northwards a good way from the rest of the fleet to see if the portugal will charge upon she the seven and twenty early in the morning Portugal bravado the frigate come and make a bravado before our ship and then before the Solomon which be next unto we and from she to the hope which ride a great way from we who drive direct upon she with all their man stow not a man to be see the master twice hail they but they will not speak whereupon they let fly at they with their bow-piece have no other to ply upon they which make they with some loss to depart the master doubt that if he have not shoot their repulse they will have board he or mischieve he by fire they come upon the advantage both of wind and tide that none of the rest of the ship can come to the rescue and in such sort right a head that hardly can he traverse any piece of ordnance at they in the afternoon I send the Solomon to accompany the hope who go to the north-ward of she and make five or six shot at the frigate who ride at anchor hard by the hope but we do not perceive any hurt she do they wherefore I command my gunner to shoot a piece to warn they to give over whereupon the Solomon stand in again and come to anchor the eight and twenty in the morning I go in the pinnace aboard the hope and Solomon to understand the occasion of their shoot and the portugal see our boat pass to and again remove in the afternoon and ride a little without we to cut off all intercourse other attempt in the mean time come the former boat which be chase a hoar aboard the gift and bring some letter from master Elkington the master send the bearer with the letter to i in the hope where have answer master elkingtons letter I send he back again to the gift to go thence in the night to surat but as the gelliwat return the frigate chase she which I perceive cause to weave to the gelliwat to return which they not see hold on her way but the frigate hold she so close that they be within shoot of she and make one fair shot at she and have not the gift let slip one cable and veer another and ply upon they with her ordnance it will have go hard with they which make they give over the chase not without some damage and late in the night upon the tide of ebb I command the hope and Solomon to set sail and fall near to the other ship and then I go aboard the gift the nine and twenty I perceive that my ride be of no avail to keep the frigate out of the river because they can pass to and fro over the sand where want water for my ship to swim and that no boat dare come to we to fetch our good for fear of the frigate neither can I hear from our friend ashore how all thing past therefore I set sail for Swally but be but little wind and calm it be the next day before we arrive there the fourteen of januarie we hear of the approach of many frigate a fleet of frigate which ride at the bar till next day within night and then in the dark come from thence and ride within shoot of we all night till the morning when they weigh and go to the southward who I think be the malabar that the nabob promise former to send i and therefore put forth a flag of truce and send master spooner one of the master mate towards they with the Gelliwat and appoint he to have a eye back to our sign that we will make if we mistrust any thing I see the gelliwat so near and no show of friendship from they in answer of we put forth my flag which before be take in and shoot a piece of ordnance for a sign to my boat to come aboard which present upon sight thereof she do who be not scarce aboard another fleet of Portugal frigate when our sentinel from topmast head descry another fleet of frigate who afterward meet together at the bar and go altogether into the river whereby I perceive they be portugal and be glad that our man and boat so well escape their hand I think these frigate be forerunner of great force cause all the deck to be clear and the ordnance free and all thing else fit both for the ordnance shot and barracadoe to be in a readiness the seventeen in the night the frigate come all forth of the river they be in the morning at the point of the bar the eighteen there come to the water side Maugie the banian captain former name with a other great man the son of Clych Caun to who I go ashore whither not long after word be bring i from aboard a fleet of ship that they descry a far off a fleet of ship loom very big which ashore we can not see by reason of the lowness of the place and after leave take on both side the Portugal force consist of six galleon and three ship and sixty frigate beside two galley he depart and I return aboard cause all thing to be set in a readiness which be speedy perform towards night we make they to be six galleon and three lesser ship beside the sixty former frigate the two galley be not yet come the tide be spend they anchor till the next day the nineteen they ply up to the entrance of our new channel where they come to a anchor and the two galley come up to they where one of the great ship be too forward come too near the sand and touch but soon get off again the nabob send the sabandar and diverse other principal man of the town to the viceroy with a present of great provision they make some treaty of peace but break off effect nothing great policy on both side be use on the nabob side to the increase of my grief for he and all the country in general despair of my be able to withstand so great force nabobs present to the viceroy and begin to make preparative beforehand to claw the viceroy with present for I once overthrow his turn have come next to endure a great assault or to make such peace as the enemy desire for peace with they be it that stand with the viceroy policy most to desire his fear and policy for the set trade a foot between they on the other side the viceroy see the tractableness of the nabob and his seem desire to make peace viceroy subtlety presumption before for the present set light of it suppose to have make it with great royalty and profit for his own part after he have overthrow we which he make no doubt easy to accomplish which once perform he expect great present and great submission on their part to he be the conqueror but it please God who behold the uniustness of his attempt to turn it contrary to both their expectation for the viceroy fail of his purpose in attempt against i see he can not recover so much as a boat thoule from i in all the time he spend with loss and disgrace about it afterward be force to revive the former neglect motion of peace with the nabob disgrace attend which nabob be strengthen with a month experience notwithstanding all their brag threat see he be not able to remove our small force one foot out of their place give answer since with so great a army he can not prevail against four merchant ship I will make no peace with you and so be the viceroy frustrate of both his hope yet now after some digression return again to my daily business former hear of the viceroy force to come we imagine it will not be so great as now by view it seem therefore high time to enter into best consideration how by God help to resist the same care and prevention of the general the odds and advantage he have over i put i to my shift in cast up all thing that make against i be overtop by his force who I esteem furnish with the principal ship and mean of India and people of great rank and valour in these part in likelihood too hard for we when we shall put into the deep water nay I know not how to put into deep water but they always ready to intercept over-charge or force i a ground irrecoverable on one side or other my disadvantage so great in put out and their small vessel I know might much with firework or otherwise hazard we within at anchor where we ride where I have hope their great ship through the shoaldnesse of water can not or dare not put in the thing with i to give i hope be my people though much with death and sickness shorten all from the high to the low seem very courageous and comfortable though for the most ignorant either of the danger or how to prevent it yet please to i to see their willingness my care be not small how to do my best in maintain the honour of my country nor negligent in the memory of the estate and charge of my friend and employer in this journey not only for the hazard of this at present commit to my charge but also all hope of future time if I shall now be overthrow by reason the enemy in get the upper hand of i will make his peace with these people upon what condition he lust to the expel of our nation this country for ever and what my care be for the safety of my people I refer to the consideration of such father as be tender over the safety of their obedient child all this while my whole power so keep in action that I find little time to converse or almost show myself sensible of the danger approach yea ever as I can be solitary or free from other very earnest crave aid and assistance from the lord of host and from that mighty and merciful God who have manifold way former deliver i the best help in trouble often I say desire his majesty so to guide and direct i that I may omit nothing which may tend to the safety of my own charge nor the danger of the enemy and that God will grant my request I have a strong confidence and the same again often quell by the assembly of my manifold and grievous offence and but for God mercy sufficient to drown the world whereby force afresh by prayer to pierce the heaven and fly unto God for aid against both inward and outward assault I so resolve by God assistance what to do if my assistant the master of the ship will yield thereunto know if we shall receive a foil ride at our anchor our disgrace will be great and our enemy little abash but in move I may move the viceroy in greediness and pride to do himself wrong against the sand hope that that may be a occasion whereby God may draw he to shorten his own force and so may open the way for our get out among the rest which will rather have be for a necessity than any way hopeful for at present our good on the way and daily by some and some expect to come hither and if once get out unless it have please God to make we conqueror and drive the viceroy clean away I can not return into my place where only and no where else I can take in my lade I esteem the viceroy to hold his honour in so high regard that he must have be dead before he will have give way I also though helpless remember two great advantage the enemy have of i in this war ever before my people come to fight they be first tire or half spend with the labour of the ship as heave at capstaine and get up our anchor set of sail and other labour which great quell their courage make they in hot country both weary and faint and then of necessity must become soldier whereas the viceroy his soldier come fresh to fight be trouble with no labour which be do by slave and inferior sea-people which be never account companion of soldier second if the viceroy loose many man in his ship he may be supply again out of his fresh supply to be fetch from their near town by their frigate whereas we can not have one man supply how many soever we shall have slay or disable this present Thursday at night I have no merchant at all aboard but all employ in the country beside those with master Elkington at the house at surat I send for all my master to supper with some mate where as the time serve I begin speech of our present business consultation desire every man to speak free how he think best for we to work consider to the present straight we seem to be in allege my confidence to be for all the brag of these portugal abound in force that God will not suffer their injurious attempt upon we that have be tender not to wrong they in the east I have have also a jealous conceit carry over i by the nabob and principal of the country as though I have be confederate with the portugal for that I do not shoot at the saucy-governed brag frigate I find all the master to my heart desire willing and tractable to whatsoever I shall wish and have some few speech about our provident moore as also of the remove somewhat lower down but ere long I let they know my conceit desire their free opinion therein which be that now our ship be as fit for fight as we can make they and our danger by night if we ride still work never so provident to prevent be not small therefore I think fit in the morning at low water to send down one ship to ride as we may have water enough at low water for all our ship for than none can come to annoy she which may prepare the viceroy mind to some attempt at high water and as the flood come the other three shall bear down against the stream the spring now near the high to prove what attempt the viceroy will give to attend it and work according as we shall see reason in hope that God will put design into the mind of the viceroy that he may commit some error to the weaken of his own force which if he do then will be fit time in the dark of the night follow to put out when it shall be unfit for they to come to sail to hinder we or if we see reason we may with the wind work every day to and again with our sail on the flood to be always ready in action when the tide be aloft which may somewhat the courage of the people quell and dismay though the gallant seem to think otherwise this no soon propound but like for the best way and so we agree to proceed and for that I find m. molineux will at low water in the morning to fall down with the hope which be according perform the twenty in the morning at low water I send down m. molineux with the hope to prepare the enemy to some attempt when the tide shall be up which be do upon the flood we also with the other three ship stand after she the viceroy and all the worthy knight about he suppose I have be fly hasten also as the stream will permit they towards the entrance to stop my come forth but contrariwise we all anchor short of the hope not altogether of purpose to leave her destitute of our help but rather doubt of depth for our ship so far down to ride at low water I be no soon at anchor and go down to my cabin and set down to write to give my friend and merchant ashore notice of my purpose and resolution howsoever it may please God to dispose of i and that they may know it to be no rashness but in good discretion to tend upon my best advantage to prejudice my enemy but present I have notice that three ship with most of the frigate be before the wind run stem-long aboard the hope the fight with the hope and the galleon after they so far as the sand give leave we assay to weigh our anchor but time not permit we cut cable and set sail for the hope rescue but the enemy ship be aboard she and enter their man before we come sufficient near they their man be enter with great show of resolution but have no quiet abode there neither can rest in their own ship nor make they loose from the hope for our great and small shot Portugal loss by slaughter sea and fire so that when the principal be kill the rest in great number for quietness sake leap into the sea where their frigate take many of they up but first of purpose to have burn the hope with they they make preparation to fire their own ship which be well perform without harm to the hope praise be the lord of heaven for so soon as the fire be well kinle the ship of fire be let loose and drive a ground on the sand where they burn till the flow water come and quench they while day light last we continue change of shot in all our ship with the galleon they be on the outside of a spit of sand and we on the inside by which they do little harm to our hulle but to our rope and sail over head in this conflict beside they which be wound a mischance we lose five man by great mischance the hope main top topsail topmast and shroud come a fire and burn away with a great part of the main mast by the firework that be in the say top the man be slay that have the charge thereof this mishap keep we from go forth into deep water to try our fortune with the viceroy but be put to our shift not know how or by what mean to get the say mast cure the one and twenty I send to weigh the anchor we have cut the day before the two and twenty I understand that many great man with five or six hundred horse and a Portugal father come down to Swalley to send on the morrow the father with three or four principal moor to conclude a peace betwixt they and the nabob send i word that he seek no such thing and be resolve to make none but wherein we shall be include he also grant i what timber we shall want which we make use of likewise we be promise provision the portugal continue quiet the five and twenty the Muccadam of Swally come to i and tell i that the former father have send to entice he to poison the former well where hence we have our water which he will not yield unto jesuite venom and therefore have put into the well some live tortoise who will by their death demonstrate the poison thereof if it shall by they be perform at night come part of the hundred and seventy bale of indigo to the water side which be present fetch aboard Isaac beg send i a present of the fruit of his own garden this day come down the rest of the timber for the hope mast. the seven and twenty I send all our boat to sound the swach at low water chief to keep the enemy always ignorant of what I intend whither be send by the enemy to prevent they one galley and five frigate think to cut off our boat whereof they fail as of all other thing they attempt the eight and twenty the nabob send to the viceroy great store of provision goat bread etc. with a banquet of sweet meat cogenozan send i a present of five bullock diverse of our man die here of flux and disease the one and thirty in the morning we receive aboard from Cambaya fifty bale indigo in the afternoon come Cogearson Allee aboard who present i with diverse thing viz. goat great store of bread roast-meat and sugar etc. with he come a old acquaintance of i a persian he report unto i that there be news come from Damon that the portugal carry thither three hundred and fifty man to be bury news of portugal slay and that this news be most certain and by our estimate there can be less than a hundred more kill and burn in their ship beside those drown which the tide do cast up ashore they also relate to i that not only here in India they find opposition but also the persian against Ormus and the malays at malacca be in arm against the portugal and whereas there have be speech of a peace to be conclude between the viceroy and mocrib can he wish i to assure myself it be break off and will none be I find his love and take great content in his long stay with i who presence I thirst to see and till now he can never get leave of the nabob to come to see i which without no man dare or will be so bold who proceed by the great charge he have from the king that all thing of worth shall be procure by the nabob for the king use which hold he in such doubt and jealousy lest any thing shall pass by any other mean to his disgrace whereby he be enforce to use strange and severe course to restrain the same the day be far spend I return he with a present give money to all his people let he see the cast of the bullet of some of our great ordnance they take their leave and depart @. 3 Portugal supply fire-boate frustrate seek peace and refuse their departure interview of the nabob and general departure of the English hhe three of February there come to the water side twenty four Bales indigo February 3 seven pack white Bastas seven pack black Bastas six pack cotton-yarne four pack blue Bastas three pack Caudikens one pack Crecany all which be present fetch aboard this day also the viceroy supply come in sight supply send the viceroy which be two ship of burden two junke and eight or ten of the country boates. the nabob send Lacandas to inform i that these supply be not for war but fill full of combustible matter to fire and so to be let drive with the tide upon our ship in the night which advice I be glad to understand and address myself also to prevent that and all other their attempt with small ship the spring now near the high and fit for their assault which every tide I expect and to show that I be in a readiness to entertain they as also how little I care for they have all the time former ride without the like I purpose and perform the set and clear our watch morning and evening with a volley of shot from every ship and the best piece in my ship direct to the prow of the viceroy which I do to daunt the courage of they he must employ and to try his temper whether it will make he angry or no the bravers brave and I still think it prove to good end it please God this day at night when I have least leisure to mourn to call to his mercy my only son George downton who early the next morning be bury ashore and the volley aforesaid appoint to try the temper of the viceroy death of the general son serve also to honour his burial this morning also come to i on Mousa attale a malabar captain with his troop attend to visit i expect some business this day by the portugal to be attempt who I entertain with all kind respect and by conference make the best use of his company that I may by draw from he the description of the principal port and harbour in his country and manifest the desire I have to be acquaint with he and to entertain love league and familiarity between the english and they with a mutual trade and traffic one with another the which with great desire he seem to embrace will i to give he some letter of my hand for their ship to carry to show to my countryman wheresoever they shall meet they which I deliver as also a letter for he to move their king for the kind usage of our nation whensoever any of our ship shall arrive in any of his harbour and so after leave take he depart I present he with a sword blade and three or four knife the master of the hope complain that beside those present kill he have many hurt bruise and disable for service wherefore I send he for supply three man from the gift four from the Hector and four from the Solomon the five I receive letter from m. aldworth from baroch who write of their arrival there reisbute assault and that the day before nine course from baroch they be set upon by two hundred thief rashpoose with pike small shot and bow and arrow and skirmish a little while with they they flee three of they be kill and more wound they have shoot Humphrey Elkington through the thigh and kill one of the horse that surde can send to guard our man and master aldworthe horse likewise receive a shot the nabob send i word that the viceroy will assault this day and therefore send gogenozan to guard the land who come to the waterside and send his son Mamod jehad aboard to see i with a Caveleer call Kemagee the son of Leckdarsee Raspooso of Guigomar or who maintain war with the Mogore and Portugal together a long time they entreat leave to see and partake in the fight who see no attempt that day give stay aboard all night and the raspoose see the backwardness of the enemy go the next day ashore but the other desirous to see the issue thereof stay two or three day long aboard and then see nothing will be do by the enemy he depart the eight in the forenoon we receive more indigo aboard in the afternoon all the frigate with the two juncke and two galley come drive up with the flood policy of the portugal make show of some attempt at the instant either by fire which I most doubt or otherwise whereupon we all weigh to go near to they who no soon perceive it but they altogether make away as fast as they may and we come to a anchor not far from our former place this device be nothing but to make we think that those fire-boat shall come from the northwards that we may not mistrust their come from the northwards and therefore the next day against night they assemble both juncke frigate and galley all together a little without the sand to take away all suspicion of the north from we which I well perceive and do always resolve that that way be the place of most danger for we and therefore give a special charge of good look out both way but chief that way which accord fell out for that a little within night we do discern they between we and a great light to the westward upon the island of Gogo creep to the northwards upon the flood and then upon the last quarter ebb fiery stratagem prevent about ten of the clock in the dark of the night before the rise of the moon there come drive down two fire-boat be tow by frigate who we discover before they come near we and p^yed at they both with our ordnance and small shot whereby we beat off the frigate that tow they who dare adventure no further with they but turn they off who come drive with the tide a pretty distance from the other the first drive clear of the gift Hector and Solomon and come thwart the hope hause and present blow up and with the blow much of their ungracious stuff but bless be God to no harm to the hope for that by cut her cable she clear herself the latter come likewise upon the quarter of the hope and then flame up but do no harm drive down the ebb and come foul of we again on the flood the abundance of fuel continual burn which our people in our boat tow ashore and the former sink down near we by daylight this day I receive a letter from master aldworth who write of the receipt of a letter from Thomas kerridge specify that Nicholas Whittington be distract and out of his right sense and that he write somewhat doubtful of Richard steel the ten at night near about the same time as before there come two fire-boat together tow by four or five frigate two fire-boat more which bear direct upon the Hector but as soon as we discover they the gift and the Hector let drive at they both with great and small shot that the frigate which tow they forsake they and force the actor thereof to give fire soon than they will and so turn they adrift who come burn direct towards she but the wind be stiff drive they to leeward of she within half a hour after we perceive a great many boat drive right with the Hector at who they and we discharge which again make the frigate forsake they other fire-boat and also those appoint for to act it soon than they expect whereby they give fire only unto two of they be four of they chain together but the Hector edge to windward and it please God to send a stiff gale of wind at present which drive they to leeward of she our gunner make a shot at one of the boat unfired and strike she whereupon she take fire and the vehemency of the flame reach unto the four and set she a fire also and so they drive ashore hard by our land place my pinnace take three of the actor in a small cannow wherein they think the exploit be do to have escape two of they be bring aboard i and the three be leave aboard the Hector and the gelliwat return aboard find another which she bring with she one of they have his shoulder shoot through thus it please God to disappoint all the malicious practice of our enemy against we the eleven the viceroy see God cross he in all his injurious attempt set sail and fall down into the bar where he anchor the cause of his anchor there I be desirous to understand I doubt it be for no other purpose then to attempt the spoil of surat but I resolve if he shall so do to put out with my ship and so to set upon his fleet which will make his enterprise against surat to be give over be desirous to assist the place where we have so great a stock viceroy seek peace and be refuse and so many of our merchant but the viceroy will not trust i so much as to unman his ship lest I shall come against he and therefore send all the frigate at night into the river with some to capitulate about a peace whereof he have flat answer to the contrary as aforesaid the twelve Lacandas come down inform i from the nabob he be so assure by the jesuit the jesuit factor of state and merchandise affair in the east indies with who he always keep fair weather for his better security if we shall be put to the worse that there be six or eight frigate go to the northwards with four or five fire-boat to be let drive among we in the night and therefore wish careful to look out for that it shall be when we shall least suspect I allow of his kindness be glad of his careful regard although need no such admonition suspect such practice as well when they be out of sight other fire-boat and further from we as when they ride hard by we the thirteen for as much as frigate or other vessel in the off can not so well discern the place of our ship in the dark night for the shadow of the shore though very low therefore in the time of their hellish gunpowder practice they have light for aim give they ashore where fit to come in now night by night we see the like in the like place as before therefore esteem some of their creature again to give aim for their come to like practice though no vessel see by daylight and be former warn as aforesaid to look out for like attempt in hope to take hold of this fire-man at night I send William Gurdin ashore with twenty man craft and subtlety of devil and man ^rove shoot and pike to encompass and take the blazer of the say fire suppose it to be some traitor inhabit these near part who in his passage come near it it will seem present out and again at a instant at another place contrary to their pursuit and so play in and out with they so long that in the end they give it over esteem it some delusion of the devil not know otherwise how to conjecture thereof this present night the viceroy set sail from the bar viceroy depart leave in the river some twenty of his frigate which continue the place shift to relieve each other sometime more and sometime less and keep in the mallabars frigate which be there in service for the defence of the town the fourteen the nabob send i a great man and a soldier who in amity he name his brother to visit i who declare his opinion that the viceroy and all his fleet be go for Goa but some frigate to attend this river and some to return to Diu and Ormus which opinion of his I see no reason for it can not allow of esteem he rather go some-whith to refresh his people to strengthen they against our put forth to sea when no sand shall hinder his great ship to encounter i he also tell i that the king have send down force both to take Damon and all the country along the seaside in which I give he courteous hear believe as I see reason and that they be more willing to give our nation entertainment and trade than ever they do the portugal the which I think he may with very good reason speak because the Portugal have be injurious always and have exercise many vile thing upon they and yet unless we continue able to mate and withstand the portugal force they will unsay that speech again for their own ease after he have see the ship and view our ordnance and all our defensible preparation he desire leave to depart with his train which with all courtesy and our boat in best fashion be perform now our daily endeavour be and long since have be to the clear and begin to lade the hope for England which by the over-top and threaten force of the viceroy former with reason I can not resolve to do though time and liberty will for present have allow the same but by hasty snatch as it come ever we put it in confuse some into one ship and some into another not think fit in so casual a time to hazard all our Cargason in one ship beside it be long before the hope burn mast be new cure and that I resolve to send home the hope it be not altogether for that I esteem her fit of burden for the stow of our good present provide but withal by the many impediment and disability in the ship in and by the master and carpenter daily complain of as that the post within the rudder be unsheathe a strange and dangerous neglect and oversight and therefore fit soon to be return and the loss of our quicksilver in she which lie upon her keel and billage another important cause the eighteen the nabob send Cogearson Allee the sabandar and other merchant of surat to entreat my stay for fifteen day which in no sort I will grant then they importune i for ten day which yet by no mean will I yield unto show how great prejudice to my voyage my stay here so long may be the cause of their request be their fear leave the viceroy after my departure shall come against surat with all his force fear for surat wherefore I consider the weight of this business and the prejudice it may be to ourselves and also be unwilling to send they back with denial see they much discontent thereat as a disgrace unto they and be loath at my departure to give the nabob any distaste therein that have do to my unttermost hitherto to give he all content possible and know what future hindrance it may be to our business ashore and last of all see there be six day work of the ten to be do in the hope before we can be possible ready I at length when they be altogether out of hope thereof and upon departure condescend to their request whereat they be exceed joyful and depart the two and twenty at night I receive a letter from surat inform i of the nabob come to see i the next day the three and twenty in the morning come down two elephant and six camel bring his tent and other provision the four and twenty master aldworth come down with the rest of the merchant to finish all business with i the five and twenty in the morning the nabob come down with a very great train and six elephant more and have be two hour ashore before I know thereof which when it be tell i be sorry for my neglect of he I send master aldworth master Elkington and m. Dodsworth ashore unto he to hold he in discourse until I come unto he which be not long after I purpose to go unto he as a son unto his father in my doublet and hose interview of the nabob and gen. without any arm or great train according to custom thereby to show my trust and confidence that I repose in he but my friend persuade i to the contrary that I shall rather go well appoint and attend on with a sufficient guard to continue the custom whereunto I consent though in conclusion it repent i that I have not take my own course and go ashore with about one hundred and forty man of pike and shot who at my entrance into the nabob tent give i a volley of shot the nabob entertain i very kind seem very joyful of my come ashore to he we sit a while under a very fair tent open on all side round about environ with many people as well of i as of his attendant at length he bring i into a more private room near adjoin have on his side only awl can a great persian captain and the banian Henie for his interpreter and on my side master aldworth master Elkington and master Dodsworth where he confer both of the estate of this country at present and also of our affair at length I demand of he if he will go aboard with i to see the ship whereunto he very willing consent then he present i with his own sword accompany with many good word tell i that it be the custom of their country Nabob give his Sword to honour captain with arm that have deserve well which as he tell i be make in his own house the hilt thereof be of massy gold and in lieu thereof I return he my suit be sword dagger girdle and hanger by i much esteem of and which make a great deal better show though of less value we come both forth of the private tent and I walk down to the waterside there stay his come whither he send i a present of ten Cuttonee quilt and twenty topseell and not long after come the nabob himself he go aboard and then we take boat together and go aboard where have show he the lie of our ordnance and all our warlike preparation for defence I present he with a very fair stand guilt cup with a cover and certain very fair knife and a roundlet of muskadine with some other toy then he desire to see our ordnance shoot off and how far they will carry their shot upon the water and I give he three then he will have take leave but I accompany he to the shore and give he at his departure eleven great shot at our part at the waterside the nabob give i four basket of grape he likewise give the gunner and trumpeter between they two hundred mamudy and among the ship company five hundred mamudy and one hundred book of white Bastas of two mamudy a piece and then after some compliment we take leave one of the other and depart I row along the shore for my better get aboard the tide run so swift and see Lacandas the banian come run towards the boat be send of the nabob to know of i if he shall erect a tomb over my son I return he many thanks and will Lacandas to tell he that I have already begin it then I return aboard and he go to surat and not long after his tent be take down and go after he with the rest of his carriage the six and twenty the nabob son and son in law a very ingenious young man come aboard to take their leaf of i upon who I bestow some knife and other thing which I have leave which can not be much have still have one great man or other to visit i who seldom or never go away without some one present or other so they view the ship and depart the seventeen there come aboard unto i the three son of Allee can the two young first and after they come the elder call Guger can who as yet have never be aboard he present i with two Antelops male and female whereat I be glad since I have send to inquire for some to send home to sir Thomas smith two Antelops but can not procure any I present he with four spanish pike with head and some other thing of my own and show he all the ship with our warlike preparation for defence as also all our ordnance and a little while after he take his leave and at his departure I give he eleven shot march 3 the three of march in the afternoon upon the tide of ebb and a small gale come up northerly to give steer way to our ship we see our friend the malabar which have desire to go with we not attempt to come forth we hasten to get up our anchor and to set sail to proceed on our journey yet see come in from the westward another fleet of Portugal frigate I be willing to show my best in the view of the country people to hinder their come into the river of surat their departure which be nothing for that there be room enough for they to pass by we every way out of the reach of our shot yet we shoot at the near of they without hope to shoot near they but only to show our good will and for encouragement to our friend on land as also for those which go alongst the coast as I esteem to give knowledge to the galleon of our come that they may report also that we shoot at their fellow go to surat that they may also expect that we care the less for their great strength in our passage this night we have diverse flaw of unconstant wind for which we come to anchor for a while afterward see it blow steady though faint we set sail continue our course south by east alongst the shore the enemy force descry at that time the daylight begin to discover to we all thing near we we descry between we and the shore our enemy force of galleon and two galley all come to sail present after they see we and stand after we with a faint gale we stand somewhat without our course with all our sail partly to gain time to make ourselves in perfect readiness to fight partly to refresh my people that have take much pain the night past as also the further I draw they off the coast the further they will be from fresh supply to be send they but ere long the tide of flood be come and little wind to hold our own we come to a anchor while the enemy rest his hope in the wind keep long under sail to his great disadvantage but I not take it for a error in they but of purpose to do we more harm it bring i into a new and great doubt which draw all my power to devise how to prevent this be that now we be at sea they mean to return to surat with all their strength and there to work their will on our friend and good which I have no mean to prevent but by follow they know they dare not unarm nor unfurnish their ship while I be in sight of they but the time now grow so late that I doubt by the most haste that I can make I shall hardly get off the coast before the foul weather come which put i into some hope that the viceroy be so great a soldier and so discreet a gentleman will not expose himself his people and ship to such great peril as the hasten winter do threaten while these th^ngs float in my mind the tide of flood be spend and time to work if we make use of the ebb we to my great content see the viceroy his fleet stand towards we with a fresh gale of wind we likewise set sail and stand away our own course before he all that tide and so spend the night to the best advantage partly by sail and partly by stop the five in the morning we see the enemy have get but little ground of we this day also we spend as before in ride and sail as time serve to our best advantage and for that the Hector go best and the hope logloaden worst I send to the Hector to take in her boat and to prepare for the hope I send to the hope to give direction to hasten to the Hector to be tow and to the end she shall have nothing to hinder she I have her boat to tow at my stern and so spend the night work for the best the wind fresh we have no cause to anchor this night the viceroy ship get much ground of we by this I be get well off from the shore and also a end to the southwards and by his work I recover some assurance to my conceit that these force will not this year annoy surat and for my business for encounter the enemy I have by good leisure well consider how to contrive it and withal I have consider of the case of either and the difference between the viceroy and i I mean in our several satisfaction and content my come hither be by the authority of my king and to follow the design of my employer which be in merchant ship fit for defence wise and sober course and to endeavour by honest commerce without strive to injury any which God have of his tender mercy and bountiful blessing so assist i that we have perform beyond my former conceit and in most thing hitherto God have grant i my heart desire and be now in a good way upon my way with the same with which without further tempt of God or presume of god continue mercy in further deliverance if I by pride swerve from what be just and before he to be allow who mercy have be free and without any cause in i for his own name sake therefore I hold it fit to proceed sober and attend upon the enemy attempt yet not in base manner but in a warlike sort on the other side the unhappy viceroy a famous valiant man therefore now send by his master the king of Spain with ship the principal of India with man all the gallant and principal braggart of those near part of India what to do thankful consideration of god assist our equity and punish the Portugal pride not only to disturb or intercept the peaceable and quiet trade of the english with the subject of the mogul a great king in his own country but to take or burn they so little regard be have to the effusion of christian blood never look towards the judgement of God nor remember that as man do to other they must expect to be do to this captain be furnish with abundance of all thing the country may yield and want nothing but a upright cause fit for God to favour he come to the place where he find what he seek four poor merchant ship a few man and many of they sick and dead and those braggart measure our mind by their own think we will never stand out against so powerful a force as they esteem they have and the conceit of that set those coxcomb a mad to be do mischief to increase their pride which they entitle honour I see the difference and the cause I have to pray to God my only refuge who it please to grant the request of i his poor and unworthy servant in consideration whereof I put forward the business and as it be bait my hook and the fish present run thereat as aforesaid they come three ship and thirty or forty frigate as I imagine with a veaze lay the hope aboard with the flower of all their gallant where by the hand of God in their amaze carriage they receive such a blow as few and they by their extraordinary chance escape with safety and the three ship burn thus it please God to cross their first attempt and never after though they beleaguer we round about by sea with all their sort of ship for many day together our people still in action and half tire with continual labour some receive in good yet bless be God they can never get the advantage to win from we the vallewe of a louse unless our bullet which we lend they his fire-boat fail and nothing prosper and once in four and twenty hour I send he a defiance for many day together to try his temper all which must needs lie heavy on the stomach of a gentleman of so great courage I esteem now he will hazard much to recover some of his honour former lose but crave pardon for this my digression I will now return and proceed with my former business wherefore the six in the morning betimes I send for my master and let he know that my purpose be that when the viceroy shall come up near with we that we will all at once cast about with he and charge he first on the sudden to strike a unexpected terror in the heart of his people who now be brag see we go away before they and to that end I now go aboard every ship to give they all direction and more that I will cause the Hector with her pinnace and i to take in a hundred fardel of the hope good to lighten she and mend she go which business by reason of my pinnace to help I stay to see it do so that it grow to be midday near which time my ship which I leave far asterne for my better come aboard strike sail whereat as we imagine the viceroy see the admiral strike her sail to fall a stern may take it of purpose to stay for he in contempt he with his consort bear up with the shore and give over the hope of their fortune by further follow of we which course I like very well since he be so patient for there be nothing under his foot that can make amends for the loss of the worst man finger I have beside I wish no occasion to fight r^sh fight be ^ather humour than honour for that which I have already pay for I be already possess on and I be so far from the humour to fight for honour unless for the honour of my king or country that I have rather save the life or life of one of my poor people then kill a thousand enemy have now finish with the viceroy I set myself to write letter for the dispatch of the hope yet still think to have hale into the bar of Goa to prove if I can have leave some commendation there for the viceroy at his return this be my great desire that I long promise yet so long trifle in dispatch of the hope that we be shoot far past it before we have finish the same the rest of this journal be * * s^nce this be wri^ten I h^ue obtain m elkingtons journal wherein you may proceed wi^h this worthy captain to Bantam and thence to his grave his history succeed this as himself do ^n the general place of command want for he be also want which shall have perfect it but alas this be the imperfection of man best perfection death lie in ambush to entrap who by open force you see he can not devour he die in this voyage and follow his son have leave this glorious act sacrum the memorable epitaph of his worth savour of a true heroic disposition piety and valour be in he season with gravity and modesty we will not with heathen poet cry out of cruel immature fate for death have prevent unto he possibility of disastrous event which as shadow follow the body in great light and leave his live memory here have lift his lively part and virtuous spirit to receive the applause and praise and reward of God and with God to who be glory for ever amen chap. 12 relation of master ELKINGTON and master DODSWORTH touch the former voyage @. i. collection take out of the journal of captain THOMAS ELKINGTON successor to captain NICHOLAS downton in the voyage aforesaid write by himself the first of january 1613. the new ship build at Detford be launch and call the new-yeares-gift Soldania the three of march we come to a anchor in the down the thirty of june we set sail from the bay of Soldania here at this time which be their dead of winter it be temperate rather incline to cold than heat we have little refresh but water and fish the people be wretched neither sow nor plant dwell in small cottage make of hides and so join many of they in a round circle have their cattle in the midst they be brown but by grease themselves become almost black and in the wind unsavoury a dozen yard off filch treacherous unworthy so good a land which in likelihood with culture will be very fertile the six of August we have sight of saint Laurence this night Robert water depart a man long disease in body the cry of blood disturb in mind by torment of conscience for a man by he kill in Virginia cowardly come behind he and knock he on the head for which he obtain his pardon in the court of man but in the inward and spiritual be thus pursue to his death s. Augustine here in the bay of saint Augustine we wooded and water some go up the river and come to their house or shed which be small thing set up with cane and cover with a thing like a hurdle make of the leaf of the palm tree the people flee and leave all that be nothing but a little Cotton spin or on the distave with a few necessary the eleleventh and twelve we buy cattle in exchange of silver chain they take the value of twenty penny or two shilling in a chain for a ox which in money will cost five or six shilling they be very good feed it seem within the land for we see nothing but sand and wood without any grass at all the nine of September we have sight of Socatora and pass by tamarind bay come to anchor in Delisha the one and twenty of October we come into the road of * * of occurrent here read the former and next follow discourse Swally after the fight on the twenty of january in which three Portugal ship be burn and two frigate sink and timber procure for the hope main mast which the nabob cause to be do so wary that it seem he be afraid lest the portugal may know it on the four and twenty come a jesuite with another fellow from the viceroy to entreat of peace with Magrib^can who on the seven and twenty send the viceroy one hundred and fifty maunds meal one hundred sheep twenty five maunds conserve with hen etc. in the afternoon the sabandar request i to read a letter from the viceroy which signify that whereas by the padre he be inform that the nabob desire to make peace in his master name and have appoint for treaty thereof the sabandar Isaac beg and he also have hearken thereto and appoint three other to that business bind himself to perform their agreement on the one and thirty the sabandar come unto i and tell i that no peace can be with the portugal they refuse to make any restitution for damage or good take but rather require money of they and that the viceroy have send to all part thereabouts for more force after their fire device frustrate they all set sail both ship juncke galley and frigate and road at the bar of surat the Hector have take one of their frigate which be employ to tow the fire-boat and in she seven man three slay four live soon after they depart and we also weigh the second of March on the four we descry the Portugal fleet which present give we chase and the next day also on the six the general come aboard we to wish we to make ready he purpose to turn and give the onset on they but about noon the portugal bear up the helm and stand in for the shore and within three hour after we lose sight of they the ten at night the hope depart from we the fifteen we see three spout of water not far from we one whereof very big continue half a hour the nineteen we double cape Comorine spout of water a. d. 1615. the ten of May the wind and current against we the general go to a green island to the north of the salthill and there come to a anchor in twenty fathom good ground sandy we seek freshwater but find none we see pig and hog on the island and gather good store of Coco nut about this island be good ride be twelve fathom within a stone throw of the shore the pinnace fetch water at a island four league off which be brackish we find water in the island beyond the burn one the second of june we come to a anchor in Bantam Road. the three of july we weigh mace and receive silk for the furnish of the Solomon for Masulipatan wherein we conclude to send for merchant George chancie Ralph Preston Masulipatan Humphrey Elkington Timothy mallory George savage and Robert savage the eight of july we lade porcelain in she and then come news by a juncke from the Moluccas of the Thomasine be there and of twelve sail of hollander at ternate which hinder all man they can from trade the eleven our old house escape great danger of a fire near it on the twenty master jordan receive letter from master ball at macassar of the violent course which the fleming use with he beat he from thence Holland abuse of we at macassar as also that they purpose with their whole force to come to take Bantam and to place the king of Motran in the government the one and twenty master Bennet set sail in the Solomon the five and twenty the advice and attendance come into the road have be out of England eight month at the cape they meet with the globe and james to who they spare eighteen man they depart towards England july the seventeen and they hither the eighteen meet with a ship near the cape which we judge to be the samaritan or hope from England the five of August I be aboard with the general then very ill and the next day have word of his departure who follow on the eight master Euans the preacher general downton his death by order in the box m. Elkington succeed advice go to japan tempest and master Hambden as be suppose by take they both be well a little before on the eleven the advice be dispee for japan with twenty two person bring out of England five black and Fernando the Spaniard the fourteen return the concord from Socodanna and macassar that night be much rain thunder and lightning the church or meskit of Bantam split in two with a thunderbolt and the chief priest almost slay which the king and people take as a ill presage and therefore determine to make peace with jacatra the sixteenth the thomasines boat come into Bantam with twenty two english and f^ue black which tell of the cast away of the Thomasine on certain flat Thomasine lose twenty two league from macassar the night before Wilson the master be careless and all the company asleep save he which be at the helm the money they save and bring with they master Baily signify also that the wrack company there enforce he to pay they their wage which we cause they to restore the nineteen the fleming put into the bilbowe three black that master Baily bring with he from celoar pretend they take they climb over their pale hollander quarrel and abuse also that they be take form a place which they protect and therefore will keep they we be many way most vile abuse by they nor be any way to right we except we shall go together by the ear this as we conceive be wrought of purpose and the black entice by they and willing to it as be take by force which after that I know I be offend with master Baily m. baily injustice be a mean that whereas heretofore we have be in all place well entreat that we shall be hate as men-robber which the fleming to disgrace we will not let to blaze abroad the thirteen of September the watch espy a fire in the thatch over master jordan lodging which be soon quench it be throw there purposely we find the cane wherein it be do for which we suspect Francisco the Spaniard turn javan the same night the like happen in two or three place of the town but all prevent Puloway the second of October Sophonee cossock merchant come in a small pinnace from Puloway one of the land of Banda with a Orancaya to confer of trade the two and twenty I with master bring and master boil go ashore to confer with the flemish general touch certain idle complaint make by they of our mariner who and the precedent I find very impatient call we insolent * * call who^^ first Dutch policy be it such a crime to be english letter from Banda with offer of trade etc. english and with threat tell we our pride will have a fall with many other disgraceful word this be the entertainment of that boorish general garret Reynes in his own house show the like or worse to master ball come aboard he at Banda and four of our man entreat passage with he thence to Cambello upon no cause he carry they thither in the bilbowe the three of November I go ashore captain jordan call together the merchant and send for the Orancaya of Banda have have his letter translate the effect whereof be that in regard of the ancient friendship between the english and they and especial with captain Keel^ng withal be provoke by the cruelty of the hollander their earnest desire be to trade only with the english for the spice of Puloway Pulerons and conditional that the english will furnish they with victual munition and ordnance and help they to recover the castle of and that some may be send to Banda to confer hereof with the Orancayas to which be answer that for help to recover we can not do it without order from England for ordnance at present we be unprovided what we can we will which be to furnish they with victual and what other provision we can till further order out of England and to trade with they for spice purpose to send a ship and some to confer with the Orancayas how we shall be secure and whether they will permit we a fort on shore the two and twenty be five hollander ride without four of which come from mauritius island have come out of Holland nineteen month pass where they find general butt cast away with three ship two utter lose the three man and good save the four go home with a jury mast in company of a small pinnace that come thither by chance one of these ship that be at the mauritius come away before the rest who they find drive to and again before the straits mouth have lose one hundred and sixty man and leave in she but eight the five and twenty by a letter from Priaman we have news of the death of master Oxewike and Samuel negus @. 2 a brief of memorial observe and write by m. EDWARD DODSWORTH merchant in the former voyage which return in the hope the sixteenth of October in the bay of surat come aboard we master aldworth and master steel and the next day in consultation it be demand of master aldworth according to the company * * this commission have six question of which I take that which be fit for the public commission concern Paul Canning of his carriage and respect with the king to which he answer that be well and this good till the jesuit have make know that he be a merchant and not immediate send from our king after that neglect since which he * * of his death you h^d before in n. w. his relation by poison as be think from the jesuit t. elk. die also he think fit that some one of our nation of good respect shall remain at court to right we in those wrong which might be offer to this function master Edward be choose as a man most answerable to the company commission to go for agra some question be make whether he shall proceed in name and profession of a merchant according to the strictness of the commission which master aldworth conceited will procure he disrespect with the k^ng after much contest some way be give to master Edward lest they shall seem contrary to each other in their proceed it be before by some give out that he be the king messenger all this while we hear not from the chief at surat nor have any encouragement or so much as refresh whereupon I be send with a letter to the nabob and doubt to get into the city be force to stay by the way and lie in a poor gonge and the next day be courteous entertain but have Nicholas vphlet with i for interpreter a man know and hate by the nabob for employment in captain Hawkins debt and affair he depart discontent (@) co^anozan with other to receive my letter I refuse to deliver it to they in the afternoon I be admit and he seem much discontent at our want of refreshment as not know it promise reformation and the next day go to talk with the general at Swally who have come into that road on the one and twenty nevertheless we have find nothing but delay and the nine and twenty he send the Sabander to acquaint we that we shall look for no trade or kindness except we will assist they against the Portugal which the general refuse further than his commission give leave he also desire leave by his letter that his merchant may come aboard with their good so to depart to some other place where with safety he may deliver his majesty letter and present to the mogoll master Elkington and master aldworth go with this letter * * these word follow and some other I have here insert out of master E^kingtons journal but Magro can will not so much as look on we but take it very scornful and go his way and send the sabandar with answer as before the second of November we have sour entertainment of he tell we if we will stay we may if we will go we may go either in god or the devil name for our other demand refer we to Isaak beg and the sabandar who will yield we nothing the common people seem well affect to we the great to desire our room rather than our company but so that we think none of they dare gainstand the king whereupon it be conclude that the good shall be land which according be do but in the Alfandica we can find no reasonable ratement on the good nor ^ave to carry away any thing till the Na^ob have see they and take what he please as he have do in open man che^^s nei^her mariner nor merchant escape without trifle take from they harsh and barbarous deal no reason after give for it search to the very pillow and pocket not spare master Edward himself custome the case bottle apparel or what we bring for necessary use as if they seek by foul usage to weary we the fifteen Magro can himself come to the and seal up the king present which he be desirous to see although he have promise that they shall pass without open he desire to have all the picture and combe-case which we say be to go for agra that the king may have his choice whereupon notwithstanding he be offer part of they he fall into great choler and object sir Henry Middleton his proceed in the Red-sea wish master aldworth to write to the king for satisfaction which be answer to have be already end by captain best as the article manifest he conclude yet with fair promise but the effect be defect and delay we b^ing not permit to carry away the king present the picture by lie in the sun be break and warp in vile manner we also in danger to lose the monson and the king present with musket and fowling-piece take from our man be carry to his house and nothing permit we except he may first see the king present which we at last yield unto and Magro can as much as he can disgrace boast of his respect with the King and thus have we leave to remove they the four and twenty come a from the mogoll which the nabob according to their custom meet in state two mile out of the city with six hundred horse and the next day we be kind entertain and he give master Edward eight hundred and fifty mamudy thirty piece of topseell ten of fine calico etc. the money to carry up the present the king not willing to charge they that bring they the stuff and calico for such as shall accompany they to the merchant also he give fifteen piece of topseel five to each wi^h his chop for our departure and kind promise all in the s^ght of he which bring the the thirty master Edward and we set forward towards Amadavar the second of December we come to baroche from whence the governor send a guard of soldier with we to demylode and there have a new convoy of fifty horse and foot to Charmondo whence we depart on the seven with five and twenty soldier all notorious thief as we after find with these we go 10 and pitch in a plain where we barricade ourselves as former we use with our cart at supper time we have be assault with fifty horseman which come close upon we have they not find we well provide the charge we carry be certain know through all the country as we travel the eight we come to and give the governor a present which he accept kind but request a further kindness to see our mastifle dog a mastiff dog in request this city stand in a plain which seem fertile and be well water a thing not so common in those part we depart hence with one hundred horse and foot which voluntary offer that service in regard especial of the king present employ by the governor not without charge to we and come to arras arras a town of Banians steel and crowther heir journal follow a town inhabit for the most part with banians where their superstition of not kill any thing cause we bad entertainment on the thirteen we come to Amadavas hence we give commission to Richard steel and John crowther for their persian journey and hence the second of january master Edward depart from we for agra all this while find the merchant here in hope of peace with the portugal to enhance the price of their indigo we resolve to go to sarques to make trial with the country people sarques who be the maker of it which on the seven we do and find good employment in four day pack up four hundred farthel and master aldworth return to Amadavas find they now more tractable sarques be thence 3 distant the town not big but count the best soil for indigo in those part the trial thereof chief by water as at amadavas jambrozerch by fire all of they ready to put trick on we by mingle or otherwise at sarques be two of the most ancient monument in those part monument and pilgrimage one of a chie^e prophet there entomb to which many pilgrim resort from far the other of their ancient king to the north of the town be the place where can can first put the guzerates the ancient inhabitant to flight the rest of the kingdom be short after conquer by Ecbar this king father this place of the victory be strong wall with brick some mile and half in circuit plant with fruit and water pleasant and a costly house call victory erect in which he reside for a time but now in Bramport the four and twenty we go to the governor for his leave to depart which he grant but hear of diverse rob and murder that night close by the city order be give that we shall stay till a sufficient guard be make ready for we the next morning we have letter from m. Elkington of the arrival of the Portugal viceroy with a strong force to drive we out of the country the fight betwixt the english and portugal see of it more in my pilgrimage l. 5. c. 7. s. 4. out of the relation of diverse of the hope company at that time as also captain Downtons own voyage the general to procure some weaken of their strength cause the hope to fall down to the southermost sand think in eager pursuit some of they will be drive aground present three of the small ship and thirty six frigate be send to board she hope to tow she away thrice the enemy enter and be thrice repulse and force at last to leap overboard think in their frigate to save themselves who receive such hot discourse from the other ship that they can not relieve they so that many be swallow by the sea other slay aboard to the number as be report of three hundred at least the ship which have board the hope be now in despair and out of all hope cut from she and seize instant by the two desperate hopeless merciless element fire and the sea recommend some bone or ash of their burn carcase to the ground and shore the six and twenty we depart with forty cartload of indigo and other good and come the seven and twenty to Mundevas where the gate be shut upon we by sarde can command which put we in much doubt we procure one to speak with the governor who tell he of letter that he have receive from Mocrib can of our general proceed at Swally and the safety of surat by the english wish he by no mean to suffer we to return without a sufficient guard which the next day shall be ready for our safe departure the twenty nine we depart at Brodera sarde can man take up more soldier to assist they many robbery and murder be daily commit and diverse company of rashboote lie in the way to intercept the second of February above three hundred rashboot assault we in a narrow lane enclose on both side with thick hedge where we can not hurt they as they do our Caffila with their arrow and shot we therefore make what haste we can for the plain mean while they cut off two of our coach but have get the plain we make a stand where they betake they to their hedge again and leave we to look to their prey lest one thief may rob another many of our company be hurt whereof Humphrey elkinton for one the next day we get to baroche and on the five to surat and thank Mocrib can for his care and hear of a assault the portugal will next day give we with his profess love and leave go the next day to Swally and come aboard but the portugal deceive our expectation the nine the poor inhabitant of Swally bring we word of two fire-boat to be send with the next ebb to fire our ship which endanger more than endamage the hope the night follow they attempt the like with four other chain together which with the advantage of the tide and attendance of small boat come but frustrate in their success save to themselves four of their company take and their boat burn to the keel the captive confess this the last of the viceroy design for this year he be enforce for want of water and victual to return for Goa the examination of Domingo Francisco take in Swally roade aboard the gift February 20. 1614 he say that he be bear in Lisboa be the son of a mariner and serve Nuna acuna in the fight against captain best in one of the four galleon and afterward go for Macao upon the border of China and return again to Goa where he have remain ten month and be two month since command to come in a Gallion call the s. Anthony in this expedition for the port of Swally where the eight of this month he be take the viceroy don jeronimo the viceroy and his force and purpose galleon six their captain burden man and munition come as this examinate further say to the destruction of the english at surat with these force his own ship call the all-saint of eight hundred ton burden have three hundred man and twenty eight piece of ordnance Michael de Soozo captain of the s. Bennet of seven hundred ton have one hundred and fifty man and twenty piece John Cayatho captain of the s. Laurence of six hundred ton have one hundred and sixty man eighteen piece Francisco Henriques captain of the s. Christopher so much burden have one hundred and fifty nine man and ordnance as the former Francisco captain of the s. jeronymo of five hundred ton have one hundred and eighty man sixteen piece Gaspar meal captain of the s. Anthonio of four hundred ton have a hundred and forty man fourteen piece the ship be the s. Peter of two hundred ton three ship captain Francisco Cavaco man one hundred and fifty piece eight the s. Paul of two hundred ton captain don John de Mescarena one hundred fifty man eight piece the pinnace one hundred twenty ton captain Andrea de quellio eighty man four piece Lewes captain of one galley two galley Diego Suro of the other in each fifty man of the frigate there be sixty have twenty soldier a piece and eighteen oar on a side the supply which come after frigate be two ship of two hundred ton a piece two India junke and eight small boat employ to fire we the admiral ordnance be all of brass of the other five galleon half of brass half of iron against all which the almighty bless be his name protect we the five and twenty the nabob visit the general both ashore and aboard and the general think fit with consent of the rest that I shall return with the hope for England the three of march we weigh from Swally ride the next day have sight of the Portugal fleet the six we expect they will have fight and prepare our fight but at noon they bear up for Goa on the eleven we part from the general they bind for Achen and Bantam we for England on the twelve we hold our course by the north end of the where by experience we find many shoald and land lay in the plait most false false plait as may seem of purpose that these sea may seem more dangerous than they be the seventeen of june 1615. we arrive at Saldania bay where we find a fleet of four sail English find for surat under the command of captain keeling which after consultation hold and news of the state there depart on the twenty of cross and his company of condemn person ^et on shore here see after in peytons voyage I meet with cross and his company there left to make a discovery and entreat some of they to acquaint Coree with my come which by the way be set upon by the savage and wound and thereupon four musket deliver cross at his request who procure Corce to come down with his whole family and ^fter that some cattle he tell of the discord among the savage whereby the mountainer sometime rob they the six and twenty we depart leave our long boat to cross with powder shot and provision in twenty nine degree north we meet with a holland ship come from the mauritius set forth thither to cut wood which seem a bastard ebony where contrary to their expectation they find the lamentable wrack of four ship come from Bantam and the Moluccas break on the rock the good and man of two of they lose of the three most of the good save and with part thereof this ship lade the four drive to sea by a storm return with a jury main mast the master promise we company but find we a hindrance after ten day leave we without so much kindness as a farewell or carriage of a letter which I impute to their inbred boorish disposition ill weather follow and we be much weaken yet I thank God without the loss of any till my arrival in Ireland thwart of the river of Limerike the seven and twenty of October 1615. there also entertain with a storm till a scottish bark cross with contrary wind be hire to pilot we into harbour where also a remainder of captain m. his ungodly crew which late have obtain their pardon put i in fear till sir Henry Foliot secure we with a supply of man and I dispee letter to London chap. 13 a journal of the journey of RICHARD steel and JOHN crowther from Azmere in India the place of the great mogul residence to Spahan the royal seat of the king of Persia in the affair of the east indian society ann. 1615. 1616. the seventeen of march march 17. 1614 richard still or steele 1614 after we have be detain in Azmere from February m. Edward have receive a letter from the mogul unto our king deliver a copy thereof together with his letter unto Richard steel and take leave promise to procure the king firman for our safety and speed and to send it after we to agra where he will we to stay for it we go that night two course to mandill we have four servant two horse and a Camel the eighteen to Bandersandree a small Aldea twelve course the nineteen ten course to Mosobade a course be a mile and half and in some place two mile English the twenty to Pipelo 13 c. the one and twenty to chadfoole a town 7 the two and twenty to Lalscotte 13 the three and twenty to mogul Serac 12 the four and twenty to hendowne 14 the five and twenty to Bramobad 12 the six and twenty to fetipore 12 this have be a fair city build by Echabar and have within it a goodly house belong to the King it be wall round with a fair wall and both within and round about have many spacious garden and place of pleasure now it go to ruin and much ground within the wall be sow with corn the king carry much of the fair stone to agra his new city the seven and twenty to agra 12 in the english house at agra we find one Richard barber a apothecary which come over with sir Robert Shirley he be send by m. kerridge to look to Nicholas withington Biana the place of fine indigo within two day journey of agra we pass by the country and city of Biana where the fine indigo be make the best be then worth six and thirty Rupias the Maun at agra but in the country much cheap the three of April perceive the firman come not and the heat of the year come on we depart leave order with Richard barber to send it after we we come that night to a call Boutta diverse seraes build by great man fair building to entertain traveller de or a ancient city 6 the four to a town call Multra 14 and lay in a fair there we receive the firman the five to a call Chatta 12 the six to a build by Chan Azam 9 the seven to a sera build by Shec ferreede call Purwell 11 the eight to another goodly sera by the same founder 10 the nine to a city 9 which be great and ancient in time past the seat of the king where many of they lie bury at this time many great man have their garden and house of pleasure there and there be bury whereby it be beautify with goodly building the inhabitant for the most part Banians poor and beggarly by reason of the king long absence the ten to Bunira 10 the eleven to culluower 12 the twelve to Pampette 12 a pretty small city where be make diverse sort of girdle sash and great store of linen cloth and they have store of handicraft the thirteen to carnal 12 the fourteen to Tanisera 14 the fifteen to shavade 10 the sixteenth to mogoll sera or gaugur 15 the seventeen to Sinan a ancient city where be make store of linen 14 the eighteen to 15 the nineteen to pullower 11 we pass this day a great river by boat call sietmege very broad but full of shoald and run west into sinda the twenty to nicouder a small town 11 the one and twenty to sultanpoare a old town have a river run to the north and a bridge with six arch here be store of linen clothe make four course from it we pass another small river the two and twenty to Chiurmul 11 this day by boat we pass a river as broad as the Thames at Gravesend call Vian run westward into sinda upon the bank whereof be pitch Chan Allom the king ambassador into Persia who camp seem a little city the three and twenty to Chan Channa sera 17 the four and twenty to Lahoare 7. @. lahor (@) of the country all the country betwixt agra and Lahore be exceed well till and manure be the best of India and plentiful of all thing it yield great store of powder sugar the best be worth betwixt two three quarter and two and a half the great maund of forty here all the way be set on both side with tree the most of they bear a kind of mulberry it be dangerous in the night for thief but in the day secure every five or six course there be seraes bu^lt by the king or some great man very fair for the beautify of the way memory of their name seraes what and wherefore build and entertainment of traveller in these you shall have a chamber and place to tie your horse also store of Horsemeat but in many of they but little good to be have for man by reason of the banians when a man have take up his lodging no other may dispossess he in the morning about day break all man make ready to depart together and then be the gate open before no man be suffer to depart for fear of thief this be a tedious travail for within two hour after the sunrising we be scarce able to endure the heat lahore lahore be a goodly great city and one of the fair and ancient of India it stand on the river Indus or sinda and from this place come the treasure of the portugal trade when they have peace as be the centre of all indian traffic and here they embark the same down the river for tatta tatta whence they be transport for Ormus and persia. the merchant also pa^^^ng that way betwixt Persia and India pay they freight they do likewise drive a great trade up this river for pepper and spice furnish these part of India therewith at this present the merchant of India assemble at lahore and invest a great part of their money in commodity and join themselves in caravans to pass the mountain of Candahar into Persia by which way be general report to pass twelve or fourteen thousand camel lade whereas heretofore scarce pass three thousand the rest go by the way of Ormus these merchant be put to great charge betwixt lahore and Spahan beside great cold in winter and ^^ate in summer and the badness of the way spend six or seven month betwixt those two place they be say to reckon every camel lade to stand they in one hundred and twenty or one hundred and thirty Rupias Persia be that way furnish with pepper and spice from Masulipata^ over land in lahore we stay from the four and twenty of April until the th^^teenth of May to refresh ourselves and our tire beast and to provide servant and necessaries for the way we also here procure letter from a ambassador of the persian King the thirteen of May we depart with intent to overtake a caravan which be go two month before and go that day to chacksunder a small town 11 the fourteen to 15 the fifteen to mutteray 8 the sixteenth to quemal Chan 19 the seventeen to 16 the eighteen to Alicasava 12 the nineteen to Trumba 12 this day we overtake a small Caravan which go from lahor eight day before we the twenty to sedouschall 14 the one and twenty to callixeckebaud 15 the two and twenty to multan 12 this be a great and ancient city within three course of it Indus run it yield white linen and diaper all caravans be constrain to stay at this river eight ten or twelve day before they can get leave of the governor to pass to the end that the city be poor may get somewhat we be stay five day and then be fain to make way with a present the eight and twenty we pass the river and go to Pettoallee a small village 20 the nine and twenty we pass another great river by boat and the same night come to a small river call Lacca where we find the caravan aforesaid we present the caravan bassa with a looking-glass and knife who wish we to pitch our tent near to he that we may have no wrong offer we the caravan have be here ten day and stay till the second of june to procure a convoy of horseman to conduct they to Chatcza a small fort in the mountain have hear of the mountainer injury to a former Caravan the second of june we dislodge and enter that night into the mountain 12 where we be distress for want of fresh water the water be brackish the three and four we travel all night climb high mountain and follow water course with diverse wind twelve course but in direct line not above six the five we follow the course of a river full of great pebble 8 the six we rest the seven we go 4 still cross the say river the eight 8 the nine twelve the ten three and come to Chatcza which be a little fort the wall build of mud enclose with a ditch where the mogoll maintain eighty or one hundred horseman to secure the way from thief but they themselves be as very thief as any where they find opportunity the captain of the castle exact upon every camel of the caravan two abacees although nothing be due by reason he and he have wage of the King in all this way betwixt Lacca and Chatcza we find not any sustenance for man or beast except in some place a little grass and therefore we be constrain at Lacca to make provision hire a ox for that purpose to carry barley for our horse the agwan so they call the mountaine-people come down to we every day where we lodge rather to espy what they can steal then to buy as they pretend the twelve in the evening have make provision for three day we go thence 14 that night the thirteen 10 the fourteen 10 this day the people come down to we and bring sheep goat meal butter and barley in great abundance sufficient for ourselves and our cattle at reasonable price and from this place forward the people daily do the like sometime also bring felt and course carpet stripe the fifteen we go 6 the sixteenth 4 the seventeen ten the eighteen 9 the nineteen 9 to a little town of the agwan call Duckee where the Mogore maintain a garrison with a little square fort the wall build of mud a good height distant a mile from the town here we stay three day because the Caravan can not agree with the captain of the castle who pretend a duty on every camel which at last they pay one Abacee and a half on each the three and twenty we go 6 the four and twenty we pass by a place call Secota or three castle because of three village trianglewise situate on the side of a hill near together we go 8 the five and twenty we rest by reason of foul weather the six and twenty 10 the seven and twenty 14 this day we pass the durue or gate of the mountain be narrow strait have rock on both side very high durue or strait of the hill whence with stone a few may stop the passage of a multitude and diverse caravans have be in these place cut off this night where we lodge we suffer diverse insolence from the agwan and on the morrow they exact of we as we pass by a small village call Coasta two A^acees and a half on each camel the eight and twenty 5 the nine and twenty by Abdun a village 8 the thirty 6 @. the first of july 7 to a place call Pesinga a small fort much like unto Duckee where be store of soldier for secure the way the captain exact half a abacee upon a camel Pesinga the three we leave the caravan and go forward 6 the four we pass a mighty mountain and descend into the plain 14 the five 20 we be distress for want of grain for our cattle the six in the like distress for they and ourselves 12 the seven to Candahar 8 @. these mountain of Candahar be inhabit by a fierce people call agwan or Candahar the mountain very strong of body somewhat white than the indian great robber accustom to cut off whole caravans but at present partly for fear of the mogoll and partly through sweet find by commerce in vent their grain sheep and goat of which they have great store and buy of course linen and other necessary they be become more civil yet if they can take any straggle by themselves or stay behind they will sell they above in the mountain and hox they to prevent run away and put they to grind grain with hand-mil and other servile drudgery the city the city of Candahar be ancient the inhabitant ancient Banians there now reside the governor of the country and a garrison maintain by the mogoll of twelve or fifteen thousand horseman in regard of the persian neighbourhood to the north. and westward it be environ with a mighty steep craggy rock and to the south and to the east with a strong wall by reason of frequent passage of caravans it be much enlarge late that the suburb be big than the city for within this two year that the way of Ormus be stop up by the war betwixt the persian and portugal all caravans which pass betwixt India and Persia must of necess^tie go by this place and here they do hire camel to go into India and at their return for persia. they can return also without the governors leave which cause they to stay a month and when least sixteen or twenty day whereby it be much inhabit with lewd people as all such place of resort common be provision of victual be there in great abundance for man and beast yet dear by so great concourse trade it yield not of itself but accidental by the meeting of indian persian and Turkey merchant which be not willing to travel further at twenty cento profit at this place the caravans which go to India do join for great strength in pass the mountain of Candahar and those which come from thence here break into small company for in many place great will not find provision barrenness of the border of the mogoll and persian for all Persia especial betwixt this and Spahan be barren where sometime in two or three day travel there be no green thing to be see only some water and that also often brackish stink and naught we stay here fourteen day partly to refresh our body weaken with heat and travail John crowther be so weak that he fear he shall not be able to travel further and partly for company the three and twenty of july we depart Candahar in company of three armenians and a dozen persian merchant and go 10 to a village call seriabe the four and twenty 12 to Deabage a small or village the five and twenty 8 to Cushecunna a small castle where the Mogor have a garrison in the utmost confine of his dominion the persian country the six and twenty 17 and lay by a river side in the open field the seven and twenty 4 to a castle call Greece the first of the king of Persias here we deliver the ambassador letter receive at lahore to the governor and present he with a looking-glass and three knife he will take nothing of we for our camel whereas other pay five abacees upon a camel he promise to safe-conduct we and to send a company of horse to carry we to the next government but we see none neither be we sorry for it for that he be little better than a rebel farsing paras^nge of 60. furlong and all his people thief the eight and twenty at night we depart and lodge near unto a call Malgee two farsing every farse be two indian course and a half the nine and twenty ten farsing and lodge in the open field where be nothing to be have but water the thirty five farsing to Gazichan a small castle the one and thirty five farsing to a old ruin fort where be nothing to be have but water and that stink the first of August five farsing to a old fort call where we pay a abacee and half on a camel and stay one day to refresh our cattle which be call make of Mochoane the three to Bacon a old castle seven farsing the four in the open field nothing but water Farra sun-dryed brick four farsing the five four farsing the six to Farra five farsing this be a little town wall with a high wall of brick about dry in the sun as be all the castle and most of the building of those part four square a mile about have a pretty Bazar vault overhead to keep from rain wherein all necessary be sold. it stand in a good soil and have plenty of water without which in this country nothing be to be have and it be strange to see where there be any good spot of ground which be here but little with what labour and industry they bring water to it water how precious in some place three or four mile together by trench underground at this town all merchant which go into Persia be force to stay seven or eight or ten day together where the king treasurer see the weight of all their pack and esteem they at so much the Maune as he think fit and take three custom at their come into Persia they be use with great favour for they fear lest complaint shall be make to the king which will have merchant kind entreat but at their go into India they use all extremity search they to the skin for gold which to transport or any coin of silver out of Persia but the king be death likewise they look narrow for horse and slave which the king will not have transport here we stay two day for certain armenians with who we go leave our former company the nine one farse to a river the ten in the open field seven farsing the eleven four farsing to a small village where we have store of provision the twelve four farsing where we dig for water the thirteen eight farsing the fourteen to draw a village five farsing where we stay a day which be the custom once in four day for such as travel with lade camel to rest the sixteenth three farsing the seventeen four farsing the eighteen to zaidebasha five farsing where be good store of carpet to be buy the nineteen to mude a village where be also carpet the twenty to birchen five farsing where be store of fine felt carpet of camel hair make from two to five abacees the Maune here we stay a day the two and twenty to deazaide where they pretend all to be religious and have store of carpet to sell at cheap rate the three and twenty three farsing the four and twenty five farsing to choore a old ruin town the five and twenty three farsing the six and twenty seven farsing the water brackish and stink the seven and twenty to dehuge where be a pretty stream of hot water which be put into any vessel become cool and health-some the eight and twenty seven farsing to Curma the nine and twenty to tobaz five farsing we pay half a abacee a camel Tobaz salt desert at Tobaz all caravans do rest at least four or five day the better to be able to pass the salt desert adjoin be four long day journey wherein many miscarry we find there a small Caravan of one hundred camel which go the next day here and in the former village be store of date and three thousand Maune yearly of the fine silk in Persia which be carry to yade a fair city where they have the like and be make into satin and damask yade the king will not suffer it to be transport especial into Turkey but the portugal carry it into Portugal Yades be about twelve day journey from Spahan and twelve farsing out of the way of India the thirty we go nine farsing over the desert lay in the field and send our beast three mile out of the way for water it be exceed salt the one and thirty ten farsing where the water be not all so brackish the first of September five farsing where we go two mile for water the second to a small castle nine farsing little provision the three five farsing lay in the field send far for water the four to Seagan ten farsing the five four farsing the six to Irabad a castle ten farsing where we pay half a abacee on a camel the seven six farsing the eight to Ardecan eight farsing where we stay till the ten then go to Sellef four farsing the eleven to gaurume a small castle three farsing the twelve nine farsing to a spring in the field the thirteen to beava three farsing the fourteen to Goolabad four farsing from whence Richard steel ride before to Spahan the fifteen to Morea shavade five farsing the sixteenth to Coopa five farsing the seventeen to sab five farsing the eighteen four farsing and lay in the field the nineteen three farsing and come to Spahan Richard steel reach thither the fifteen at noon and find sir Robert Shirley dispatch from the persian king in embassage to the king of Spain with he his lady and for his chaplain a friar of the barefoot order with five and fifty Portugal prisoner and his own follower both persian and armenians speed for Ormus to embark for Lisbon the purpose be that see the portugal be not able to stand the spaniard may be bring in six friar remain in hostage till his return at Spahan who otherwise the king have vow to cut in piece which he be likely enough to do who have do to death his own son and commit a thousand other severity Richard steel deliver his letter to sir Robert who dare scarce read they but now and then by stealth fear the portugal shall know of they of sir Robert Shirley his land read peytons first voyage and of the rest of his journey his second he after say it be too late to look after that business for our nation and seem discontent with the company and the master and merchant which land he but at last say he be a Englishman and promise to effect our desire and the friar be absent carry both on the nineteeth to the master of the ceremony or maimondare and take we with he to the great Vizier Sarek Hogea who present call his scrivans and make draught of what we desire viz. three one which John crowther have for surat one for Richard steel to carry into England the three send to jasques to the governor all be seal with the king great seal and to this effect that all governor of seaport within his majesty dominion shall kind entertain the english ship etc. the same day that these be end depart sir Robert Shirley be the last of September towards sirrah with great pomp and much honour etc. your worship at command RICHARD steele your worship servant ever to be commend JOHN crowther the chief commodity of Persia be raw-silke of which it yield commodity of persia. according to the king book yearly seven thousand and seven hundred batman rhubarb grow in Corasan where wormseed grow also carpet of all sort silk and gold silk and silver half silk half Cotton etc. their money in Persia of silver be the abacee the mahomedee Shahee and biftee the rest of copper like the and of India their money the abacee weigh two met^icalls the mahomedee be half a abacee the Shahee half a mahomedee in the rial of eight be thirteen shahee in a Shahee be two biftee and a half or ten casbeg one biftee be four casbeg or two tang their measure the weight differ in diverse place two mahan of Tauris make one of Spahan and likewise the batman the measure of silk etc. be the same with the pike of Aleppo which we judge seven and twenty inch John crowther return into India Richard steel to England by the way of Turkey from Spahan the second of December Richard steeles journey by land through Persia and Turkey five farsing to a sarail the three eight farsing to another sarail the four to a village six farsing the five to dreag seven farsing the six to a sarail seven farsing the seven to Golpigan eight farsing the eight to Curovon seven farsing the nine to showgot seven farsing the ten to Saro six farsing the eleven to Dissabod eight farsing the twelve two manfield to a fair town Tossarkhan twelve farsing and rest that day because of the deep snow the fifteen to Kindanor six f^rsings the sixteenth to Sano eight farsing the seventeen to Shar nuove where I be stay by the Daiga but show letter from the Vizier he bid i depart in the name of God and alle. the eighteen pass by a bridge where all man be to give account what they be and pay two shahee a camel the nineteen to Kassamkhan the last of the persian government and give a present to the governor for a guard against the turke-man which he not only do but give i licence to feed on his village without pay which yet I will not the one and twenty I begin my journey over the high mounta^nes which part the two country be dangerous and the two and twenty arrive at a village eight farthing the three and twenty seven farsing lay under a rock the four and twenty to Mando a town under the turk eight farsing the five and twenty to emomester eight farsing the six and twenty to boroh pass over a river by boat and that night arrive at bagdat eight farsing where I be search and examine for letter which I have hide under my saddle whither one also be pry but by a sign which I make give over and follow i to my lodging for his expect reward I escape better than a old Spaniard which a fortnight before be imprison and chain in the castle his letter read by a Malteza renegado I meet with a Portugal which arrive here from Goa and Ormus two day before i the bassa make we stay here twenty day to stay for a sabandar of he the sixteenth of january we pass Tigris and lay on the desert side the seventeen we go five Agatza league or farsing the eighteen meet with Euphrates at tlulquy where merchant disembarcke for bagdat or after five cento custom pay pass the Tigris for the persian gulf and after a tedious passage partly by the river partly by desert partly by sea the fifteen of April 1616. he arrive at marsiles and the ten of May at Dover etc. your worship to command in all obedience richard steel the copy of the king of Persias firman translate out of the persian Frank a name give in the east to all western christian since the expedition into the holy land the french be chief therein and a french council at claremont cause thereof forman or command give unto all our subject from the great unto what degree soever unto the souf-basha or constable of our country to kind receive and entertain the english Frankes or nation at what time any of their ship or ship shall arrive at jasque or any other of the port in our kingdom to conduct they and their merchandise to what place or place they themselves desire and that you shall see they safe defend about our coast from any other Frank or franks whatsoever thus I will and command you so to do as you shall answer to the contrary give at our royal city the twelve of this Ramassan October in the year of our 1024. A.D. 1615. chap. 14 memorial of a voyage wherein be employ three ship the samaritan Thomas and Thomasine 1614 write by * * the journal have not the author name but I find he thus name by captain payton as chief at tecoo Soldania in thirty three degree fifty minute south JOHN milward merchant who go in the Thomas the ten of may 1614 we anchor at gore-end the three of October in the bay of Soldania where we buy one hundred and forty sheep and ten ox and more may have do these people be most miserable destitute of religion in any kind so far as we can perceive and of all civility their speech a chatter rather then language naked save a short cloak of skin on their shoulder and a fox-skinne before their privity have but one stone natural or ceremonious I know not eat that which dog will hardly digest they demand unreasonable for their cattle which we think proceed from cory who have be in England and as we suppose acquaint they with our little esteem of iron and copper ask piece as big as their cloak and have for their cattle skillet basin and scummer one seem to be chief who the general kind entertain in his tent and we after that buy more free their sheep like our goat with small horn their ox large than we the flesh white like our mutton the fat yellow as the yolk of a egg wild and of one stone most of they like themselves October be with they as April with we the weather temperate but hot and parch at noon the air wholesome our man present recover some desperate sick they of the scurvy use a red Berry as big as a goose-berry the twenty of December the general cause the master and masters-mate to come aboard the copy of this voyage be so hurt with wet that I can not in some place read it and therefore have deliver it more imperfect they know not where they be trade wind suppose that we be shoot one hundred and fifty league more than reckon to the east in eighteen degree forty minute the nine and twenty we descry land but know not well in what height we be resolve that it be java but know not what part of it suppose it the southside and that we be fall on it by keep too easterly a course and though the plait make it to lie betwixt eleven and twelve degree and our latitude at that time be but eight degree forty minute yet it be questionable whether it have be discover but howsoever or wheresoever we be it be certain that we be fall to lee-ward of the strait of Sunda by two or three degree and into the northwest monsons which blow thereabouts from September to the last of March. all the master be of opinion to go back into thirteen or fourteen degree southward to fetch the southeast wind which be a trade wind between twenty eight and eleven degree and so to shape our course more northerly other be of opinion to go round about the island and to fetch Bantam as certain dutchman have do heretofore on like occasion and accomplish it in six week space but the first opinion take place the land hereabout be very high and near the sea full of great tree the air noisome by stink from the shore subject to much lightning thunder and rain with sudden gust the next day noon we have a good observation in the latitude of eight degree thirty five minute the general be resolve to beat up and down to see if we can get any thing to the west he charge m. Wilson for author of the error betwixt who also and the captain Wilson accuse as also for the loss of the Th^masine afterward strong current pass both word and blow which the general reduce into amity the eleven of january on the eighteen we have land in seven degree ten minute be by likelihood not far west from our first land notwithstanding that we have run from it by our course near one hundred league to the west by reason of a violent current to the east the land to the sea be low and level within high mountain we anchor at the entry of the bay where we find calm the current set strong east southeast that in a calm it will carry a ship four league a watch there be store of wood and water from the rock but brackish we find near to the shore continual calm the wind still blow two or three league off at sea be it never so great a storm in this place enforce Bay which I may well call enforce bay we see no people the shore very thick of wood palm and a hundred other kind of tree some grow in a number of root * * indian figtree or arbory (@) whic^ Co^op^us concede to be the tree of Adam sin see my Pilgr. l 5. c. 13. @. 2. which descend from the top of the branch which be forty or fifty foot high and take root again so that the tree show like a woodstacke I suppose that never Christian have be there nor will again if he can avoid it yet the general in one of the tree set up his name and arm we be not pass two league from our anchor place from whence we have scant wind enough to bring we but there rise so great a gust of wind and rain that we be force to take in all our topsail and strike our main sail on the three and twenty after much consultation and subscription for the general discharge we bear in with the land and anchor in a bay which I may term voluntary voluntary Bay where we find a Dutchman at anchor who we have former meet at Sestos the next day we go ashore and find a town and people not black but tawny their house build of cane clothe some from the waste other whole they respect nothing that we have nor affearded we any thing to speak of their weapon pike and cryse the Dutchman name this place Middleton bay it be a good harbour have a river and a island Middleton Bay and lie some fifty league to the east of the north end of java as the Dutchman inform we who coast it all along it be in seven degree thirty five minute the second of February we be in ten degree twelve minute we see the next day a small island forty league to the south of in ten degree about five league broad a island eight long the four at sunsetting we have three degree ten minute to the west variation it be a infallible rule that from the cape of good hope to java rule of variation the variation increase to the west the further east we run till it come to about seventeen degree and then as we run to the east decrease till we come to the straits of Sunda where it be three degree and a half variation and be hold the best guide for east and westing though not observe exact proportion on the five we have nine degree sixteen minute and three degree forty eight minute variation west the declination of the crosier be twenty eight degree and a half on the thirteen we be in the straits of Sunda have on our larboard sumatra and java on our starboard Bantam the fourteen at night we anchor within three league of Bantam Road. the next morning come to we m. Baily merchant and m. salmon master of the globe who tell we that the globe be then lade for England and that the trades-increase be bring on ground on pulo peniohn the trade increase all her man die in the careen of she and afterward it stand they in fi^e hundred rial of eight a day to hire javan of who five hundred die in the work before they can sheathe one side so that they can hire no more man and therefore be enforce to leave her imperfect where she be sink in the sea and after set on fire by the javan the chinese also report that the devil appear on pulo peniohn island signify his offence that the chinese will undertake such a business on his ground and give he nothing for they be the workman whereupon one of the chief chinese carpenters come to sir Henry Middleton and report it desire to have a Buffolo for sacrifice who deny yea forbid he when he will have do it at his own charge esteem the want thereof cause of their evil the globe depart from Bantam the one and twenty of February the four and twenty the Thomasine depart for the Molluccas m. Baily cape merchant and m. Wilson master our general send word to the king of Bantam that the spaniard will invade he and take away his town who answer that if all the caffar so they call all not Mahumetans in the world shall come against he he have a god * * where be the evidence that will defend he the fourteen of march we depart in the Thomas for the coast of sumatra the twelve of May we arrive at Priaman but be deny trade the next day we ride to tecoo along by the seaside no trade without the king of Achens l^t^er at Priaman and Teco smooth sea in great wind Achen which I think in this place have the great source of any in the world occasion by the many shoal and breach on this coast whereby the danger of sail be unknown on the seventeen we weigh for Achen where the twenty of june we arrive on all ^his coast when there be no rain although it be calm the sea go very high and in rain though the wind blow much the sea be smooth the king send we his chop on the eight and twenty he send a elephant to carry the king letter in State we carry for a present a great piece of ordnance with the carriage twenty bullet a ladle skowr and two barrel of powder twelve fowl piece ten sword six fine bafta all wrap in the king colour he sit in great sit with the king of jor and give to myself m. Nicols and m. yate three vest contrary to his custom and be very merry the second of july he come by the water side upon a elephant in great state with diverse elephant before he the king woman and pomp and twelve other elephant have castle as they term they on their back full of his woman have multitude of woman and eunuch attend all other people be beat out of the way and not dare to be see ourselves have our house near the water side be command to shut our door and window the sabandar by a parable teach we to know he tell we that if a man will sow a piece of cloth let the needle go through and the thread will follow of itself insinuate that a bribe must usher our design the king offer we to settle a factory here pay custom as other nation do which be seven in the hundred factory at Achen and we accept it whereat the dutch be angry the six the Hector set sail for Teco have lose at Achen twenty six man principal occasion by distemper in Aracke house the eleven the captain of the dutch house protest he have not a maze to buy victual death by distemper Dutch relieve and beside be indebt whereupon I lend he seventy tail of gold to be pay at Bantam perceive the gold of this place base I refuse to sell but for silver on the sixteenth we go to the court without a present presence be not tolerate there to see a cockfighting but the king speak nothing of any business and except he begin no man else may they next day I attend all day in vain while he be solace himself with his woman on the eighteen his galley come from malacca on the nineteen he send they for Pedir and so for malacca twelve of they be very fair with twenty eight and thirty oar on a side king of Achens galley the admiral have a turret build in the poop cover with ma^^^ie plate of gold and curious wrought it be report that in each of his great galley he will carry one thousand man and in his fleet be three hundred great and little one hundred thousand he force a guzerate junke of four hundred t^nnes with the commander to go with he yet tt be think he mean not to go himself but give it out to further his business and that orencay Maraga shall be general a man who he most fear as of ancient nobility a good soldier and popular yet circumspect the king be go word be bring that for the rest of his debt I must take pepper at eight tail the Bahar which I refuse yet be it weigh choose whether I will take it or nothing Laxaman demand for better condition a cable anchor great piece barrel of powder twenty shot and for himself sixty tail of gold for other officer thirty so shall we settle at Teco and Priaman for two ye^res at length for so much gold and twenty tail more he undertake to procure our dispatch but at last the other also be demand on the thirty come in two dutch ship from Masulipatan the admiral the white lion wherein be the visador and the Ragusa Dutch reject the visador send the king a great piece with other thing for a present which be reject as of too little value they demand Sr. Isaac captain of the dutch house at Achen as indebt to the company who the king have appoint for malacca and hold as his slave and say that if the dutch take he they shall have no trade in his country he demand one of their ship with he to malacca allege a ancient promise of such a kindness by a former ambassador some twenty year ago but they excuse and he say they be a unjust nation and deny they his chop that they may not go on shore for seven or eight day so much as to fill water and three or four day after they turn their admiral ashore and give she to the king willing to give he content and withal to avoid that desperate voyage the seventeen of August the Thomas set sail from Achen the twenty nine of September we have a spout at our first come from Achen we stand o^t to the west current deceive for avoid of rock and shoal about sixty league wherein be deceive in the current we be off one hundred and fifty league whereby we bring ourselves open to the bay of Bengala and so into a strong current which keep we very long from our port. the seven and twenty of October we anchor in Teco ride and the next day present the king of Achens letter for two year factory the thirteen of November the Thomas depart for Bantam I George Piborne John perce and my man Peter stay we have much ado with these rude people but bear ourselves stiff on the king of Achens letter the nine of May 1616. a man of Achen be revile by a woman do beat she and thereupon grow a great uproar hatred betwixt the Tecoan^ and Acheners for the tecoan have fine he at four tail he deny to pay any and the next day a hundred man come to take he but all the achener join they be repulse one slay and six hurt and they be two hundred fortify the neither town intend to stand it out to the utmost affirm that if they shall suffer themselves to be over-borne by the country people the king of Achen will cut off their leg the king by this policy his officer be all achener which will suffer no a-abuse hold they in awe but the matter be end lose gee the Achener pay a sum of money three month before this time the small pock be rife here whereof many die this month also be very unwholesome and faint many die with a swell vnholsomenesse of tecoo ourselves be sick round about the house the eleven of june arrive the expedition at Priaman the second of july there be a that lose both his hand for steal who in the execution be not see once to stir the thirteen captain payton send i word that he fear his man will mutiny knot of knave and run away with the ship as they have former attempt at Bantam and therefore desire i to receive some of they ashore so to disperse their knot the six and twenty the dragon and peppercorne anchor at the off captain Will keeling general in the dragon and captain Harris in the other they have be with the king who have grant they trade at Teco for two year after which time he will have no nation to trade but at Achen he leave m. Nichols principal at Achen the eight and twenty of August arrive Addicke Raia Pongola Corcon from Achen who have the king good to sell and power to receive all the king custom past and to come he come in nature of a informer and therefore all man stand in fear of he the first of September begin their ramdam at the first of sight of the new moon all that month follow they eat nothing but in the night and that temperate the fifteen we begin to buy pepper ramdam or Lent but be force to promise Addicke Raia one hundred royal before we can have any trade the next day I except against the weight whereupon Raia take it away to examine it whereat the Polimo be much afraid have in that kind much abuse our nation corruption of officer by corruption only to be amend the Pongelo come to the english house to reform the weight but be present to weigh give we a weight less than that we have the next day I send he fifty rial for a present which he return say he scorn to be feed like a boy the one and twenty captain Harris be ashore seem to take so much upon he that Raia Addick send to he to borrow three hundred rial of eight to buy he a wench and press the matter so instant that I be force afterward to send he a hundred the three of October I speak at his instance also unto captain Harris to spare his carpenter two or three day to mend his prow which he refuse to do the six come the Speedwell send by the general from Bantam in the charge of John Clare boatswain of the Hector sink at Bantam in the carine news of five ship from England four for surat Hector sunke^ and the swan for Bantam the Thomas go for japan the concord for Socodania the attendant for jamb^ from Maccassar also that the spaniard be there find for the Moluccas spanish fleet fear twenty seven sail of ship galley and frigate that we doubt much their come to Bantam on the fourteen arrive a java junke with five hollander which have be cast away in the Aeolus five degree south and desire our relief we grant they the Speedwell to go to the island Engano where they have lay their good and money ashore Dutch relieve whether they set sail on the three and twenty the people complain that when they sell their pepper to the king they lose a fo^rth part by reason they take so much more than when they deal with the chap. 15 the second voyage of captain WALTER PEYTON into the east indies in the expedition which be set forth by the east India company together with the dragon lion and peppercorn in january 1614 gather out of his large journal @. i. occurrent at Soldania Mohelia Socotora surat with diverse other intelligence IAnuary the four and twenty 1614 we set sail from Gravesend the second of February sir t. Ro^ sir Thomas roe ambassador from his majesty to the great mogoll repair aboard the lion with fifteen follower and master Humpherey boughton aboard the peppercorn recommend to the company by his majesty to pass into India we carry with we in the fleet eleven japoneza bring into England by the Clove divide proportionable among the ship likewise fourteen guzerats bring by the dragon also nineteen condemn person out of Newgate japonezes guzerats and condemn person to be leave for discovery of unknown place the company have obtain the king pardon for they to this purpose on the twenty some of the dragon man the newgate-bird among attempt to run away with their pinnace which then be prevent but one of those condemn with two of the pepper-corne company carry away her pinnace next night two of my ship company have conspire to carry away the boat but be discover the three and twenty we set sail out of the down on the six of march lose sight of the lizard and on the six and twenty have sight of land which we suppose the westermost part of Forteventura 1615. map false in cape Boyadore and Marpequena and prove part of Barbary one of the land point enter the river Marpequena be misgraduate one whole degree more northerly than it shall be likewise cape Boyadore be misgrade one degree as we then find by experience escape great danger cause by that error in our plait the six and twenty the general wind begin the ten of May be by reckon distant from the cape of good hope bear east a quarter south six hundred and twenty league we see many pintado Mangareludas and other fowl whereof I have not hear the like the five of ^une we anchor in the bay of Soldania have not bury above three or four in the whole fleet Soldania corey a savage which have be in England about thirty be now sick we build five tent corey come down and welcome we after his manner by who mean the people be nothing so fearful as at other time nor so thievish they bring we cattle in great abundance which we buy for copper shred corey show some of our people his house wife and child at a town thence distant five english mile contain about one hundred house most of they can say sir Thomas smith english ship which they often with great glory repeat their wife and child come often down to we to who we give great content with bugle and the like and two or three desire to go for England see corey have speed so well and return so rich with his copper suit which he yet keep in his house very chary corey also determine to return and to carry one of his son when our ship be thence find home-ward on the east-side of the table be another cottage of ten small house build round like bee-hive cover with mat make of bents weave together the sixteenth we set on shore by consultation ten condemn person to remain at the cape their house ten condemn person set on shore viz. John cross Henry Cocket clerk Brand bouth Hunnyard Brigs pet metcalfe Skilligall we give each man something for his own defence against wild beast and man weapon and victual they consent cross shall be their head the people desire brass and se^ not so much by copper they desire piece of a foot or more square iron hoop they care little for we catch seven or eight hundred fish in the river with sayne Ningin a medicinable root much ^^ized in japan somewhat like a skirret the country people bring we down of the root ningin whereof we buy one handful for a piece of copper a inch and half broad and two inch and half in length our man get some but not so full nor ripe this be not the season which in the full perfection be as tender and sweet as annis-seed on the twenty we set sail on the five and twenty we have sight of land in thirty four degree twenty eight minute it be the land to the west of cape arecife misgraduate twenty seven minute in daniels plait more northerly than it shall be likewise on the six of july we shall have see land of saint Laurence false plait by most of our reckon according to the plait of Daniel of mercators projection which prove false about seventy league in distance of longitude betwixt the land of Aethiopia cape Bona Speranza and the i will of saint Laurence as the same protract into plano of totten make do manifest the two and twenty all four ship anchor at Mohelia Mohelia plentiful refresh we have water out of well we dig a little above the high water mark close by the root of tree eight or nine foot deep Doman be the chief town where the sultan abide to who we give a double lock piece and a Sword we have plentiful provision for little money hen goat bullock lemon orange limb Tamera coco-nut pine sugarcane with other fruit there be among they arabian turk moor many of which speak reasonable porteguse these tell i of a strange course of the current which run fifteen day westerly strange current fifteen day easterly and fifteen day no way of which somewhat I observe for at our first come the current set westerly and on the eight and twenty it set easterly and so continue while we stay six day but we go away before perfect trial can be make I learn of they that the king of juanni be here king and give the government to this sultan the nine and twenty a ship arrive at Doman from Gangamora in saint Laurence tree-cloth and I be wish by the general to see their commodity which be Rice and a kind of cloth make of bark of tree whence they make cool garment I inquire of the pilot who speak portuguse well touch captain rowles and the englishman betray in that island c. rowles lose out of the unity of who they can say nothing but that two or three year past a english boy be at Gangamora in the custody of portugal who they think now to be dead neither know how he come thither this town of Damon have in it one hundred house of lime and stone strong build the inhabitant orderly and civil they have traffic on the coast of melinde Mombassa Arabia and saint Laurence they carry slave take in war which they sell for nine or ten rial of eight and be sell again in Portugal for one hundred at Momboza and I understand of great trade for elephant tooth and drug and it be conclude to advise the honourable company thereof touch send a pinnace yearly thither we buy in Mohelia two or three bullock for a bar of iron weigh betwixt twenty and five and twenty pound we buy there two hundred head of cattle forty goat hen fruit etc. the second of August we set sail from Mohelia the seventeen we have sight of cape Guardafui where the country people be fearful of we the twenty we anchor in the road of Galencia in Socotora where the fierceness of the wind make the sea in a breach round about we and with the sprie of the sea which the wind blow about we like rain ship white with Salt our ship and tackle be all over white like a hoary frost or white Salt the three and twenty we anchor at tamarine the king town and the four and twenty at Delisha here aloe we be demand thirty rial of eight the kintal of aloe Socatrina which make we buy the less for captain downton the faik say have buy one hundred kintal it be liquid by reason of the newness or heat of the sun and ready to run out of the skin each kintal contain by our beam one hundred three pound and a half it be make of the leaf of semperuive the top and root cut away and the juice of the rest press out and boil to a certain height after put up in earthen pot stop close so stand eight month and last put in small skin to sell. the north part of Socotora or Socatra lie in twelve degree thirty minute and the body in one hundred and twenty degree twenty five minute it be fourteen league thence to Abadelcuria and as much from thence to cape Guardafui caveat for sail to Socatra and I shall wish those that sail to Socatra to touch at the cape thence to sail the next morning a little before break of day to lose no daylight which be precious there by reason of the thick and obscure night with boisterous wind and fog this month and a part of September from thence to Abadelcuria and anchor on the west side thereof in seven or eight fathom water under the low land or if they get no anchorage to keep close by a wind to the southward in the night lest the wind and northerly current put they too much to lee-ward before daylight the wind blow not steady notwithstanding the monson sometime south by west and south south-west but seldom to the east of the south on the one and thirty we set sail from Socatra the ten of September we have quail heron and other land-fowle blow from land unable to return on the fourteen we have sight of Diu and on the sixteenth of Damon inhabit with portugal and strong fortify on the eighteen we pass by the bar of surat and anchor against Swally bar arrive at Swally the next day we send a messenger ashore and our boat return the same night with m. William biddulph he tell we of affair in the country and that zulpher Chan be governor at surat here we have sheep for half a rial of eight a pi^ce and twenty hen for a rial of eight vile price base custom at surat the two and twenty day master barber and other merchant be send to surat to provide furniture for sir Thomas roe the lord ambassador house who be there narrow search their pocket and other part according to the base manner of the country where a man must pay custom for a rial of eight in his purse or a good knife in his pocket and if any rarity appear the governor under pretence of buy take it away the five and twenty the lord ambassador land accompany with the general captain and merchant and eighty man in arm with shot and pike in order forty eight piece of ordnance discharge from the fleet the ship also fit in their holiday suit of waste clothes streamer ensign flag pendant the chief man of surat attend in their tent ambassador land and there welcome he much ado there be about the barbarous search which they will have execute on his follower which the ambassador whole disclaim till at the last he and three or four of his chief follower be exempt the rest they will only embrace for fashion sake much pass also betwixt the governor and he about like barbarous exaction he just challenge the honour and immunity of a ambassador from a free king they willing to make no difference betwixt he and other of that rank in those part and of our own also which have assume that name once their barbarous usage not only then perplex he and detain he long till from the court he have order but all his time as hereafter out of his own journal shall follow hold he busy more then enough neither do they easy acknowledge difference betwixt this ambassador and master Edward who be so style among they fugitive the first of October master barwickes man which be inveigle by a fugitive from captain best and since turn Moor have run away be bring back from surat other after do the like and write from Damon to persuade other the second come aboard two hollander which have come thither by land from Petapoli the ten the governors brother come board with fair word and have a present give he also we have news of master aldworths death the governor impudent urge present have have three already but find fault with they and nominate what he will beggar and chooser both the five of November we have news from brampore of the lord ambassador fall sick there and of master boughtons death coin and ware at surat the current coin at surat be rial of eight whereof the old with the plain cross be esteem best worth five mamudy a piece the new with flower-delices at the end of the cross at four mamudy three quarter if they be not light the mamudie be a silver coin course contain thirty pice which be a copper coin twelve dam make one pice the english shilling if weight will yield thirty three pice and half be much about the worth of mamudy Rupies be of sundry sort some worth half a rial of eight other less by which a man may easy be deceive their trade be by banian broker who be subtle and deceitful both to the buyer and seller if not prevent in their weight each city differ from other the commodity be infinite the chief indicoe of two sort checque the courser and lahor the fine cloth make of cotton-wool as calico white and colour contain fourteen yard the book from two to one hundred mamudy the piece pintado chint and chador sash and girdle cannaken treckanee Serrabaffs aleiae quilt carpet green ginger sucket aloe opium sadarmoniacke and abundance of other drug commodity vendible be knife glass picture and such like toy english cloth China ware silk and porcelain all manner of spice the guzerats lade their great ship of nine twelve or fifteen hundred ton at Goga and steal out unknown to the portugal chief city for trade on the river sinde or Indus be tatta on a river which fall into it duilsinde Indus false set in map multan lahore at duilsinde the expedition in her former voyage have deliver sir Robert Shirley the persian ambassador of who I think good to add this which I learn by inquiry of some of his follower to agra as a appendix to that relation in my former journal be weary of duilsinde by the governors evil entreaty and suffer the portugal to molest he of sir Robert Shirley seek also to cut he off for which purpose twelve portugal come from Ormus he seek liberty to go to tatta but the governor not permit as be think of evil purpose he go without leave and be by the way to pass a river where none dare carry he or he tatta be prohibit on pain of death by the say governor they therefore make raft of board and Timbers on which the ambassador ship himself with Nazerbeg one of his follower to help he over and be no soon put off but twenty or thirty horseman come from the governor in great haste to stay they thus be they bring back man swim to the raft which Nazerbeg be not able to guide against the tide and they narrow escape drown Ward slay his follower disdain this rude deal one master John Ward shoot off his pistol in their face and be instant slay by another shot and the rest carry away prisoner to duilsinde be pillage by the way of the soldier after some time of imprisonment the governor permit their departure to tatta where they be friendly entertain of the governor be a persian sir Thomas powel and master Francis Bub sir t. Powels death and his lady be then dead before in duilsinde he remain at tatta till fit opportunity for agra the way long and in danger of thief whither he go in company of a great man which have a strong convoy for who he wait also two month the lady powel in this space be deliver of a son but she and it together with master Michael powel brother to sir Thomas lose their life in this tedious expectation in boat for that great man aforesaid at his come to agra the mogoll give he favourable entertainment and upon his complaint send for the banian governor of duilsinde to answer at the court promise he his own revenge if he will stay but he haste to the persian after many present from the mogoll with a convoy and necessary for his journey depart for Persia not have one Englishman with he master Richard barber his apothecary return to surat and John heriot die at agra there remain with he of his old follower only his lady and her woman two persian the old armenian and the Chircassian his dutch jeweller come from agra to surat with master Edward @. 2 prize take factory at calicut observation of diverse place of sumatra the english ship miscarry dutch abuse factory in India the nine and twenty of February we take a Portugal prize the three of march we ride at a anchor in the road of calicut Samorine or king of Calcutta the great samorines deputy come aboard many boat attend he signify his master joy of our come and his earnest desire to have conference with our nation and therefore earnest persuade we to stay a day or two till he may send to the Samorine then at crangalor besiege a castle of the portugal we have here store of provision bring aboard at reasonable rate calicut have latitude eleven degree ten minute variation fifteen degree forty minute the same evening come a pilot by order from the Samorine to entreat we to ride two or three day before crangalor the five we anchor all four ship before crangalor two league from the shore about noon the Samorine send to the general to request his company ashore crangalor in 10 deg. 15. min. which be not think fit without a pledge and master George Barkley go but the Samorine refuse to reveal his mind to any but the general and seem discontent at his stay the eight he go and speak with the Samorine offer of the samorine to the English who business be to establish a factory in his dominion proffer a fair house rent-free freedom from custom or any other taxation for whatsoever good bring thither or carry thence with protestation of his affection to our nation answer be make of our present disability have leave most of our good at surat and now go to Bantam he reply that for present leave good it be no matter only that we will leave two or three english there which shall want nothing and the next year we may make supply of man and good hereby he be assure of our return otherwise his care and hope shall be frustrate he tell also of a ship lade of pepper there to be have yearly and of the vent of our commodity whereupon it be conclude to leave a factory there which with merchandise be send ashore on the nine factory at crangalor the man be George woolman chief Peter needham and Roger hare under-factor Edward Peake a boy and Richard Stamford the b^y be to learn the language the king name be Samorine a minion and a barrel of powder be give he for a present he promise that if he recover the fort of crangalor from the portugal the english shall possess it the ten the king send his letter of agreement touch the say privilege with many protestation of love this day we set sail cochin Co^lan a second prize take we come before cochin and may behold the form of it the next day we have sight of Coulan castle and town and a ship ride at anchor under the castle which we board and bring forth the people be flee without hurt of shot from the castle it be a Portugal ship of four or five hundred ton late arrive from Bengala and Pegu lade with Rice graine Bengala clothe butter Sugar Gummelacke hard wax drug and other provision the twel^th we espy another ship which by midnight we fetch up a three prize in part of satisfaction for their unjust vexation and hurt at Sura^ etc. she yield at the first shot I send for her chief man aboard my ship the rest be three or four mile off and set some of i aboard charge they to hurt no person there be eighteen of twenty portugal and about eighty slave man woman and child her chief lade rice butter Sugar Gummelacke drug Bengala Stuffe we offer these our first price with victual to carry they ashore which they refuse fear to become a prey to the malabar a fleet of who consist of fourteen sail they late have with difficulty escape the next day we land they where they desire and suffer they to depart unsearched for plate jewel money and the like we have three english ship and three price the fourteen we arrive at brinion where we take out of the first prize what we please and set she a drift brinion brinion be in latitude eight degree thirty minute variation fifteen it have a small town in a little round bay be to be know by a long white beach to the north and to the south be all high land and two league to the south a red cliff near the Sea from thence to cape Comorine be sixteen league the course southeast by south bold and free coast. the inhabitant of brinion be no way subject to the portugal the first of April the body of Zeilon do bear east by south seven league off 1616. note for cape Comorine the ten the pike Adam bare north. I take my leave of the general the dragon and peppercorn they be find for Achen and I in the expedition for Priaman tecoo and Bantam it be good to ride till the end of march in brinion and not to double the cape by reason of calm the southerly current set off to the but then the easterly monson end I will wish all that come from the west to Priaman or tecoo to dispose that they may have daylight enough for the come in betwixt Nimptan and the other land adjacent the best be on the north-side on the thirty I meet the advice go for tecoo but at my request she return to Bantam whence she be send for japon the advice and Hosiander at japon the first of May I arrive at Bantam where I find the Hosiander new return from japon and the attendance from jambe most of the man sick or dead here I hear of the death of captain downton and of the arrival of captain Samuel castleton with the Clove and defence which with the Thomas and Concord be go for the Moluccas the Thomas appoint to proceed from thence to japon the nineteen I set sail for tecoo the ten of june I put into Priaman and the eighteen arrive at tecoo the three of july I bring my ship on careene to sheathe she the double sheathe of ship which go for surat be of great purpose for though the outermost sheathe be eat like a honeycomb with worm yet the inner be nothing perish it be also requisite that the rudder be sheathe with thin copper strange worm in the surat Sea to prevent the worm eat off the edge thereof which cause great defect in the steer not easy to be remedy be so deep under water the inhabitant here be barbarous deceitful expect bribe and sometime I have be in danger to be murder one hundred of they draw their crisis upon we because they may not have their will to take our good upon trust or otherwise at their pleasure the twenty Thomas Bonner master of the expedition die John row succeed the three master in this ship this voyage the six and twenty arrive the dragon and peppercorn from Achen they have buy there pepper carry thither from tecoo in great juncke and prawe which sail to and fro but never out of sight of land the king of Achen command those of tecoo to bring thither their pepper which none may buy but he king of Achen his play the merchant who put off his surat commodity in truck at what rate he please oft time he send his commodity to Priaman and tecoo enforce they to buy they at his rate none be suffer to buy or sell with other till he be vent this make our trade with they the better jambe be on the east-side of sumatra it yield like great-grained pepper as Priaman but be not subject to the king of Achen as be baruse Passaman tecoo Priaman Cottatinga and other place on the westside jambe baruse be to the north of Passaman and yield store of Benjamin Cottatinga gold the other place pepper the general bring the king of Achens letter to they which the great man receive with great submission each kiss and lay it on his head promise we to perform the content but fail and it be fit in these letter of the king to procure he to express the manner and particular of our trade the eleven of September I set sail from tecoo for Bantam the best gold and most plenty be have at the great high hill of Passaman where also be great quantity of pepper the fair and best cheap but the evil constitution of the air be so pestilent and infectious Passaman best gold and pepper gold and good constitution of body or mind not agree tecoo barbarous that there be no go thither for our nation without mortality of man neither needs for the pepper surat commodity at tecoo be sufficient attractive many of the native I have observe full of contagious disease the limb of some ready to drop off with rottenness other have huge swell wen under the throat as big as a two penny loaf which they impute to the bad water they be very ignorant to cure their disease the people of tecoo be base thievish subtle embrace gain at any price by fraud or as far as they dare by force mis-reckoning false weight yea attempt to poison our meat and drink as they be dress creese also our horse better order may be hope by the king of Achens procurement there be but five leave in the factory our two Portugal prize we make away at Achen share according to the custom of the sea one six part to the ship company the rest for our employer etc. betwixt Priaman and tecoo there lie a dangerous shall northwest by west observation for go ^^to Priaman Road. he mention many other shoald no^ here express but know to ou^ countryman by experience from the south-west i will of Priaman a mile and quarter in length and in breadth a quarter of which care be to be have lest the current set southerly put you on it this and other shoald hereabout be white coral be easy discern when the south-west Ile do bear south southeast from you then be you past danger provide the northermost i will of the four by Priaman shore bear east by north so may you steer in for the road east and east by south and east southeast leave two land on the starboard and two on the larboard side latitude of tecoo be south thirty minute variation west four degree thirty minute latitude of Priaman be also south betwixt eight and forty degree fifty minute many of our man be sick whereof the cause seem their immoderate drink of Arack and strong drink at Bantam be at my last be there October 1616. four english ship there and at jackatra and five flemish ship which raise the price of pepper and the rather by the hollander boast of bring this year sixteen hundred thousand rial of eight huge sum transport by hollander their pride and abuse of the English ready money which it be likely they report to outbrave our nation the last fleet of they six in number take two or three Portugal ship whereof they make great brauado they seek by all abuse to depress our nation in unchristian manner through the indies even in Bantam where they acknowledge our equal right they threaten to pull our people out of the factory by the ear sometime quarrel with they in the street other time imprison they and when themselves have cause a uproar they complain to the king of Bantam of our unquietness and bribe he to command we to be quiet who receive their money and tell we of their deal himself take advantage to pole both part by this disagreement also at Puloway a island free give his majesty they abuse our people insolence a^ Puloway put halter about their neck and lead they through the town with a hourglass before they publish that they shall be hang so soon as the glass be run and although they do not effect that honourable design yet do they imprison they and keep they three or four day in iron afterward send they aboard the concord and Thomasine upon a counterfeit composition never to return these thing be report to be very true likewise at the return of the Hosiander from japan she bring thirty ton of wood free of freight and charge for the hollander who notwithstanding report that she have return empty but for their wood which they may have say as well of my bring one and thirty churl of indigo and a chest of pistol fraight-free for they from surat to Bantam captain castleton go to the Moluccas with four ship the cloave defence captain castleton to the Moluccas with four ship Thomas and Concord to be better able to defend themselves against the hollander but be threaten by eleven sail of they they return without do any great matter only a few cloave lade in the the captain himself die there of the flux to who the fault be impute with other thing lay to he the trades-increase be fire twice by the javan and by our people quench but the three decay or loss of english ship trades-increase darling time fire in so many place at once that industry can not save she the darling that I may add such ship as be lose and lay up at my departure from Bantam be lay up at Patania in june 1615. by master Larkine and the factory and can not be repair herrold the master be report to have intend to run away with she to the portugal which be prevent he yet go himself the Thomasine be cast away come from the Moluccas upon a shall in the night Thomasine in September 1615. they lose their good which be not much but save their money two thousand rial of eight with their provision live fourteen day in a desolate island where they fit their boat which bring they and their money to Bantam leave the rest behind the king of Macasser seize on they who will not make restitution this shall lie eighteen league west from Macasser the Hector fail at jacatra in careen the upper work not fit as be report and the seam open and receive so much water that she sink in three fathom Hector the keel exceed worm-eaten the concord be there also lay up rot and leak concord that they be force to take out her provision and let she sink close to the shore the Hosiander be appoint to set sail for the coast of coromandel the fifteen of October 1616. the factory which I can hear of settle for the company in the east indies be these Bantam wherein be George Barkley chief John jordan George ball Ralph Copendale english factory with diverse other both factor and attendant jacatra surat Amadavas agra and Azmiro brampore Calcutta M^sulipa^an Patania siam Beniarmasse Socodania Macasser Achen jambe tecoo Fe^ando in japan japar Banda the commodity which arise from the factory at Achen be to solicit for our our better proceed at Priaman and tecoo the place be unwholesome Aracke a wine distil out of Rice steep in liquor take out of the coco-tree especial for such as stuff themselves with hot and fiery drink as Aracke and Aracape which bring many unto untimely end whence arise a imputation to the voyage how unruly the common sort be abroad can be imagine at home many never think themselves well long than while their brain be a crow with drink king of Achen the king of Achen be ^aid to have a strange strain of drink drink when the english resort to he thereby to show his love to who it seem dishonour not to conform in sit in the water with he and other his rite he be very cruel to his subject daily cut off their hand arm or leg upon small or no occasion cause they to be throw before elephant himself command the understanding elephant to toss the party so oft and so high either to bruise or kill he as he fancy he have prohibit any which arrive at his port without his chop to come on shore which a dutch merchant neglect cause a dutch general there arrive to come on land profess his great savour with the king who come to the courtgate where they must demand another ch^p the king find the chieefe leaguer cause of that presumption send for he and lay he before the elephant which toss he three time without much bruise to teach he how to neglect the command of king another time the dutch general stand by and fear his own share who yet the king clear as ignorant of his Law cause of disgust betwixt the Achener and Hollander the king after send for the merchant to pry into his patience who for fear of worse soothe he and acknowledge it a fatherly chastisement yet close flee at the departure of the ship the rest follow be bring back and the king have place we in their house @. 3 a brief declaration of the port city and town inhabit and trade unto by the Portugal betwixt the cape of good hope and japan as I can learn by diligent enquiry the river in south latitude one and twenty degree fifty minute here be report to be gold place of Portugal trade or Mosambique Mombassa elephants-teeth ambergreese and slave for which they trade yearly Mosambique be a island where they trade for gold ambergreese and slave Mombassa in sou^h latitude three degree thirty minute where they yearly trade for gold ambergreese elephants-teeth and slave in truck of iron lead tin and Cambaya commodity have two degree five and twenty minute store of elephants-teeth some ambergreese and diverse sort of drug from these place they drive their annual trade into Cambaya the Red-sea and other place observe the monsons which blow west in April May june the monsons course july August and part of September and the east monson the rest of the year the space betwixt both be various or calm but in few day hold course except to the east of sumatra where they keep five month east and five west two variable Ormus Ormus in the gulf of Persia whence they trade into Persia Arabia diulsinde etc. they fetch much pearl from Balsora and with persian commodity lade a ship or two for diulsinde where in the end of Augu^^ or middle of September they arrive they bring with they also great store of rial of eight O^mus be their best place but Goa which they have in the indies Muskat Muskat they have small trade here and a fort where they awe the native by land and sea not suffer they to trade but by their licence what and how much under pain of confiscation which they practise through all the indies where they be strong sinde diu. sinde or diulsinde in the mogoll dominion in four and twenty degree eight and thirty minute variation west six degree five and forty minute Diu where they have a strong castle Damon Damon be a city inhabit by they where they have a castle and by report one hundred village be a little south from Damon and border upon the decans country betwixt which and Chau they have three port Gazien Banda and Maia Cha be a great city with a castle Chau Dobul Dobul have a factory but no Fort. Goa Goa be their metropolitan city of India build on a small island the anchor place of their caricke the seat of their vic^roy onor barcolor onor have a small fort. barcolor have a castle and town it yield pepper ginger and many sort of drug mangalor Canano^ crangalor mangalor have a ^owne and castle Cananor be a city and have a castle merchandise as before from Calicut they be thrust out by the Samorine as he seek also at crangalor where they have a Fort. cochin have a strong city and castle pleasant situate by the sea side in a good air with a fair river for ship to ride cochin Cowlan here they have a town and strong castle saint Laurence be a small village Cowlan saint Laurence inhabit by friar and jesuit Quilaon be a small city with a castle Tuckatra a town with a castle the people most part christian quilaon-tuckatra manner Columbo manner be on the island Zelon betwixt cape Comorine and Punto gall a town inhabit by portugal there also they have Columbo and many other small habitation have almost conquer the island it yield cinnamon and drug Negapatan be a city of great trade here they have only a factory saint Thomas Negaptan saint Thomas alias maliapor be a wall city inhabit with portugal in thirteen degree twenty minute up the river Ganges they have many small habitation some factory and a town at Bengala Ganges in Pegu they have a factory and likewise in Aracon and in the river of Martaban Pegu. Aracon junsalao at junsalao they have a great factory from whence they lade much tin for the coast of malabar malacca be a strong city and castle the centre of a great trade in those part malacca whence the king of Achen seek to root they out have burn and spoil some of their ship this year at Macao a island upon the coast of China they have a city with a castle report to be of great trade with the chinese in japan they have a factory but neither town nor Fort. japan they trade also on the coast of China in the time of fit monson to and from japan and other part whereof the hollander be say to make good pillage and of all heathen nation Chineses and other be all fish that come to net the first of November we set sail the five of january I be not able to weigh the anchor the wind over-blowing to follow the dragon to Pengwin island my advice for ship come about the cape at this time of the year be not to anchor short of Soldania road but rather to put for Pengwin island and there to anchor with two at once till the wind serve in December january and February the south southeast wind be there very furious from the new moon to the full note I hold it dangerous nevertheless to neglect this place in hope of saint Helena a certainty for uncertainty the sun and moon often obscurity and thick mist at this time of the year may frustrate the best artist to the loss of ship and man Cory come down with three sheep and promise more but haste away to his wife and child which he say now dwell further it seem that the hollander have fright they by their go up into the country with one hundred man at a time our best refresh here be fresh-fish the nine of April 1617. we pass much weed call the Seragasso Seragasso which lie in long ridge or rank a pretty distance one from another alongst with the wind with which they alter and shift it have a leaf like samper but not so thick and a yellow berry very small it reach from two and twenty degree three minute north latitude unto two and thirty degree north latitude the nine and twenty of may we anchor in the down chap. 16 observation collect out of the journal of sir THOMAS roe knight lord ambassador from his majesty of great Britain to the great mogul of matter occur worthy memory in the way and in the mogul court. his custom city country subject and other indian affair @. i. occurrent and observation in and touch the voyage to surat the five of june we anchor in the road of Soldania uncertainty of the variation though the variation be a excellent evidence in the whole course of veer land yet it deliver no other certainty but warning to look out for it lessen not in the same proportion near land but by a much slow for which I can give a perspicuous reason but too large for this place nor can any judgement at all be make to twenty league thereby that shall be infallible the magnetical amplitude be so difficult to observe true by the ship motion and the needle quickness that a degree be scarce a error this consideration make i confident that we shall see no land until the five day early in the morning Soldania be as I suppose a island in the south end whereof be the cape of good hope Soldania divide from the main by a deep bay on the southeast side and due east by a river which we discern upon the table the land be fruitful bear short thick grass the main be divide with most high and steep rocky mountain cover with snow and unaccessible except it be search by the river of which doubtless be very great fall into the bay on the east side there be on the island five or six hundred people the most barbarous in the world eat carrion wear the gut of sheep about their neck for health and rub their head curl like negro with dung of beast and dirt they have no other clothe then beast skin wrap on their shoulder the skin next the body in heat in cold the hairy side their house be but one mat concave like a oven into which they creep and turn they about as the wind change for they have no door to keep it out they have leave their steal by trade with we and by sign make show their heart be good they know no kind of God or religion the air and water be very good and wholesome and both of they subtle and search there be on the island bull cow Antelops baboon mole of great bigness feasant partridge lark wild-goose duck Passerflannugos and many other on Pengwyn there be a foul so call that go upright Pengwin island his wing without feather hang down like sleeve face with white they fly not but walk in path and keep their division and quarter orderly they be a strange fowl or rather a miscellaneous creature of beast bird and fish but most of bird confute that definition of man to be animal bipe implume which be near to a description of this creature the commodity here be first reasonable refresh with cattle so that a season be choose when they be not lean a month after the sun be depart from they northward Maugin root arras if our merchant be not deceive and I do strong suppose that I find out a rock yield quicksilver and vermilion the stone be spot all without with a most pure red colour equal to any paint and that will come off upon paper or other fit matter by the description of John acosta it can fail to be the same it be also very heavy full of Marquisat and mineral appearance the height of the table the table or high rock so call by a straight line from the water side be 11853 foot high the bay be full of whale and seal the dutch have fish on Pengwin for they the latitude be thirty three degree forty five minute the longitude twenty eight degree thirty minute from the lisard the variation doubtful whether to the east or west but my opinion be that the variation be west thirty minute the cause of variation be in the main as appear evident by the many line and change towards the cape f. and after westerly if any ship have time enough fall but one hundred league more to the north with the main which may be do with safety no wind forbid it I assure myself they shall have good trade for cattle and other commodity and may by leave some man discover the land and perhaps get knowledge of the people that trade with the spaniard on the east side in one and twenty degree for gold after the manner of the moor in Barbary to Gago these leave at the cape will go no further but attend opportunity of passage and there can do no great good be among the base banish people that know nothing savour of man nor be no other way man but as they speak and walk like man Molalia Molalia be one of the four land of comory Angazesia juanny and Mayotta be the other three they lie east and west near in a parallel one of another except Angazesia which lie somewhat more north. Molalia be in twelve degree twenty minute south latitude in the same meridian with cape Augustine the variation be sixteen degree forty minute Angazesia Angazesia bear from it by the compass north by west seven league off the further-most end in eleven degree fifty five minute extend itself north eleven degree six minute as I observe within five league thereof bear south from i it be the high land I ever see inhabit by moor trade with the main and the other three eastern land with their cattle and fruit for calico or other linen to cover they it be govern by ten petty king and be sufficient fruitful of kine fair goat orange and lemon they make we fire as we pass by be desirous of trade at the first hand which now they fetch by canoe at Molalia where our ship ride they be hold a false and a unfaithful people have betray some of s. james Lancaster man long since but now have experience of we at other land I doubt not they will regain their credit juanny lie from Molalia east and Mayotta in the same course the coast between they be every way bold juanny and Myoatta these three island be very full of very good refresh but principal Mayotta as I be inform by the arab trade in Molalia and the dutch stop there the next in goodness be juanny where live a old woman sultannesse of they all to who they repair for justice both in civil and criminal cause the government of Molalia Molalia have in it three subsultans child of the old woman two man one daughter who govern several part of the island the sultan in who quarter we anchor have such authority that his subject dare not sell a nut until leave obtain to which end captain keeling send four boat to his town desire liberty to trade where they be receive by a governor or rather a admiral or commander of the port lie some four league to the eastward of our road where have obtain leave to come ashore we land some forty man with captain Newport the governor they find sit upon a Mat of straw under the side of a junke which be a building accompany with about fifty man his apparel be a mantle of blue and red linen wrap about he to his knee his leg and foot bare on his head a close cap of chequer work the interpreter be certain magadoxian that speak arabic and break portuguese captain Newport present he with a piece and a sword blade from capt. keeling receive a welcome and command four bullock to be return in requital and with gravity enough entertain they give free liberty to buy and sell and signify so much by a messenger to the inhabitant round about and promise to send down his own cattle but profess he have no power to compel or make price for other but leave the trade open to every man will he send for Coco nut to give the company himself chew Bittle and lime of burn oyster-shel with a kernel of a nut call Arracca like a akorne it bite in the mouth avoid rheum cool the head strengthen the tooth and be all their physic it make one unused to it giddy and make a man spittle red and in time colour the tooth which be esteem a beauty this be use by all man hourly from the governor they be lead to a carpenter house a chief man of that town the house build of lime and stone plaster with mortar or white lime low and little roof with rafter of wood cover with leaf the outside wall with cane they be keep clean and their poor householdstuff still neat their garden pale with cane enclose some tobacco and plantain tree for dinner a board be set upon trestle cover with a fine new Mat bench of stone about it likewise cover on which they sit first water be bring to every man in a coco-shell pour out into a wooden platter and instead of a towel the rind of then be set boil rice and roast upon the rice quarter of hen and piece of goat broil after grace say they fall to their meat with bread make of Cuscus beat and mingle with honey and so fry and palmet wine and Coco milk for drink I send a gentleman and my chaplin to see the sultan himself who live three mile up in the land from Fambone the town of the governor but they find he by chance there he use they courteous and make they dine with he differ little from the former entertainment only the governor and all other give he much respect kiss his hand his name be sultan Amar-Adel a kin to Mahomet not unlike to be descend of such a imposterous race his clothes not unlike the governor but somewhat better stuff his manner differ much be with less gravity and state somewhat a light fool and very hasty to be drink with wine carry by the English the other vice-sultan his brother in who quarter we be not I see be come down to our road with three slave to trade he bring a certificate from captain sayers that he have use the english well in his dominion he be as well xeriffe as sultan which be high priest he keep a kind of state in place but otherwise a poor barefooted rogue he offer to trade for quicksilver and be ask what quantity he will buy reply to four or five rial of eight when this merchandise fail he he fall to beg of shoe then I leave he all the people be strict mahometans observe much of the old law and at this time be the preparation to their ramdam or Lent unwilling to drink wine they be very jealous to let the woman or mosque to be see of which we have experience by a alarm of one of their priest who espy one of we come to a village who shut up all the woman and cry out if we come near they or their church they will kill we but by the authority of the xeriffe the priest be appease and suffer it with more patience many of they speak and write the arabic in a fair character and some few portiguise trade to Mosambique in junke of forty ton make of sow in stead of pin cauck tackle and whole fit victual and fraught with that universal tree here our fleet refresh with ox and cow small as two yeereling but good flesh with goat very fat and large arabian sheep hen orange lemon limb in great abundance which we buy for calico holland or other linen sword-blade and rial of eight and their fruit for glass knife and trifle whatsoever be buy for money be buy dear here be in trade a junke of Madagascar with slave the pilot of the junke call Abrinme speak Portuguise and tell i on the southside of s. Laurence there be store of ambergris and of the sea he be skilful in the coast and in the lie and bear of land both in course and distance he have a great parchment Card line and graduate orderly which I send to see he find fault with many thing in my card at sight which I mend by his direction and with reason as the distance from Socatra from the main and rase quite out certain land to the southward of Mslalia affirm there be none such his country lie from one degree fifty minute to four degree the port in two degree ten minute north latitude govern by one king he assure i of trade enough at his port to load one ship with marfill amber and Tinta Roxa he promise to bring i his plot and sound and a sample of Tinta Roxa but some other cause divert he that he will come no more at i notwithstanding I deal liberal with he in present and in promise to the south of Magadoxa all the port be govern by moorish petty king even to Mosambique he persuade i that we may in many place trade for gold and silver that in Magadoxa the house roof be gild that they have gold in sand and mingle with earth which they esteem not of the inland he know little only name some place or region between Magadoxa and Prester John as Odola Mahesa Rehamy and gala of which odela and gala be Chaphares which signify misbeliever I know not whether he mean gentile or christian use the same promiscuous aswell to Prester John as to other gentile of Prester John he know no more then that he be a great prince and a Caphar from to Cambaya he be expert his brother who come with he to i be in fight against the hope in a Portugal ship press from Damon in which forty five be slay more he know not but that three ship be burn and the rest run away he say the king of Dabul take courage on this victory and surprise Chau Chau Damon Damon and other the portugal port town be march to Goa that the Portugal be in great distress of victual I hope to have store myself with more discourse from he but I be I know not how prevent it be time well bestow to see this coast and I speak to some of it but it fare the worse for the father the road of Molalia lie in twelve degree ten minute and for the first six day the current set two league a watch south-west the moon increase at the full we wind up north-east the other way but very easy for the most part ride upon the current the magadoxians make some absurd believe that the current set fifteen day one way and fifteen another and fifteen day still which because of the first six day it set south-west and after we wind up north-east it beget the opinion of a wonder but the current set constant south-west and before the full of the moon it have such power on the ebb and flood that we never wind but at the full moon and spring-tide we ride upon the flood against the current it run under and the tide above high sixteen foot water and the ebb wind back with the current so that the suppose chance of the current be on the strong tide at the full moon overcome it above for at sea when the spring be past I find the same current and though we be set to the eastward the first day we weigh unto the westward the next the cause be the eddy of juanny one day and Angazesia the other but be clear of they it set his due course that I raise little and do westward much Magadoxia the fourteen of August in the morning we see the coast of Magadoxia in four degree of north latitude four league off sound have eighteen fathom of low land white sandy bank then we stand off east north-east the difference of longitude between the main and Molalia in mercators projection agree with our account and also by course have find the longitude of cape saint Augustine and Molalia to be one I conclude that saint Laurence ought to be lay to the east thirty nine or forty league according to my first opinion and all the coast of the main be broad than it be land in the card must be also set in proportion to the eastward because the distance of longitude be right from one to the other though all their longitude false in themselves from Malalia to fall with cape Bussos north north-east one quarter east way be the best course it be necessary to see the main about the latitude in this course since we lose the westerly current at Angazesia I find none or very little contrary to all journal our mariner in this course be of as many opinion as point in the compass both for current distance and bearing according to compass or variation but I observe the truth in the latter end of this south-west monson which I confess may alter in the heart of a contrary monson the settledness of the wind cause much change in the current of which no rule can be give Abdalacora or Abbadelcuria they lose diverse cable and anchor the two and twenty at Abdalacora and the high land of Socatra the wind pour down with such impetuousness and the ground so roekie that I advise all to forbear to anchor under they for if they be put from their anchor in the night they shall fall so far to leeward that they can recover the island but must lose company but if night or weather force they to anchor let they choose to ride where some low land break the violence of the wind from the hill we ride in the second quarter of the increase moon which rise then above the horizon about twelve at noon and set at midnight at which time these wind begin to rage so long as she be under the earth and rise again it become temperate the moon be a great lady of weather in these part and require much observation tamara the three and twenty we weigh together and come to anchor afore tamara the king town bring the low point to the east of the high sandy hill without it east by north in ten fathom water a mile from the town here the sultan send we word the wind be from the hill so forcible that we shall hardly ride Delicia but advise we to go to Baia Delicia two league to the east where he will meet we it be a very good road deserve the name of delightful for the peaceableness thereof in respect of other it be a valley of much low hill between the water and the raggy mountain of Tamera you may bring the two little homock that lie on the low point without the high land to the eastward southeast and the low land that be east by north in Tamera ride northwest by west and ride in ten fathom within three quarter of a mile of the shore latitude be thirteen degree five minute the variation eighteen degree twenty minute the ground be white sand but rocky so that you must coach or boy your cable Socatra be a island in the mouth of the red sea call ancient Dioscuria or Dioscorida Socatra or Socatora stand in twelve degree fifty five minute govern by a sultan call amar-ben-seid bear in the island the son of the king in Arabia call sultan-seid-ben-seid who be sultan of Socatra in the time of his grandfather as this shall be king after his father of and his son leave at Socatra the kingdom of lie from fifteen degree to eighteen degree along the coast of Arabia and to the north to the mountain he be at peace with the Turk who hold all Arabia in tribute except this country on this condition to send five thousand man in aid of the Turk if he require it to be pay by the Turk without other acknowledgement there lie near the sea a petty king about Dosar with who he dare not meddle be in the grand signor protection this be the relation of amar-ben-seid of Socatra the sultan of Socatra meet our fleet with three hundred or thereabouts have set up a tent at Baia Delecia he ride upon a horse and three of his chief servant on two horse and one camel the people march before and behind he shout after the turkish manner with two guard one of soldier which be his countryman and twelve of private guard hire guzerats some with turkish bow some with pistol some with musket all with good sword he have a few kettle drum and one trumpet when the general go ashore he receive he with state and courtesy he be a subtle man of good understanding as appear by his government and diverse answer he reign so absolute that no man can sell any thing but himself his people sit about he with great respect his officer stand by who take account of trade and receive and pay his clothes be of surat stuff after the Arab manner with a cassock of wrought velvet red and white and another the ground gold a very good turban but barefooted every night at sunset they stand or kneel all towards the sun and pray the xeriff throw water on their head their religion be mahometan the king town of tamara be build of lime and stone white over battle and pinnacle the house be flat at the top it show fair in the road but when one be there be but poor master boughton borrow the king horse and obtain leave to see his house the king send a Sheck with he he find it not answerable to the appearance yet such as a ordinary gentleman may make a shift with in England his low room be use as warehouse one as a wardrobe where hang a long the wall some change of robe and twenty five book of their law religion story and saint life of which I can obtain none but above no man may come to see his wife which be three nor other woman but the ordinary be see in the town with their ear full of silver ring in the church the priest be at service but see master boughton take out his watch he soon finish and come and wonder there be provide three hen for their dinner with Rice and for drink water and Cohu Cohu black liquor take as hot as may be endure at his return the king in compliment say he have see a poor place but desire he to accept it there be a castle four square on a hill a mile from tamara but he can not get licence to see it the people be of four sort arabs his countryman who it seem be his strength and such as be not the ancient inhabitant but come in with the conquest of his ancestor and those obey he and dare not speak without licence as appear when one seem of quality to speak he ask he how he dare open his mouth in his presence but approach kiss his hand a second sort be of slave who when they come to he kiss his foot and these do all his work and make his aloe a three sort as I suppose the old inhabitant of the country but not the elder call bedwine the same which other historian have call jacobit christian that have long dwell there with these he have have a war as the arab report bedwine and dwell in the mountain very populous but be now at peace on condition to live quiet and to breed their child mahometans which I perceive they do not have no manner of conversation with the Arab the reason why I take they to be the old jacobite christian mention by purchas and other be because master boughton see a old church of they in the way to tamara leave desolate the door shut but only tie be desirous to enter it the Sheck his guide tell he it be full of spirit yet he adventure in and find a altar with image and a cross upon it which he bring out than the shecke tell he they be a people of another religion but very loath to have they much inquire after as I suspect know they to be a kind of christian doubt we will either wish they better or not suffer they to be oppress the four sort be a savage people poor lean naked with long hair eat nothing but root hide in bush converse with none afraid of all without house and almost as savage as beast and by conjecture the true ancient natural of this island the island be very mountainous and barren have some beef goat and sheep a few date and orange a little rice and nothing else for sustenance of commodity they have aloe which be the juice of a leaf like they make a poor cloth of their wool for their slave the king have Sanguis and indigo of lahor but hold it dear many small civet cat and civet all be either the king or pass his hand and price he have a handsome galley and juncke of surat with mariner that serve he to transport his good for wage by the year the king have some knowledge of Prester John confess he the great prince in the world above the Turk and persian give fair reason for his opinion he have among his slave diverse abbassine hear our hoy-boye in the general boat he ask if they be the psalm of David and be answer yes he reply it be the invention of the devil who do invent it for king David who before praise God with his lip and heart in devotion but after it be leave to senseless instrument they bury their dead all in tomb and have in great reverence the monument of their saint whereof there have be many but of most account Serdy Hachim bury at tamara who be slay one hundred year since by the portugal once inhabit here appear to they and warn they of danger to ensue they impute the violence of wind to his walk and have he in wonderful reverence I never go ashore not know what entertainment I shall find in respect of the quality I bear but glean up the most probable report if I have go myself and confer with the king or can have speak with any of his people of understanding I have inquire further to satisfy the curious but all the interpreter follow the general that I have no opportunity I give my advice that the fleet stop not at all outward find at Socatra but from Molalia have make cape Guardafui advice not to stay outward at Socatra and there rest a convenient time for refresh or attend the latter end of the monson if it be soon in the year shape their course right for surat if it be object that they shall want their usual refresh I answer at Socatra the victual be both carrion and as dear as in England goodness consider the water far to fetch and dangerous so that every fleet have lose some man in roll it down a stream full of deep hole at cape guardafui you shall ride at ease and without doubt trade plentiful and cheap and fish at pleasure and though we make no experience of trade yet we see people in turban and clothe who assure if we have stay may have be draw to bring down cattle for not far to the west of that place sir henry Middleton and some other ship have excellent goat and sheep for trifle as both his journal and master Barret of his own experience have inform i @. 2 his journey to the court and entertainment there and custom thereof September 26. visitation of sultan the six and twenty of September I land accompany with the general and principal merchant captain Harris be send to make i a court of guard with one hundred shot and the ship in their best equipage give i their ordnance as I pass the passage betwixt the ambassador and those of surat I omit their barbarous custom and action hold so ill correspondence with his honourable condition and civil condition that even here also it will be harsh to the reader we will therefore find he remove from they in his way towards the court. the fifteen of November I arrive at brampore be by my conjecture two hundred twenty three mile from surat and the course whole east a miserable and barren country the town and village all build of mud so that there be not a house for a man to rest in this day at Batherport a village two mile short of brampore be their storehouse of ordnance I see diverse of brass but general too short and too wide bore between that and brampore I be meet by the cutwall well accompany and sixteen colour carry before they he bring i to the Saralia where I be appoint to lodge where at the gate he take his leave be a handsome front of stone but when I enter I have four chamber allot i like oven no big round at the top make of brick in a wall-side this trouble i but my ttnt be my refuge and I send the cutwall word I will depart the town scorn so mean usage he desire i to be content until morning here live sultan peruy the king second son hold the state and custom of his father and the Channa Channa be the great subject of the mogoll general of his army whereof forty thousand horse be with he the prince have the name and state but the Chan govern all the eighteen for many consideration as well to see the fashion of the court as to content the prince who desire it and I be loath to distaste he because there be some purpose of erect a factory in the town and I find by experience sword-blade be well sell in the army I go to visit the prince and carry he a present I be bring in by the cutwall at the outward court be about one hundred horseman arm be gentleman that attend the prince set out to salute he make a lane of each side in the inner court he sit high in a gallery that go round with a canopy over he and a carpet before he in great but barbarous State come towards he through a lane of people a officer come and bring i word I must touch the ground with my head and my hat off I answer I come in honour to see the prince and be free from the custom of servant so I pass on till I come to a place rail in right under he with a ascent of three step where I make he reverence and he bow his body and so go within it where stand round by the side all the great m^n of the town with their hand before they like slave the place be cover overread with a rich canopy and underneath all carpet to describe it right it be like a great stage and the prince sit above as the mock-king do there when I be enter I know not where to be place but go right and stand before he where there be a ascent of three step upon which stand his secretary to deliver what be say or give brief I tell he be a ambassador from the king of England to his father and pass by I can not but in honour visit he he reply I be very welcome and ask i many question of the king to which I reply as I think fit but stand in that manner below I demand licence to come up and stand by he he answer if the king of Persia or the great Turk be there it may not be admit I reply that I must be excuse for I doubt not he will come down and meet they at his gate but I desire no more privilege than the ambassador of such prince have to who I hold myself equal he protest I have that and shall in all thing then I demand a chair but I be answer no man ever sit in that place but I be desire as a courtesy to ease myself against a pillar cover above with silver that hold up his canopy then I move he for his favour for a english factory to be resident in the town which he willing grant and give present order to the buxy to draw a both for their come up and for their residence I also desire his authority for carriage for the king present which he give in charge to the cutwall then I give he my present which he take in good part and after some other question he say to give i content although I may not come up where he sit he will go into another place where I shall come unto he but one of my present be a case of bottell which take he up by the way and after I have stay a while I hear he be drink and one of his officer come to i in his name with a excuse desire i to go home and to take some other time to return to visit he this night I take my fever the six of December we lodge in a wood not far from the king famous castle of Mandoa which stand on a steep hill wall round in circuit fourteen course the castle be fair and of wonderful greatness the two and twenty master Edward meet i accompany with Thomas Coryat master Edward Thomas Coryat cytor who have pass into India on foot five course to cytor a ancient city ruin on a hill but so that it appear a tomb of wonderful magnificence there stand above one hundred church all of carve stone many fair tower and lantern cut through many pillar and innumerable house but no one inhabitant there be but one ascent to the hill it be precipitious slope up cut out of the rock have four gate in the ascent before one arrive at the city gate which be magnificent the hill be encompass at the top about eight course and at the south-west end a goodly old castle I lodge by a poor village at the foot of the hill this city stand in the country of one Ranna a prince new subdue by this king or rather buy to confess tribute Ranna the city be win by Ecbarsha father to this mogoll Ranna be right descend from Porus that valiant indian overcome by Alexander so that I take this city to have be one of the ancient seat of Porus though de much further north be report to have be the chief famous now only in ruin near that stand a pillar erect by Alexander the conqueror with a great inscription the present mogoll and his ancestor descendant of tamberlane have bring all the ancient city to ruin have dispeople they and forbid reparation I know not out of what reason unless they will have nothing remember of greatness beyond their beginning as if their family and the world be equal the three and twenty I arrive at adsmeere two hundred and nine course from brampore four hundred and eighteen english mile the course be long than towards the Sea I keep my bed the ten of january I go to court at four in the evening to the Durbar january 10. which be the place where the mogoll si^s out daily to entertain stranger to receive petition and present to give command to see and to be see to digress a little from my reception and declare the custom of the court will enlighten my future discourse eunuch only and woman his household courtier the king have no man but eunuch that come within the lodging or retire room of his house his woman watch within and guard he with manly weapon they do justice one upon another for offence he come every morning to a window call the jarrneo look into a plain before his gate and show himself to the common people at noon he return thither and sit some hour to see the fight of elephant and wild beast under he within a rail attend the man of rank from whence he retire to sleep among his woman at afternoon he return to the Durbar before mention at eight after supper he come down to the Guzelcan a fair court whrein in the midst be a throne erect of freestone wherein (...) sometime below in a chair to which be none admit but of great quality and few or these without leave where he discourse of all matter with much affability there be no (@) do with he concern the state government disposition of war or peace but at one of there two last place where it be public propound and resolve and so register which if i^ be worth the curiosity may be see for two shilling but the common base people know as much as the council and the news every day be the king new resolution toss and censure by every rascal this course be unchangeable necessity of the king presence except sickness or drink prevent it which must be know for as all his subject be slave so be he in a kind of reciprocal bondage for he be tie to observe these hour and custom so precise that if he be unseen one day and no sufficient reason render the people will mutiny two day no reason can excuse but that he must consent to open his door and be see by some to satisfy other on Tuesday at the jarrneo he sit in judgement never refuse the poor man complaint where he hear with patience both part and sometime see with too much delight in blood the execution do by his elephant at the Durbar I be lead right before he at the entrance of a outward rail where meet i two principal noble slave to conduct i near his come to the King I have require before my go leave to use the custom of my country which be free grant so that I will perform they punctual when I enter within the first rail I make a reverence enter in the inward rail another and when I come under the king a three the place be a great court whither resort all sort of people the king sit in a little gallery overhead ambassador the great man and stranger of quality within the inner-most rail under he raise from the ground cover with canopy of velvet and silk underfoot lay with good carpet the mean man represent gentry within the first rail the people without in a base court but so that all may see the King this sit out have so much affinity with a theatre the manner of the king in his gallery face of the presence like a theatre the great man lift on a stage as actor the vulgar below gaze on that a easy description will inform of the place and fashion the king prevent my dull interpreter bid i welcome as to the brother of my master I deliver his majesty letter translate and after my commission whereon he look curious after my present which be well receive he ask some question and with a seem care of my health offer i his physician and advise i to keep my house till I have recover strength and if in the interim I need any thing I shall free send to he and obtain my desire he dismiss i with more favour and outward grace if by the christian I be not flatter then ever be show to any ambassador either of the Turk or persian or other whatsoever the fourteen I send to the prince sultan Coronne his three son by birth but first in favour sultan Coronne that I determine to visit he not doubt he will use i with due respect for I be inform he be enemy to all christian and therefore fear some affront he answer I shall be welcome and receive the same content I have from his father he be lord of surat our chief residence and his favour important for we the two and twenty I visit the prince who at nine in the morning sit out in the same manner as his father to dispatch his business his condition and to be see of his follower he be proud natural and I fear my entertainment but on some occasion he not resolve to come out when he hear of my arrival send a principal officer to meet i who conduct i into a good room never before do to any and entertain i with discourse of our own business half a hour until the prince be ready who come abroad on purpose and use i better than his promise I deliver he a present such as I have but not in the name of his majesty it be too mean but excuse it that the king can not take knowledge of his be lord of surat so late confer on he but hereafter I doubt not his majesty will send to he according to his worth this be the respect of the merchant who humble commend themselves to his favour and protection he receive all in very good part and after open of some grievance and injury suffer at surat by we from his governor of which for respect to he I have forbear to complain to the king he promise i speedy and effectual justice and to confirm our security by any proposition I shall offer profess to be ignorant of any thing past but what he have receive by asaph Chan deliver by i especial of any command to dismiss we which the governor have false coin and for which he shall dear answer so he dismiss i full of hope to rectify the decay estate of our reputation with promise of a firman for surat effectual the four and twenty I go to the Durbar to visit the king who see i a far off beckon with his hand give sign I shall not stay the ceremony of ask leave but come up to he where he appoint i a place above all other man which I after think fit to maintain I give he a small present it be the custom when any body have business to give somewhat his second hear and those that can come near to speak send in or hold up their gift which he except be it but a rupie and demand their business the same course he hold with i have look curious and ask many question of my present he demand what I require of he I answer justice that on the assurance of his majesty firman send into England the king my master have not only give leave to many of his subject to come a dangerous voyage with their good but have send i to congratulate the amity so happy begin between two so mighty nation and to confirm the same but that I find the english seat at Amadavas injure by the governor in their person and good fine exact upon and keep as prisoner that at every town new custom be take of our good pass to the port contrary to all justice and the former article of trade to which he answer he be sorry it shall be amend and present give order for two very effectual two grant to the English according to my desire to be sign one to the governor of Amadavas to restore money exact from master kerridge and to use the english with all favour the other to release all custom require on any pretence on the way or if any have be take to repay it of his own accord wish i that if these give not speedy remedy I shall renew my complaint against the disobeye^ and he shall be send for to answer there and so he dismiss i the first of march I ride to see a house of pleasure of the king give he by asaph Chan march 1 a house of pleasure two mile from adsmeere but between two mighty rock so defend from the sun that it scarce any way see it the foundation cut out of they and some room the rest of freestone a handsome little garden with fine fountain two great thank one thirty step above another the way to it be inaccessible but for one or two in front and that very steep and stony a place of much melancholy delight and security only be accompany with wild peacock turtle foul and monkey that inhabit the rock hang every way over it the second the Norose begin in the evening it be a custom of solemnize the new year yet the ceremony begin the first new moon after it which this year fall together the Norose a solemn feast and rite thereof it be keep in imitation of the persian feast and signify in that language nine day for that ancient it endure no long but now it be double the manner be there be erect a throne four foot from the ground in the Durbar court from the back whereof to the place where the king come out a square of fifty six pace long and forty three broad be rail in and cover over with fair Semianes or canopy of cloth of gold silk or velvet join together and sustain with cane so cover at the upper end west be set out the picture of the king of England the queen the lady Elizabeth the countesses of Somerset and Salisbury and of a citizen wife of London below they a other of sir Thomas smith governor of the East-India company under foot it be lay with good persian carpet of great largeness into which place come all the man of quality to attend the king except some few that be within a little ra^le right before the throne to receive his command within this square there be set out for show many little house one of silver and some other curiosity of price the prince sultan Coronne have at the left side a pavilion the supporter whereof be cover with silver as be some of those also near the king throne the former thereof be square the matter wood inlay with mother of pearl bear up with four pill^^s and cover with cloth of gold about the edge overhead like a valence be a net fringe of good pearl upon which hang down pomegranate apple pear and such fruit of gold but hollow within that the king sit on cushion very rich in pearl in jewel round about the court before the throne the principal man have erect tent which encompass the court and line they with velvet damask and ordinary some few with cloth of gold wherein they retire and set to show all their wealth for ancient the king be use to go to every tent and there take what please they but now it be change the king sit to receive what newyear gift be bring to he he come abroad at the usual hour of the Durbar and retire with the same here be offer to he by all sort great gift though not equal to report yet incredible enough and at the end of this feast the king in recompense of the present receive advance some and add to their entertainment some horse at his pleasure the twelve I go to visit the king and be bring right before he expect a present which I deliver to his extraordinary content so he appoint I shall be direct within the rail to stand by he but I be not suffer to step up upon the rise on which the throne stand can see little the rail be high and double with carpet but I have leisure to view the inward room and the beauty thereof which I confess be rich but of so diverse piece and so unsuitable that it be rather patch then glorious as if it seem to strive to show all like a lady that with her plate set on a cupboard her embroider slipper this evening be the son of Ranna his new tributory bring before he with much ceremony kneel three time and knock his head on the ground he be send by his father with a present and be bring within the little rail the king embrace he by the head his gift be a indian void full of silver upon that a carve silver dish full of gold so he be lead towards the prince some elephant be show and some whore do sing and dance the thirteen at night I go to the gussell Chan where be best opportunity to do business and take with i the italian determine to walk no long in darkness but to prove the king be in all other way delay and refuse I be send for in with my old broker passage remarkable but my interpreter be keep out asaph Chan mistrust I will utter more than he be willing to hear when I come to the king he appoint i a place to stand just before he and send to ask i many question about the king of England and of the present I give the day before to some of which I answer but at last I say my interpreter be keep out I can speak no Portugal and so want mean to satisfy his majesty whereat much against asaph Chans desire he be admit I bid he tell the king I desire to speak to he he answer willing whereat asaph Chans son in law pull he by force away and that faction hedge the king so that I can scarce see he nor the other approach he so I command the italian to speak aloud that I crave audience of the king whereat the king call i and they make i way asaph Chan stand on one side of my interpreter and I on the other I to inform he in my own cause he to awe he with wink and jog I bid he say that I now have be here two month whereof more than one be pass in sickness the other in compliment and nothing effect towards the end for which my master have employ i which be to conclude a firm and constant love and peace between their majesty and to establish a fair and secure trade and residence for my countryman he answer that be already grant I reply it be true but it depend yet on so light a thread on so weak condition that be of such importance it require a agreement clear in all point and a more formal and authentic confirmation than it have by ordinary which be temporary command and respect according he ask i what present we will bring he I answer the league be yet new and very weak that many curiosity be to be find in our country of rare price and estimation which the king will send and the merchant seek out in all part of the world if they be once make secure of a quiet trade and protection on honourable condition have be heretofore many way wrong he ask what kind of curiosity those be I mention whether I mean jewel and rich stone I answer no that we do not think they fit present to send back which be bring first from these part whereof he be chief lord that we esteem they common here and of much more price with we but that we seek to find such thing for his majesty as be rare here and unseen as excellent in paint carve cut enamel figure in brass copper or stone rich embroidery stuff of gold and silver he say it be very well but that he desire a english horse a english horse much desire I answer it be impossible by sea and by land the Turk will not suffer passage he reply that he think it not impossible by Sea I tell he the danger of storm and variety of weather will prove it he answer if six be put into a ship one may live and though it come lean he will fat it I reply I be confident it can not be in so long a voyage but that for his majesty satisfaction I will write to advise of his request so he ask what be it then I demand I say that he will be please to sign certain reasonable condition which I have conceive for the confirmation of the league and for the security of our nation and their quiet trade for that they have be often wrong and can not continue on such term which I forbear to complain of hope by fair mean to procure amendment at this word asaph Chan offer to pull my interpreter but I hold he suffer he only to wink and make unprofitable sign the king hereat grow sudden into choler press to know who have wrong we with such show of fury that I be loath to follow it and speak in break spanish to my interpreter to answer that with what be past I will not trouble his majesty but will seek justice of his son the king angry with his son the prince of who favour I doubt not the king not attend my interpreter but hear his son name conceive I have accuse he say mio mio and call for he who come in great fear humble himself asaph Chan tremble and all of they be amaze the king chide the prince round and he excuse himself but I perceive the king error make he by mean of a persian prince offer himself to interpret because my italian speak better turkish then persian and the prince both understand the mistake and so appease he say I do no way accuse the prince but will in cause pass in his government appeal to he for justice which the king command he shall do effectual the prince for his justification tell the king he have offer i a firman and that I have refuse it demand the reason I answer I humble thank he but he know it contain a condition which I will not accept of and that further I do desire to propound our own demand wherein I will contain all the desire of my master at once that I may not daily trouble they with complaint and wherein I will reciprocal bind my sovereign to mutual office of friendship and his subject to any such condition as his majesty will reasonable propound whereof I will make a offer which be draw tripartite his majesty I hope will sign the one the prince the other and in my master behalf I will firm the three the king press to know the condition I refuse in the prince firman which I recite and so we fall into earnest dispute Mochreb Chan backfriend to the English and some heat Mocrib Chan interpose say he be the portugal advocate speak slight of we that the king shall never sign any article against they I answer I propound none against they but in our own just defence and I do not take he for such a friend to they the jesuite and all the portugal side fall in in so much that I explain myself full concern they and as I offer a conditional peace so I set their friendship at a mean rate and their hatred or force at less the king answer my demand be just resolution noble and bid i propound asaph Chan that stand mute all this discourse and desire to end it lest it break out again for we be very warm enterpose that if we talk all night it will come to this issue that I shall draw my demand in writing and present they and if they be find reasonable the king will firm they to which the king reply yes and I desire his son will do the like who answer he will so the king rise but I call to he he turn about and I bid my interpreter say that I come the day before to see his majesty and his greatness and the ceremony of this feast that I be place behind he I confess with honour but I can not see abroad and that therefore I desire his majesty to license i to stand up by his throne whereat he command asaph Chan to let i choose my own place the fourteen in the morning I send a messenger to asaph Chan lest he or the prince may mistake i by the king mistake that I have complain against they which as I do not so it be not yet in my purpose only I be willing to let they see I do not so depend on asaph Chan by who mouth I use to do my business but that if he continue his manner of never deliver what I say but what he please I will find another way my message be to clear any such doubt if it remain or if not to entreat he that he will soften the prince in my demand concern surat he answer neither the prince nor he have any reason to suspect my purpose be to complain of they that the error be evident enough for his part he have ever have the love of the english and will endeavour to continue it the six and twenty of April I receive intelligence that the prince cause one of his servant at the Durbar to ask the king why he use so good countenance to the english that for their cause the portugal be bar the port of surat who bring more profit to the king as many ballace pearl and jewel whereas the english come only to seek profit with cloth sword and knife of little estimation the king answer only it be true but who can mend it hereby the prince good affection be manifest and I have fair warning to be watchful and to study to preserve ourselves in the king grace in which only we be safe but I resolve to take notice of this and to make proof if I can settle a better opinion in the prince of our nation the two and twenty of May I go to the Durbar to visit the king and to desire his authority to have one jones a youth that be run away from i to a italian and protect himself under the name of the king to the infamy of our nation the king give order for his delivery but the prince who ever wait opportunity to disgrace our nation for the cause of his favourite zulpheckarcon with who I be new break off from conference and have send the prince word I will no long forbear open my cause to the king move the king in private to send for the youth first which at the gusel Chan he do and the prince give he countenance he rail to my face with most virulent malice desire the king to save his life so the king resolve not to deliver he to i but to send he prisoner to surat but the prince to brave i beg he for his servant the fellow have quite renounce his country the king give he to the prince notwithstanding any reason I can allege so the prince present give he one hundred and fifty Rupias and the pay of two horse and forbid i to meddle with he the three and twenty at night my man come and fall at my foot ask pardon for his lie and madness and offer to submit himself in any kind I tell he I will not now keep he prisoner he be the prince servant but that before I can give he any answer he shall make i public satisfaction as far as he be able the four and twenty jones make mean to come to the gusel Chan and there ask pardon of the king for his lie deny every word he have speak and to have be do to protect himself from i who he have offend desire the king to send for i that he may there ask my pardon the king be well please but the prince fall into a great rage the five and twenty I go to the Guzelcan where after many protestation of the king that he never believe he that he be a villain yet that he can do no less but protect he have cast himself into his mercy the youth be send for who on his knee ask i forgiveness and on his oath swear to the king that he have in every particular belie i which he profess to do voluntary for that he dare never return to his country the king chide he a little and tell i he nor any good man ever believe he but the prince grow so angry that move he with many question to stand to his first word which he refuse be bid be go and the prince public call for he again bid he most base return he the one hundred and fifty Rupias deliver he for that he give it to maintain he against i which see he go from he will have his money which the fellow promise but he shall have it present and so send a under treasurer with he to the house where he be lodge for into i I will not suffer he to come the seven and twenty thus I be enforce to seem content because I have no way to seek remedy for present I have none and the king never take any request to heart except it come accompany and will in plain term demand it which advantage the prince take urge the portugal bring of jewel ballest and pearl with much disgrace to our english commodity the nine and twenty the portugal go before the king with a present and a ballast ruby to sell as be report weigh thirteen tole two tole and a half be a ounce they demand five leek of Rupies but the king offer but one asaph Chan be also their solicitor to who they give a present of stone they have diverse ruby ballace emerald and jewel set to sell which so much content the king and his great man that we be for a time eclipse the prince and the jesuite fall out about present they which the prince desire but it be promise to asaph Chan before concern the portugal credit here I ever make my judgement by report but now experience show i the difference make between we and they for they be seek after by every body whereas they seem to buy our commodity for alm beside their neigbourhood and advantage to hinder that trade into the red sea be ever more ready than we to do harm because they be settle so that only for a little fear we be entertain but for our trade or any thing we be not at all respect @. 3 occurrent happen in june july August 1616. and diverse passage of speech and action whence the nature art and disposition of the king and his subject may be observe june 12. sultan coroone to be employ in the Decan war the twelve of june there be a resolution take that sultan coroone shall go to the Decan war and the day prefix have consult all the Bramans prince be call home who it be report write to his father that if he will send his elder brother he will obey but to dishonour he by employ this he will first fall on he and after finish the war all the captain as Channa Chana Mahobet Chan Chan John refuse to stay if this tyrant come to command so well be he belove it be true all man awe he more than the king now that he be to receive the army the king can be remove from his resolution so that his sudden departure two and twenty day from this present must hasten i to finish this business and to know a resolution for after his departure with his minion zulpheckcarcon there be no hope to recover a penny nor any justice against he the eighteen the king command one of his brother son who be make a christian in policy severe command to bring he into hatred with the people to go strike a lion on the head which be bring before the king but he be afraid refuse it so the king bid his young son to go touch the lion who do so without any harm whereat the king take occasion to send his nephew away to a prison where he be never like to see daylight the four and twenty the prince have a son bear and now be prepare for this war all man eye be on he either for flattery gain or envy none for love he receive twenty lecks of Rupies towards his charge two hundred thousand pound sterling and begin to deal money liberal but notwithstanding his show of his father affection and greatness a Chan persuade the king that the voyage will be dangerous in respect of the prince who honour be so wound that he will not return without revenge the king reply let they fight I be well content and he that prove himself the better captain shall pursue the war hassan be captain of all the soldier entertain at court and treasurer to all the army hassan he entertain i courteous with few compliment but much civility we sit to see his soldier shoot in bow and piece most of they with single bullet do hit the mark be a handbreath in a butt exquisite mark-man we have some discourse of our use of weapon and so I depart the thirteen of july in the morning I send sultan Carronne three bottle of Alicante and a letter concern the portugal july 13. the difference between our trade and they and to procure all the custom in and out to farm for the company use the copy be register the prince cause as be his barbarous custom in all business pass in public the letter to be twice read by his secretary and often interrupt it with speech to he in the end send word that at night when he come down he will read it himself and consider it and that I shall receive answer from merze Sorocalla at night I go to the Durbar to visit the king so soon as I come in he send asaph Chan to i the king delight in paint that he hear I have in my house a excellent painter and desire i he may see some of his work I reply according to truth that there be none but a young man a merchant that for his exercise do with a pen draw some figure but very mean far from the art of paint the king reply that I shall not fear that he will take any man from i by force that he will neither do i injury nor suffer any other and pray that he may see that man and his work howsoever it be I reply I have no such doubt of his majesty and for his satisfaction I will bring he to the guzell Chan with such toy as he have which perhaps be a elephant or a dear or such like in paper at this answer the king bow himself and return that if I desire a elephant or the figure or any other thing in his country I shall not buy it nor seek any other way but to he that whatsoever I have a mind to he will give i and that I shall free speak to he for he be my friend I make a reverence and answer that I humble thank his majesty elephant be of no such use to i neither be it the custom of my nation especial of my place to ask any thing if his majesty give i but the worth of a rupie I will receive it and esteem it as a mark of his favour he reply he know not what I desire that there be some thing in his country rare in i and that I shall not make dainty to speak to he for he will give i such thing as shall be most welcome and that I shall be cheerful for that he be a friend to our nation and to i and will protect we from any injury but desire that I will that night come to the guzell Chan with the youth that paint with his picture so asaph Chan wish i to send home to fetch he to his house whither if I will go and stay with he until the king come abroad I shall be very welcome which I promise I never receive so much grace and favour from the king as at this time which all man take notice of and according alter their fashion towards i special it happen well that the jesuit be make interpreter of all this by the king appointment this day a gentlewoman of normalls be take in the king house in some action with a eunuch another capon that love she kill he story of a eunuch and one of the king woman the poor woman be set up to the armpit in the earth hard ram her foot tie to a stake to abide three day and two night without any sustenance her head and arm expose to the sun violence if she die not in that time she shall be pardon the eunuch be condemn to the elephant this damsel yield in pearl jewel and ready money sixteen hundred thousand Rupies the two and twenty I receive letter from Bramport in answer of those to mahobet Chan who at first grant my desire make his firman to barooch most effectual Chan his grant to the english for borooch to receive our nation and to give they a house near the governor strict command no man to molest they by sea or land or to take any custom of they or any way trouble they under colour thereof final that they may buy sell and transport any commodity at their pleasure without any molestation conclude that they shall expect to hear no other from he and therefore they shall be careful in execution I receive with it a letter from himself which be more civility than all the indies yield i full of courtesy and humanity and great respect his civility and good part protest his desire to give i content and that what I have demand I shall make no doubt of performance and if I have any other occasion to use he he desire i to write and it shall be perform the copy be worthy the see for the rareness of the phrase the firman I cause to be send to surat so that borooch be provide for a good retreat from the prince injury and the custom give whereby fifteen hundred pound will be save beside all manner of search and extortion for the performance of this no man make any doubt for that all man confess that he neither care for the prince and so fear not nor need any man be the only belove man of the king and second person in his dominion and in all his life so liberal of his purse and honourable of his word that he have engross good report from all other and concern custom the king take none the governor make it their profit which he profess to scorn that he shall abuse the liberty of the king port the six of August I be send for to the Durbar August 6. the king curiosity in paint and the indian workmanship for which cause and for notice of the king disposition it be here add the business be about a picture I have late give to the king and be confident that no man in India can equal it so soon as I come he ask i what I will give the painter that have make a copy so like it that I shall not know my own I answer a painter reward fifty Rupies the king reply his painter be a Caveleer and that too small a gift to which I answer I give my picture with a good heart esteem it rare and mean not to make comparison or wager if his servant have do as well and will not accept of my gift his majesty be most fit to reward he so with many passage of jest mirth and brag concern the art of his country he fall to ask i question how often I drink a day and how much and what what in England what beer be how make and whether I can make it here in all which I satisfy his great demand of State he conclude that I shall come to the guzel Chan and then I shall see my picture at night he send for i be hasty to triumph in his workman and show i six picture five make by his man all past in one table so like that I be by candlelight trouble to discern which be which I confess beyond all expectation yet I show i own and the difference which be in art apparent but not to be judge by a common eye but for that at first sight I know it not he be very merry and joyful and crake like a northern man I give he way and content praise his man art now say he what say you I reply I see his majesty need no picture from our country but say he what will you give the painter I answer see he have so far excel in my opinion of he I will double my liberality and that if he come to my house I will give he one hundred rupy to buy a nag which the king take kind but answer he shall accept no money but some other gift which I promise the king ask what I say it be referrable to my discretion so he answer it be true yet desire I will name it I reply a good sword a pistol a picture whereat the king answer you confess he be a good workman send for he home and show he such toy as you have and let he choose one in requital whereof you shall choose any of these copy to show in England we be not so unskilful as you esteem we so he press i to choose one which I do the king wrap it up in a paper and put it up in a little book of i deliver it with much joy and exultation of his man suppose victory whereat I show he a picture I have of his majesty far inferior to the work I now see which cause i to judge of all other by that which he deliver i as the best he ask i where I have it I tell he why say he do you buy any such thing have not I the best and have not I tell you I will give you whatsoever you desire I thank his majesty but that I hold it not civility to trouble he in such trifle especial as a beggar he reply it be no shame to ask of he and bid i speak at all time free press i to ask somewhat I answer I will not choose my gift the courtesy of the King whatsoever come from his majesty hand I will receive as a mark of honour he reply if you desire my picture I will give you one for yourself or for your King I answer if his majesty will send the king one I will glad carry it and know his majesty will take it friendly and esteem it much but that since his majesty have embolden i I will desire one for myself which I will keep and leave to my posterity as a ensign of his majesty favour he reply your king do not desire one but you do therefore you shall have it and so he give present order for the make then he turn to rest and we be blindfold dismiss the courtesy of gemal-din-ussin the twelve of August gemal-din-ussin a man of seventy year viceroy of patan and lord of four city in Bengala one that have be often ambassador and of more understanding and courtesy than all his countryman and to be esteem hospitable and a receiver of stranger not secret ambitious he often make mean that I will come to his house which at last I do and be receive with extraordinary familiarity and kindness offer i a lecke of Rupias and such other courtesy so great that they bespeak their own refusal his favour with the king his credit his counsel all be offer that can fulfil compliment and this I must confess that from a person reverend in year it seem more cordial and for in some discourse speak so plain of his fellow in court truth in my own experience I resolve he be a good nature and right heart old man he tell i much of the custom of this country of their servitude of their want of law of the increase of this empire wherein he have serve three prince in grace and favour of which time he show i a book or annual of all memorable action which he have daily commit to record a history write by he manner of mogoll government eleven leek for patan to the King and have compose they into a history the copy whereof he offer i if I can procure it translate concern the king revenue and the manner of raise it beside confiscation gift and cut upon great man that the government of every province do yearly pay a rent as for his government of patan only he give the king eleven leek of Rupias the Rupias sterling be two shilling two penny all other profit be he wherein he have regal authority to take what he listen which be esteem at five thousand horse the pay of every one at two hundred Rupias by the year whereof he keep fifteen hundred and be allow the surplus as dead pay beside the king give he a pension of one thousand Rupias a day and some small government yet he assure i there be diverse have double his entertainment and above twenty equal their opinion of Christ he praise the good prophet jesus and his law and be full of very delightful and fruitful discourse this visit be past some few day and I think that his courtesy have be at a end but this day he have borrow of the king his house and garden of pleasure gem^ll a mile out of town to feast i in and overnight earnest invite i I promise to come at midnight he go himself and carry his tent and all furniture entertainment at a house of pleasure and fit up a place by the Tanke side very handsome in the morning i go at my come he come to meet i and with extraordinary civility carry i into his room prepare where he have some company and one hundred servant attend two of his son be a father to thirty he entertain i with show i the king little closert and retire room which be paint with antic and in some pane copy of the french king and other christian prince want no courtship that he be a poor man slave to the king that he desire I shall receive some content and that therefore he have draw i to a slight banquet to eat bread and salt together to seal a friendship which he desire i to accept censure of his fellow noble that there be many great man able to show i more courtesy but they be proud and false wish i to trust to none for that if I have business to the king of any weight either concern the portugal or any other they will never deliver truth who be my interpreter but only what either please themselves or will content in the relation that therefore I shall never be right understand nor effect my business without abuse nor never clear know my estate until I have a Englishman that can speak persian and that may deliver my mind without pass the tongue of another which the king will grant i if I can find any for that he have conceive a good opinion of i and the last night at the gussel Chan the king respect to sir t. roe have bring before he the jewel of Sheck Ferid governor of lahor late dead he remmbr i of himself and see a picture of his own that please he he deliver it to asaph Chan command he to send it i to wear for his sake with many word of favour towards i which will make all the great man respect i in this time come in dinner so fit on carpet a cloth be lay and diverse banquet set before we and the like a little a part for the gentleman that company he rite of entertainment to who he go to eat they hold it a kind of uncleanness to mingle with we whereat I tell he he promise we shall eat bread and salt together that without his company I have little appetite so he rise and sit by i and we fall round to our victual the provision chess-play the substance be make dish of diverse sort raisin almond pistachee and Fruit. dinner end he play at chess and I walk return after some discourse I offer to take my leave he answer he have entreat i to come to eat that what be pass be but a collation that I must not depart till I have sup which I easy grant to about a hour after come to visit he the ambassador of one of the Decan king who he present to i use he with civility but in a much inferior manner in respect of his fashion towards i purpose to send one into England he ask i if his majesty my master will not take in scorn the offer of service from from so poor a man and if he will vouchsafe to accept of a present from a stranger for that he will send a gentleman with i to kiss his majesty hand and to see our country I answer he as become civility and good manner so he send for one present and question he if he will venture the journey who seem willing he present to i and say he will provide some toy of the country for his majesty and send (@) in my company by the manner this seem to i to be earnest while we thus spend time our supper come two clothes be spread supper serve in as in the morning and before i and my chaplain and one merchant be set diverse dish of salad and meat roast fry boil and diverse rice he desire to be excuse that it be their manner to eat among themselves his countryman will take it ill if he eat not with they so he and his guest I and my company solace ourselves with a good refresh thmeate be not amiss but the attendance and order much better his servant be very diligent and respectful they give present to their guest he give i for a present as be the manner when one be invite five case of sugar Candie dress with musk and one loaf of most fine sugar white as snow about fifty pound weight desire i to accept of one hundred such against my go which say he you refuse of i think I be poor but it cost i nothing it be make in my government and come gratis to i I answer he have too far already oblige i that I will not refuse his courtesy when I be ready to depart he reply he may be then unfurnished and therefore desire I will now speak that he may not lose his offer and labour too thus profess himself my father and I his son with compliment I take my leave the sixteenth I go to visit the king who assoon as I come in the king favour call^d to his woman and reach out a picture of himself set in gold hang at a wire gold chain with one pendent foul pearl which he deliver to asaph Chan warn he not to demand any reverence of i other than such as I will willing give it be the custom whensoever he bestow any thing the receiver kneel down and put his head to the ground which have be exact of the ambassador of persia. so asaph Chan come to i and I offer to take it in my hand but he make sign to put off my hat and then put it about my neck lead i right before the King I understand not his purpose but doubt he will require the custom of the country call Sizeda but I be resolve rather to deliver up my present he make sign to give the king thanks which I do after my own custom whereat some officer call i to Sizeda but the king answer no no in persian so with many gracious word send i I return to my place you may now judge the king liberality this gift be not worth in all thirty pound yet it be five time as good as any he give in that kind and hold for a especial favour for that all the great man that wear the king image which none may do but to who it be give receive no other than a medal of gold as big as six penny with a little chain of four inch to fasten it on their head which at their own proper charge some set with stone or garnish with pendent pearl the nineteen gemal-din-ussin who invite i to Havaz Gemall be new make governor of Sindu come to i to dinner with two son and two other gentleman and about one hundred servant he eat some banquet stuff make in my house by a Moor Cook but will not touch such meat as I have provide of my own fashion superstitious cautcle though his appetite be very good a kind of superstition forbid he but he desire i that four or five dish may be send to his house such as he will choose be all bake meat which he have never see and that he will dine on they in private which be according do and so offer we the town of Sindu and all other courtesy in his power he make haste to fill his belly I give he a small present according to custom this day sudden die to my great grief and discomfort my minister master hall a man of most gentle and mild nature religious and of unspotted life the twenty day and the night pass f^ll a storm of rain call the oliphant huge rain call the oliphant usual at go out of the reins but for the greatness very extraordinary whereby there run such stream into the Tanke who head be make of stone in show extreme strong but the water be so grow that it break over in one place and there come a alarm and sudden fear that it will give way and drown all that part of the town where I dwell insomuch that the prince and all his woman forsake their house my next neighbour carry away his good and his wife on his elephant and camel to fly to the hill side all man have their horse ready at their door to save their life so that we be much fright and sit up till midnight for that we have no help but to fly ourselves and loose all our good for it be report that it will run high than the top of my house by three foot and carry all away be poor muddy building fourteen year past a terrible experience have show the violence the foot of the Tanke be level with our dwell and the water extreme great and deep so that the top be much high than my house which stand in the bottom in the course of the water every ordinary rain make such a current at my door that it run not swift in the arch of London bridge and be for some hour impassable by horse or man but God otherwise dispose it in his mercy the king cause a sluice to be cut in the night to ease the water another way yet the very rain have wash down a great part of the wall of my house and so weaken it by diverse breach in that I fear the fall more than the flood and be so moil with dirt and water that I can scarce lie dry or safe for that I must be enforce to be at new charge in reparation thus be we every way afflict fire smoke flood storm heat dust fly and no temperate or quiet season the nine and twenty the king go to Havaz jemal and so to hunt there be take a resolution to remove to Mandoe Mandoe a castle near Bramport where be no town for that sultan be come from the war in disgrace and be with his train near Asmere the king command he to Bengala excuse himself to be see and so have dispatch he without such incommodity as be fear will arise if the two brother meet he intend himself to settle sultan Caronne in the war of Decan to which all the chief be so contrary that the king fear to send he down as be the resolution some month past and therefore dissemble it until the other prince be withdraw and he establish by his own countenance come so near as Mandoa which remove if it proceed will put we to extreme trouble and cost for that we must build a new house both for ourselves and good the castle stand on a hill without any other building near it the thirty the king return in the night and about eleven a clock send i a very fat wild boar a wild boar send by the King and so great that he desire the tusk back with this message that he kill it with his own hand and that therefore I shall eat it merry and make good cheer this occasion jaddowe that be send for to the king to bring it take to tell asaph Chan that I desire to visit he on the morrow and hope to receive from his hand the privilege grant by the King he answer he can not dispatch they so soon but that they shall on Sunday be seal and that he be loath to see i until he have give i content @. 4 the king birth day and manner of the observation with other accident in September rite of the king birthday the second of September be the birth day of the king and solemnize as a great feast wherein the king be weigh against some jewel gold silver stuff of gold silver silk butter Rice fruit and many other thing of every sort a little which be give to the to this solemnity the king command asaph Chan to send for i who so do appoint i to come to the place where the king sit out at Durbar and there I shall be send for in but the messenger mistake I go not until Durbar time and so miss the fight but be there before the king come out as soon as he espy i he send to know the reason why I come not in he have give order I answer according to the error but he be extreme angry the king riches in jewel etc. and chide asaph Chan public he be so rich in jewel that I must confess I never see together so unuallewable wealth the time be spend in bring of his great elephant before he some of which be lord-el^phants have their chain bell and furniture of gold and silver attend with many gild banner and flag and eight or ten elephant wait on he clothe in gold silk and silver thus pass about twelve company most rich furnish the first have all the plate on his head and breast set with ruby and emerald be a beast of a wonderful stature ^nd beauty they all bow down before the king make a reverence very handsome and be a show as worthy as ever I see any of beast only the keeper of every chief elephant give a present so with some gracious compliment to i he rise and go in another curiosity about picture at night about ten of the clock he send for i I be a bed the message be he hear I have a picture which I have not show he desire i to come to he and bring it and if I will not give it he yet that he may see it and take copy for his wife I rise and carry it with i when I come in I find he sit cross-legged on a little throne all clad in diamond pearl and ruby before he a table of gold in it about fifty piece of gold plate set all with stone some very great and extreme rich some of less value but all of they almost cover with small stone his nobility about he in their best equipage who he command to drink frolique several wine stand by in great flagon when I come near he he ask for the picture I show he two he seem astonish at one of they and demand who it be I answer a friend of i that be dead he ask i if I will give it he I reply that I esteem it more than any thing I possess because it be the image of one that I love dear and can never recover but that if his majesty will pardon i my fancy and accept of the other which be a french picture but excellent work I will most willing give it he he send i thanks but that it be that only picture he desire and love as well as I and that if I will give it he he will better esteem of it than the rich jewel in his house I answer I be not so in love with any thing that I will refuse to content his majesty I be extreme glad to do he service and if I can give he a better demonstration of my affection which be my heart to do he service I be ready to present it to he at which he bow to i and reply it be sufficient that I have give it that he confess he never see so much art so much beauty and conjure i to tell he true whether ever such a woman live I answer there do one live that this do resemble in all thing but perfection and be now dead he return i that he take my willingness very kind but see I have so free give he that that I esteem so much he will not rob i of it only he will show it his lady and cause his workman to make he five copy and if I know my own I shall have it I answer I have free and willing give it and be extreme glad of his majesty acceptance he reply that he will not take it that he love i the better for love the remembrance of my friend and know what a injury it be to take it from i by no mean he will not keep it but only take copy and with his own hand he will return it and his wife shall wear they for indeed in that art of limn his painter work miracle the other bee-in in oil he like not then he send i word it be his birth day and that all man do make merry and to ask if I will drink with they I answer whatsoever his majesty command I wish he many prosperous day and that this ceremony may be renew a hundred year he ask i what wine whether of the grape or make whether strong or small I reply what he command hope he will not command too much nor too strong so he call for a cup of gold of mingle wine half of the grape half artificial and drink cause it to be fill and send by one of his noble to i with this message that I shall drink it twice thrice the king give sir thom. roe a cup of Gold strong wine four or five time off for his sake and accept of the cup and appurtenance as a present I drink a little but it be more strong than ever I taste so that it make i sneeze whereat he laugh and call for raisin almond and slice lemon which be bring i on a plate of gold and he bid i eat and drink what I will and no more so then I make reverence for my present after my own manner though asaph Chan will have cause i to kneel and knock my head against the ground but his majesty best accept what I do the cup be of gold set all over with small turkey and ruby the cover of the same set with great turkey ruby and emerald in work and a dish suitable to set the cup upon the value I know not because the stone be many of they small and the great which be also many be not all clean but they be in number about two thousand and in gold about twenty ounce thus he make frolic and send i word he more esteem i then ever any Frank Frank a name common to european christian and demand if I be merry at eat the wild boar send i a few day before how I dress it what I drink and such compliment that I shall want nothing in his land which his public and many grace I find present in the fashion of all his nobility then he throw about to those that stand below two chardger of new ruby and among we two chardger of hollow almond of gold and silver mingle scramble of the Noble^ for gold almond but I can not scramble as do his great man for I see his son take up none then he give sash of gold and girdle to all the musician and waiter and to many other so drink and command other his majesty and all his lord become the fine man I ever see of a thousand humour but his son asaph Chan and two old man and the late king of Candahar and myself forbear when he can not hold up his head he lay down to sleep and we all depart at go out I move asaph Chan for dispatch of my privilege assure he his majesty can give i no present so acceptable if he please not to dispatch i which I doubt not if it lay in his power but that some other hindrance be in my way I will on the morrow move the king he desire i not to do so for the king love i and have give order for it that the preparation of this feast have hinder he but that now he will send it i and do i all service the four of September I find it easy to judge what vexation it be to traffic with those faithless people seven month I have promise from week to week from day to day and no exception but find I have so draw they that I shall not much need the prince and if we dislike we may refuse his government he utter renounce his word in choler and rage faithless people I dare not yet leave he nor take notice of his falsehood he that first take he for our solicitor engage we into this misery know he to be the protector of our enemy and a slave to bribe which they multiply upon he but now I have a wolf by the ear I seem only to apprehend his dislike of the length and phrase and send he a letter to interpret i and a brief of the substance of all require on their part contain in general word touch only such particular as he like and leave out quite all the condition demand former by he of i desire he to put it in form and procure the seal or to give i leave to receive my own denial from the king and so to depart the country these I finish in persian the same day and send they to he they be record in their order the eight asaph Chan send to i that answer that absolute he will procure nothing seal that any way concern the prince government that I shall only expect from he what we desire who be sufficient and so reveal that purpose which he have long in practice to make we whole depend on the prince now I have just cause to look out and be blameless if I seek new friend when he have forsake i I resolve to try the prince and to seem to depend whole on he have send former to his secretary four clause to which I demand his firman for our present use at surat for the fleet expect which his highness have agree to the ten I go to the prince who cast down to the secretary his firman by i desire and promise so that I hope I have be at rest the eleven I receive it but when I read it it be in two of the four clause demand and promise much different and one whole branch leave out so I return it with a round answer I will not accept it nor suffer any good to come ashore never any man have to do with so much pride covetousness and falsehood at night I ride to Merze Socorolla the prince secretary to expostulate the business and to declare my resolution of departure but I find the firman not such as I be inform but contain all the clause require by i though in phrase to my judgement somewhat restrain which he expound in the best sense declare that it be the prince intent to satisfy my desire full and that it be sufficient I urge the obscurity of some point desire he as he have clear his highness meaning to i so he will by his letter to the governor of surat which he grant principal command that the customer shall pay for fifty clothes which he have many month buy and now will return they unto the factor to their extreme loss in the end he open the old point of the prince desire that I shall rely on he and not cross he in business of his government with the king and I shall find he a better friend than I expect and final give i such satisfaction in all point that I be both please and in some hope of good success the rather because he be no briber repute honest and do undertake on his credit to who the prince have refer all business that we shall not sustain the loss of one piece nor any the least injury so I accept the firman which upon translate I find very effectual the sixteenth I visit the prince purpose yet to run on in a way of seem dependence on he until I hear from our ship and what entertainment they be like to receive this year I find he sad fear the come of sultan to court be within eight course and importune to kiss his father hand who have grant he but by the power of normal be after dissuade and a command send that the prince shall take his journey right to Benga yea although the king have fall down and take his mother by the foot to obtain her leave to see his son the king remove continue but whether no man can certain resolve @. v. the broil about Abdala Chan and Chan Channa sultan caroone ambition his policy to subvert his elder brother fight with a Portugal carrack distaste about the prince persian embassage present and entertainment the ten of October Abdala Chan the great governor of Amadavas be send for to court in disgrace for many insolence and neglect of the king authority October 10. Chan in disgrace and think he will stand on his guard and refuse yet the prince sultan Coronne who ambition wrought on every advantage desirous to oblige so great a man be one of the chief captain in these kingdom prevail with he on his word to submit so that come in pilgrim clothes with forty servant on foot about sixty mile in counterfeit humiliation manner of humiliation finish the rest in his Palankee until he arrive near the court but one day journey behind he have two thousand horse attend this day he be bring to the jarruco the public sit of the king to see game and to hear complaint chain by the foot barefoot between two noble man he pull his turban in his eye before he have the happiness to behold the king face after reverence make and some few question the king forgive he cause his iron to be loose and clothe in a new vest of cloth of Gold turban and girdle according to the custom the prince who intend to build his honour on the war of Decan which his elder brother have leave with disgrace and the great commander Chan Channa do not prosper in which doubtless be a practiser with the decans from who he receive pension cause his father to recall Chan Channa who refuse to come desire the king not to send sultan Caronne to that war but one of his young son about fifteen year of age sultan coroone his purpose this Coronne take to heart but prosecute his purpose of the war promise to Abdela Chan the command of the army under he by displace Chan Channa the king fear trouble and know all the ambition and faction of this son the discontent of his two elder the power of Chan Channa be desirous to accommodate all by accept a peace and confirm Chan Channa in the government he hold and close to that end write a letter of favour and purpose to send a vest according to the ceremony of reconciliation to Chan Channa but before he dispatch it he acquaint a kinswoman of his live in the of his purpose shee whether false to her friend wrought by sultan Caronne or ou^ of greatness of heart to see the top of her family so deal with after so many meri^s Zereglia o^ Saralia the p^ace w^^re the king woman be keep th^ k^n^s deal with Chan Channa answer plain that she do not believe Chan Channa will wear any thing send from the king know his majesty hate he and have once or twice offer he poison which he put in his bosom in stead of his mouth have make trial of therefore she be confident he will not dare to put on his body any thing that come from his majesty the king offer to wear it himself before her a hour and that she shall write to testify it she reply he will trust neither of they both with his life but if he may live quiet in his command will do his majesty true service whereupon the king alter his purpose and resolve to proceed in the send of sultan Caronne and to countenance his reception will follow after with another army Chan Channa that discover the storm practise with the decans who be at his service to offer term of peace for a season find no other way to dissolve this cloud that hang over they both until the king and prince be depart and settle further off to this end come two ambassador this day from the prince of Decan they bring horse bar decans offer peace rich furnish for present at first the king refuse to hear they and their gift but turn they over to his son with this answer if he will have peace or war it be in his breast the prince advance by this favour and swell with pride resolve though I be inform the condition be very honourable and such as the king will have accept to go on the journey answer he will treat of no peace until he be in the field with his army Chan Channa shall not so beguile he of the honour of finish that war the ambition of this young prince be open the common talk of the people yet his father suffer all but intend he not the kingdom for sultan Corsoronne the elder brother be both extreme belove and honour of all man almost adore and very just for his noble part and this the king know and love but think his liberty will diminish his own glory and see not that this she youth do more darken he by ambitious practice than the other can by virtuous action thus he nourish division and emulation between the brethren fear of future broil and put such power in the hand of the young suppose he can undo it at his pleasure that the wise foresee a rend and tear of these kingdom by division when the king shall pay the debt to nature and that all part will be tear and destroy by a civil war the history of this country for the variety of subject and the many practice in the time of Echarsha father of this king by he then prince and these late trouble be not unworthy commit to writing but because they be of so remote part many will despise they and because the people be esteem barbarous few will believe they therefore I content myself with the contemplation but I can deliver as many rare and cunning passage of state subtle evasion policy answer and adage as I believe for one age will not be easy equal only one that pass late I can omit to show wisdom and patience in a father faith in a servant falsehood in a brother impudent boldness in a faction that dare attempt any thing when the high majesty give they liberty either beyond the law of their own condition or the limit of policy and reason the prince sultan Carronne Narmahel the dear queen aunt to his wife asaph Chan his father in law brother to the queen and Etiman dowlet the party of the faction father to they both be they that now govern all and dare attempt any thing resolve it be not possible for they to stand if the prince sultan Corseronne live who the nobility love and who delivery or life will punish their ambition in time therefore practise how to bring he into their power that poison may end he drift to take away sultan cors^r^one Narmahel attempt the king with the false tear of woman bewitch flattery that sultan Corseronne be not safe nor his aspire thought depose the king hear she say it but will not understand more than she deliver plain this fail they take opportunity of the king be drink the prince Etiman Dowlet and asaph Chan move the king that for the safety of sultan Corseronne and for his honour it be fit he be in the company of his brother who company will be please one to the other and his safety more regard then in the hand of a rashboote Gentile to who the king have commit he therefore they humble desire his majesty that he may be deliver into the hand of his dear brother which the king grant and so fall asleep they think their own greatness such as bring the king authority no man dare refuse and be once in their possession they will dispute the redelivery so the same night asaph Chan in the name of the king send by the prince come with a guard to demand and receive sultan Corseronne at the hand of Anna rah a * * a prince ra^ah rashboote to who the king have entrust he he refuse to deliver his charge with this answer that he be sultan caronne humble servant but that he have receive the prince his brother from the hand of the king and to no other will deliver he but he shall have patience till the morning when he will discharge himself to his majesty and leave it to his pleasure to dispose this answer cool all in the morning Anna rah come to the king and acquaint he with the demand of the prince his refusal and answer Anna rah his fidelity and add his majesty have give he the charge of his son and make he the commander of four thousand horse with all which he will die at the gate rather than deliver his prince into the hand of his enemy if his majesty require he he be ready to obey his will the king answer but he will provide for his own innocency the king reply you have do honest faithful you have answer discreet continue your purpose and take no knowledge of any command I will not seem to know this neither do you stir further hold your faith and let we see how far they will prosecute it the prince and the faction the next day find the king silent hope he may forget what pass in wine take no notice of the grant nor of the refusal but it fall not without suspicion on both part this I insert to this end that you may beware scatter your good in diverse part and engage your stock and servant far into the country for the time will come when all in these kingdom will be in combustion and a few year war will not decide the inveterate malice lay up on all part against a day of vengeance wherein if sultan Corseronne prevail in his right sultan corsoroone a lover of christian this kingdom will be a sanctuary for christian who he love and honour favour learning valour the discipline of war and abhor all covetousness and discern the base custom of take use by his ancestor and the nobility if the other win we shall be loser for he be most earnest in his superstition a hater of all christian proud subtle false and barbarous tyrannous there be daily expect a ambassador from the Shabas king of persia. October 13. Fo^re English sh^ps arrive at Swally the thirteen of October at night the king return and send i a wild pig I receive advice of the arrival of four ship safe at the port of Swally with letter from England that they depart the coast the nine of march 1615. with six ship lose company of the rose about the north cape by foul weather the twelve of june 1616. the other five come safe to the bay of Soldania where the lion homeward find be ready for a wind her commander and people in health stay day at the road without news of the small ship they dispee the swan to Bantam for effect the business and set sail for surat the nine and twenty with four ship and come to anchor to their port the four and twenty of September 1616. in their passage the six of August near the land of Comora about twelve degree fifty minute they have sight of a carack burden fifteen hundred ton man with six hundred be admiral of the fleet send for Goa of this fight see more in master child journal follow bear the flag the globe fetch she up to windward and after salutation of the sea the carrack command she to lee-ward and second it with five shot through her Hull which she requite with eighteen and so fall off the admiral and english fleet come up demand satisfaction for the injury which be reply to with scorn so begin a fresh fight in few shot the commander Benjamin joseph be slay and the new establish continue it at the evening she run herself ashore among the rock of Angazesia the fleet anchor short of she to attend the issue and send a boat to offer fair war but about midnight she fire herself after it be know that so^e few escape with life and poverty and burn all the next morning the english send their boat can not approach but believe that not one man be save by circumstance very probable the new viceroy for Goa be in this ship who resolution be the death of all the other the next day I impart the king with his majesty remember salutation which be with much courtesy receive but he begin with the present i first mention our late fight and victory which he seem to rejoice in and to applaud the valour of our nation but fall off to what have the king send i compliment with the King I answer many token of his love and affection that my master know he be lord of the best part of Asia the rich prince of the east that to send his maiest^e rich present be to cast pearl into the sea the mother and store-house of they that therefore his majesty think it unnecessary but have present he with his love with many curious toy which I hope will give he content he urge i to some particular which I name he ask i for french muff or velvet I answer my letter be not arrive some other be come which he desire he inquire for dog I tell he some have their fortune in the fight some die two be preserve for he at which he rejoice and continue if I can procure he a horse of our great size such as I describe be a Rone or dutch horse he will accept it better than a crown I reply his desire of dog and a horse I will do my endeavour for his majesty satisfaction but I fear it can not be effect he answer if I will procure one he will give i a leck of Rupias I desire his majesty letter for the come of these present without search and for the good usage of our people he reply a horse prize above 10000 pound the port be his son but send for he and public give express order for what I will require and take on i that it shall not be search nor pay custom but be dispee with expedition safe to my hand that I may distribute it at my discretion that he shall command the good reception of our people and final that he shall give i content in all my desire this general extend not to the grant of a fort for that clause asaph Chan refuse to deliver this charge be very round and hearty in the king and a grace to i the prince call asaph Chan to i and there profess and promise before his father and all the court to give i all reasonable content this be the strength of new present the fifteen I receive from Masulipatan that captain keeling have take two Portugal bark and a ship one on the coast of cochin lade with tin the other freight from Bengala which he carry to Bantam that sir Robert Shirley be dismiss with disgrace from Goa and that he be on his way over land to Masulipatan to seek passage unprobable and I believe untrue the seventeen the prince pursue his purpose of finish the Decan war by his own person and undertake to give answer to the ambassador give none but detain they until his approach but be to depart he and his party think not themselves secure if sultan Corseronne remain in the hand of Annarah that in his absence the king may be reconcile and by his liberty all the glory and hope of their faction will vanish and the injury and ambition hardly be pardon they new assail the king constancy to deliver up his son into the hand of asaph Chan as his guard under sultan Coronne they pretend that it will fright Chan Channa and the decans when they shall hear that this prince be so favour who now come to make war upon they that the king have deliver up his elder son in that as it be his whole kingdom and hope of succession and the present power thereof this day he be deliver up the soldier of Anna rah discharge and the soldier of asaph Chan plant about he with assistance of two hundred of the prince horse Anna rah discharge and s. cors. deliver to the faction to the grief of the court and commonalty his sister and diverse woman in the seraglio mourn refuse their meat cry out of the king dotage and cruelty and profess that if he die there will a hundred of his kindred burn for he in memory of the king bloodiness to his worthy son the king give fair word protest no intent of ill towards the prince and promise his delivery and send Normahell to appease these enrage lady but they curse threaten and refuse to see she the common people all murmur they say the king have not deliver his son but his own life into the hand of a ambitious prince and a treacherous faction that Corsoronne can perish without scandal to the father or revenge from he therefore he must go first and after he his son and so through their blood this youth must mount the royal seat new hope be spread of his redelivery and soon allay every man tell news according to his fear or desire but the poor prince remain in the tiger power refuse meat and require his father to take his life and not to let it be the triumph and delight of his enemy the whole court be in a whisper the nobility sad the multitude like itself full of tumour and noise without head or foot only it rage but bend itself upon no direct end the issue be very dangerous principal for we for among they it matter not who win though one have right and much more honour yet he be still a Moor and can be a better prince than his father who be of so good disposition that he suffer all man to govern which be worse than to be ill ill through goodness for we be better bear injury of prince then of their minister the nineteen the persian ambassador Mahomet Rosa Beag about noon come into the town with a great troop which be partly send out by the king to meet he with one hundred elephant and music but no man of great quality than the ordinary receiver of all stranger his own train be about fifty horse well fit in coat of cloth of gold persian ambassador their bow quiver and target rich garnish forty shot and some two hundred ordinary peon and attender on baggage he be carry to rest in a room within the king outward court till evening when he come to the Durbar before the king to which ceremony I send my secretary to observe the fashion when he approach his submiss^nesse he make at the first rail three Tessilims and one Sizeda which be prostrate himself and knock his head against the ground at the entrance in the like and so present the Shabas his letter which the king take with a little motion of his body ask only how do my brother without any title of majesty and after some few word he be place in the seven rank against the ray by the door below so many of the king servant on both side which in my judgement be amost inferior place for his master ambassador but that he well deserve it for do that reverence which his predecessor refuse to the dishonour of his prince and the murmur of many of his nation it be say he have order from the sophy to give content and thereby it be gather his message be for some aid in money against the Turk mogul assistance of the persian against the Turk persian present in which kind he often find liberal succour though it be pretend he come only to treat a peace for the decans who protection the Shabas take to heart envy the increase of this empire the king according to custom give he a handsome turban a vest of gold and a girdle for which again he make three tessilims and one Sizeda or ground courtesy he bring for present three time nine horse of Persia and Arabia this be a ceremonious number among they nine mule very fair and large seven camel lade with velvet two suit of Europe arras which I suppose be venetian hang of velvet with gold and not arras two chest of persian hang one cabinet rich four musket five clock one camel lade with persian cloth of gold eight carpet of silk two ruby ballast one and twenty camel of wine of the grape fourteen camel of distil sweet water seven of Rose waters seven dagger set with stone five sword set with stone seven venetian look glass but those so fair so rich that I be ashamed of the relation these present be not deliver now only a bill of they his own furniture be rich lead nine spare horse trap in gold and silver about his turban be wreathe a chain of pearl ruby and turquess and three pipe of gold answerable for three spridge of feather yet I cause diligent observance to be make of his reception and compare it with my own and find he have in nothing more grace in many thing not so much in rank far inferior to that allow i except only his meeting without the town which by reason of my sickness be omit to be demand neither do the king receive the Shabas his letter with such respect as my master who he call the king of England his brother the persian bare brother without any addition which be a observation of the jesuite that understand the language @. 5 the prince bravery the persian ambassador behaviour the manner and effect of drink of the king and his noble the king remove his super-exceeding pomp wealth magnificence therein Portugal fray relation of sultan corsoroone persian news the one and twenty of October I go to the prince and open my desire to have a certain * * a certain clause in his let^er to surat ambiguous like the old oracle etc clause in his letter expound at which his highness stick a little and I perceive his highness to be as hollow as I imagine he demand then how he shall have his present or see such toy as come up and move i to go with he I reply I can not do so until I have deliver my master message and token to the king but that finish I will myself attend his highness with his present and all such rarity as come to my hand shall be send after he he press i to pass my word and so I obtain order for the firman to my content feather in request his highness look on a white feather in my hat demand if I will give it he I reply I will not offer that I have wear but if he please to command it that or any thing in my power be to serve he he ask if I have any more I answer three or four of other colour he reply if I will give they all for that he be to show his horse and servant to the king within two day and that he want some be very rare in those part I promise to bring all I have on the morrow that his highness may take his pleasure Chan in a gallant equipage both of his person and attendant in apparel strange and antic a rich present but in these part soldado present the prince a white horse the saddle and furniture of gold enamel a beast of delicate shape life and courage who return he a sword plain with a belt of leather there be bring before he many other the hilt of silver chape set with small stone and target cover with gold velvet some paint and boss with gold and silver which he give to his servant against this muster many saddle and furniture of gold rich set with stone of his own be show for spare horse his boot imbrother and all other ingredient of bravery I confess the expense be wonderful and the riches daily see invaluable pompous bravery this night past it be report six of the prince servant come to murder sultan Corsoronne but be refuse the key by the porter that the queen mother be go to the king with a overture of all the practice the truth be uncertain and it be dangerous to ask at evening I go to the Durbar to visit the king where I meet the persian ambassador with the first muster of his present he appear rather a jester or juggler than a person of any gravit^ behaviour of the persian run up and down and act all his word like a mimic player now indeed the atachikanne be become a right stag he deliver the present with his own hand which the king with smile and cheerful countenance and many word of contentment receive his tongue be a great advantage to deliver his own business which he do with so much flattery and obsequiousness that it please as much as his gift ever call his majesty king and commander of the world forget his own master have a share in it and on every little occasion of good acceptation he make his Tessilims when all be deliver for that day he prostrate himself on the ground and knock with his head as if he will enter in the gift be a fair quiver for bow and arrow delicate embroider all sort of european fruit artificial in dish many other fold purse and knack of leather wrought with needlework in colour silk shoe embroider and stitch great glass inlaid in frame one square piece of velvet embroider high with gold in pain between which be italian picture wrought in the stuff which he say be the king and queen of Venice which as I suppose be the hang call arras of these six be give one only show many other tricanado of small value after the three nine of horse and mule which be fair one the horse either have lose their flesh or beauty nine a remarkable number for except one or two I judge they unfit for to be send or take by prince so he return with many antic trick to his place far inferior to that allow i which be alone and above all subject which at first asaph Chan will have put i by but I maintain it as my due this be but the first act of his present the play will not be finish in ten day at night I send to the prince secretary for my promise writing but his highness be loath to let the present pass without ransack and have change his mind refuse to seal the letter the two and twenty at my come I deliver he two pluriaes and two bird of paradise he accept they easy and my business be move and my resolution make know not to consent to open nor to send they up but by the hand of my servant at last he yield and give command to the secretary to dispatch i at night I go to the Durbar to observe the ambassador of Persia I find he stand in his rank and often remove and set low as great man come in the king once speak to he and he dance to the tune thereof but give no present only the king command that he shall be feast by the noble the time be spend in see saddle and furniture for the remove of which his majesty give some to his follower it be daily expect to rise the king tent be out four day since I send to the secretary for my but he delay it with excuse the four and twenty the king remove to Havaz Gemall and call the persian ambassador where at night he eat and drink before the king with the nobility in the same fashion that I do the birthday the difference only be the king gift to the persian the king give he for expense twenty thousand Rupias for which he make innumerable Tessilims and sizedaes not rise from the ground a good space which extreme please the king and be base but profitable idolatry the prince attend his father I can get no dispatch in my business the five and twenty the king return at evening have be overnight far go in wine some by chance or malice speak of the merry night pass and that many of the nobility drink wine which none may do but by leave the king forget his order demand who give it it be answer the buxie for no man dare say it be the king when he will only doubt it the custom be that when the king drink which be alone sometime he will command that the nobility shall drink after which if they do not it be a offence too and so every man that take the cup of wine of the officer his name be write and he make strange deal with noble though perhaps the king eye be misty the king not remember his own command call the buxie and demand if he give the order he reply no false for he receive it and by name call such as do drink with the ambassador whereat the king call for the list and the person and fine some one some two some three thousand Rupias some less and some that be near his person he cause to be whip before he receive one hundred and thirty stripe with a most terrible instrument have at each end of four cord terrible whip iron like spur-rowel so that every stroke make four wound when they lie for dead on the ground he command the stander by to foot they and after the porter to break their staff upon they thus most cruel mangle and bruise they be carry out of which one die in the place some will have excuse it on the ambassador but the king reply he only bid give he a cup or two though drunkenness be a common and a glorious vice and a exercise of the king yet it be so strict forbid that no man can enter into the Gusel-Chan drunkenness prevent where the king sit but the porter smell his breath and if he have but taste wine be not suffer to come in and if the reason be know of his absence he shall with difficulty escape the whip for if the king once take offence the father will not speak for the son awe of the King so the king make the company pay the persian ambassador reward the six and twenty I send to sorocolla for the firman he send i a copy as ambiguous and fraudulent as the former which I refuse and draw the mislike clause myself which I send back and be promise that on the morrow it shall be seal the eight and twenty the king day of remove at hand I send to asaph Chan for a warrant for carriage the merchant have seek all the town to remove their good to agra can find none so I receive order be enrol by his majesty upon my offer for twenty camel four cart and two coach at the king price whereof I dispose as many as the factor need to their use but it be a extreme error to omit a passage either of wonderful baseness in this great monarch or a trial of i the king have condemn diverse thief among which be some boy there be no way to save their life but to sell they for slave his majesty command asaph Chan to offer two of they for money which he appoint the cutwall that be the marshal to do my interpreter make answer without my knowledge that christian keep no slave that those the king have give I have free and that it be in vain to propound it to i but after I suspect it may be a trial of i whether I will give a little money to save the life of two child or else I suppose if it be in earnest it be no great loss to do a good deed and to try the baseness or scope of this offer I command my interpreter to return to asaph Chan to tell he that he have acquaint i with the motion and his answer that I reprehend he for presume in any case to give my resolution that my own reply be if there be any money to save the life of two child to those who they have rob or to redeem they from the law both for respect of the king command and for charity I be ready to give it but I will not buy they as slave only pay their ransom and free they that if he please to know the king pleasure that I may give they liberty without offence I be very willing to do it asaph Chan reply I may at my own will dispose they that it be a extraordinary goodness with many praise accept the money desire i to send it to the cuttwall and to use my discretion to the boy not once offer to inform the king which be one end of my liberality I be loath to be cozen and know not whether this may be the profit of officer or no resolve to pay the money but so as the king shall not be ignorant I have more mercy than he and that a Christian esteem the life of a Moor above money so I send a factor and my interpreter to the cuttwall to acquaint he with the communication with asaph Chan and to let he know if at night he will inform the king that I have offer to redeem the prisoner for charity sake if after his majesty will consent to their liberty I be ready to send he money but to buy they as slave though for a hour I will not they shall never come nor be manumise by i but that I desire his majesty to pardon they upon my redemption so I put they to the test of their base offer this money exceed not ten pound a poor sum to impose on a stranger or to be gain by a King the cuttwall return answer he will know the king pleasure and according advise i some will persuade i this be one of the mogul signal favour to choose out such great man as he will give occasion to do good and honourable work a old custom to redeem prisoner and that the money give satisfaction to the plaintiff rob and that those so appoint by the king to ransom other make Sizeda as for some benefit receive yet I find not any honour in a prince to impose it on a stranger to who he give neither maintenance nor liberality I go to the Durbar to see if his majesty will of himself speak to i that I may deliver my own offer the cuttwall make many motion bring in the executioner who receive some command but I understand it not but expect my answer the first of November sultan Corronne take his leave and go to his tent the king at noon sit out at the Durbar where the prince bring his elephant about six hundred rich trap and furnish six hundred rich elephant and other bravery of the prince rich Sword and his fellow by estimation ten thousand horse many in cloth of gold with Hearne top-feather in their turban all in gallantry himself in cloth of silver embroider with great pearl and shine in diamond like a firmament the king embrace he and kiss he and show much affection at his depature he give he a sword the scabbard all of gold set with stone value at a hundred thousand Rupias a dagger at forty thousand a elephant and two horse with all the furniture of gold set with stone and for a close one of the new caroche make in imitation of that send by his majesty my master and command the english coachman to drive he to his tent into which he ascend and sit in the middle the side open his chief nobles a foot walk by he to his tent about four mile all the way he throw quarter of Rupias be follow with a multitude of people he reach his hand to the coachman and put into his hat about one hundred Rupias the king remove the second the king remove to his tent with his woman and all the court about three mile I go to attend he come to the palace I find he at the Farraco window and go up on the scaffold under he which place not have see before I be glad of the occasion on two trestle stand two eunuch with long pole head with feather fan he he give many favour and receive many present what he bestow he let down by a silk roll on a turn instrument what be give he a venerable fat deform old matron hang with gymbal like a image pluck up at a hole with such another clue at one side in a window be his two principal wife who curiosity make they break little hole in a grate of reed that hang before it to gaze on i I see first their finger and after lay their face close now one eye now another sometime I can discern the full proportion they be indifferent white black hair smooth up but if I have have no other light their diamond and pearl have suffice to show they when I look up they retire and be so merry that I suppose they laugh at i sudden the king rise and we retire to the Durbar and sit on the carpet attend his come out not long after he come and sit about half a hour until his lady at their door be ascend their elephant which be about fifty all most rich furnish principal three with turret of gold grate of gold-wyre every way to look out and canopy over of cloth of silver then the king descend the stair with such a acclamation of health to the king as will have out-cryed cannon at the stair foot where I meet he and shuffle to be next one bring a mighty carp another a dish of white stuff like starch into which he put his finger and touch the fish superstitious ri^e and so rub it on his forehead a ceremony use presage good fortune then another come and buckle on his sword and buckler set all over with great diamond and ruby the belt of gold suitable another hang on his quiver with thirty arrow and his bow in a case the same that be present by the persian ambassador on his head he wear a rich turban with a plumbe of horn top not many but long on one side hang a ruby unset as big as a walnut huge gem on the other side a diamond as great in the middle a emerald like a heart much big his Shash be wreathe about with a chain of great pearl ruby and diamond drill about his neck he carry a chain of most excellent pearl thrice double so great as I never see at his elbow armlet set with diamond and on his wrist three row of diamond of several sort his hand bare but almost on every finger a ring his glove be english stick under his girdle his coat of cloth of gold without sleeve upon a fine semian as thin as lawn on his foot a pair of embroider buskin with pearl the toe sharp and turn up thus arm and accommodate he go to the coach which attend he with his new english servant who be clothe as rich as any player and more gaudy and ha^ train four horse which be trap and harnish in gold velvet this be the first he ever sit in and be make by that send from England so like that I know it not but by the cover which be a gold persian velvet he get into the end on each side go two eunuch that carry small mace of gold set all over with ruby with a long bunch of white-horse-taile to drive away fly before he go drum ill trumpet and loud music and many canopy quittusol and other strange ensign of majesty of cloth of gold set in many place with great ruby nine spare horse the furniture some garnish with ruby some with pearl and emerald some only with stud enamel the persian ambassador present he a horse next behind he come three Palankees the carriage and foot of one plate with gold set at the end with pearl and a fringe of great pearl hang in rope a foot deep a border about set with ruby and emerald a footman carry a footstool of gold set with stone the other two be cover and line with cloth of Gold next follow the english coach new cover and trim rich which he have give the queen Normahell who ride in it after they a three of this country fashion which i think be out of countenance in it sit his young son after follow about twenty elephant royal spare for his own ascend so rich that in stone and furniture they brave the sun every elephant have diverse flag of cloth of silver gild satin and taffeta his nobleman he suffer to walk a foot which I do to the gate and leave he his wife on their elephant be carry like parakito half a mile behind he when he come before the door where his elder son be prisoner he stay the coach and call for he he come and make reverence with a sword and buckler in his hand his beard grow to his middle a sign of disfavour the king command he to ascend one of the spare elephant and so ride next to he to the extreme applause and joy of all man sultan c^rsoroone deliver who now be fill with new hope the king give he one thousand Rupias to cast to the people his gaoler asaph Chan and all the monster yet a foot I take horse to avoid press and other inconvenience and cross out of the leskar before he and attend until he come near his tent he pass all the way between a guard of elephant have every one a tur^et on his back on the four corner four banner of yellow taffeta right before a sling mount that carry a bullet as big as a great tennis ball the g^nner behind it in number about three hundred other elephant of honour that go before and after about six hundred all which be cover with velvet or cloth of gold bravery of elephant and have two or three gild banner carry in the way run diverse footman with skin of water that make a continual shower before he no horse nor man may be suffer to approach the coach by two furlong except those that walk a foot by so that I haste to his tent to attend his alight they be wall half a mile in compass in form of a fort stately tent with diverse coin and bulwark with high cannat of a course stuff make like arras red on the outside within which figure in pane with a handsome gatehouse every post that bear up these be head with a top of brass the throng be great I desire to go in but no man be suffer the great of the land sit at the door but I make a offer and they admit i but refuse the persian ambassador and all the noble man here first the persian ambassador salute i with a silent compliment only in the midst of this court be a throne of mother of pearl bear on two pillar raise on earth cover over with a high tent the pole head with a knob of gold under it canopy of cloth of gold underfoot carpet when the king come near the door some nobleman come in and the persian ambassador we stand one of the one side the other of the other make a little lane the king enter cast his eye on i and I make a reverence he lay his hand on his breast and bow and turn to the other side nod to the persian I follow at his heel till he ascend and every man cry good joy and fortune and so take our place he call for water wash his hand and depart his woman enter some other port to their quarter and his son I see not within this whole rail be about thirty division with tent all the nobleman retire to they which be in excellent form some all white some green some mingle all encompass as orderly as any house one of the great rarity and magnificence I ever see the whole vale show like a beautiful city for that the rag nor baggage be not mingle I be unfit with carriage and ashamed of my provision but five year allowance can not have furnish i with one indifferent suit sortable to other and which add to the greatness every man have a double for that one go afore to the next remove and be set a day before the king rise from these so I return to my poor house November 5. the five of November the prince sit in the same magnificence order and greatness that I mention of the king his throne be pla^ed over wit^ silver inlay with flower of gold and the canopy over it square bear on four pillar cover with silver his arm sword buckler bow arrow and lance on a table before he the watch be set for it be evening when he come abroad I observe now he be absolute and curious in his fashion and action he receive two letter read they stand before he ascend his throne I never see so settle a countenance nor any man keep so constant a gra^itie never smile nor in face show any respect or difference of man but mingle with extreme pride and contempt of all yet I find some inward trouble now and then assail he and a kind of brokenness and distraction in his thought unprovide and amaze answer suitor or not hear if I can judge any thing he have leave h^s heart among his father woman with who he have liberty of conversation Normahell in the english coach the day before visit he and take leave she give he a cloak all embroider with pearl diamond and ruby and carry away if I err not his attention to all other business the six I receive a letter from master Browne from amadavas who certify i of a fray begin by the portugal fray betwixt the Po^tugals and English five of they set on a english b^y in Cambaya and disarm he upon rumour whereof John Browne and james Bickeford go to his rescue and be assail by seven of they one shoot a pistol h^rt John Browne in the hand but his heart lie not there they defend themselves honest brave like englishman kill one hurt some other and chase they up and down the town like beast to the great shame of such villain and reputation of our nation to revenge this the portugal be arrve in their frigate diu^rs come ashore no more english in town but the three mention the governor understand the occasion and send the cutwall with a guard to our house and shut the water port expel the portugal by command upon pain of chastisement not to meddle with the english and so deliver they safe out of town who be return to Amadavas the nine I find the prince earnest at card but he excuse himself of forgetfulness and blame the officer formal card-play but in show use i with more courtesy then ordinary call i to see his card and ask many question I expect he will speak of my go with he but find no such discourse I tell he I be come only to obey he and to take my leave that I desire his pardon that I haste away for that I be to return to Adsmere be unprovided to stay all night he answer he send for i to see i b^fore his go that I shall present be dispatch then he send in a eunuch and diverse of his captain come smile s^ying the prince will give i a great present and if I fear to ride late I shall have ten horse to guard i and make such a business as if I shall have rece^ued his b^st chain of pearl by and by come a cloth of gold cloak of his own once or twice wear which he cause to be put on my back and I make reverence very unwilling when his ancestor Tamerlane be represent at the theatre the garment will well have become but it be here repute the high favour to give a garment wear by a prince or be new once lay on his shoulder order to fire the leskar at Adsmere the sixteenth the king give order to fire all the leskar at Adsmere to compel the people to follow which be daily execute I be leave almost desolate and the persian ambassador who have fight chide brauld complain but can not get remedy in the same estate we se^t to bemoan one another and by his example I begin to resolve to buy for many wo^ld s^ll which at the king price can not hire and I cast it at the best hand I can almost to save the hire though the cart be dear for in three month the price be ea^en necessity enforce i for the town be burn and desolate I be in danger of thief that from the army come and rob in the night I can not find bread to eat yet I send anew to court and resolve to abide all the inconvenience of a hard siege the seventeen I receive from Goa for truth that don Emanuel meness news from Goa with about three hundred of those save ashore from out the admiral be arrive poor rob and rifle by the inhabitant of Angazesia who have slay many and force some to circumcision on the four and twenty of October not one of the fleet send out from Lisbon arrive to their great wonder the Gallion of Mosambique be fight with by the Hollander that late depart from surat who lie off and on before Goa as she come in to meet the ship expect she be rich in gold and other commodity but she escape by mean of the port. observe the boldness of the hollander to attempt with one ship and to brave the head of the indies I receive a promise for camel to remove the eighteen I can not procure carriage but be so daily delay that I fear to stay two cart I be enforce to buy and camel I be constant promise m. Biddolph remain in the prince leskar to get money the king be yet but twelve course from Adsmere the jesuite take his leave of i be force to buy carriage notwithstanding his order for it out of the king store but scarcity punish all man relation of sultan Corsoroon this empty time offer no discourse of my own affair I shall digress convenient to mention the state of sultan corsoroone of who new delivery into the hand of his enemy every man heart and mouth be full the king notwithstanding he have so far agree to satisfy his proud son at his departure yet it seem mean not to wink at a injury offer to the elder and partly to secure he in the hand of asaph Chan partly to satisfy the people that murmur and fear the practice of some treachery against he he take occasion to declare himself public asaph Chan have visit his new prisoner and in his fashion do not acknowledge he as his prince but rude press upon he against his will and with no reverence some be of opinion he pick a quarrel and know the brave nature of the prince that will not bear indignity tempt he to draw his sword or to use some violence which the guard shall sudden revenge or else it shall be declare to the king as a attempt to kill his keeper and to escape but the prince be only he get a friend to acquaint the king with the manner of his jailor the king call asaph Chan at the Durbar and ask when he see his charge he answer two day past his majesty reply what do you with he he say only visit he but the king press to know what reverence and fashion he carry towards he asaph Chan find his majesty know what have pass and confess he go to see he in affection and offer his service but that the prince refuse he admittance into his chamber which because he have charge of his safety he think it both necessary for he to do and discourtesy for the other to deny therefore he press in the king return quick when you be in what say you and what do you what duty show you towards my son he stand blank and confess he do not any reverence whereat the king tell he he will make his proud heart know he to be his elder and belove heir his prince and lord and if he once hear of any the least want of reverence or duty towards he he will command his son to set his foot on his neck and trample on he that he love sultan Coronne well but he will make the world know he do not entrust his son among they for his ruin the three and twenty and four and twenty I stay for the merchant and receive a answer from Spahan that my letter be dispee for Aleppo that our come into Persia news from persia. be expect but on condition to fit the Shabas so that it may advance his design of divert his silk from the way of Turkey that the general of the grand-signior lie with a mighty army at Argerone six day march short of Tauris uncertain whether to assail the city or to enter Gorgeston and Gilan the country of silk to win that by conquest which he be prohibit by commerce to meet both attempt the Shabas be encamp at Salmas a village indifferent seat in the way but if in two month the army encounter not winter approach and the want which attend such multitude will dissolve they both without any honourable action or if they meet the persian though by report one hundred and eighty thousand will not adventure battle but be light and able to march easy without cannon and baggage will fall on and off on every side so on the turk army as he will break and waste he without hazard @. 7 sir Thomas roe follow the court in this progress description of the king leskar and some place which they pass the king superstition drink and deal about the present the first of December I remove four course to ramfor where the king have leave the body of a hundred naked man slay in the field for robbery decemb. ^ and the caravan at midnight depart Adsmere the four five course I overtake in the way a camel lade with three hundred man head send from Candahar by the governor in present to the king that be out in rebellion description of Godah the six four course where I overtake the king at a wall town call Godah in the best country I see since my land be a fair champion be every course a village the soil fruitful in corn Cotton and cattle the seven the king pass only from one side of the town to the other which be one of the best build I ever see in India for that there be some house two story high and most such as a pedlar may not scorn to keep shop in all cover with tile it have be the seat of a Raza Rashboote before the conquest of Ecbarsha and stand at the foot of a great rock very strong have many excellent work of hew stone about it excellent cut many thank arch vault and descent make large and of great depth by it stand a delicate grove of two mile large a quarter broad plant by industry with mange tamerin and other fruit divide with walk and full of little temple and altar of pagoda and gentilitiall idolatry many fountain inconvenience which follow the slavery of subject and the king only propriety the king Lescar admirable well thank and summer-house of carve stone curious arch so that I must confess a banish Englishman may have be content to dwell there but this observation be general that ruin and destruction eat up all for since the propriety of all be come to the king no man take care for particular so that in every place appear the vastation and spoil of war without reparation the nine return I view the Lescar which be one of the wonder of my little experience that I have see it finish and set up in four hour except some of great man that have a double provision the circuit be little less than twenty english mile the length some way three course comprehend the skirt and the middle wherein the street be orderly and tent join there be all sort of shop distinguish so by rule that every man know ready where to seek his want every man of quality and every trade be limit how far from the king tent he shall pitch what ground he shall use and on what side without alteration which as it lie together may equal almost any town in Europe for greatness only a musket shoot every way no man approach the Atasykanha royal which be now keep so strict that none be admit but by name and the time of the Durbar in the evening be omit and spend in hunt or hawk on by boat in which the king take wonderful delight and his barge be remove on cart with he and he sit not but on the side of one which be many time a mile or two over at the jarruco in the morning he be see but business or speech prohibit all be conclude at night at the Guzelchan when often the time be prevent by a drowsiness which possess the king from the fume of Bacchus there be now a gre^t whisper in court about a new affinity of sultan corsoroone and asaph Chan and great hope of his liberty I will find occasion to discourse it for that the passage be very worthy and the wisdom and goodness of the k^ng appear above the malice of other and Noomahel fulfil the observation that in all action of consequence in court a woman be not only always a ingredient but common a principal drug of most virtue and she show that they be not incapable of conduct business nor herself void of wit and subtlety it will discover a noble prince a excellent w^fe a faithful counsellor a crafty stepmother a ambitious son a cunning favourite all reconcile by a patient king who heart be not understand by any of all these but this will require a place alone and not to be mingle among business the sixteenth I visit the king who have be at his sport and his quarry of foul and fish lie before he he desire i to take my choice and so distribute the remainder to his nobility I find he sit on his throne and a beggar at his foot a poor silly old man all asht humility and charity superstitious and therefore blind rage and patch with a young rogue attend on he with these kind of profess poor holy man the country abound and be hold in great reverence but for work of chastisement of their body and voluntary suffering they exceed the brag of all heretic or idolater this miserable wretch clothe in rag crown with feather cover with ash his majesty talk with about a hour with such familiarity and show of kindness that it must needs argue a humility not find easy among king the beggar sit which his son dare not do he give the king a present a cake asht burn on the coal make by himself of course grain which the king accept most willing and break one bit and eat it which a dainty mouth can scarce have do after he take the clout and wrap it up and put in the poor man bosom and send for one hundred Rupias and with his own hand pour they into the poor man lap and what fall beside gather up for he when his collation of banquet and drink come whatsoever he take to eat he break and give the beggar half and after many strange humiliation and charity rise the old wretch not be nimble he take he up in his arm which no clean body dare have touch embrace he and three time lay his hand on his heart call he father he leave he and all we and i in admiration of such a virtue in a heathen prince the six and twenty we pass through wood and over mountain tear with bush tire with the incommodiousness of a impass^ble way where many camel perish many depart for agra and all complain I lose my tent and cart but by midnight we meet the king rest two day for that the leskar can not in less time recover their order many of the king woman and thousand of coach cart and camel lie in the woody mountain without meat and water himself get by on a small elephant which beast will climb up rock and pass such strait as no horse nor beast that I know can follow he the twenty four of january news arrive at court january 24. decans resist the mogoll power Mandoa that the decans will not be fright out of their dominion which asaph Chan and Normahal have pretend to procure this voyage but that they have send their impediment into the heart and attend in the border with fifty thousand horse resolve to fight and that sultan Caronne be yet advance no further than Mandoa afraid both of the enemy and Chan Channa these counsellor change their advice and declare to the king that they conceive the Decan before his passage over the last hill will have yield by the terror of his approach but find the contrary persuade he to convert it to a hunt journey and to turn his face towards agra for that the other be not a enemy worthy his person he reply this consideration come too late his honour be engage see he have so far pass he will prosecute their first counsel and his purpose and adventure the hazard of both but he daily dispee fresh troop towards his son partly from his own the rest command from government according to report thirty thousand horse but not by muster the three of February depart out out of the road of the leskar for ease and shade February 3 conference with sultan corsoroone and rest under a tree for the same commodity come upon i sultan corsoroone the king elder restrain son ride upon a elephant with no great guard nor attendance his people desire i to give he room which I do but attend to see he who call for i and with some gentle and familiar question full of courtesy and affability he depart his person be good and countenance cheerful his beard grow to his girdle this only I note that his question show ignorance of all passage in court in so much he never hear of any ambassador nor English the six at night we come to a little tower new repair where the king pitch in a pleasant place upon the river of Sepra short of Vgen the chief city of Mulwa one course Mulwa Calleada king drunken drown this place call Calleada be ancient a seat of the gentile king of Mandoa one whereof be there drown in his drink have once before fall into the river and be take up by the hair of the head by a slave that dive and be come to himself it be relate to he to procure a reward he call for the instrument of his safety and demand how he dare put his hand on his sovereign head cause they to be strike off not long after sit alone with his wife in drunkenness he have the same mischance to slip into the water but so that she may easy have save he which she do not and be demand why she reply she know not whether he will also cut off her hand for her recompense the eleven the king ride to vgen to speak with a or saint live on a hill old who be report to be three hundred year old I think this miracle not worth my examination at noon by a foot-post I receive a letter that the prince notwithstanding all and command of his father have intercept the present and good send up prince incivility to fulfil his base and greedy desire and that notwithstanding any gift nor entreaty or persuasion of master terry to who charge they be commit will not part with they but by force compel they to return with he towards brampore yet do he forbear to break any thing open but press the english to consent which they refuse by my order he think to win they by vexation such be the custom to see all merchant good even before the king that he may first choose but I resolve to break that in our behalf the prince to satisfy his desire before I can have knowledge he send a post to the king to certify he that such good he have stay without mention of present and pray leave to open they and to buy what he fancy so soon as I hear of this faithless uncivil usage I resolve I be justifiable before all the world if I use the extremity of complaint that I have practise all mean to win and purchase favour and have suffer beyond the patience of a freeman my former course will witness and leave i without blame in ill success though I find it in a rough way see I can find no better in the smooth brief I resolve to appeal to justice by complaint but as calm and wary as I can to express my whole grief extreme injury and long patience to go to asaph Chan though to neglect he will displease he ^et to try he I fear will prevent my purpose to send to he that I desire to visit the king at the glutel-chand I doubt what I intend may be suspect if he have hear of the injury so I practise first to prevent and avoid prevention the prophet who the king unite offer i occasion and my new linguist be ready I ride and meet his majesty on his elephant and alight make sign to speak he turn his monster to i and prevent i my son have take your good and my present be not sad he shall not touch nor open a seal nor lock at night I will send he a command to free they with other very gracious speech that he know I come full of complaint to ease i he beg^nne first upon the way I can do no more but at night without further seek to asaph Chan I go to the guzel Chan resolve to prosecute the complaint of force back our good in respect of the charge and trouble of the abuse of surat and all our other grievance so soon as I come in the king call my interpreter and deliver by he that he have write and send his command very effectual that not a hair shall be diminish I reply the injury be such and the charge and abuse of our liberty by the prince officer that I desire redress for that we can not long suffer it be answer what be past I must remit to his son but by asaph Chans mediation I can procure nothing but very good word for he smooth on both side so that I be force to seem content and to seek a opportunity in the absence of my false friend and procurator the good king fall to dispute of the law of Moses jesus and Mahomet and in drink be so kind that he turn to i and say I be a king you shall be welcome christian moor jew he meddle not with their faith they come all in love the mogoll in drink and he will protect they from wrong they live under his safety and none shall oppress they and this often repeat but in extreme drunkenness he fall to weep and to diverse passion and so keep we till midnight judge all man what travel I endure by reason the factor keep my present four month and send they even in the mouth of the prince arrive within two day of brampore and hereby every way our charge double that I rest not satisfy but see I have begin and that the prince be as I fear enough exasperate with a little I think as good lose he to some purpose as to none at least to try the king what he will do so I wait advantage but send back the messenger to master terry to stand out and attend the king answer which I will speedy send he and so resolve to dissemble that I hope to repay when I come with base flattery worse than the theft or at least to give i some satisfaction because trouble be in my face for otherwise it be no injury here to be so use he begin to tell i he have take diverse thing that please he extreme well name two cushion embroider a fold glass and the dog and desire i not to be discontent for whatsoever I will not give he I shall receive back I answer there be few thing that I intend not to present he but that I take it a great discourtesy to my sovereign which I can not answer to have that be free give seize and not deliver by my hand to who they be direct and that some of they be intend for the prince and normahall some to lie by i on occasion to prepare his majesty favour to protect we from injury that stranger be daily offer and some for my friend or private use and some that be the merchant which I have not to do withal he answer that I shall not be sad nor grieve that he have his choice for that he have not patience to forbear see they he do i no wrong in it for he think I wish he first serve and to my lord the king of England he will make satisfaction and my excuse the prince Normahall and he be all one and for any to bring with i to procure his favour it be a ceremony and unnecessary for he will at all time hear i that I shall be welcome empty hand for that be not my fault and I shall receive right from he and to go to his son he will return i somewhat for he and for the merchant good pay to their content conclude I shall not be angry for this freedom he intend well I make no reply then he press i whether I be please or no. I answer his majesty content please i so see master terry master terry the minister welcome who I bring in with i he call to he padre you be very welcome and this house be you esteem it so whensoever you desire to come to i it shall be free for you and whatsoever you will require of i I will grant you then he convert himself with this cunning unto i name all particular in order the dog cushion barber case you will not desire to have back for that I be delight in they I answer no. then say he there be two glass chest for they be very mean and ordinary for who come they I reply I intend one for his majesty the other to normahall why then say he you will not ask that I have be content with one I be force to yield next he demand who the hat be for that his woman like they I answer three be send to his majesty the four be i to wear then say he you will not take they from i for I like they and you I will return if you need it and will not bestow that on i which I can not refuse then next he demand who the picture be I answer send to i to use on occasion and dispose as my business require so he call for they and cause they to be open examine i of the woman and other little question require many judgement of they of the three picture of Venus and a satire he command my interpreter not to tell i what he say notable question about the picture of a satire but ask his lord what they conceive shall be the interpretation or moral of that he show the satyr horn his skin which be swart and point to many particular every man reply according to his fancy but in the end he conclude they be all deceive and see they can judge no better he will keep his conceit to himself iterate his command to conceal this passage from i but bid he ask i what it mean I answer a invention of the painter to show his art which be poetical but the interpretation be new to i that have not see it then he call master terry to give his judgement who reply he know not the king demand why he bring up to he a invention wherein he be ignorant at which I enterpose that he be a preacher and meddle not with such matter nor have charge of they only come in their company he be more note and so name as their conductor this I repeat for instruction to warn the company and he that shall succeed i to be very wary what they send may be subject to ill interpretation for in that point this king and people be very pregnant and scrupulous full of jealousy and trick for that notwithstanding the king conceit himself yet by the passage I will deliver my opinion of this conceit which know I have never see the picture and by ignorance be guiltless he will not press hard upon i but I suppose he understand the moral to be a scorn of asiatiques who the naked satire represent and be of the same complexion and not unlike who be hold by Venus a white woman by the nose it seem that she lead he captive yet he reveal no discontent but roll they up and tell i he will accept he also as a present for the saddle and some other small toy he will fit i with a gift to his son to who he will write according to promise so effectual that I shall need no solicitor in many business with as many compliment excuse profession and protestation as can come from any very noble or very base mind in either extreme yet he leave not but inquire what mean the figure of the beast and whether they be send i to give to he I have understand they be very ridiculous and ill shape ordinary creature the varnish off and no beauty other than a lump of wood I be real ashamed and answer it be not my fault those that seize they must bear the affront but that they be not intend to he bu^ send to show the form of certain beast with we he reply quick do you think in England that a horse and a bull be strange to i I reply I think not of so mean a matter the sender be a ordinary man in good will to i for toy and what he think I know not well say the king I will keep they and only desire you to help i to a horse of the great size it be all I will expect and a male and female of mastiff and the tall irish greyhound and such other dog as hunt in your land the king request and if you will promise i this I will give you the word of a king I will full recompense you and grant you all your desire I answer I will promise to provide they but can not warrant their life and if they die by the way only for my discharge their skin and bone shall be preserve he give extraordinary bow lay his hand on his heart and such kind of gesture as all man will witness he never use to any man nor such familiarity nor freedom nor profession of love this be all my recompense that he often desire my content to be merry that the wrong he have do i he will royal requite and send i home to my country with grace and reward like a gentleman but see nothing return of what be seize but word I desire his majesty to deliver back the velvet and silk be merchant good that they be send up among i by his majesty command for that by that pretence they escape the ravine of the prince officer so he give order to call master Biddolph to agree with he and to pay for they to content then I deliver a letter I have ready write contain my desire for privilege and justice otherwise I shall return as a fayzneane and disgrace to my sovereign and desire some justice for sulpheckarkon debt late dead he reply he will take such order with his son for surat as I shall have no cause to complain and that he shall clear it for which he give instant order for other place he will give i his command and every way show how much he love i and to the end I may return to my master with honour he will send by i a rich and worthy present with his letter of my behaviour fill with many praise and command i to name what I think will be most acceptable I answer I dare not crave it be not our custom nor stand with my master honour but whatsoever he send I doubt not will be acceptable from so potent a king and so much love of my Lord he reply that I think he ask in jest to please i and that he see I be yet discontent but he conjure i to believe he be my friend and will at conclusion prove so and vow by his head he speak hearty concern present but I must not refuse for his instruction to name somewhat this earnestness enforce i to say if his majesty please I think large persian carpet will be fit for gift of cost and value my master expect not he answer he will provide of all sort and size and add to they what he think be fit that your king may know I respect he next have venison of diverse sort before he he give i half a stag with these word he kill it himself and the other half I shall see bestow on his wife which be present cut out in small piece of four pound and send in by his three son and two woman that be call out to diverse such mammock as if it have be a dole to the poor and carry by the prince bear in his hand now I have as much satisfaction and so abundant grace as may have flatter i into content but the injury be above word though I be glad of these and of colour to dissemble for he send as a conclusion to know if I be please and do not depart discontent I answer his majesty favour be sufficient to make i any amends then say he I have only one question to ask you which be I wonder much now I have see your present two year what be the reason why your king send a merchant a mean man before you with five time as many and more curious toy that content all and after to send you his ambassador with a commission and his letter mention present and yet what you bring be little mean and inferior to the other I acknowledge you a ambassador I have find you a gentleman in your usage and I be amaze why you be so slight set out I will have reply but he cut i off I know it be not the king fault nor you but I will let you see I esteem you better than they employ you at your return I will send you home with honour with reward and according to your quality and not respect what you bring i will like a king present your lord and master only this I will require from you and not expect it from the merchant to take with you a pattern of a quiver and case for my bow a coat to wear a cushion to sleep on of my fashion which be at his head and a pair of boot which you shall cause to be embroider in England of the rich manner and I will expect and receive they from you for I know in your country they can work bettet then any I have see and if you send they i I be a king you shall not lose by it which I most thankful undertake and he command asaph Chan to send i the pattern then he demand if I have any grape wine I can not deny it he desire a taste next night and if he like it he will be bold if not he desire i to make merry with it so spend this night only on i he rise the three of march we come to Mandoa into which the king enter in state but no man be suffer to go in before he be set by the advice of his astrologer so that we all sit without attend a good hour Mandoa the six I come into Mandoa have send before and find a fair court well wall and in that a good church one great tomb it be take up by one of the king servant but I get possession and keep it be the best within all the wall but two mile from the king house yet so sufficient that a little charge will make it defensible against reins and save one thousand Rupias and for air very pleasant upon the edge of the hill ill proforecast the eleven at night I go towards the court but the king upon news of a lion that have kill some horse be go to hunt so that I have leisure to seek some water for we be bring to a hill with a multitude of people so great be the foresight and so good the policy where be no water that man and castle be like to perish that little that be in pool some great man possess and keep by force I can get none the poor forsake the city and by proclamation many be command away all horse and cattle forbid and so those who be now in hope to rest be force to seek new dwelling who depart some two three and four course off to the extreme trouble of all man and the terrible rise of provision I know not what to do my room and house be good and though I be far from market yet it be a less inconvenience then to sit in the field without house or shelter only I want water so I ride myself to seek some and find a great Poole possess by Chan which be give by the King I send to desire he leave to draw who grant i four load a day which satisfy i in such sort that with sell away some of those jade that be put upon i from surat and put off my cattle I have hope to live to which purpose I send two with they to lie out of town there be not a misery nor punishment which either the want of government or the natural disposition of the clime give we not @. 8 the new-year feast suspicion of the english trade of Dabul distaste of the persian englishman of war in the indian sea the twelve I go to the king and carry a new-year gift a pair of very fair knife of my own and six glass of you the excuse I make be well receive and the king use i with all grace this only be my comfort he say whatsoever come from my hand be present sufficient he accept my love and it be his part now to give i I find a gainer by he who have so far perform his promise that I perceive the king instruct in my desire and give present order to a officer to send for master Bidolph to pay he to his content for such thing as he claim and all the other be acknowledge to be receive by name and that when I go to the prince the king will write but be loath to part with any thing of which the best sweet bag lay before he I reply I be as loath to go empty hand so it rest the king command I shall come up and stand within on the degree of his throne by he where I find on one side the persian ambassador on the other the old king Candahar with who I rank and he present fall to beg a knife which next day I send the king call for the persian to come down to who he give a jewel and a young elephant for which he kneel and salute the ground with his head the throne be the same use the last year english picture and all the other furniture at the upper end be set the king my sovereign picture the queen my lady Elizabeth sir Thomas smiths and some other two piece of good and fine tapestry below they that come from Persia a throne of gold set all over with ruby emerald and and the old music of sing whore this day I dispatch to surat my advice of the persian business and the new ambassador and some remembrance to Abram Chan the governor from who I receive a letter that in his absence our nation have be wrong against his knowledge but that his power be augment by the prince he desire i to be confident in he that while he live in authority we shall never suffer any such abuse but we shall live in all freedom the thirteen I send a compliment to asaph Chan a fair wrought nightcap of my own and a rich pair of glove which he return as useless in this country the cap he receive and desire some Alegant wine which I send the next day at night Aganor who diligence now give i great hope and ease send a Banman his secretary to tell i he have order for the dispatch of the merchant good and that his man shall attend master Biddolph to finish it that the pattern shall be send i home and that the king will give i a coat and money to bear my charge to the prince I return answer that I have no use of a babylonish garment nor need money if his majesty be please to consider the injury offer of which the paper testify remain in his hand and to give i his letter to the prince with some present or else to write in my excuse it be all I will desire but for his gift I expect none but Iustice the one and twenty I yet can not at instant press it further only I discover the king doubt for he suspect my steal out of his country suspicion of the English and breach with our nation for the prince either out of guiltiness or fear or perhaps cunning to make we the pretence of his own dessigne have new inform the king that next year the english purpose the take of surat and keep it of which our own folly give some colour for late upon one of their ordinary brabble they cause two hundred musketer to land and march towards surat and be meet by diverse the joyful mariner give out they go to take it this absurd bravado for a a handful of man to pass twelve mile to a wall town able to put out a thousand horse arm and as many shot a river to pass which a few man will defend against a good army give just occasion of scorn and offence and which the prince apprehend for some other his own end to refortifie the castle and town and to send down ordnance for the defence a good provision to keep a door open to fly out if his brother live to correct his ambition but this information occur with my discontent here and some free language my pressure to go to brampore and fly news that we have take Goa and be prepare a great fleet in England do cause some suspicion in the king which though he conceal it yet he think to discover by the former discourse with which he rest full satisfy but I do not I have be long feed with word and know as well as the heart that tremble that fear of we only preserve our residence the nine and twenty of march this complain of officer be a tune so new so odious in court that it trouble all great man it be their own case a. d. 1617. tyranny of officer who live upon farm government in which they use all tyranny to the natural be loath to suffer a way open to the king understanding of their practice who ordinary hang man by the heel to confess money or to ransom themselves from no fault this make all man envy my employment and avoid i as a informer the five and twenty of April I receive from Dabull ride from cap. Pepwell letter from captain Pepwell at Dabull that according to advise he have stay the juncke find for Mocha but weigh the caution give by i to consider well what correspondence be between that prince and Mozolapatan in who territory the Solomon be and can not get to sea find both alliance and friendship he free she without spoil allege the refusal of trade to Middleton which courtesy procure he so good entertainment as the indies afford seldom free trade and promise to take three hundred clothes yearly a good quantity of lead sell for money and some ordnance which I like not to arm the indian and the portugal friend enemy to the mogoll and all other courtesy which if this kindness proceed not for that the juncke be yet under command give i good hope of some trade in sale yearly at the port however the free of the juncke assure i the commander will do nothing by catch prejudicial to the company and deliver himself honest from the jealousy cast upon he from Dabul he signify his intent to proceed to Callicute and if that factory be not worth supply to transmit it to Dabul the seven and twenty by the foot-post I receive from Mesolapatan that the Solomon be get to sea and the Hosiander from Bantam arrive who bring the ill news of the loss of the Hector and Concord careen in the road of jacatra on java in recompense that the dragon Clove and defence be homeward lade from Bantam I take this occasion to convey a letter to the governor of Dabul over-land to apprehend the overture new make by he of the trade though I have little opinion of the place yet I will not neglect that overture of trade at Dabull nor encourage the next fleet to proceed but upon better assurance than a force friendship and offer make while their juncke be in our power the effect be to signify the cause of our stay their good for refuse trade to sir Henry Middleton but now find in he a better inclination and a desire to receive we and to establish a friendship and league a promise to take cloth in good quantity I require if these motion be hearty and such as befit a man of honour that he will write to the king his master to procure his firman with such privilege as be fit for merchant and his promise to buy our good and to fulfil all the friendly offer make by he his officer under his seal and with expedition to send it i to the court of the great mogoll whereby I may receive assurance and encouragement that they intend faith and on such reception I do undertake on the behalf of the king of England a good and firm peace towards his master his subject free passage in the sea from any oppression by our fleet and that yearly I will either send a ship to his port for trade or if it so require leave and establish a residence in his government I doubt not but yearly for fear or love some good trade by sale may be make but for enuestment it will not be worth it only I proceed as I will have wish all man not with too seem eager a desire nor to swallow any offer and condition hungerly for strict care in the first settle be the best advantage and for misery of ensue time it be a general rule never to mend your first estate often to impair it every man best hour be when he be new a stranger and at first see after the natural lenity of these barbarian find all that bring not change fastidious this dispatch I commit to master bangham and desire he to make diligent enquiry of the commodity advantage inconvenience humour and affection of these decanny towards we distaste of the persian ambassador the thirty the time that he bring i the excuse of the persian ambassador for fail in take his leave of i which he will not send by a servant but utter the truth that the ambassador be not sick as he pretend but receive no content from the king in his business he sudden take leave and have give thirty fair horse at his departure the king give in recompense three thousand Rupias which he take in great scorn whereupon the king prize all that the ambassador have give he at mean rate and likewise all that the king have return since his arrival even to slave drink melon pine Plantanes hawk plume the elephant and whatsoever at extreme high rate and send both bill make it up in money this base usage and scorn cause he to excuse his not see asaph Chan and Etimon dowlet on a fever which have do he can not come through the town to i without discovery but desire he to acquaint i with the truth and to make all excuse and profession that he will recompense this discourtesy by double friendship to my countryman in Persia with some bitterness against the king which aganor as free deliver and I seem as unwilling to hear I present they with some Aligant and knife and we part the twelve of May I receive news of a great blow give the persian by the turk army so that Tanris be raze and the Shabas not able to keep the field the five and twenty a lion and a wolf use my house and nightly put we in alarum fetch away sheep and goat out of my court and leap a high wall with they I send to ask leave to kill it for that no man may meddle with lion but the king and it be grant I run out into the court upon the noise and the beast miss his prey seize on a little island dog before i that I have long keep but the wolf one of my servant kill and I send it the King the fourteen of june certain good of the jesuite be send from Cambaya in a cabinet physic and necessary and a letter which be betray by the bringer and deliver the king which he open and send for the padre to read the letter and to see all in the box of which nothing like he he return all which I observe as a warn to all that deal in this kingdom to be wary of what they write or send for such be the custom and humour of the king that he will seize and see all lest any toy shall escape his appetite the eighteen I receive letter from Amadavar of the hope of the fall of indigo by the fail of the Goa Caffila and that there be plenty to be buy but dear that the unicorn horn be return as without virtue concern which I give he new advice many complaint against surat and other which I meddle not with I receive from brampoore two letter how doubtful the debt of Ralph stand and news of the return of spragge from the leskar of Decan the general melickamber with much show of honour give instant order for privy search in all his camp for the persian flee and by i remand but find he depart to vizeapoore by testimony that business be pursue no further but by a letter to a dutch there resident the general desire spragge to be a mean to bring he english cloth and sword to his camp for the supply of his soldier which lie within six day of brampoore in my opinion that have be a good employment of some idle man and a way to vent our dead commodity the thirty of july I receive from surat of the cast away of two dutch ship on the coast of Damon that have come from the southward with spice and China silk be find for the red sea but lose their season with much extremity of weather beat many week about the entrance for harbour attempt the like at Socatra and upon the coast of Arabia but be not able to get in any way they resolve for surat hope by the last year good success to be able to ride safe but the year differ and be force to anchor in extremity their great ship cut her mast by board and after her cable break she go ashore upon the coast Ozie ground within musket shoot the ship keep upright but have lose their long boat and their Skiffe not able to live by rafter four man get ashore and the tide heave she in upon the spring they save much good and all their people her pinnace of sixty tun be beat to piece the one and twenty of August the king of candahor come to visit i and bring wine and fruit sit half a hour and for one jest of his beg a bottle of wine the prince sultan corseroone have his first day of hope liberty and come to take air and pleasure at the banquet house by i the prince at Brampoore have make a marriage without the king consent and get displeasure beside some practice of his be discover against his brother life but this as a secret he be call for to Court Normahal and asaph Chan by their father advice come about to make a peace with corsoroone and alliance and with infinite joy his liberty be expect the two and twenty the king feast at asaph Chans I receive from Aleppo and Persia passage of the war the turk retreat but no word of our English only that the captain of Grinins have write to practice their disgrace the five and twenty I advise to agra my proceed in the armenian business back to surat and brampoore of all occurrent this day asaph Chan feast normahall the prince sultan corsoroone as be report to make a firm alliance and that he will bring away a wife by his father importunity this will beget his full liberty and our proud master ruin the first of September be the king birthday and the solemnity of his weigh to which I go and be carry into a very large and beautiful garden the square within all water on the side flower and tree in the midst a pinnacle where be prepare the scale be hang in large trestle and a cross beam plate on with gold thin the scale of massy gold the border set with small stone ruby and Turkey the chain of gold large and massy but strengthen with silk cord here attend the nobility all sit about it on carpet until the king come who at last appear clothe or rather load with diamond ruby pearl and other precious vanity so great so glorious his sword target throne to rest on correspondent his head neck breast arm above the elbow at the wrist his finger every one with at least two or three ring fetter with chain or dyall diamond ruby as great as wal-nut some great and pearl such as my eye be amaze at sudden he enter into the scale sit like a woman on his leg and there be put in against he many bag to fit his weight which be change six time and they say be silver and that I understand his weight to be nine thousand Rupias which be almost one thousand pound sterling after with gold and jewel and precious stone but I see none it be in bag may be pebble then against cloth of gold silk stuff linen spice and all sort of good but I must believe for they be in farthel last against meal butter corn which be say to be give to the and all the rest of the stuff but I see it careful carry in and none distribute only the silver be reserve for the poor and serve the ensue year the king use in the night to call for some before he and with his own hand in great familiarity and humility to distribute that money the scale he sit in by one side he gaze on i and turn i his stone and wealth and smile but speak nothing for my enterpreter can not be admit in after he be weigh he ascend his throne and have basin of nut almond fruit the king weigh spice of all sort make in thin silver which he cast about and his great man scramble prostrate upon their belly which see I do not he reach one basin almost full and pour into my cloak his nobleman be so bold as to put in their hand so thick that they have leave i none if I have not put a remayner up I hear he throw gold till I come in but find it silver so thin that all I have at first be thousand of several piece have not weigh sixty Rupias I save about twenty Rupias weight yet a good dishfull which I keep to show the ostentation for by my proportion he can not that day cast away above one hundred pound sterling at night he drink with all his nobility in rich plate I be invite to that but tell I must not refuse to drink and their water be fire I be sick and in a little flux of blood and dare not stay to venture my health the nine of September the king ride to the river of darbadath five course on pleasure and come by my house I ride out to meet he the custom be that all man by who he pass near their gate make he some present which be take as a good sign and be call mombareck good news or good success I have nothing to give nor may fit go with nothing nor stay at home without discourtesy which make i venture upon a fair book well find fillet and gild mercators last edition of the map of the world which I present with a excuse that I have nothing worthy mercators Atlas present to the mogoll but to a great king I offer the world in which he have so great and rich a part the king take it in great courtesy often lay his hand on his breast and answer every thing that come from i be welcome he ask after the ship arrival which I tell he I daily expect he tell i he have some fat wild hog send he from Goa and if I will eat any at his return he will send i some I make he due reverence and answer any thing from his majesty be a feast to i he ride on his elephant and the way be stony and I offer to bring he towards the gate he bid God keep i and return to my house demand which it be and praise it indeed it be one of the best in the leskar yet but a old church and large tomb enclose iterate his farewell he say the way be ill and desire i to go home and with much show of courtesy take leave prince of Can^ahors uncivility the sixteenth I ride to repay the visit of marre Rustam the prince of candahor who at my arrival send word he dare not see i except he ask leave of the king or acquaint Etimon dowlet or asaph Chan which at the Durbar he will I answer he shall not need for I never mean to trouble myself with a man so uncivil nor to come a second time I know well it be a shift out of ill manner that the king will be no more angry for his bid i welcome to his house then for his come to i but that I care not to see he but come in civility to requite that I take so in he his man desire i to stay until he tell his master my answer but I will not and return at night I ride to court to visit the king who question about the book of map but I do forbear any speech of my debt the five and twenty I ride to the court very weak to make trial of the king about our debt for that muckshud have also new answer he have miss his Prigany and know not how to pay but by his house I deliver the king the merchant petition which he cause to be read aloud and the name of the debtor and surety and sum distinct by asaph Chan which do he call Chan the chief of his officer of household and the cutwall and give they order but what I understand not read the name he question their ability and quality and what good they receive find some dead some stranger concern rulph asaph Chan offer to speak to the prince at his arrival to finish it my interpreter be now call in and the king convert to i give this answer that the merchant have make debt at their own will and not bring a note of their good to he therefore if the man be insufficient it be at their peril for that it be no reason to expect the money from he which I suppose he speak of his servant Hergonen who be dead his good be seize for the king use but see it be the first time he will now assist i and cause our money to be pay but if hereafter the english will deliver their good to his servant without money or acquaint he they shall stand to the hazard but if when their commodity come to the court they will bring a bill to he of all he will first serve himself and after distribute the rest to such as shall buy that and if any of they fail he will pay the money himself this be indeed the custom of Persia merchant to bring all to the king which I have often see who take his choice and deliver the rest to his nobility his scrivanoe write to who and his officer cut price a copy of which be give the merchant and he go to their house for money if they pay not there be a express officer that have order by currant course to force they then be it tell my interpreter what command the king have give that arad Chan shall call the debtor before he and cause they to pay but this please not our merchant I think it both a just and gracious answer better than in such case private man can get of great prince the king hear I have be sick and wish for wine give i five bottle and command when I have end those to send for five more and so as I want and a fat hog the fat I ever see send up by Mochreb Chan that come from Goa which at midnight be bring home by a haddy with this message since it come to the king it have eat nothing but sugar and butter I take this as a sign of favour and I be sure in that court it be a great one then he send for the map-booke mercator return and tell i he have show it his mulay and no man can read nor understand it therefore if I will I shall have it again I answer at his pleasure and so it be return the six and twenty there be a Raia in rebellion in the hill not past twenty course from the laskar a Raia withstand the king force the king late send out two with horse to fetch he in but he defend his quarter slay one of they and twelve maancipdare and in all of both side about five hundred return scornful message to the king to send his son for he be no prey for ordi^nry force October 2. the second of October the prince enter the town and all the great man in wondrous triumph the king receive he as if he have no other contrary to our expectation brampore leave almost empty under Chan Channa I have send to asaph Chan to excuse my not meet he for I be not able to stir nor have no present all the great man and the king mother receive he four course off I send also some of my servant with my just excuse which his pride only nod at the five I receive from surat news of our ship arrival the admiral miss and her prize of Mosambique english ship take by the english which may else have endanger their countryman the rest well who have take two english rover set out by who be find in chase of the queen mother ship return from the Red-sea which they fortunate rescue and bring safe in if she have be take we have all be in trouble with these the company letter in voice instruction for Persia and diverse other note of advice that by reason of the admiral absence they know not what course to take with the man of war i dispee to surat order about all business as appear in my letter the six I ride to visit the prince at his usual hour to give he welcome and to acquaint he with our business determine to make offer of all respect to he and to that end not to come empty hand and buy a fine chain of gold China work I send in word he return that I shall come next morning at sun rise when he sit to be worship or stay till his ride to court which I must have do at his door this I take in extreme scorn the prince pride his father never deny i access and his pride be such as may teach Lucifer which make i answer round I be not his slave but a free ambassador of a king and that I will never more visit he nor attend he he have refuse i justice but at night I will see he with the king to who only I will address myself and so depart at night I go to the king who receive i gracious I make a reverence to the prince but he will not once stir his head then I acquaint the king that according to his order I have bring a abstract of our lade desire his command after his manner he ask what and what and be so wonderful satisfy especial with arras that he promise i all favour all privilege all that I will desire he inquire for dog which I can not answer and for jewel which I tell he they be dear in England then in India at which he rest satisfy I dare not name the pearl for many reason if I have our people have be waylay for by the prince and such snatch as I can not avoid infinite trouble I know I can bring they ashore and to court by stealth that the lesser expect the better welcome but my main reason be I will make a friend by they therefore when asaph Chan press i to know I desire he to make that answer of dearness and that I will speak with he alone he soon understand i and make excuse the king be well please I think it good time to move again for the debt and have my petition ready open it and offer it up the king not mark other discover what it be and know the king will be enrage that his order be neglect whereat one step to i and clap down my hand gentle desire i not to do so I answer aradake Chan have absolute refuse i justice at which he be by come in in much fear call asaph Chan desire he to hinder i from complaint I answer our ship be arrive and we can not forbear nor endure such delay so they consult together and call the cutwall give order to execute the king command who that night at midnight beset their tent and catch some of they so that now we shall have reason I have great thanks of all the vmrey for protect the queen ship and our courtesy to their passenger which they inform the king who take it kind and they all promise that they be oblige to love our nation and will do they all service but they wonder we can not govern our people but that thief can come out without the king leave at the king rise asaph Chan carry i with he to his retire place and there first we translate the abstract into persian to show the king a hour after in which I insert the money with some addition because the king may perceive be bring profit to his dominion next the cloth and sort than the fine ware in general last the gross commodity desire his majesty to order what he will buy and to give we liberty for the rest this finish asaph Chan renew the reason why I will speak alone bid i be free vow and protest such friendship as I never can expect I reply the reason why I desire it be to ask his counsel for it be true I have somewhat but my usage last year be so bad that I dare not trust any but that he may see how I reply on he I be willing on his oath to reveal it which he present give I tell he I have a rich pearl and some other rope fair I know not whether it be fit to tell the king lest the prince be displease I tell he how in the morning I have be to visit he and his discourtesy and my resolution but that I know his favour be so necessary for we that I hope I may recover it by this one respect that I keep the pearl for he this I say be my purpose and reason I conceal it he be father in law to he and favourite of the king I be ready to please both and desire his advice he embrace i and begin I have do discreet but I shall acquaint neither if I do I shall never want trouble the king will use i well but keep such a stir to see it and get it into his hand according to custom and then I must sue for my own the prince be ravenous and tyrannical and weary all nation he bid i steal all ashore trust none and show i many conveyance bid i observe the usage of the portugal how they be ransack and desire to buy it which if I will grant it I shall have money in what I shall ask and he will for this trust of he solicit all my desire that without he I can do nothing now be a opportunity to make a friend I answer I be willing but I fear he will reveal it which have receive his oath and a ceremony of covenant by cross thumb we embrace I promise to be direct by he and he to do all that I require for the come up of the rest he will take order to give i no man shall touch any thing bu^ all come to i to dispose of at pleasure the prince he will reconcile to i and the next time he visit he he will take i and make he use i with all grace and for other business it shall not be in his power to cross i but if he do he will assign we a Syndie which be in his government or procure any other port at my desire and whatsoever I demand shall be perform faithful he also advise i to give his sister normahall some toy he say he will make the king give i money to which I answer I desire you to convert it into the well usage of my countryman I ask no more thus we rise and he carry i in to the king with the note translate who give i all good usage ask if the arras be a present I answer yes lest it shall be seize for the prince be by in conclusion he say he will buy all the parcel of cloth and many other thing appoint i to send for it speedy asaph Chan to take order for a firman from the prince thus I have a good night and I know though they be all yet in this he will deal true because it be to help himself and dare not betray i till he have the pearl for fear to miss it nor after for have himself betray the prince @. 9 asaph Chan seek to further we for hope of gain so also norma^al master steeles arrival danger to the public by private trade stir about a Fort. asaph Chans friendship for hope of gain the twelve according to promise asaph Chan carry i to the prince into his private room where I present he with a small China gold-chaine in a China cup he use i indifferent asaph Chan persuade he to alter his course towards we tell he he gain yearly by we a lecke of Rupias at his port that it appear we yearly increase our trade and it will in time bring profit that if the hard measure be continue we will quit both that and the country of which inconvenience will ensue that we be his subject such word he must use if for desire of toy he give we discontent we will practice to conceal ^ll from he but if he give we that liberty which be fit we will strive to bring all before he for that I only study his content and favour for my particular that he shall receive i when I come to visit he with honour and according to my quality it will encourage i to do he service and content my nation final he move he for a firman for our present ease and obtain it promise all manner of content and at instant give order to asaph Chan his secretary to draw it in every point according to my own desire and to write a letter to the governor in recommendation of it and that I shall at all time have any other letter w^en I call for it it be easy see with how base and unworthy man I traffic asaph Chan for a sordid hope only of buy some toy be so reconcile as to betray his son and to i obsequious even to flattery for the ground of all this friendship be that he may buy the gold take in the prize and some other knack to which end he desire to send down a servant which I can not deny without lose he I have so long labour to get neither be it ill for we for his payment be good and it will save we much charge and trouble to sell aboard especial wine and luggish that spoil in carriage and he obtain leave under false colour and write to the governor in our behalf with all manner of kindness there be a necessity of his friendship his word be law and therefore I dare not see his unworthiness and hope by this course to win he at least to make present good use of he upon this occasion I move for a firman for Bengala which he promise and will never before hearken to and this effect of his greatness I find that he prosecute our debtor as if his own and pass by the cutwa^^s on his elephant call to command dispatch which be a unusual favour upon which Groo be imprison and Muckshu have two day liberty only to pay we and I doubt not but to end that in ten day the sum be four and forty thousand Rupias and the debtor most shift false knave in India the one and twenty at this instant come in to i from asaph Chan a servant in the name of Normahal that she have move the prince for another firman that all our good may be in her protection and that she have obtain it and be ready to send down her servant with that to see and take order for our good establishment that she will see that we shall not be wrong that asaph Chan have do this for fear of the prince violence and because of his delay that now he be sure that his sister have desire to be our protectress that the prince will not meddle that upon his honour I shall receive all thing consign to i that she have write such a command and charge her servant to assist our factor so that we shall have never more cause to complain of Su^at therefore he desire of i two or three word to the captain and factor to use he kind and to let he buy for she some toy such as I will spare this I dare not deny though I see the greediness and give he a note on condition to see the copy of the firman which be seal and I can not without leave and so he be dispee but you may by this judge this place how easy it be to raise a stock^ last year we be not look after now because I translate the cargazon of fine ware yet conceal the pearl and give it the king every one be ready to run down to buy Normahall and asaph Chan study to do i good office many great man desire a letter to send their servant down so that if you have treble this stock it will be buy up aboard and save you custom and carriage and spoil for which purpose out of this I have order your factory to sell to the servant of Normahall and her brother whatsoever may be spare so that I may be fit at court in any proportion thus I shall save trouble and you charge the prince prevent and our friend confirm and yet I hope sufficient for to please the king and his son at the delivery of which asaph Chan have undertake the firman for Bengala or any port and a general command and grant of free privilege in all his dominion the four and twenty the king depart Mandoa four course and wander in the hill leave we irresolute what way to take no man know his purpose the six and twenty I get a warrant for ten camel at the king price the nine and twenty I remove after force away by the desolation of the place the one and thirty I arrive at the king tent but find he go with few company for ten day a hunt no man to follow without leave the leskar divide and scatter into many part ill water dear provision sickness and all sort of calamity accompany so infinite a multitude yet nothing remove he from follow this monstrous appetite here I understand the king purpose be uncertain whether for agra or guzerat the latter give out the former more probable because his council desire to be at rest but that how ever for the dispatch of my business see he will linger here about a month I be advise and think it as fit to send for the good and present as to defer it upon uncertainty be that dispatch I have hope of some quiet in this course I wear out my body be very weak and not like to recover upon daily travel in the field with cold raw muddy water the second of November arrive Richard steel and master jackson November 2. with the pearl and some other small matter steal ashore according to my order master steeles project question which I receive and give quittance for with he I have conference about his project which because I will not rash reject they as he have set they afoot after have make he see his fancy and understand the quality of these people how for the waterwork if to be effect it must be begin at our charge and after trial we shall not enjoy the profit but the natural teach and our people reject neither our commodity vent by it for that the lead will treble his price by portage over-land and can be deliver at agra so cheap as find there yet I be content he shall make trial for satisfaction by carry his workman to Amadavas to meet i there where by assistance of Mocrib Chan who only be a friend to new invention I will make offer to the king of their industry and make proof what condition may be obtain but in my judgement it be all money and labour cast away the company must shut their ear against these projector who have their own employment more in their end than their master profit many thing hold well in discourse and in the theoric satisfy curious imagination but in practice and execution be find difficult and airy especial to alter the constant receive custom of kingdom where some drink only rainwater some of a holy river some none but what be fetch by their own cost his second of reduce the caffilaes and Merchants of lahor and agra by the river Indus that use to pass by candahor into Persia to transport by sea in our ship for jasque or the gulf be a mere dream some man in conference may wish it but none ever practice it the river be indifferent navigable down but the mouth be the residence of the portugal return back against the stream very difficult final we must warrant their good which a fleet will not do neither do the Portugal ever lade or noise such good but only for those of sindie and tatta that trade by their own juncke they give a or pass to secure they from their frigate and trade with they for which they pay a small matter and that only which come to the purse of the grand of Diu Damon and Ormus or if all other difficulty be take away yet will the lahorne never be draw down be that Caffila consist most of return Persians and armenians that know the passage from jasque almost as bad as from candahor and for that little on the confine of sinde not worth mention notwithstanding for his better satisfaction I be content he shall by experience learn his own error so it be not at the company charge but I suppose he will let it fall not know at which end to begin a three project for to join the trade of the red sea with this I recommend to he for that it be already in use and the peril for the guzurat very apparent therefore I doubt not some merchant may be draw to lade in our ship at freight whereby we shall make ourselves necessary friend to these people supply our own defect save export of money and final for this year employ one ship of the old account that shall return in September and receive the proceed of the remain of this joint stock which will be sufficient to re-lade a great ship otherwise to transport it over will be extreme loss this I open and urge the consequence show which way to effect it and commend by he to the commander the cape merchant and your factor with all earnestness as by my letter appear the consequence I will make evident in your profit if they follow it for be the good and estate all my own if I can not procure somewhat towards charge by freight from the guzurat yet have so many empty vessel for so small a stock and two fall into your hand of man of war I have rather go empty and for company with they then to omit that there be many chance in that sea and in the way she return only of our own remain shall requite all forbearance and be ready in time for employ she must be if we intend to send the rest upon this acco^nt for that here be no harbourage at his arrival I find he high in his conceit have somewhat forget i master kerridge and he at war which I endeavour to temper on all part but for his wife I deal with he clear his wife she can not stay with our safety nor his master content that he have ruin his fortune if by amends he repair it not that she shall no^ travel nor live on the company purse danger by bring wife I know the charge of woman that if he be content to live himself like a merchant as other do frugal and to be order for the company service and to send home his wife he be welcome otherwise I must take a course with both against my nature have to this persuade he I likewise practise the discouragement of captain Towerson about his wife you know not the danger the trouble the inconvenience of grant these liberty to effect this I persuade Abraham his father in law here to hold fast I write to they the gripe of this court the small hope or relief from his alliance who expect great matter from he final I persuade his return quiet to further this I write to your chief factor that such thing as he have bring and be vendible shall be bring to your use by bill of exchange to such profit for he as both may save and this inconvenience you bring on yourselves by liberty unreasonable but to take tie of his trash to lie upon your hand upon any condition I do prohibit I find by your letter your strict command in private trade as well for your own servant as other whereby I collect you mean not that he shall have that liberty he expect for he be furnish for above one thousand pound sterling public loss by private trade first penny here and steel at least two hundred pound which he presume send home his wife his credit and merit be so good towards you that you will admit in this case to be rid of such cattle I will not buy but order that it be mark and consign to you that you may measure your own hand you discourage all your old servant some may do all thing for fair word some nothing for good action I can instance some go home two year since that only employ their own stock do no other business and live now at home in pleasure other that raise their fortune upon your money from port to port and return rich and unquestioned last year a mariner have six and twenty churl of indigo other many farthel a three seven thousand mamude first penny in baroach the name be omit bastaes choose apart for he invest your money and it be probable he choose not the worst for himself a four above one hundred and fifty pound first penny these I mention not for spite but to move you to equality neither by their example these may escape for they swallow you up but that a indifferent restraint be execute upon all for the effect of all these purpose the send home the woman and the prosecution of the red sea I send back Richard steel with order to surat have alter my purpose of the good and present from the leskar it be declare that the king will for guzurat where I have appoint Richard steel after have dispatch other matter to meet with they and his engineer inventory of the good in the man of war I also send my advice and direction to captain bring to take a inventory of all the money and good in the two man of war to make it over to your stock and land it to sell or dispose of the ship as his occasion shall require the money if sell to be put to stock to grant passage to some of the chief to entertain the rest and to refer it to you at home who you will deal with the owner that set they out my opinion be peremptory that their surprise be just and justifiable all their good forfeit if you will restore any thing at your courtesy but with the more rigour you deal with these the better example you will leave for such barbarous piracy for if this course be practise take your leave of all trade about surat and the red sea and let the company of Turkey stand clear of the grand signor revenge and we here must expect cold iron the six I go to asaph Chans have receive his pass unto who I show the pearl according to promise though the sort fit not the country just as I be inform hereafter yet their performance with he give he such content that I be confident I may use pharaohs word the land be before you dwell where you will you and your servant for the price we talk not but he vow such secrecy and for my sake who have show this confidence in he he will give more than their worth Normahal a friend to the English and not return on^ and pay ready money of which he profess not to want and to lend i what I want his sister I have promise to visit who he have make our protectress and brief whatsoever contentment word can bring I receive and some good effect when the present arrive assure you I will not be liberal to your loss little shall serve asaph Chan admonish i himself so they come with somewhat to induce they as well accept buy as give experience of other make i to approve of this doctrine finish these compliment with he in his bedchamber he rise to dinner have invite i and my people but he and friend dine without appoint i a mess with he apart for they eat not willing with we where I have good cheer and well attend the reversion for my servant after dinner I move Groos debt tell he the delay he answer I shall not open my lip he have undertake it that Groo by his mean be finish account with a jeweller that he have order as money be pay it shall rest in the cutwall hand for we which I find true and the cutwall promise to finish it in three day desire i to send no more to asaph chan. I can omit a baseness or favour according as you will interpret it the king when his prison be full of condemn man some he command to be execute some he send to his Vmraes to redeem at a price this he esteem as a courtesy to give mean to exercise charity but he take the money and so sell the virtue about a month before our remove he send to i to buy three abassine for forty Rupias a man who they suppose all christian I answer I can not buy man as slave redeem of prisoner as other do and so have profit for their money but in charity I will give twenty Rupias a piece to save their life and give they liberty the king take my answer well and bid they to be send i they expect money and I be not hasty hear no more of it I hope it have be forget but his word be write decree this night the officer see I send not deliver the prisoner into my procuradors power and take his sc^eete for sixty Rupias which at my return I pay and free the slave the ten I visit asaph Chan have receive advice from surat of a new firman come down to disarrive all the english and some other restriction of their liberty causeless jealousy touch a fort upon a complaint make to the prince that we intend to build a fort at Swally and that our ship be lade with brick and lime for that end which suspicion arise only by bring a few on shore to sound the ship bell yet the alarm come to court so hot that I be call to answer which when I make it appear how absurd the fear be how dishonourable for the king how unfit the place for we without water or harbourage yet the jealousy be so strong imprint because former I have demand a river by Goya for that end that I can hardly persuade the prince we intend not some surprise by this you may judge how easy it be to get a port for ourselves if you affect it which I can neither so profitable for you nor a place tenable notwithstanding all remonstrance this furnace must be demolish and a Had^ey of horse send down to see it effect the disarm of our man be all that our people stomach though it be only to leave their weapon in the customhouse and that only of the ship company though it be quiet for we except they be often more civil yet I tell asaph Chan we will not endure the slavery nor I stay in the country that one day the prince send a firman for our good usage and grant of privilege the next day countermand it that there be no faith nor honour in such proceed neither can I answer my residence long he reply at night he will move the king before the prince and give i answer the thirteen I revisit asaph Chan he tell i wondrous matter of the king affection to my sovereign to my nation and to i that he have venture the prince disfavour for our sake and have full promise for a new reformation but because he fear the prince deal he give i this assurance that he will take the Prigany of surat which the prince must leave be make governor of Amadavas Cambaya and that Territorie and to give i satisfaction that he have not dissemble with i he desire i to come at night to court and bring the king my master letter and the translation the opportunity be fair to deliver it upon the occasion of which he bid i persist in my complaint and offer to take leave I shall then see what he will say for we and so I shall believe myself at evening I go to the king it be a very full court and present my letter which the king sit on the ground be lay before he and he busy take no great notice asaph Chan whisper his father in the ^are desire he to read the letter and to assist we for that he may better begin that then himself Etimon dowlet take up both letter give the english to the king and read the translate to which when the king have answer many word of complaint Etimon dow^et^or ^or the English to that point of procure our quiet trade by his authority among the Portugal^ he demand if he will make peace I answer his majesty know long since I offer to be govern by he and refer it to his wisdom and have expect his pleasure he reply he will undertake absolute to accord we and to make agreement in his sea which he will by answer to my master letter signify and therein give he content in all other his friendly desire notwithstanding I demand (...) to to meet the king present and to prepare for my return upon which mo^ion the question grow between the king and the prince who complain that he have no pro^^^ by we ^nd that he be content to be rid of we asaph Chan take the t^rne and very round tell the king that we bring both prof^t to the p^rt to the kingdom and (@) that we wer^ (...) by the prince seruan^s and that it be not poss^ble for we to reside without amends it be (...) his majesty ^o license we then to entreat we so discourteous f^r it wo^l^ be the end th^ prince reply very choler^ckly that ^e have never do we wrong and have late give i a firman at his entreaty he reply it be true you give a firman to his content and in ten day send another in effect to contradict it that he stand surety between both have undertake from the prince mouth our redress but now he have the shame and dishonour of it that he ought i nothing nor I he he speak for no end but for the king honour and justice in that which he say that he do we no wrong he must appeal to i who complain that our good be take by force that two year past Rulph have begin it will never pay we and his officer continue every ship that if the prince be weary of we he may turn we out but then he must expect we will do our own justice upon the sea he demand if the king or prince give i mean to eat or who do that I be a ambassador and a stranger that live and follow the king at great charge that if our good be force and after we can get neither good nor money how shall I live and maintain myself this deliver with some heat the king catch the word force force redouble it to his son and give he sharp reprehension the prince promise to see i pay all that he have take nothing but only cause the present to be seal because his officer have no custom and desire to have they open before he I absolute refuse it also I tell the king I will only do my duty to my master in deliver his present free after I will give the prince all content Etimon dowlet who be always indifferent and now by his son make our friend whisper with the king and read a clause or two in my master letter at which the king make his son rise and stand aside asaph Chan join in this private conference which they tell i be for my good and in conclu^^on the prince be call command to suffer all the good to come to my hand quiet to give i such priu^ledges as be fit which asaph Chan shall propound the prince will not yield the present except asaph Chan will stand surety that he shall have a share which he do and then we all agree upon that point the king give i many good word and two piece of his pawn out of his dish to eat of the same he be eat then I take leave to go to Amadavas to meet the present and so we part at night I set on my journey leave my tent suppose the next day to reach the city but I ride two night a day and a half with one bait upon straw and the fifteen at noon arrive at Amadavas januarie 8. word betwixt the prince and the ambassador about present the eight of januarie there be some question about present the prince ask for they I answer they be ready if he please to receive he then he demand why I break his seal I tell he it be dishonourable for i to bring a king gift in bond and great discourtesy to set seal upon they I expect and attend his licence twenty day but see no hope I be enforce to do it some heat begin at which appear a gentleman of the king who be send to observe the passage and to stickle and tell we both the king command we shall come before he at a garden where he sit a course out of town upon the river so the prince take his Palankee and I a coach well attend by servant both of father and son when I come to the gate the woman be enter and then no man can but the prince who make within a bitter complaint against i that I have dare to cut his seal and to take out what I listen asaph Chan be call for who be my surety and the prince lay it on he he as the custom be deny it excuse himself yet I have not accuse he but take it upon i as know myself better able to bear it and that he will deny it then I be send for to the waterside where the king sit private where I enter with i the present but the king be within among his woman asaph Chan chafe at i for break his word tell i the prince have shame he I reply by jaddow you know I have your consent this man be witness custom to disavow the king word if he will not acknowledge it he deny it to we both I reply though I will not cast it upon he it be true for I have witness jaddow will not return the answer but tell i he may not tell he he lie to his face and this be usual if any command come from the king that he forget he that bring the message will disavow it I bear up as high as I can the great man tell i it be a great affront no man dare do such a thing other smile I answer not so great as the prince have do i often thus we spend the day and the king appear not but private steal away leave we all sit in expectance at night word come the king be go and I offer to go home but be so well attend I can not but by force in the way new messenger come to seek i and I arrive back at the king court not have eat or drink but the king be not come in nor can I get loose of my attendant but they use i very respectful we sit a hour sudden news come to put out all light the king be come who enter on a open wagon with his normahall draw by bullock himself carter and no man near when he and his woman be house the king chariot draw by bullock the prince come in a horseback and enter in call for i I find they alone with two or three * * eunuch capon and about midnight the king set on it a angry countenance tell i I have break my word that he will trust i no more the prince have desire he to do so I answer as round I hold it fit to give free I have do nothing of offence in my own judgement if their custom be other it be ignorance and I must be pardon we have many dispute at last the prince interpose offer his friendship and we be all reconcile full and promise too large then I open the chest give the king his present the prince his and send in that for normahall we be above two hour in view they the arras he take well but say it be course desire to have a suit of such as the sweet bag and we conclude that in the morning I shall come to the prince that he shall be my protector and procurator the good except three thing more than present be there return i for those three the prince tell i he will pay see his father take they the ten I go to the prince be receive with all favour have order for a firman for the man murder a declaration of his reconcilement in public command to all his officer to take knowledge and to his chief Raia to be my procurator and to draw what so ever I desire I present captain Towerson and some english who he use with grace and for a sign of this peace give i a of silver cloak and promise to be the protector of our nation in all thing I tell he of master steele and his workman he desire i to bring a small present to his father at night he will present they which I do he keep his word and speak for we to he who be willing enough I present captain Towerson to the king who call for he up and after a few question rise at the gushel choes I present master steele and his workman the king sit in a hat I give he all night call for master Paynter and after much discourse give he ten pound and promise to entertain the rest the thirteen the dutch come to court with a great present of China ware sanders present of the dutch. parrot and cloave but be not suffer to come near the three degree at last the prince ask i who they be I reply the hollander resident in surat he demand if they be our friend I reply they be a nation depend on the king of England but not welcome in all place their business I know not he say for be our friend I shall call they up and so I be enforce to send for they to deliver their present they be place by our merchant without any speech or further conference final I have all grant I desire I attend the performance and money and thus I conclude that without this contestation I have never get any thing for I tell the prince messenger in the presence of all the english that if he use force to i or my good he may do his pleasure but it shall cost blood that I will set my chop upon his master ship and send she for England the eighteen I receive from surat of the imprisonment of spragge and Howard and Howard accuse at brampoore their house and good seize their life in question for drink with the cutwall in their house that one of the cutwall man die that night upon which they stand accuse of poison and the cutwall to free himself of come into the house pretend that he come to fetch a man wife away from Thomas Spragge what the truth be I know not information be come to the king against they and I go to the prince who undertake all my cause but can not speak with he with the same come complaint of a force use to the Caffila upon the way notwithstanding the firman send by the Raia of the country in both which to night I will make petition to the King my toil with barbarous unjust people be beyond patience at the prince I find the firman promise draw but half the condition agree on leave out upon which I refuse it and desire nothing but leave to depart to treat with these in the Sea the one and twenty a command to free the english and their good and that if the Moor come into their house to drink if they kill he with a dagger he have his just reward the second to Raia Partapshaw to repay we all exaction whatsoever not to take hereafter any duty upon the way towards his port and in case of fail that he will deliver his son into my hand he further order the delivery of the firman for surat the article by i demand and to pay we all our debt of surat and to cut it off upon his mancipdary that have take that without delay he call to account his old customer charge the new to use we as his friend show as much favour public as I can require I move expedition he reply to morrow by nine in the morning all shall be deliver into my hand the two and twenty I go myself to receive they and carry the merchant with some pearl that the prince have be instant to see pretend to be master towerson but he have receive some uncertain information of pearl to the value of twenty or thirty thousand pound which he hope to draw from we when his secretary see the small sort he reply the prince have maunds of these if we bring no better commodity we may be go he care not for our custom how base false and covetous be those of jewel you may judge I undertake reply that I have procure those from a gentle woman to satisfy they if they like they not they can not be make better it be incivility to be angry with merchant for their good will but tell he I come for my and expect they I be answer we have deceive their hope and the prince will deceive we firman I shall have none I have ask leave to depart I may come and take leave when I please I answer nothing content i more but that I will visit their unjustice in a indifferent place that I will speak with the king and depend no more on they for I see all be covetousness and unworthiness so I rise and part but he recall i to come to the king and prince together the next day I shall have content and now reader we be at a stand some more idle or more busy spirit willing either to take their rest or to exchange their labour and some perhaps wish they have the whole journal and not thus contract into extracts of those thing out of it which I conceive more fit for the public and for the whole myself can have wish it but neither with the honourable company nor elsewhere can learn of it the worthy knight himself be now employ in like honourable embassage from his majesty to the great Turk yet to supply the defect of the journal I have give thou the chorography of the country certain letter of he write thence to his honourable lord and friend in England out of all which well wrought on by a understanding spirit may be ^ewed and frame a delightful commentary of the mogoll and his subject take they therefore reader and use they as a prospective glass by which thou may take easy and near view of those remote region people rite religion and first here follow a description of the country both by map and write and after they the letter pa^sing mutual betwixt his majesty and the mogoll and last those of sir Thomas roe aforesaid @. x. the several kingdom and province subject to the great mogoll SHARKWELL Selim GEHANGIER with the principal city and river the situation and border and extent in length and breadth as near as by description I can gather they the name I take out of the king register I begin at the northwest 1. CAndahar the chief city so call lie from the heart of all his territory northwest confine with the Shabas and be a province of persia. 2. tata the chief city so call be divide by the river Indus which fall into the sea at Sindu and lie from Candahar south from the middle of which I suppose agra west somewhat southerly 3. Buckar the chief city so call Buckar Suckar lie upon the river Sindu or Indus to the northward somewhat easterly of tata and west confine upon the baloache a kind of rude warlike people 4. multan the chief city so call lie also upon Indus east from Candahar north from Bu^kar 5. Haagickan the kingdom of the boloache to the west of tata and Bachar and confine west upon the kingdom of Lar subject to the Shabas Indus wind itself into the easter-side of it it have no renown city 6. Cabull the city so call a great kingdom the northermost of this emperor dominion and confine with Tartary 7. the chief city be call Sirivaker the river of Bhat pass through it and find the sea by g^^ges or some say of itself in the north part of the bay of Bengala it border Cabul to the east southerly it be all mountain 8. bankish the chief city be call beishar 9 Atack the chief city so call it lie on one side the river nilab which run the northwest into the river Indus 10. the kingdom of the katary lie at the foot of the mountain it have principal city danke and Purhola it border north-east on Kishimer 11. pen-lab which signify five water for that it be seat within five river the chief city be call lahor it be a great kingdom and most fruitful the city be the mart of India for traffic it border north-east on multan 12. janba ^he chief city so call it lie east on pen-lab it be very mountainous 13. Peitan the chief city so call it lie east of jenba and from the northwest Bengala it be full of mountain 14. nakarkut the cliefe city so call the north eastermost confine of Mogor it lie to the north-east of the head of the b^y of Bengala it be very mountainous 15. Siba the chief city so call it border with nakarkut southerly it be all mountainous 16. jesuall the chief city so call Ragepar it border with Bengala southeast north and with Siba and Nakarkat it be full of mountain 18. the chief city call Narnol it lie on the east of Ganges 19 Sanball the chief city so call it lie between Ganges and jemui to the northwest of their meeting 20. Bakar the chief city be call bikaneer it border northwest on Ganges 21. agra a principal and great kingdom the city so call the heart of the mogoll Territorie in north latitude about twenty eight degree and a half it lie most on the south-west-side of jemui the city upon the river where one of the emperor treasury be keep from agra to lahor be three hundred and twenty course which be not less than seven hundred mile it be all a plain and the highway plant on both side with tree like a delicate walk it be one of the great work and wonder of the World 22. jenupar the city so call upon the river of Kaul which I suppose to be one of the five river enclose lahor and the country lie between it and agra northwest from one southeast from the other 23. Banda the chief city so call it confine agra to the west 24. patna the chief city so call it be enclose by four great river Ganges jemna Serseli and Kanda so that it lie from agra southeast towards the bay of Bengala where all these pay tribute 25. gor the chief city so call it lie towards the head of Ganges 26. Bengala a mighty kingdom enclose the westside of the bay on the north and wind south-wester it border on Cormandell and the chief city be ragmehhell and Dekaka there be many haven as port grand port trade by the portugal Philipatan Satigam it contain diverse province as that of purp and patan 27. Roch it have no city of note and border on the south-west east of Bengala and the Bay 28. Vdeza the chief city jekanat it be the utmost east of the mogul territoritie beyond the bay and confine with the kingdom of Maug a savage people lie between Vdeza and Pegu. 29. Canduana the chief city be call Kerhakatenkah it lie south-west of the south of Bengala 30. kualiar the chief city so call it lie to the southeast of Kanduana and border on burhampur 31. chande the chief city call burhampur a great kingdom one of the ancient seat of Decan and conquer from they it lie east on Guzarat south of chitor west of Decan and it be water with the river Tabeti which fall west into the bay of Cambaya it be now the seat of the Decan 32. the chief city call vgen Narr and sering it lie west of chande between that and the country of Ranna on the east of the river sapra which fall into the bay of Cambaya not far from surat 33. berar the chief city be call shahpur it border on guzerat and the hill of Ranna 34. guzerat a goodly kingdom enclose the bay of Cambaya the chief city be Amadavar it contain the city and government of Cambaya the beauty of India the territory and city of surat and baroach it be water with many goodly river as that of Cambaya false suppose to be Indus the river of Narbadah fall into the sea at baroach that of surat and diverse other it trade to the red sea to Achin and many place 35. Soret the chief city call Ganagar it lie to the northwest of guzerat 36. Naruar the chief city call ghehud lie south-west from chitor 37. chitor a ancient great kingdom the city so call on a mighty hill wall about ten english mile there stand yet above a hundred church the palace of the king many brave pillar of carve stone there be but one ascent cut out of the rock pass four magnificent gate there remain the ruin of a hundred thousand house of stone it be habited it be doubtless one of the seat of Porus and be win from Ranna his issue by Ecbarshaw the last mogoll Ranna fly into the strength of his kingdom among the mountain seat himself at odepoore who be bring to acknowledge the mogul for his superior lord by sultan Caronne three son of the present emperor in the year 1614 this kingdom lie northwest from chande and north-east from the northwest of guzerat in the way between agra and surat Ranna himself keep the hill to the west near Amadavar the length * * let not the diversity of name trouble any in so remote tongue and differ pronuntiation if any other difficulty happen in compare this discourse with the map or relation I confess I will have fight better to satisfy myself if sir t. roe have be at home as for course they be diverse take as southern and northern mile with we in some place long in oth^rs short which cause scruple in the computation be northwest to southeast from Chandahar to lahor three hundred and fifty course about eight hundred mile from lahor to agra three hundred and twenty course about seven hundred fifty two mile from agra to hhagipierpatua three hundred course about six hundred and eighty mile from hhagipurpatua to kirasunder three hundred course about six hundred and seventy mile in all course one thousand two hundred and seventy Miles about two thousand eight hundred seventy two the breadth in all be north-east to south-west from Harduar to Duarsa six hundred and fifty course about fifteen hundred mile the king letter send to Selim Shagh the great Mogor in the year 1614 by sir Thomas roe JAMES by the grace of almighty God the creator of heaven and earth king of great Britain France and Ireland defender of the christian faith etc. to the high and mighty monarch the great Mogor king of the oriental indies of Chandahar of Chismer and Corazon etc. greeting we have notice of your great favour towards we and our subject by your great to all your captain of river and officer of your custom for the entertainment of our love subject the english nation with all kind respect at what time soever they shall arrive at any of the port within you^ dominion and that they may have quiet trade and commerce without any kind of hindrance or molestation etc. as by the article conclude by suc Suff governor of the guzerats in your name with our love subject captain Thomas best appear have think it meet to send unto you our ambassador which may more full and at large handle and treat of such matter as be fit to be consider of concern that good and friendly correspondence which be so late begin between we and which will without doubt redound to the honour and utility of both nation in which consideration and for the further of such laudable commerce we have make choice of sir Thomas roe knight one of the principal gentleman of our court to who we have give commission under our great seal of England together with direction and instruction further to treat of such matter as may be for the continuance and increase of the utility and profit of each other subject to who we pray you to give favour and credit in whatsoever he shall move or propound towards the establish and enlarge of the same and for confirmation of our good inclination and wel-wishing towards you we pray you to accept in good part the present which our say ambassador will deliver unto you and so do commit you to the merciful protection of almighty God a copy of the grand Moghor his letter to the King unto a king right descend from his ancestor breed in military affair and clothe with honour and justice a commander worthy of all command strong and constant in religion which the great prophet Christ do teach king JAMES who love have breed such impression in my thought as shall never be forget but as the smell of amber or as a garden of fragrant flower who beauty and odour be still increase so be assure my love shall grow and increase with you your letter which you send i in the behalf of your merchant I have receive whereby I rest satisfy in your tender love towards i and desire you not to take it ill for not have write unto you heretofore for this my present letter I send to renew our love and herewith do certify you that I have send forth my firmaund through all my country to this effect that if any english ship or merchant shall arrive in any of my port my people shall permit and suffer they to do what they will free in their merchandize cause aid and assist they in all occasion of injury that shall be offer they and that the least cause of discourtesy be not do unto they as also that they be as free and free than my own people and as now and former I have receive from you diverse token of your love so I desire your mindfulness of i by some novelty from your country as a argument of friendship between we for such be the custom of prince here as for your merchant I have give express order through all my country to suffer they to sell buy transport and carry away at their pleasure without the let or hindrance of any person whatsoever all such good and merchandise or other thing as they shall desire to buy and let this my letter as full satisfy you in the desire peace and love as if my own son have be the messenger to ratify the same and if any in my country not fear God nor obey their king or any other void of religion shall endeavour or be a instrument to break this league of friendship I will send my son sultan Coronne a soldier approve in the war to cut he off that no obstacle may hinder the continuance and increase of our affection my lord only for promise which be a honest debt this letter I find among master Hak. his paper as the two former the rest be transcribe from sir t. roe own book no law but the king word see of these thing captain Hawkins large relation I send your lordship a journal till my arrival at brampore a city of house make of mud where one of the king son keep his court. he be call peruey I have need to write a apology for it there be nothing of worth nothing memorable and yet not my fault but I have rather trust your nobleness then trouble you with excuse and so descend to a more universal description of the state and custom of the land they have no write Law the king by his own word rule and his governor of province by that authorit^e once a week he sit in judgement patient and give sentence for crime capital and civil he be every man heir when he die which make he rich and the country so evil build the great man about he be not bear noble but favourite raise to who he give if it be true wonderful mean they be reckon by horse that be to say colonel of twelve thousand horse which be the great whereof be four beside his son and wife so descend to twenty horse not that any of these be find to keep or raise any at all but the king assign they so much land as be find to maintain so many horse as a rent each horse at five and twenty pound sterling by the year which be a incredible revenue give away so many that be almost all but the ploughman artificer and tradesman in town live upon it but as they die and must needs gather so it return to the king like river to the sea both of those he give to and of those that have gain by their own industry but for the most part he leave the widow and child their horse stuff and some other stock and then put they into a signiory if the father be of six or seven thousand horse perhaps of a thousand or five hundred and so set they to begin the world anew and advance they as they deserve of he they all rise by present he which they strive to do both rich and rare present of a hundred thousand pound some give a hundred thousand pound in jewel at a time he have one belove wife among four that whole govern he he receive late a present from the king of bisa^pore to obtain peace who ambassador knock his head three time against the ground of six and thirty elephant of two whereof the chain and all tackle be of beat gold to the weight of four hundred pound two of silver of the same fashion the rest of copper fifty horse rich furnish and ten leek of Rupias in jewel great pearl and balasse ruby every lecke be a hundred thousand Rupias every Rupia two shilling six penny sterling some say two shilling some two shilling three penny the mogoll greatness so ten leek be a million of Rupias his territory be far great than the persian and almost equal if not as great as the turk his mean of money by revenue custom of present and inherit all man good above both his country lie west to Sinde and so stretch to Candahar and to the mountain of Taurus north. to the east as far as the utmost part of Bengala and the border of Ganges and south to Decan it be two thousand mile square at the least but have many petty king within that be tributary the true descend heir of Porus that be overcome by Alexander call Ranna heir of porus. be late conquer more by composition then force the king have rather buy he then win he and hereby no way augment his revenue but give a great pension to he his country I cross between this town of Asmere and Cetor have be ancient the chief town Cetor a great ruin city and sure stand on a hill steep as a rock some fifteen mile about that be all wall the city within but with one ascent and five admirable gate in the ascent all ruin and no person dwell but there stand a hundred muschee many lantern and such reverend and brave relic of imagery and carve work a hundred muschee or mahometan temple that few or hardly any where can be equal in general all the old city be beat down by what policy I understand not but the king seek the ruin of any thing not begin by his ancestor so that all the land have not a house fit for a cottager but in such city as he favour surat be best build of any and in old time they in these part make mighty work which every day decay at surat there be a Tanke for water of freestone in a polygon form of above a hundred side every side eight and twenty yard it have stair on every side for man to descend and many stop for horse it be a wondrous work both for the hugeness and for the brave building I have now on the court to touch and my entertainment the king never use any ambassador with so much respect without any dispute give i leave to use my own custom his entertainment at Court not require that of i which he use of the persian he present i with a welcome before I speak and say the king and he be brother with many other courteous word I have be sick he offer i physician he take the present in good part and be so fond of the coach that at night in his court he get into it and make two or three of my man draw he a little in it he be very affable and of a cheerful countenance without pride three time a day he sit out in three place the king sit three time a day once to see his elephant and beast fight about noon after from four to five or six to entertain all that visit he at night from nine till midnight with all his great man but none else where he be below with they in all familiarity I visit he in the second of these where I find he in a court set above like a king in a play and all his noble and myself below on a stage cover with carpet a just theatre with no great state but the canopy over his head and two stand on the head of two wooden elephant to beat away fly they wear nothing but calico but be ever attendant the great man ride in train some two hundred some five hundred footman follow they the Grande^ and (@) or five banner carry before th^m and a hundred or two hundred horse after they this be all their pride they keep their horse most delicate feed with butter and sugar and though they be not very great yet they be of delicate shape both of Persia arabs and of this land falsehood of map In^us mouth at s^nde I have one observation more to make of the falseness of our map both of mercator and all other and their ignorance in this country first the famous river Indus do not empty himself into the sea at Cambaya as his chief mouth but at sinde my reason be lahor stand upon Indus from whence to Sinde it be navigable to Cambaya not so lahor in the map be also false set down it lie north from surat above a thousand mile the city where the king ordinary residence be agra not describe at all Asmere but it stand north north-east from surat on a river that fall into Ganges but the king now reside in a base old city wherein be no house but of mud not so great as a cottage on hownslo-heath only himself have one of stone his lord live in tent and I have sudden build to my mud wall upon cane a dozen thatch room this town be short of agra ten day journey two hundred mile which stand from hence north north-east this place be from Bramport north four hundred and fifty mile Bramport from surat east above two hundred mile the latitude near five and twenty degree thus my lord I have say somewhat but to little purpose I forget not some book for you but loadstone here be none they be in the far east country neither be there any correspondence with China no correspondence with China news of persia. Vsbec tartars to Persia and so to Aleppo there go caravans to Cathaya none here be no news but of persia. the king have take away water and relief from Ormus and banish the portugal his territory he have late overrun the poor Georgians with fire and sword and be of a unquiet nature intend the conquest of the vsbiques a nation between Samarchand and he which he aim at he late strike off his son head with his own hand he be favour and fear of the mogoll as be lord of the more warlike nation for these be more than half Bramanes who religion be not to kill a louse bite they and the mogoll be a effeminate people so that the Turk the last year send on ambassage to entreat he not to assist the per^ian he give he very harsh entertainment make he Salem to the ground and as soon as he be dismiss send the persian ten leek of Rupias I shall be glad to do your lordship service in England for this be the dull base place that ever I see and make i weary of speak of it therefore if you be also weary of read I be glad I shall desire your lordship to let master Hackwell read the journal for I promise he one but I have not leisure to write it and so with all respect and little ceremony I hope to return to do you better service in the mean time to live a miserable life though with abundance and state enough yet I want the conversation and presence of those friend I love and honour in which number your lordship have make i presume to esteem you and to account myself your lordship humble friend to do you service THOMAS roe Asmere the court of the mogoll january 17. 1615. a letter of sir THOMAS roe to etc. may it please your place far remote have somewhat of wonder in the distance cause much expectation in themselves of strange matter among the vulgar such as I suppose they shall have subject of worthy and large discourse but these be unlike the star that seem less the further off here the remoteness be the greatness and to maintain the ancient privilege of traveller they have be so far alchemist as multiplication some ground some spirit to quicken the body of their monstrous relation where I shall begin what I shall say worthy one of your vacancy from great affair I know not to undertake a cosmographical description be a labour not unworthy of time but not proportional to a letter Ortelius mercator Atlas nor any understanding any truth herein yet for the maynnesse of the error Indus false describe by our geographer I will observe that the famous river Indus do not pour himself into the sea by the bay of Cambaya but far westward at sinde for from lahor stand a thousand mile north inthe Maine upon Indus it be navigable to Sinde to Cambaya not but certain by-streame beget by the season of rain make mighty inundation which have cherish the error all the rest be as false both in bear distance longitude and latitude as that but the correction here incomprehensible the true latitude of this place five and twenty degree and a half a description of the land custom and manner which be incident be fit for winter-night they be either ordinary or mingle with much barbarism law they have none write the king judgement bind who sit and give audience with much patience law execution once weekly both in capital and criminal cause where sometime he see the execution do by his elephant with too much delight in blood his governor of province rule by his which be a brief letter authorise they governor they take life and good at pleasure many religious and in they many sect moores or mahometans adhere to Ally religion and Sect. such be the king Banians or Pythagorians for the transmigration and therefore will not kill the vermin that bite they who often buy many day respite in charity from kill any flesh at all in such a province or city gentile of sundry idolatry their wife adorn the pile and enter the funeral fire with great joy and honour the extent of his territory be west to Sinde northwest to chandahor north almost to Taurus east to the border of Ganges and southeast all Bengala extent the land border the gulf south to Decan much great than the persian almost equal if not full to the Turk if his land be crush together into a square as this agra the ordinary residence of the king be a thousand mile from any border far from some the right issue of Porus be here a king in the midst of the mogul kingdom never subdue till last year and to say true he be rather buy then conquer win by gift Porus his issue not by arm to acknowledge a superior Lord the pillar erect by Alexander be yet stand at Dely Alexander pillar the ancient seat of the ancestor of Ranna the issue of porus. the building be all base of mud one story high except in surat where be some stone house building public and private but I know not by what policy the king seek the ruin of all the ancient city which be brave build and now lie desolate and ruin his own house be of stone both in good form and fair but his great man build not for want of inheritance but as far as I have yet see live in tent or house worse than a cottager yet where the king affect as at agra because it be a city erect by he the building be as be report fair and of carve stone in revenue doubtless he exceed either Turk or persian or any eastern prince reason of his great revenue and wealth the sum I dare not name but the reason all the land be he no man have a foot he maintain by rent give of signory count by horse all that be not mechanic and the revenue give to some be a german prince estate second all man rise to great and great signiory as they rise in favour which be only get by frequent present both rich and rare last he heir all man good that die inheritance as well those that gain by industry as merchant as those that live by he and take all their money leave the widow and daughter what he please give the son some little signiory and put they anew to the world who father die worth two or three million but I be fall by my purpose not to interrupt your with th^se presume of your pardon I will only say a little of the court and so pass to that be more necessary the king sit out in three several place thrice every day except some occasion prevent he court custom a hour at noon to see his elephant fight at four till five to entertain all comer to be see and worship nine till midnight with his principal man in more familiarity be below among they I go to present myself at the second of these I come into a court full of base people and at a rail which shut they out right against the king I be stay in his sight to demand audience only a ceremony so he send his principal officer to bring i up he sit in a place like a theatre above where the king sit in a play and I be conduct four step up just under he like a stage all on carpet my self and all his great man be actor the common-people below gaze on he prevent i with speech call the king his brother and that I must consequent be welcome for the barbarous custom of kneel and knock the ground with the head which he never pardon neither the turk nor persian ambassador he require not but at my first motion grant i all liberty of my own manner and as all say he never use such respect to a live man all the policy of his state be to keep the great about he or to pay they afar off liberal policy and polity disposition no counsel but every officer answer to the king apart his duty he be of countenance cheerful and not proud in nature but by habit and custom for at night he be very affable and full of gentle conversation I believe your be weary of he and will pass into Persia from whence we receive for truth that the sophy have distress Ormus by take away the water and provision of the main persian news at Ormus they be in great necessity so that if the sophy have any help of ship to take it he may be persuade to put it into our hand to turn his silk from the passage of his enemy the Turk a matter of infinite consequence for if I be to open these trade I will show important difference for the kingdom of England but it will require large discourse he have make late a road with fire and sword upon the poor georgian christian and subdue they and be of a spirit natural unpeacefull he prepare for the conquest of Samercand as his end but pretend the punish of a valiant race of tartar call vsbiques between he and his desire he smite off his elder son head with his own hand return from Georgia and have by sharp edict banish all portugal all his dominion Vsbique^ never be such opportunity to discharge the Portugal from all these coast our trade here and the dutch plantation below go^ have so shorten their return that half their galleon come not portugal those that do come bring new supply for the garrison but return so empty that the charge be but defray we have now twice beat a great Armado with few ship a armado that be appoint por castigar the word of one father to anoher and after to punish the mogoll for entertain we so that he have lose more in reputation which be his strength then in substance jesu^tes term but if his majesty will condescend that we shall assault they as they do we it will utter break they it be both the noble and safe part of a war to which we be subject at their pleasure then to defend always beside they make this use in report of we that the king of England be so afraid of the king of Portugal islander that he dare not warrant a assault but only to defend what they say of the king and our nation be so slanderous that further east the dutch have take many town and play the mole better than he and have beat he in many sea-conflict he be decline on all side and a little weight on his head now lay will sink he it be a matter of great consequence for future time and though I have no hope I propound it to your to make what use seem best to your wisdom I have reward enough if I have pardon for my talkativeness but it be obedience to your and not presumption who wisdom and sincerity I do ever honour to who I shall be happy to be tie in all humble service THOMAS roe Asmere the seven and twenty of january 1615. another letter to the same lord date the thirty of October 1616. may it please your etc. the frailty of passage between this place and England especial of my last letter that wander over land and rather go upon discovery then business advise i to send your transcript of they not that there be contain any matter worthy your honour leisure but see you command i to wri^e the relation of one to another will somewhat clear the whole discourse for break and undependant piece and fragment have little light in they less pleasure and no profit so that he that will do any thing in this matter shall write a history and take it somewhat high to show the beginning and growth of this empire what fortune and what impediment it have overcome what friendship it have need and effect the ambition and division in the present state that like impostume lie now hide but threaten to break out into the rend and ruin of the whole by bloody war the practice subtlety and carriage of faction and court-secret false call wisdom wherein I assure your they be pregnant and excel in all that art which the devil can teach they craft and be behind none in wicked craft some passage whereof be not unworthy nor unpleasant to relate their religion suffer by the king and practise without envy or contention on any part how the portugal have creep into this kingdom jesuitical beast and by what corner they get in the entrance of the jesuit their entertainment privilege practice end and the growth of their church whereof they sing in Europe so loud praise and glorious success last the arrival of our nation on this coast their fortunate or bless victory over their enemy that not only seek how to possess these quarter by themselves and to forbid all other that which nature have leave free as if God have create the world for they only but also to abuse this people as if they alone be the son of war they only triumph and that all other europeans strike sail to their fortune and valour which now be bring so low in value that it be grow into a proverb one Portugal to three moor proverb of english and Portugal one Englishman to three portugal so that the best foundation of their greatness be absolute mine and blow up and our reception here stand on the same ground from which we have cast they down which be fear a honourable but uncertain base of so great a charge for if either the enemy once prevail or other misfortune happen to we our welcome shall turn round with it the profit and fitness of this trade for England while it may stand not only respect the company now interest but the state whether the commonwealth in general lose or win for often in traffic private man prosper by detriment of the republic as in all trade that maintain vanity and sin this work or method be worthy some pain and as will require a good judgement and much time both which be want to i so it will not be unprofitable to read nor without some pleasure to view and meditate the diverse operation and work of God the variable constitution and disposition of man and all thing under their government but see nature and conveniency have deny i ability and leisure to set upon so great a labour I have choose one branch only to treat of to your without other method then by way of bare relation which be the estate of the church here as well christians as of all other diffuse sect of infidel but to continue as in a parenthesis the advice I give your honour in my last of our constitution here and the news of Persia brief I stand on very fickle term though in extraordinary grace with the king who be gentle soft and good of disposition yet on point and dispute with a insolent and proud son of he the prince ambition into who hand he have remit all power which he be neither worthy nor able to manage he be lord of the port and by his folly give i much travel so sordid ambitious that he will not have i acknowledge his father king nor make any address nor deliver any present nor compliment of honour but to himself which I will never yield to and so I maintain my credit by confidence on the privilege of my quality and the king goodness yet a ambassador in this court that know himself and will not wrong his master shall often win enemy than friend their pride endure no term of equality especial where there be no other honour nor title but what be measure by expense so that to maintain one that shall in his equipage and life hold proportion with his quality in this court will cost much more than the profit of the trade can spare and he that live under it wrong his degree and slide into contempt I do my utmost to hold up with little poor mean but my opinion be a mean instrument will better effect business of traffic that may creep and show and suffer some affront which my rank may not endure and I find the king of Spain will never send any ambassador hither out of greatness know they be not receive with proportionable honour and with my small experience I can do the company better service by my return in advice how to govern the whole concern Persia the Turk have only yet make a bravado and perform little persian and turkish war the passage be stop and the king draw his army into his border to defend himself and find no great work take occasion to take in by force a revolt nation to the east of Babylon the people be call coord how by the ancient or the true geographical situation of their country I be yet ignorant in sir Robert Shirley by a ill passage to Goa lose the opportunity of the fleet for Lisbon and be stay there another year so that negotiation will not be so speedy advance as I fear sir Robert Shirley we shall have breath to work upon it according as it shall be requisite in the judgement of your honour in England or at least of the merchant who it first regard here be arrive a persian ambassador with little news it be nine month since his departure from Spahan he bring many rich present and d^d such obeisance prostrate himself and knock the ground with his head that I believe his master will not accept of it except as be suppose he be command to use a^l obsequiousness and to flatter this mon. of greatness his errand be to procure money for aid against the Turk in which kind he find often liberal supply and succour which be not feel from this sea of treasure although to mediate a peace for the king of Decan be the pretence who protection the persian take to heart jealous of the increase of this empire yet I doubt not he will be satisfy with silver and suffer his ally to be overcome he be not allow so good rank nor presence in court as I which get it by dispute and have keep it by contention to the displeasure of some neither do the king do so much honour in reception of his master letter not vouchsafe once to give the persian any title of majesty as of my sovereign lord which not a little content i other advantage he have of language neighbourhood and acquaintance which be defect but no fault of i the king be now ready to march towards Decan who army be command by his son and we with much toil shall hang in the skirt our fleet arrive this year 1616. in the way meet the admiral Carrick of Lisbon find for Goa about Mo^alia a island in twelve degree north latititude and hale she after the courtesy of the sea be requite with disgraceful language and five great shot which occasion apprehend she be fight with three day at last put ashore and fire herself she be of burden fifteen hundred ton and by pregnant circumstance the expect viceroy send for Goa perish in she which be one of the great disgrace and loss that ever happen to the portugal in these part the reward of their own insolency in this fight the chief commander of the english be slay and the new declare maim little other loss thus your have some touch of our affair and I will fall upon my purpose of the church with your favour and patience before the inundation of Tamerlane the great the nine ancestor of this king Tamerlane these country be govern by diverse petty gentile prince not know any religion but worship according to their several idolatry all sort of creature the descendant of he bring in the knowledge of Mahomet but impose it upon none by the law of conquest leave conscience at liberty so that these natural from the circumcision which come in with the moor call they mogul or chief of the circumcise among the moor there be many strict mahometant that follow Ally his son-in-law religion mogoll why so call and other new rise prophet which have their xeriffe and priest their mosque religious votary wash praying and ceremony infinite and for penitentiary no heresy in the world can show so strange example nor brag of such voluntary poverty punishment suffering and chastisement as these all which be esteem holy man but of a mingle religion not upright with their great prophet the gentile be of more sort some valiant good soldier drink wine eat hogs-flesh but worship the figure of a beast some that will not touch that flesh which be not holy by imputation^ other that will not eat any thing wherein ever there be any blood nor kill the vermin that assault they nor drink in the cup with those that do superstitious in wash and most earnest in their profession but all of they ascribe a kind of divinity to the river of Ganges at which at one season of the year four or five hundred thousand meet and cast in gold and silver for oblation in like manner to a pig head in a church near this city and to all live cow and to some other beast and kind these have their synagogue and holy man prophet witch soothsayer and all other the devil imposture the molaes of Mahomet know somewhat in philosophy and the mathematics be great astrologer and can talk of Aristotle Euclyde Auerroes and other ^ the learned tongue be arab. Ecbarsha in this confusion they continue until the time of Ecbarsha father of this king without any noise of Chrictian profession who be a prince by nature just and good inquisitive after novelty curious of new opinion and that excel in many virtue especial in piety and reverence towards his parent call in three jesuite from Goa who chief be jeronimo xavier a after their arrival he hear they reason and dispute with much content on he and hope on their part and cause xavy to write a book in defence of his own profession against both moor and gentile which finish he read over nightly cause some part to be discuss and fina^^y grant they his letter patent to build to preach teach convert and to use all their rite and ceremony as free and ample as in Rome bestow on they mean to erect their church and place of devotion so that in some few city they have get rather templum then in this grant he give grant to all sort of people to become christian that will even to his court or own blood profess that it shall be no cause of disfavour from he here be a fair beginning to a forward spring of a lean and barren harvest Ecbar^^ha himself continue a mahometan yet he begin to make a breach into the law consider that Mahomet be but a man a king as he be and therefore reverence he think he may prove as good a prophet himself this defection of the king spread not far a certain outward reverence detain he and so he die in the formal profession of his Sect. ghe-^angier-sha his son the present king be the issue of this new fancy and never circumcise breed up without any religion at all continues so to this hour and be a * * understand it in general sense ^or one not setl^d in any religion of all and therefore of none atheist sometime he will make profession of Moor but always observe the holiday and do all ceremony with the gentile too he be content with all religion only he love none that change but fall into his father conceit have dare to enter far therein and to profess himself for the main of his religion to be a great prophet than Mahomet and have form to himself a new law mingle of all which many have accept with such superstition that they will not eat till they have salute he in the morning for which purpose he come at the sun rise to a window open to a great plain before his house where multitude attend he and when the moor about he speak of Mahomet he will soothe they but be glad when any one will break out against he of Christ he never utter any word unreverent nor any of those sect which be a wonderful secret work of God truth and worthy observation concern the new plant christian church he confirm and enlarge all their privilege every night for one year spend two hour in hear disputation often cast out doubtful word of his conversion but to wicked purpose of this see before in the journal of master Hawkins and Finch and the rather to give some hope he deliver many youth into the hand of Francisco Corsie now resident here to teach they to read and write Portugal and to instruct they in human learning and in the law of Christ and to that end he keep a school some year to which the king send two prince his brother son who be bring up in the knowledge of God and his son our bless saviour be solemn baptize in the church of agra with great pomp be carry first up and down all the city on elephant in triumph and this by the king express order who often will examine they in their progression and seem much content in they this make many bend towards the same way doubt his majesty intention other that know he better suppose he suffer this in policy to reduc^ these child into hate among the moor for their conversion of who consist the strength of his estate but all man fail of his purpose which be thus discover when these and some other child be settle as be think in christian religion and have learn some principle thereof as to marry but one wife not to be couple with infidel the king set the boy to demand some portugal wife of the jesuit who think it only a idle motion of their own brain chide they and suspect no more but that be the end of their conversion to get a woman for the king and no care take the two prince come to the jesuit and surrender up their cross and all other right profess that they will be no long christian because the king of Portugal send they no present nor wife according as they expect the padre see this begin to doubt there be more in that then the boy reveal especial see their confidence that have cast off the awe of pupil and examine the matter have it confess the king command they they refuse to accept the cross answer they have be give by his majesty order and they will not take notice from boy of any such surrender but bid they desire the king to send some of those who by a kind of order be to deliver all his majesty command who mouth be by privilege sufficient authority and then they will accept they hope and know the king nature that he will not discover himself to any of his officer in this poor plot the boy return with this message which enrage the king but he be desirous to dissolve the school and to withdraw the youth without noise he bid they call the jesuit to the woman door where by a lady he receive the order and without take any notice since of any thing his kinsman recall who be now absolute moor without any taste of their first faith and so the frui^ of all these h^pes be vanish and I can find by good search that there be one Christian real and orderly convert nor make the profession except some few that have be baptize for money and be maintain by the jesuit of which sort there will be more convert how poor but that they find the deceit and can endure the burden this be the truth of all their brag and labour and the full growth of their church here but that your may a little more understand the fashion of the king and the jesuit proceed I will make you one or two merry and late relation and either say he be the most impossible man in the world to to be convert or the most easy for he love to hear and have so little religion yet that he can well abide to have any decide not many day since the jesuit house and church be burn the crucifix remain safe miracle which underhand be give out for a miracle and much talk of ^ that will be content any use may be make of a accident to enlarge the name of Christ hold my peace but the jesuit suspect I will not agree to the miracle disavow it to i and make it a matter of reason why it be not burn insinuate that the moor have catch up this opinion of miracle without his consent or suggestion though he confess he be glad of the occasion but the king who never let slip any opportunity of new talk or novelty call the jesuit and question with he of it he answer ambiguous whereupon his majesty demand dispute of religion and miracle if he do not desire to convert he and receive full answer reply you speak of your great miracle and of many do by you in the name of your prophet if you will cast the crucifix and picture of Christ into a fire before i if it burn not I will become a christian the jesuit refuse the trial as unjust answer that God be not tie to the call of man that it be a sin to tempt he that he wrought miracle according to his own council but offer to enter the fire himself for proof of his faith which the king refuse here arise a great dispute begin by the prince a most stiff mahometan and ha^er of all christian that it be reasonable to try our religion by this offer but withal if the crucifix do burn then that the jesuit shall be oblige to render Moor he urge example of miracle profess to be do for less purpose then the conversion of so mighty a king and in case of refusal of the trial speak scornful of Christ jesus the king undertake the argument and defend our saviour to be a prophet by comparison of his work with those of their absurd saint instance the raise of the dead which never any of they do the prince reply to give sight to one natural blind be as great a miracle this question be press hot on both side a three man to end the controversy interpose that both the father and the son have reason for their opinion for that to raise a dead body to life must needs be confess to be the great miracle ever do but that to give sight to a eye natural blind be the same work for that a blind eye be dead sight be the life thereof therefore he that give sight to a blind eye do as it be raise it up from death thus this discourse end and so in wisdom shall I but I can leave out a apish miracle which be act before this king which the jesuite will not acknowledge nor own as their practice only of the truth there be no doubt a strange story of a ape a juggler of Bengala of which craft there be many and rare bring to the king a great ape that can as he profess divine and prophesy and to this beast by some sect be much divinity ascribe the king take from his finger a ring and cause it to be hide under the girdle of one among a dozen other boy and bid the ape divine who go to the right child and take it out but his majesty somewhat more curious cause in twelve several paper in persian letter to be rewrite the name of twelve lawgiver as Moses Christ Mahomet Ally and other and shuffle they in a bag bid the beast divine which be the true law who put in his foot take out the inscribe of Christ this amaze the king who suspect that the ape master can read persian and may assist he write they anew in court character * * court character be such as he only and his near minister use in mystery of state unknown to all other and present they the second time the ape be constant find the right and kiss it whereat a principal officer grow angry tell the king it be some imposture desire he may have leave to make the lot anew and offer himself to punishment if the ape can beguile he he write the name put only eleven into the bag and keep the other in his hand the beast search but refuse all the king command to bring one the beast tear they in fury and make sign the true lawgivers name be not among they the king demand where it be and he run to the nobleman and catch he by the hand in which be the paper inscribe with the name of Christ jesus the king be trouble and keep the ape yet this be act in public before thousand but where the abuse be or whether there be any I judge not only one of the jesuit scholar run to he with open mouth profess the king have a ape a good Christian of this accident the jesuit make great account to i they slight it except the truth of the fact which be not unlike one of their own game your will pardon i all this folly to interrupt you with so much and so useless tattle I shall be glad to remove where I may learn and practice better matter but I can repent my journey it have make i learn and know my god and myself better than ever I shall have learn either among the pleasure of England he have wonderful show i his mercy and teach i his judgement his goodness be glorify and magnify for ever I humble desire your to present my name I dare not say my service before his majesty my lord and master it be enough for i if I be not forget I shall never merit nor aspire the employment of his favour but I will pay my vow and pray for his majesty that he may live a happy and glorious long life to the comfort of his church and enjoy the crown of crown prepare by the king of king for those that love he wherein I have fail to your honour or by my own weakness your will measure by this rule and you will pardon the assume so high a word as friendship with this interpretation which as I be bold to profess I will be ready to demonstrate by obedience to your command thomas roe Asmere the thirty of October 1616. a letter of sir THOMAS roe to another right honourable councillor if my last send your honour by the way of Aleppo be miscarry this present discourse will be undependant and obscure which cause i to send a transcript that you may command from sir Thomas smith how far that design of bring in the Spaniard by Shirley have proceed and my poor opinion that will inform with the present estate of the war there in preparation what have succeed your honour shall receive that Shirley be stay at Goa by fall short eight day of his passage this last year where he be entertain with honour and maintenance which make i judge his offer and negotiation be gracious the Shabas yet so depend on that hope that he continue the prohibition of exportation of silk through Turkey some few day since I receive advise from Spahan that Shirley have write to the king that with much joy and ready embracement he have so far proceed with the viceroy of Goa in a conclusion of the league as his commission have power that he be ready to embark for Spain to accomplish it full if it proceed and take effect I can make it evident that it wi^^ revive and strengthen all the ruin and decay of the portugal in the indies and make all other waver prince accept they only I will not press the consequence where it will be so full understand the * * the persian Armi^ be 18^0^0 strong the turk double Shabas be in the field at Salmas a village indifferent to the way to Tauris or Gordgeston attend the turk general who with a monstrous army if it be not increase by fame be encamp at Argerom irresolute which of these two attempt he shall begin be not above five day from the one and ten from the other but these great army will dissolve of themselves and I be of opinion there will be no great effect of they the winter approach and that they will treat a peace which the Turk will never embrace but with the open of the trade and liberty of ancient commerce which though the persian yield unto yet if the Spaniard accept his offer the liberty give the Turk will be useless for that the silk shall come down to Ormus but I hope your honour will prevent it God have provide you leisure the king of Persia late inquire anew after the english for he be indifferent what christian have the trade so that the grand-signior lose it for his first offer to the Spaniard will take his truce and after we may have the leave we have send to jasque a ship from our port of surat with cloth and english good to make the first offer of a residence and to get a kind of a possession for where it be free to refuse or accept we it will be now a injury to turn we out be come upon assurance of his letter receive by i but though I do not consent to the go of this ship because I know both the port unfit the good unuendible and prejudicial to the great expectation and promise which make i fear the Shabas will despise we and judge we by this beginning and so with the more roundness either conclude with the Spaniard or make peace with the Turk for his design be either whole to divert the trade or nothing yet I will mend it as well as I can by the help of a ambassador late arrive at this court who as I suppose be come to get aid of money in which kind he often find liberal relief and this king of India may better spare then any monarch of the east I have send the copy the advantage to be make of it in England be if I may give my opinion that when sir Robert Shirley shall arrive in Spain and negotiate his employment the ambassador of his majesty resident may crave audience and produce the letter grant to we and urge our possession of the port and therefore require in the name of his majesty that in this new contract either the english may be comprehend or at least that nothing pass on the part of the king of Spain prejudicial to the subject of his majesty nor contrary to the amity of the two nation which if the Spaniard shall enterprise to the expulsion of we it be in my opinion the trade be in a free kingdom grant we a just cause of such a breach as may produce letter of mart and repris^ll in all the eastern part to right ourselves I will in the mean time amaze the persian with as many doubt as I can infuse into he of the and hope of we in this court which be now in the field towards the conquest of Decan with a effeminate army sitter to be a spoil than a terror to enemy I shall so far effect my employment as to confirm our trade and people on equal ^ to the inhabitant and bear subject who suffer themselves abuse of governor which can never be remedy but by a whole change of the regiment and form of dominion for the constancy I will no far give my word than our own prosperity and the other fear and the portugal feebleness shall confirm to we the trade be profitable and fit for England but no way understand by the company how to effect it at best advantage and yet we have do little but discover error I have no power to meddle in that but if I be at home ten day I will do they better service than here in ten year to prove and demonstrate every particular and circumstance be rather the subject of a book then of a letter but I will do my part every way according to my ability and judgement faithful and honest beside though they may think I speak for my own end I assure your honour it be not sit to keep a ambassador in this Court I have shuffle better out and escape and avoid affront and slavish custom clear than ever (@) do I be allow rank above the per^^an but he outstrip i in reward this master lye^^eere we but his majesty command i to do nothing unworthy the honour of a christian king and no reward can humble i to any baseness I see what the per^ian do and suffer I know one that will creep and sue may effect more business than I for every little matter can trouble the king and his great man be more proud and expect that from i I can give they the king of Spain can never be draw to send any and their experience have teach they that beside he shall not be receive in honour correspondent to his quality they know a easy way to effect their end I shall not return a rich man and then many will condemn i for want of providence or wit to get it but they know not the indies it grow here in as rough way as in Europe I will trust to the company and to my merit I can write your honour many remarkable accident in this government and kingdom all the policy and wicked craft of the devil be not practice alone in Europe here be enough to be learned or to be despise but you have not leisure to entertain so foreign discourse that part which may be worth know as the proceed of the jesuit the growth of their church and the commixture of this kingdom with Europe by trade and the ally it embrace if I find not leisure to put they into method I will weary your honour with they by a fireside in break piece the Portugal pursue we here with virulent hatred but God do chastise he and his pride see it not the admiral Gallion find for Goa a vessel of fifteen hundred arm with six hundred man fall among our fleet a small ship hale she after the custom of the sea which she requite with silence except of her ordnance the commander of our fleet Benjamin joseph come up with she m. joseph slay and demand reason but be return scorn so that he begin a fight in which he lose his life a new commission be open Humphrey Pepwell succeed he to his place and resolution with the loss of his eye and other hurt fight until the Gallion have her mast shoot run ashore on Comara a island inhabit by moor in the latitude of eleven degree one and fifty minute where the general don Emanuel de Meneses with three hundred escape but fire the ship she be very rich and the succour of India this year her companion be lose at sea and on the fourteen of Octob. there be no news of any of they which be three ship this be the great disaster and disgrace ever befall they for they never miss their fleet in September nor lose any vessel as this which be report invincible and without supply they perish utter the islander rifle the general and all his follower and they be since arrive at Goa naked and bare in the Gallion of mosambiques which have likewise be danger by a Hollander but the nearness of the port save she all these consider i think the heaven conspire the fall of the Portugal in this quarter if his majesty will be please to bend only his royal countenance but I shall I hope return and not expect to see it effect in my time I will entreat your honour to preserve my name in the king memory not for any worthiness but a humble desire to serve he and that you will be please to accept of my endeavour and esteem i such as I be one that love and honour you and that will pray to God as the best expression of my affection to increase you in all worthy honour and to bless you with his holy spirit your honour humble faithful servant THOMAS roe I humble desire your honour to do i the favour to thank sir Thomas smith in my behalf that he may find my gratitude to my friend from the camp of the great mogoll emperor of India November 30. 1616. part of a letter to the company of the East-India date the three and twenty of November 1616. my honourable friend I receive your letter on the twelve of October 1616. from the Charles safe arrive with four ship at the bar of surat the six and twenty of the former month of what pass at Sea I doubt not you will receive ample relation only a little difference in the report of our fleet and the portugal I will mention that we begin the fight and that no viceroy be send this year a ancient soldier don Emanuel de Meneses that have twice be general of their force report of the fight be in the admiral who be beat run herself ashore at Mosambique and be now arrive at Goa this tale hang very ill together for that I know they first make five shot and that it be impossible they can pass from Aguzesia to Mosambique in a Canoa or that the inhabitant have rob they dare carry they into their strength or that all this can be effect and news of their arrival come from Goa in so little time so that my judgement be they make their relation as near we as they can and be loath to confess truth that either all perish or the viceroy which be the great loss and dishonour ever happen to they in India I shall not need to write you any long discourse of your affair nor my opinion for that in a continue journal I have set down all passage and send you the copy of my letter to your factory wherein many point be dispute and open from both which you may make bect your own collection and judgement for in they casual all your business be handle and discuss at full and it may be collect into such a method as you may sit at home and see it at once but because some point in my last letter I follow at my first come at other report which since I find vain and frivolous and other perhaps be unresolued in my general discourse I will run over the material point with brevity for I extreme desire that you once understand the constitution of this trade how to govern and settle it that by variety of fond opinion you be not counsel to unnecessary charge nor fall into gross error and damage concern the aid the mogoll or coast his subject into the red sea it be now useless yet I make offer of your affection but when they need not a courtesy they regard it as a dog do dry bread when his belly be full the king have peace with the portugal and will never make a constant war except first we displant they then his greatness will step in for ashare of the benefit that dare not partake of the peril when they have peace they scorn our assistance and speak as loud as our canon if war oppress they they dare not put out under any protection nor will pay for it you must remove from you all thought of any other than a trade at their port wherein if you can defend yourselves leave they to their fortune you can never oblige they by any benefit and they will soon fear you then love you your residence you need not doubt so long as you tame the Portugal therefore avoid all other charge as unnecessary that resist * * understand this so long as they by force and arm oppose the english proceed and sock to supplant they as hitherto not he he only can prejudice you for a fort at my first arrival I receive it as very necessary but experience teach i we be refuse it to our advantage if he will offer i ten I will not accept one first where the river be commodious the country be barren and untraded the passage to part better plant so full of thief that the king authority avail not and the strength of the hill assure they in that life if it have be fit for trade the natural will have choose it for they feel the incommodity of a barren haven and it be argument enough of some secret inconvenience that they make not use of it but if it be safe without the wall yet be it not a easy work to divert trade and to draw the resort of merchant from their accustom mart especial for our commodity which be buy by parcel and can be call staple second the charge be great than the trade can leave for to maintain a garrison will eat the profit it be not a hundred man can keep it for the Portugal if he once see you undertake that course will set his rest upon it to supplant you war and traffic be incompatible by my consent you shall no way engage yourselves but at sea where you be like to gain as often as to lose it be the beggar of the Portugal notwithstanding his many rich residence and territory that he keep soldier that spend it yet his garrison be mean he never profit by the indies since he defend they observe this well it have be also the error of the dutch who seek plantation here by the sword they turn a wonderful stock they prowl in all place they possess some of the best yet their dead pay consume all the gain let this be receive as a rule that if you will profit seek it at sea and in quiet trade for without controversy it be a error to affect garrison and land war in India if you make it only against the natural I will agree to make it for they they be not worth it and you shall be very wary how to engage your reputation in it you can so easy make a fair retreat as a^ onset one disaster will either discredit you or interresse you in a war of extreme charge and doubtful event beside a action so subject to chance as war be most unfit undertake and with most hazard when the remoteness of place for supply succour and counsel subject it to irrecoverable loss for that where be most uncertainty remedy shall be so much the near to occur to all occasion at sea you may take and leave your design be not publish the road of Swally and the port of surat be fit for you in all the mogul territory I have weigh it well and deliver you that shall never be disprove you need no more it be not number of port factory and residence that will profit you they will increase charge but not recompense it the inconveniency of one respective to your sale and to the commodity of inuestants and the well employment of your servant be all needful a port to secure your ship and a fit place to unlade will not be find together the road at Swally during the season be as safe as a pond surat Cambaya baroach and Amadavar be better trade then all India and seat commodious the incovenience be the portugal at sea and the land of good to meet with which first you must bring to pass that your lade be ready by the end of September at your port which may be effect by a stock beforehand or by take up money for three month and so you may discharge and lade in one and depart for excellent season for England and the enemy shall not have time with force to offend you who will be new arrive and if the preparation be ancient we shall know it for the second to land good without danger of frigate and to save the carriage over land you must send a pinnace of threescore ton with ten piece that draw but seven or eight foot water to pass up the river between Swally and surat and so your good will be safe and in your own command to the custome-house-key and it will a little awe the town she may proceed after according to your appointment the commodity you s^ll pass lest in that quarter the good you seek be principal indigo and cloth no one place be so fit for both and the less inconvenience be to be choose of this you shall gather more at large my opinion and reason in my journal and discourse to your factor perhaps some of they will contradict it but I be not deceive nor have private end to keep factory to employ and advance friend the place and number of servant I have deliver my judgement in and can manifest the past error but not mend they Sindu be possess by the portugal or if it be free be no fit than surat nor safe as it be it will be more subject to peril your factor send i four or five clause out of your commission that concern Persia a fort a plantation in Bengala all which they know be not of use with no other purpose proposition or resolution they will acquaint i they can abide I shall understand or direct they if they resolve of any thing in their opinion for your profit and send to i I will effect the court part but you will find in my letter and journal how they use i which doubtless at first be sow by some jealousy of you which will cost you dear for the settle your traffic here I doubt not to effect any reasonable desire my credit be sufficient with the king and your force will always bind he to constancy it will not need so much help at court as you suppose a little countenance with the discretion of your factor will with easy charge return you most profit but you must alter your stock let not your servant deceive you cloth lead tooth quicksilver be dead commodity and will never drive this trade you must succour it by change and you will find my opinion discuss in letter I have this year past many difficulty by the perverseness of sultan Caronne lord of surat but by God direction I have overcome they article of treaty on equal term I can effect want of present disgrace i but yet by piece I have get as much as I desire at once I have recover all bribe extortion debt make and take before my time till this day or be least at honourable composition but when I deliver the next gift to the mogoll in the prince absence I will set on a new for a formal * * that which follow as other letter al^o I have willing omit as not so fit for vulgar reader be mystery of commerce contract etc. I have hear that sir Thomas roe at his return desire the great magor or mogoll his letter of commendation to his majesty easy obtain that request but find he very scrupulous where to set his seal lest if under he shall disparage himself if over it may cause distaste to the king his resolution and prevention therefore be this to send the letter unseal and the great seal itself that so his majesty may according to his own pleasure affix it the seal be silver the type and form whereof contain only the mogul genealogy from tamerlane in several circle with the english translation I have here add the description of the great mogul seal chap. 17 a letter of Mr. THOMAS Coryat which travail by land from jerusalem to the court of the great mogul write to Mr. l. Whitaker to which be add piece of two other to entertain you with a little indian-odcombian mirth most dear and belove friend master l. w. from the court of the most mighty monarch call the great mogul resident in the town of Asmere in the oriental INDIA 1615. cordial salutation in the author of salvation JESUS CHRIST where I write unto you last I remember well even from Zobah as the prophet SAMVEL call it 2. book chap. 8. vers. 3. that be Aleppo the principal Emporium of all Syria or rather of the orient world but when in truth I have forget for I keep not copy of my letter as I see most of my countryman do in whatsoever place of the world I find they howbeit if my conjecture do not much fail i I may affirm that it be about fifteen month si^ce about a month after I return unto Aleppo from jerusalem after which time I remain there three month long and then depart therehence in a caravan into Persia pass the noble river Euphrates the chief of all th^t irrigated paradise wherehence as from their original the three other river be derive about four day journey beyond Aleppo on the further side of which gen. ^ 10 I enter Mesopotamia alias Chaldea for the E^phrates in that place disterminate^h Syria and Mesopotamia there-hence I have two daye^ journey to of the chaldean gen. 11.28 where Abraham be bear a very delicate and pleasant city there I remain four day but I can see no part of the ruin of the house where that faithful servant of God be bear though I much desire it from thence I have four day journey to the river Tigris which I pass also but in the same place where I cross it I find it so shallow that it reach no high th^n the calf of my leg for I wade over it afoot now I well perceive by my ocular experience that Chal^ea be name Mesopotamia for that it be enclose with the foresay river I enter Armenia the great after that the low and reside six day in the metropolis thereof heretofore call E^batana the summer seat of Cyrus his court a city eft soon mention in the scripture now call Tauris more woeful ruin of a city save that of Troy and cyzic^m in Anatolia never do my eye behold when I serious contemplate those (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) the doleful testimony of the turkish deu^stations I call to mind Ovi^s verse and that of HESIOD (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) from that I have two day journey to a city that in Strabos time be call Arsacia in the high now Casbin once the royal seat of the tartarian prince four day journey from the caspian Sea from Casbin I have three and twenty day to Spahan in Par^hia the place of residence of the persian King but at my be there he be in the country of Gurgistan ransack the poor christian there with great hostility with fire and Sword there I remain two month and so with a caravan travel into the eastern India pass four month and odd day in my travel betwixt that through part of the true Persia and a large tract of the noble and renown India and the goodly city of lah^r in In^ia one of the large city of the whole universe for it contain at the least sixteen mile in compass and exceed Constantinople itself in greatness but a dozen day before I come to lahor I pass the famous river Indus which be as broad again as our Thames at London and have his original out of the mountain Caucasus so much ennoble by the ancient both poet and historiographer greek and La^ine which Plato for curiosity sake in his travel of these part go to see it lie not far from that upon the confine of Scyth^a now call Ta^taria myself also conceive some hope of see it before my final farewell of India I have almost forget one memorable matter to impart unto you about the middle of the way betwixt Spa^a^ a^d lahor just about the frontier of Persia and India I meet sir Robert Shirley and his lady travel from the court of the mogul where they have be very gracious receive and enrich with present of great value to the king of Per^^a's court so gallant furnish with all necessary for their travail that it be a great comfort unto i to see they in such a flourish estate there do he show i to my singular contentment both my book neat keep and have promise i to show they especial my itinerary to the persian king and to interpret unto he some of the principal matter in the turkish tongue to the end I may have the more gracious access unto he after my return thither for through Persia I have determine by God he^pe to return to Aleppo beside other rarity that they carry with they out of India they have two elephant and eight antlop which be the first that ever I see but afterward when I come to the mogul court I see great store of they these they mean to present to the persian King both he and his l^dy use i with singular respect especial his lady who bestow forty shilling upon i in persian money and they seem to exult for joy to see i have promise i to bring i in good grace with the persian king and that they will induce he to bestow some princely benefit upon i this I hope will be partly occasion by my book for he^ be such a jocund prince that he will not be mean delight with diverse of my facetious hieroglyphic if they be true and genuine expound unto he from the famous city of lahor I have twenty day journey to another goodly city call agra through such a delicate and even Tract of ground as I never see before and doubt whether the like be to be find within the whole circumference of the habitable World another thing also in this way be no less memorable than the plainness of the ground a row of tree on each side of this way where people due travel extend itself from th^ townes-end of lahor to the townes-end of agra the most incomparable show of that kind that ever my eye saruey likewise whereas there be a mountain s^me ten day journey betwixt lahor and agra but very near ten mile out of the way on the left hand the people that inhabit that mountain observe a custom very strange that all the brother of any family have but one and the selfsame wife so that one woman sometime do serve six or seven man the like whereof I remember I have read in Strabo concern the arabian that inhabit be a very great city and the place where the mogoll do always save within these two year keep his court but in every respect much inferior to lahor from thence to the mogul court I have ten day journey at a town call Asmere where I find a cape merchant of our englishman with nine more of my countryman resident there upon term of negotiation for the right worshipful company of merchant in London that trade for east India I spend in my journey betwixt jerusalem and this mogul court fifteen month and odd day all which way I traverse a foot but with diverse pair of shoe have be such a propateticke I will not call myself Peripatetic because you know it signify one that make a perambulation about a place (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) signify to walk about that be a walker forward on foot as I doubt whether you ever hear of the like in your life for the total way betwixt jerusalem and the mogul court contain two thousand and seven hundred english mile my whole perambulation of this Asia the great be like to be a passage of almost six thousand mile by that time that in my return back through Persia afterward also by Babylon and Niniveh I shall come to cairo in Egypt and from that down the Nilus to Alexandria there to be one day by God help embark for Christendom a very immense dimension of ground now I be at the mogul court I think you will be glad to receive some narration thereof from i though succinct handle for I mean to be very compendious lest I shall otherwise preoccupate that pleasure which you may hereafter this reap by my personal relation thereof this present prince be a very worthy person by name Selim of which name I never read or hear of any more than one mahometan king which be sultan Selim of Constantinople that live about eighty year since the same that conquer jerusalem Damascus Aleppo cairo etc. add the same to the turkish empire he be fifty and three year of age his nativity day have be celebrate with wonderful pomp since my arrival here for that day he weigh himself in a pair of golden scale which by great chance I see the same day a custom that he observe most inviclable every year lay so much gold in the other scale as countervail the weight of his body and the same he afterward distribute to the poor he be of complexion neither white nor black but of a middle betwixt they I know not how to express it with a more expressive and significant then olive a olive colour his face present he be of a seemly composition of body of a stature little unequal as I guess not without ground of probability to i but much more corpulent than myself the extent of his dominion be very spacious be in circuit little less than four thousand english mile which very near answer the compass of the turk territory or if any thing be want in geometrical dimension of ground it be with a great pleonasme supply by the fertility of his soil and in th^se two thing he exceed the turk in the fatness as I have say of his land no part of the world yield a more fruitful vein of ground than all that which lie in his empire save that part of Babylonia where the terrestrial paradise once stand whereas a great part of the turk land be extreme barren and sterrile as I have observe in my peregrination thereof especial in Syria Mesopotamia and Armenia many large portion thereof be so wonderful fruitless that it bear no good thing at all or if any thing there second in the conjunction and union of all his territory together in one and the same goodly continent of India no prince have a foot of land within he but many parcel of the turk country be by a large distance of sea and otherwise divide asunder again in his revenue he exceed the Turk and the persian his neighbour by just half of his revenue and of all other thing of this state read captain Hawkins his relation who have better mean and judgement to know they the unicorn be no other but the rhinoceros for his revenue be forty million of crown of six shilling value by the year but the turk be no more than fifteen million as I be certain inform in Constantinople and the persian five million as I hear in Spahan it be say that he be uncircumcised wherein he differ from all the mahometan prince that ever be in the World he speak very reverent of our saviour call he in the indian tongue Ifazaret Eesa that be the great prophet jesus and all christian especial we English he use so benevolent as no mahometan prince the like he keep abundance of wild beast and that of diverse sort as lion elephant leopard bear antlop unicorn whereof two I have s^ene at his court the strange beast of the world they be bring hither out of the country of Bengala which be a kingdom of most singular fertility within the compass of his dominion about four month journey from this the midland part thereof be water by diverse channel of the famous Ganges which I have not as yet see but God will I mean to visit it before my departure out of this country the near part of it be not above twelve day journey from this Court the king present himself thrice every day without fail to his noble at the rise of the sun which he adore by the elevation of his hand at noon and at five of the clock in the evening but he stand in a room aloft alone by himself and look upon they from a window that have a embroider sumptuous coverture support with two silver pilaster to yield shadow unto he twice every week elephant fight before he the brave spectacle in the world many of they be thirteen foot and a half high and they seem to justle together like two little mountain and be they not part in the midst of their fight by certain firework they will exceed gore and cruentate one anchor by their murder tooth of elephant the king keep thirty thousand in his whole kingdom at a unmeasurable charge in feed of who and his lion and other beast he spend a incredible mass of money at the least ten thousand pound sterling a day I have rid upon a elephant since I come to this court determine one day by God leave to have my picture express in my next book sit upon a elephant the king keep a thousand woman for his own body whereof the chief which be his queen be call normal you may remember to relate this unto your friend that I will now mention as a matter very memorable I spend in my ten month travel betwixt Aleppo and the mogoll court but three pound sterling yet fare reasonable well every day victual be so cheap in some country where I travel that I oftentimes live competent for a penny sterling a day yet of that three pound I be cozen of no less than ten shilling sterling by certain lewd christian of the armenian nation so that indeed I spend but fifty shilling in my ten month travail I have be in a city in this country call Detee where Alexander the great join battle with Porus king of India and conquer he and in token of his victory erect a brass pillar which remain there to this day at this time I have many iron in the fire for I learn the persian turkish and arabian tongue have already get the italian I thank God I have be at the mogoll court three month already and be to tarry here by God holy permission five month long till I have get the foresay three tongue and then depart here-hence to the Ganges and after that direct to the persian court. your assure love friend till death THOMAS Coryate from the court of the great mogoll resident at the town of Asmere in the eastern India on Michaelmas day 1615. I do enjoy at this time as pancraticall and athletical a health as ever I do in my life and so have do ever since I come out of England save for three day in Constantinople where I have a ague which with a little let blood be clean banish the lord be humble thank for his gracious blessing of health that he have give unto i I be rob of my money both gold and silver but not all by reason of certain clandestine corner where it be place in a city call Diarbeck in Mesopotamia the turk country by a spahee as they call he that be one of the horseman of the great Turk but the occasion and circumstance of that misfortune will be too tedious to relate notwithstanding that loss I be not destitute of money I thank God since my arrival here there be send unto this king one of the rich present that I have hear to be send to any prince in all my life time it consist of diverse parcel one be elphant whereof there be one and thirty and of those two so glorious adorn as I never see the like nor shall see the like again while I live for they wear four chain about their body all of beat gold two chain about their leg of the same furniture for their buttock of pure gold two lion upon their head of the like gold the ornament of each amount to the value of almost eight thousand pound sterling and the whole present be worth ten of their leak as they call they a leak be ten thousand pound sterling the whole a hundred thousand pound sterling to the high seneschal of the right worshipful fraternity of sireniacall gentleman that meet the first Friday of every month at the sign of the meremaid in Bread-street in London give these from the court of the great mogoll resident at the town of Asmere in the eastern India right generous jovial and mercurial sirenaicke I have often read this greek proverb (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) that be one hand wash another and the latin this letter by m. Rogers be deliver to myself one mule scratch another by which the ancient signify that courtesy do unto friend aught to be requite with reciprocal office of friendship the serious consideration hereof do make i to call to mind that incomparable elegant safe-conduct which a little before my departure from England your fraternity with a general suffrage give i for the security of my future peregrination concinuate by the pleasant wit of that inimitable artisan of sweet elegancy the moiety of my heart and the quondam seneschal of the noble society master l. w. therefore since it be requisite that I shall repay somewhat for the same according to the law of humanity such a poor retribution as I send unto you from Aleppo the metrpolitan city of Syria by one master Henry allare of Kent my fellow-pilgrime there-hence to jerusalem I mean a plain epistle which I hope long since come unto your hand I have send unto you by a man no less dear unto i then the former one master Peter Rogers a kentish man also from the most famigerated region of all the east the ample and large India assure myself that because I be not able to requite your love with any essential gratulation other then verbal and scriptall you will as love entertain my poor letter be the certain manifestation of a ingenuous mind as if I shall send unto you the mineral riches or drug of the noble country think it no wonder I pray you that I have make no use in all this space since I leave my native country of the superexcellent commeate for I have spend all my time hitherto in the mahometan country and be like to spend three year more in these Musselman as they call they region of Asia after of Europe before I shall arrive in Christendom for this cause I leave it in Aleppo with my countryman there to receive it from they again after that I shall have end my indian and persian perambulation and there-hence to carry it once more to Constantinople and that by the way at Iconium nicaea Nicomedia and in the country of Anatolia a journey of forty day from that final through the heart of Greece by the city of Athens Thebes Corinth Lacedaemon thessalonica and to the city of ragouze heretofore Epidaurus so sacred for the image of Aesculapius in the country of Sclavonia once call illyricum from thence I have three day journey to the inestimable diamond set in the ring of the adriatic gulf as once I say in the first harangue that ever I make to prince Henry of bless memory translate since my departure from London from the terrestrial tabernacle to the celestial habitation venerous Venice the sovereign queen of the mare if the great jehovah shall be so propitious unto i as to grant i a prosperous arrival in that noble city I will there begin to show your safe conduct and to decantate yea and to blazon your praise for the same and after in every other place of note until I shall arrive in glorious London communicate it to the most polite with that the city will yield through which my laborious foot shall carry i it will be superuacaneous to commemorate unto you the almost incredible extent of land I traverse from jerusalem to the court of the great mogoll in India where I now reside with the variable region and province interjacent betwixt they and the manifold occurrence and observation of special work in this vast Tract for it will be such a fastidious discourse that it can not be well comprehend in a large sheet of paper but master Whitaker I hope I will not fail to import unto you in a few compendious relation which I have acquaint he with in a particular letter to himself of which if I shall have write again to you it will have prove the gentleman that bring this letter unto you be Pracher to the english merchant conversant at the court of the aforesaid mighty monarch in the town of Asmere in this eastern India and in diverse love office have be so kind unto i that I entreat your generosity to entertain he friendly for my sake to exhilarate he with the pure quintessence of the spanish french and rhenish grape which the mermaid yield and either one in the name of you all or else the total universality of the one after another to thank he hearty according to the quality of his merit farewell noble sirenaicke your generosity most oblige countryman ever to be command by you the hierosolymitan-syrian-mesopotamian-armenian-median-parthian-persian-indian legge-stretcher of Odcomb in Somerset THOMAS Coryate pray remember the recommendation of my dutiful respect to all those who name I have here express be the lover of virtue and literature and so consequent the wellwiller I hope of a prosperous issue of my designment in my laborious pedestriall perambulation of Asia Africa and Europe write with my own hand at the court of the great mogoll shaugh Selim resident in the town of Asmere in the umbilicke of the oriental India the eight day of November be Wednesday dom. 1615. to the two lady varney the mother and the daughter at boswell house without Temple-bar 2 item to that famous antiquary sir Robert Cotten at his house in the blackfriar pray tell he that I have a very curious white marble head of a ancient Heros or giantlike champion find out very casual by my diligent pervestigation among the ruin of the once renown city of Cyzicum mention by Cicero in his second oration if my memory do not fail i against verres situate in a Peninsula of Bythinia in the goodly country of Anatolia near the sea propontis to this head will his best antiquity whatsoever veil bonnet 3 item to that courteous sweet and elegant-natured and nurture gentleman master william Ford preacher to our nation at Constantinople if you happen to meet he in any part of England one that deserve better of i than any man in all this catalogue for of he have I learn whatsoever superficial skill I have get in the italian tongue pray reduplicate my commendation unto he 4 item to master George speak my generous and ingenuous countryman the son and heir apparent of sir George speak in somersetshire he you be like to find in any term either at the middle temple or in some barber house near the temple 5 item to master John Donne the author of two most elegant latin book pseudomartyr and Ignatij conclave of his abode either in the strand or elsewhere in London I think you shall be easy inform by the mean of my friend master l. w. 6 item to master Richard Martin counsellor at his chamber in the middle temple but in the termtime scarce else 7 item to master Christopher brook of the city of York counsellor at his chamber in Lincoln inn or near it 8 item to master John hoskins alias aequinoctial Pasticrast of the city of Hereford counsellor at his chamber in the middle temple 9 item to master George garret of who be you shall understand by master Donne aforesaid 10 item to master William Hackwell at his chamber in Lincoln inn 11 item to master Benjamin johnson the poet at his chamber at the blackfriar 12 item to master John bond my countryman chief secretary unto my lord chancellor 13 item to master doctor mocket resident perhaps in my lord of Canterbury house at Lambeth where I leave he 14 item to master Samuel purchas the great collector of the lucubration of sundry classical author for description of Asia Africa and America pray commend i unto he and his (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) master Cook by the same token that he give i a description of Constantinople and the thracius Bosphorus write in latin by a Frenchman call Petrus which book when I carry once in a afternoon under my arm in walk betwixt our english ambassador house in P^ra on the opposite side to Constantinople and the flemish ambassador house I lose it very unfortunate to my great grief and never find it again etc. there be another and late letter of he to his mother write the last of October 1616. part of which for the Odcombian style and coryaticall strain I have hither transcribe great pity it be that his voluminous observation of his foot pilgrimage long than perhaps of any man ever have be in that kind be either lose or at least not come to some discreet hand which may no doubt distil good instruction thence for the public as sweet fresh water out of the huge salt ocean some write note of he it please sir Thomas roe to give i whence omit such thing as before you have have in sir Thomas roe own observation I have insert a few follow this letter from agra the capital city of the dominion of the great mogoll in the eastern India the last of October 1616. most dear and well-beloved mother though I have superscribe my letter from Asmere the court of the great monarch of the east call the great mogoll in the eastern India which I do to this end that those that have the charge of conveyance thereof perceive such a title may be the more careful and diligent to convey it safe to your hand yet in truth the place from which I write this letter be agra a city in the say eastern India which be the metropolitan of the whole dominion of the foresaid king mogoll and ten day journey from his court at the say Asmere from the same Asmere I depart the twelve day of September an. 1616. after my abode there twelve month and sixty day which though I confess it be a too long time to remain in one and the selfsame place yet for two principal cause it be very requisite for i to remain there some reasonable time first to learn the language ^f those country through which I be to pass betwixt the bound of the territory of this prince and Christendom namely these three the persian turkish and Arab which I have in (@) comp^^ent measure attain unto by my labour and industry at the say king court matter as (...) unto i a^ money in my purse as be the chief or rather only mean to get i money if I (...) destitute a matter very inc^dentall to a poor footman pilgrim as myself in these (...) country through which I travel second that by the help of one of those (...) the persian I may both procure unto myself access unto the king and be able to express my mind unto he about the matter for the which I shall have occasion to discourse with he these be the reason that move i so long to tarry at the mogul court during which time I abide in the house of the english merchant my dear countryman not spend one little piece of money either for diet wash lodging or any other thing and as for the persian tongue which I study very earnest I attain to that reasonable skill and that in a few month that I make a oration unto the king before many of his noble in that language and after I have end the same discourse with his majesty also in that tongue very ready and familiar the copy of which speech though the tongue itself will seem to a Englishman very strange and uncouth as have no kind of affinity with any of our christian language I have for novelty sake write out in this letter together with the translation thereof in english that you may show it to some of my learned friend of the clergy and also of the temporalty in evil and elsewhere who belike will take some pleasure in read so rare and unusual a tongue as this be the persian be this that follow the copy of a oration that I make in the persian tongue to the great mogul before diverse of his noble Daruces emadam as wellaget door az mulk inglizan kekessanaion petheen mushaca cardand ke wellaget mazcoor der acre magrub bood mader hamma nezzaert dunmast sabebbe amadane cheez fast auval be dedane mobarreckdeedar ba Trankestan reeseedast mulk Musulmanan der sheenedan awsaffe amadam be deedane bray deedane feelhay Hazaret ianooar der heech mulk in bray deedane namwer Gauga Serdare daryaha dumiest even fast keyee fermawne alishaion amayet fermoyand der wellayett Vzbeck raftan ba shahre San arcand bray zeerat cardan cabble mobarreche crawncah awsaffe tang oh mosachere oh der meshoor fast belch der wellagette we meshoor chunan che der mulc Inglisan have digr bishare eshteeac che own che focheer Stambol boodam you dermean che padshaw eezawiaw i namesh Manuel bood che aseem bood baad as gristane sulten Batasetra as iange aseem shahre bursa sultan de Zenicera bestand oh der cafe nahadond even cheese as man ium baneed as mulc room oh Arrac as door der mulc hasar pharsang raw darad beshare derd oh heech der mohuet casheedast bray roo che be shaugh shaughee musharaf fermoodand the english of it be this lord * * this be the ordinary title that i^ give he by all stranger protector of the world all hail to you I be a poor traveller and world-seer which be come hither from a far country namely England which ancient historian think to have be situate in the far bound of the west and which be the queen of all the land in the World the cause of my come hither be for four respect first to see the bless face of your majesty who wonderful fame have resound over all Europe and the mahometan country when I hear of the fame of your majesty I hasten hither with speed and travel very cheerful to see your glorious Court second to see your majesty elephant which kind of beast I have not see in any other country three to see your famous river Ganges which be the captain of all the river of the World the four be this to entreat your majesty that you will vouchsafe to grant i your gracious pass that I may travel into the country of Tartary to the city of samarcand to visit the bless sepulchre of the lord of the corner this be a title that be give to Tamburlaine in this country in that persian language and whereas they call he the lord of the corner by that they mean that he be lord of the corner of the world that be the high and supreme monarch of the universe who fame by reason of his war and victory be publish over the whole world perhaps he be not altogether so famous in his own country of Tartary as in England moreover I have a great desire to see the bless tomb of the lord of the corner for this cause for that when I be at Constantinople I see a notable old building in a pleasant garden near the say city where the christian emperor that be call Emanuel make a sumptuous great banquet to the lord of the corner after he have take sultan Bajazet in a great battle that be fight near the city of Prussia where the lord of the corner find sultan Bajazet in fetter of gold and put he in a cage of iron these four cause move i to come out of my native country thus far have travel afoot through Turkey and Persia so far have I trace the world into this country that my pilgrimage have accomplish three thousand mile wherein I have sustain much labour and toil the like whereof no mortal man in this world do ever perform to see the bless face of your majesty since the first day that you be inaugurate in your glorious monarchal throne after I have end my speech I have some short discourse with he in the persian tongue who among other thing tell i that concern my travel to the city of samarcand he be not able to do i any good because there be no great amity betwixt the tartarian prince and himself so that his commendatory letter will do i no good also he add that the tartar do so deadly hate all christian that they will certain kill they when they come into their counntry so that he earnest dissuade i from the journey if I love my life and well fare at last he conclude his discourse with i by a sum of money that he throw down from a window through which he look out into a sheet tie up by the four corner and hang very near the ground a hundred piece of silver each worth two shilling sterling which countervail ten pound of our english money this business I carry so secret by the help of my persian that neither our english ambassador nor any other of my countryman save one special private and intrinsical friend have the leact inkling of it till I have thorough accomplish my design for I well know that our ambassador will have stop and barricado all my proceed therein if he may have have any notice thereof as indeed he signify unto i after I have effect my project allege this forsooth for his reason why he will have hinder i because it will redound somewhat to the dishonour of our nation that one of our country shall present himself in that beggarly and poor fashion to the king out of a insinuate humour to crave money of he but I answer our ambassador in that stout and resolute manner after I have end my business that he be content to cease nibble at i never have I more need of money in all my life then at that time for in truth I have but twenty shilling sterling leave in my purse by reason of a mischance I have in one of the turk city call Emert in the country of Mesopotamia where a miscreant Turk strip i of almost all my money according as I write unto you in a very large letter the last year which I send from the court of this mighty monarch by one of my countryman that go home by sea in a english ship lade with the commodity of this India which letter I hope come to your hand long since after I have be with the king I go to a certain noble and Generous Christian of the armenian race two day journey from the mogoll court to the end to observe certain remarkable matter in the same place to who by mean of my persian tongue I be so welcome that he entertain i with very civil and courteous compliment and at my departure give i very bountiful twenty piece of such kind of money as the king have do before countervail forty shilling sterling about ten day after that I depart from Asmere the court of the mogoll prince to the end to begin my pilgrimage after my long rest of fourteen month back again into Persia at what time our ambassador give i a piece of gold of this king coin worth four and twenty shilling which I will save if it be possible till my arrival in England so that I have receive for benevolence since I come into this country twenty mark sterling save two shilling eight penny and by the way upon the confine of Persia a little before I come into this country three and thirty shilling four penny in persian money of my lady Shirley at this present I have in the city of agra wherehence I write this letter about twelve pound sterling which according to my manner of live upon the way at two penny sterling a day for with that proportion I can live pretty well such be the cheapness of all eatable thing in Asia drinkable thing cost nothing for seldom do I drink in my pilgrimage any other liquor then pure water will maintain i very competent three year in my travel with meat drink and clothes in this city of agra where I be now I be to remain about six week long to the end to expect a excellent opportunity which then will offer itself unto i to go to the famous river Ganges about five day journey from this to see a memorable meeting of the gentle people of this country call Banians whereof about four hundred thousand people go thither of purpose to bathe and shave themselves in the river and to sacrifice a world of gold to the same river partly in stamp money and partly in massy great lump and wedge throw it into the river as a sacrifice and do other strange ceremony most worthy the observation such a notable spectacle it be that no part of all Asia neither this which be call the great Asia nor the lesser which be now call Anatolia the like be to be see this show do they make once every year come thither from place almost a thousand mile off and honour their river as their god creator and saviour superstition and impiety most abominable in the high degree of these brutish ethnic that be alien from Christ and the commonwealth of Israel after I have see this show I will with all expedition repair to the city of twenty day journey from this and so into Persia by the help of my bless Christ etc. your dutiful love and obedient son now a desolate pilgrim in the world THOMAS certain observation write by THOMAS Coryat jesuitical mariani^ie whereas the beggar beg in this country of a christian in the name of Bibee Maria and not of hazanet Eesa thereby we may gather that the jesuit have preach Mary more than jesus notable example of atheism a great Raia a gentile a notorious atheist and contemner of all deity glory to profess he know no other god than the king nor believe nor fear none sit dally with his woman one of they pluck a hair from his breast which be fast root pluck off a little of the skin that blood appear this small scar fester and gangrene incurable so that in few day he despair of life and be accompany with all his friend and diverse courtier he break out into these excellent word which of you will not have think that I be a man of war shall have die by the stroke of a sword spear or bow but now I be enforce to confess the power of that great God who I have so long despise that he need no other lance then a little hair to kill so blasphemous a wretch and contemner of his majesty as I have be ecbar juggle Ecbar shaugh have learn all kind of sorcery who be once in a strange humour to show a spectacle to his noble bring forth his chief queen with a sword cut off her head and after the same perceive the heaviness and sorrow of they for the death of she as they think cause the head by virtue of his exorcism and conjunction to be set on again no sign appear of any stroke with his Sword sultan Cursaroo have but one wife for which one principal reason be that during his imprisonment wively fidelity the king intend to make a hunt progress of four month consult how to keep he safe in his absence at last resolve to build a tower and immure he within it without gate door or window except some small hole to let in air high than he can come unto put in all sort of provision whatsoever both fire clothes etc. with some servant to abide with he for that time while this be building his wife come and fall at the king foot and never will let go till she have obtain leave to be shut up with he the king much persuade to enjoy her liberty she utter refuse any other comfort then to be the companion of her husband misery among which this be the great that if any of those that be immure be in number fifty shall have die in the king absence there be no mean to bury they for that no man be admit to come near the tower right and (@) about find a fountain the fountain find the first day by one of my lord people master Herbert brother to sir Edward Herbert which if he have not do he must have send ten course every day for water to a river call narbode that fall into the bay of Cambaya at Buroch the custom be such that whatsoever fountain or Tanke be find by any great man in time of drought he shall keep it proper and peculiar to himself without the interruption of any man whatsoever the day after one of the king haddy find the same and strive for it be take by my lord people and find all etc. a great controversy be about it etc. remember the charity of two great man that in the time of this great drought be at the charge of send ten camel with twenty person every day to the say river for water charity of moor and do distribute the water to the poor which be so dear that they sell a little skin for eight pise Ecbar shaugh a very fortunate prince and pious to his mother his piety appear in this particular ecbars piety that when his mother be carry once in a Palankeen betwixt lahor and agra he travel with she take the Palankeen upon his own shoulder command his great noble to do the like and so carry she over the river from one side to the other and never deny she any thing but this that she demand of he that our bible may be hang about a ass neck and beat about the town of agra for that the portugal have take a ship of they at sea in which be find the Alcoran among the moor tie it about the neck of a dog and beat the same dog about the town of ormuz but he deny her request notable sentence say that if it be ill in the portugal to do so to the Alco^an be it become not a king to requite ill with ill for that the contempt of any religion be the contempt of God and he will not be revenge upon a innocent book the moral be that God will not suffer the sacred book of his truth to be contemn among the infidel one day in the year for the solace of the king woman all the tradesman wife enter the Mohal with somewhat to sell profligate iust. in manner of a fair where the king be broker for his woman and with his gain that night make his supper no man present observe that whatsoever be bring in of virile shape as instance in reddish so great be the jealousy and so frequent the wickedness of this people that they be cut and jagged for fear of convert the same to some unnatural abuse by this mean he attain to the ^^ght of all the pretty wench of the town at such a kind of fair he get his belove Normahal after shaof free have win the battle of lahor by a stratagem the captain be take by the king and hang upon fleshhook and stake apophthegm make a entrance for the king to lahor his son Cursaroo be then take prisoner and ride barefooted upon a elephant his father demand he how he like that spectacle of his valiant and faithful captain hang in that manner to the number of two thousand he answer he that he be sorry to see so much cruelty and injustice in his father in execute they that have do nothing but their duty for that they live upon his bread and salt but he shall have do right if he have save they and punish he which be their master and the author of the rebellion for more clear declaration of this excellent virtue upbraid the coldness of our charity the king external charity he have add here of the king respect to twofold daruise which you have before in sir t. roe you shall understand a custom of this king who sleep in his gusle-can often when he awake in the night his great man except those that watch be retire call for certain poor and old man make they sit by he with many question and familiar speech pass the time and at their departure clothes they and give they bountiful alm often whatsoever they demand tell the money into their hand for a close of this discourse I can forget that memorable piety when at Asmere he go afoot to the tomb of the prophet hod. mundin there bury and kindle a fire with his own hand and his Normahal under that immense and heidelbergian-aequipollent brasspot and make kitcherie for five thousand poor take out the first platter with his own hand and serve one Normahal the second and so his lady all the rest crack i this nut all the papal charity vaunter a armenian desirous to turn Moor procure a nobleman to bring he to the king the king like not shifter of religion who the king ask why he turn Moor whether for preferment he answer no. some few month after crave some courtesy of the king he deny it he say that he have do he the great favour that can be to let he save his soul but for his body he himself shall provide as well as he can the king like not those that change their religion he himself be of none but of his own make and therefore suffer all religion in his kingdom which by this notable example I can make manifest the king have a servant that be a armenian by name Scander to who upon occasion of speech of religion the king ask if he think either he or the Padres have convert one Moor to be a true christian and that be so for conscience sake and not for money who answer with great confidence that he have one which be a perfect christian and for no worldly respect will be other who the king cause present to be send for and bid his master depart demand why he be become a Christian who render certain feeble implicit jesuitical reason and avow that he will never be other whereupon the king practise by fair speech and large promise to withdraw he to the folly of Mahomet offer he pension mean and command of horse tell he he have now but four Rupias a month Wages which be a poor reward for quit he praepuce faith but if he will recant he will heap upon he many dignity the fellow answer it be not for so small wage he become Christian for he have limb and can earn so much of any mahometan but that he be a christian in his heart and will not alter it this way not take effect the king turn to threaten and menace of torture and whip but the proselyte manful resolve to suffer any thing answer he be ready to endure the king pleasure upon this resolution when all man expect present and severe castigation the king change his tune high commend his constancy and honesty bid he go and return to his master and to serve he faithful and true give he a Rupia a day pension for his integrity about two month after the king have be a hunt of wild hog a beast odious to all moor and accustom to distribute that sort of venison among christian and razboote send for this armenian master of this convert catechumen or mahometan to come and fetch part of his quarry the armenian not be at home this his principal servant come to know the king pleasure who command he to take up a hog for his master which no Moor will touch which he do and be go out of the courtgate be so hoot at by the mahometan that he throw down his present in a ditch and go home conceal from his master what have pass about four day after the armenian come to his watch the king demand of he whether the hog he send he be good meat or no who reply he neither hear of nor see any hog whereat the king remember to who this hog be deliver cause the fellow to be send for and examine the matter have it confess how he throw away the hog and never carry it home the king press to know the reason the poor fellow answer how he be mock for touch it and it be a thing odious to the moor for shame he throw it away at which he reply by your law there be no difference of meat and be you ashamed of your law or to flatter the mahometans do you in outward thing forsake it now I see thou be neither good Christian nor good mahometan but a dissemble knave with both while I find thou sincere I give thou a pension which now I take from thou and for thy dissimulation do command thou to have a hundred stripe which be present give he in stead of his money and bid all man by his example take heed that see he give liberty to all religion that which they choose and profess they may stick unto I have think at first to have finish all these indian voyage in this four book but perceive it to grow into such greatness and withal such great alteration as the turkish trade at Moha and especial the persian at jasques have cause in the english trade with the contrary attempt of the portugal and chief the dutch before no good friend and there the worst of enemy to the english-indian trade I think fit to make thereof a five book navigation voyage traffiqve discovery of the english nation in the eastern part of the world continue the english-indian occurrent and contain the english affair with the great SAMORINE in the persian and arabian gulf and in other place of the continent and land of and beyond the indies the Portugal attempt and dutch disaster diverse sea-fight with both and many other remarkable relation the five book chap. i. memorial take out of the journal of ROGER hawes touch the proceed of the factory at cranganor under the great Samorine the general of this fleet be captain William keeling in the dragon Robert Boner master captain Christopher Harris in the peppercorne captain Walter payton * * you have his journal before in the expedition the four of march 1615. we chase a Portugal frigate which run into a creek and escape we and we make our way on towards cape Comorine there come a Tony aboard we with messenger from the Samorine to the general the next day the governor send a present and entreat the general to go to Cranganor which the day after we do and the chief man send from the Samorine the general be desire to come ashore to speak with he but in the go certain frigate come and anchor near the shore and cause he to go aboard the expedition some shot pass but little hurt on the eight the general go ashore with master Barkley cape merchant and other where they receive kind usage and conclude to settle a factory the article agree on be these VNderecon cheete the great Samorine etc. to JAMES by the grace of God king of great Britain etc. whereas your servant and subject William keeling esquire arrive in my kingdom in the month of march 1615. with three english ship at the port of Cranganor in latitude ten degree fifteen minute and at my earnest solicitation come ashore to see i there be conclude by i for my part and by he for the english nation as follow as I have be ever a enemy to the portugal so do I purpose to continue for ever I do hereby faithful promise to be and continue a friend to the english march 4. 1615. Cranganor cast^e and island promise to the English and my successor after i to endeavour the take in of the fort of Cranganor and to possess the english thereof as their own with the island thereof which be in length on the sea-coast nine mile and in breadth three provide that I purpose to build therein a house for some of my own people to the number of one hundred person cochin promise and covenant to be give to the English I will also endeavour with the aid of the english hereafter to take in the fort and town of cochin belong former to my crown and kingdom and then to deliver it into the possession of the english as their own proper land and possession provide that the charge of the surprise be equal bear the one half by myself the other by the english nation and the benefit of the spoil thereof in whatsoever quality the one half to belong to i the other half to the english nation the Samorine to have no right title or interest in the aforesaid town precincts or appurtenance of cochin at all and the Samorine do also covenant for himself his heir and successor that the whole trade of the english in whatsoever commodity bring in or carry out shall pay yield or allow no manner of custom imposition tax toll or any other duty of whatsoever quality and to these covenant which the shortness of time do not permit to amplify I the Samorine have religious swear by the great God I serve to perform according and that not only for myself but for my successor after i and in witness hereof have lay my hand upon this writing and the say William keeling do promise to acquaint the king majesty with the premise and to endeavour his majesty undertake thereof according a stock be make as the state present permit and three factor appo^^ted George woolman chief Peter needham one of the general servant second myself Roger hawes three edward Peake a youth attendant and to learn the language and John Stamford a gunner to assist the Samorine if need require in his war on the ten the ship depart leave we in a shrambe at the water side with our good and a present for the Samorine where we continue till the thirteen at which time the last of our good be carry to the samorines castle who thus possess of our good we much suspect on the twenty he will needs see master trunk suppose we have store of money needham have tell he we have five hundred ryalls of eight and find little above fifty ryalls he will needs borrow fifty which we can not deny he and offer a pawn not worth half which we refuse to take hope after this money lend he will permit we to depart for Calicut but find delay he also urge we to give his brother a present on the eight and twenty he come up into the chamber where we be and give master Woollman two gold-rings and to every of the rest one and the next day call we to the sight of his tumble sport Stamford a drunken fool or a false knave the same night Stamford go out with his sword in his hand tell the boy he will come again present and the next news we hear of he be that he be meet with by the king of cockin Nayros have lose himself be drink they demand whither he will go he say to the samorine whither they undertake to bring he and he know not himself betray till he come at cochin this put we in great fear but the Samorine give we good word say he have rather now find he a knave then when he shall have put trust in he in April we get liberty to depart with our good for Calicut where the two and twenty we arrive and be kind entertain but be fain to stay in the customhouse till we may get a more convenient house which be make ready for we the six of May with promise of a better after the rain fain will we according to the general his order have send a messenger with he and our letter to surat to acquaint our countryman with our be here but the governor will not consent till we have sell our good for their better encouragement on the eighteen one be send part of the good be sell by the governors procurement perfidious people to the merchant at Calicut soon after on the six and twenty and fair promise of part of payment short but it be not the custom of b^st or worst in this country to be as good as their word be certain only in dissemble master Wo^llman be desirous to go to Nassapore to make sale but the governor put he off with diverse shift from time to time july 3 the three of july the messenger send for surat return with report that be well onward on his way he be set upon beat his money and letter take from he among which be a letter of general keeling to the next general which grieve we suspect yet he be rob with his own consent and of his honesty only a broker of Nassapore tell master needham that they be sell to the portugal the governor hear of it and hang down his head as guilty therein we sell good here to merchant of Nassapore August 17. the seventeen of August master Woollman die our promise money we can not get and our br^ker tell we that some one of the debtor will go to the governor and with a bribe procure respite the rest refuse till they pay all on the four and twenty the samorines sister send we word she will both cause they to pay and lend we any money we need but we find she as the rest the queen mother also make we fair show diverse likewise promise to convey letter to surat for we but with word as diverse from the event and adverse to all truth master needham thus wrong further wrong himself by indiscretion threaten he will be go to the king of cochin in presence of a Nayro appoint to attend we who discover the same and he add yet further to put he in fear with make show of violent revenge as he do also to a Scrivano which be as a justice with we take he by the throat and make as though he will have strike he with his sword for detain money he have receive for we our broker also tell he it be not merchant-like to go up and down the town with a sword and buckler his carriage and habit resemble those which here we call roaring-boy rather than merchant notwithstanding my admonition which be requite with ill language to myself and accompany with abuse of his own self and the company affair the three and twenty of September a holland ship which have trade at Mecca September 23. hollander at Calicut come to this port with purpose of settle a factory which be by the governor appoint to go to the king and promise to carry we a letter but go without it and here dally and delay continue whereupon the four of November master needham go to the Samorine and return the five and twenty have have a gold-chaine bestow on he a jewel and a gold-ring to wear on his arm with order also from the king to effect our design but the performance halt the twenty of December a malabar captain have take prize of the portugal December 20. and will have trade with we but we can not get in our money due long before we hear also the same day of four english ship at surat but the governor and people continue their wont perfidiousness the one more careful of take the other of give bribe then pay our debt we use a strange policy to get some of they strange policy strong superstition for when we come to demand they at their house if they will pay we none we will threaten not to depart till they pay we and we have hear it report that their custom be neither to eat nor wash while we be in their house by this mean we sometime get fifty fano of one one hundred of another by no mean will they endure we to lie at their house except one where we wait three day and night with three or four Nayros they have for their watch of they but we can g^t nothing the Nayro who the king have appoint to get in our debt come to demand a gratuity of we yet get in nothing yea he will go to the debtor house and take three or four fano of each and then depart without the money the nine of january master needham go to demand a debt a Nayro as he say january 9 a dangerous fray will not suffer he to pass and be put by with his hand strike he whereupon he give the Nayro a dangerous wound in the head which it be think he will not recover other moor be hurt in take his part and word be present bring to we to shut up our door leave the Nayros shall assemble to do we some mischief feud or kindred-quarrel and murder be rife among they without other law to right themselves our Nayro with his kindred (@) guard he home to the number of thirty with pike and sword and buckler in his defence who he can not but gratify our house be guard three or four night and da^es none of we dare to go into the town for money or other business wh^ch before we do very safe for a week and then our broker will we not to go without a Nayro for that they have swear the death of one of we in revenge of he that be kill the twenty the Portugal armada of four and thirty sail pass by from the south fight with the Po^tuga^s and Nayros whereof fourteen ship the rest frigate they put into the harbour where three frigate lay at anchor a hot fight follow but the portugal go away with disgrace have only ^ut one of the frigate half which drive ashore and break in piece belong to the governor who be well serve keep in the country and keep four or five great piece wh^ch be at his dispose in the town lock up all save one neither have they powder an^ shoot for above two shot before the fight be end some four thousand Nayros be come down diverse be slay on both side nine or ten portugal be drive ashore and two or three of the chief present hang by the heel two day and then be take down the night follow be devour by wild beast the eight and twenty a Pattemar tell that the governor be friend to we only in show wish the portugal in our room for we do no good in the country but bring ware which they be force to buy whereas they cause good by trade the eight of February we receive letter from surat the four of march we receive letter from the king wish we if our ship come to come with they to Panean and for our money not to trouble ourselves for he will pay we though he sell his ring chap. 2 note take out of the journal of ALEXANDER child from England to surat and thence to jasque in Persia and of the fight by the way with the portugal in which general JOSEPH be slay june 13.14.15 1616. the thirteen fourteen and fifteen of june 1616. after our arrival at Soldania we make merry one with another glad of our meeting there with captain Newport homeward find we find here good water but little refresh else save fresh-fish for our sick man the black bring we nothing August 1 the first of August we fall with the main the place call in sixteen degree five and thirty minute south latitude variation thirteen degree twelve minute fight with the portugal carrack the six we descry a sail the admiral of the Carricks that go this year from Lisbon the globe sail better than the rest of the fleet first come up to she and the carack present give she a whole broad side shot diverse shoot through the ship and hurt a man or two which cause she to fall asterne and stand in with the general and the rest of the fleet show we of the portugal discourtesy when our general come up with the carack he send his shallop aboard she to know of the captain why he shoot at his friend and to entreat he to come aboard to make satisfaction for the wrong do but he send the boatswain aboard the general who tell he direct that he will not come aboard nor give satisfaction who thereupon have send his man aboard begin the fight which continue a hour and half but within less than a hour captain Benjamin joseph slay a unlucky shot come from the carack and slay our worthy general then do the admiral present fall off and put abroad a flag of council where come aboard we find to our grief his body mangle with a Culuerine shoot and himself sudden depart captain Pepwell succeed in place and fight we keep company with the carrack till six the next morning and it prove under the island Moyella calm that we be force to anchor by mean of a pretty strong current set to the south and pass the whole day in make our ship ready for fight I take out my long boat and pinnace out of my ship and mount the rest of my ordnance and keep the carrack company all the next night the eight about seven in the morning our general captain Pepwell see he can not fetch she up so soon as he desire call to i who ship go better and give i leave to have the first onset I come up and give he three or four broadside and in the mean time the general come up and I give place the vice-admiral also and the globe one after another and thus we fight all day between three and four in the afternoon his main mast fall overboard and present his foretop-mast follow at five we give he over within less than a league of the shore Comora be a lee-shoare and a great sea the land name be Comora very steep to a hundred fathom within less than a cable length of the rock and no ground so we stand off and on all that night the general be sore wound on the face with splinter from a great shot in his half deck captain pepwel and other wound diverse slay and Richard hounsell the master be hurt in his arm another have his head shoot away and diverse other be hurt I lose two man the general in the evening send master Connock cape merchant to the captain of the carrack that if he will yield he shall have good quarter and be send to Goa in safety his answer be he neither will nor can but if we can win he with the sword he must be content and hope to find honourable war with we the carrack fire read more hereof in sir Thomas r^e if we take he at twelve in the night she be aground between two rock very steep and set on fire whether accidental or wilful we can tell the nine in the morning I send master Anthony fugar my mate ashore in my long boat to see if any man be save and to take in some of they to know how she come on fire but the carrack be still burn and not a man of she to be see there be many black of the island on the land against the carack and they put out a flag of truce for my man to come ashore but there be no land in that place nor within three league to the east or west the rock be steep and as high as our main topmast the ten we bear about the south-west part of the island and anchor in two and twenty fathom water with one refresh at Comora and another I lay out in fourteen against a town call Mattoma the people promise beef and all that the island do afford but we be frustrate of our hope till at last with much ado we buy nine beef September 24. Thomas kerridge he be now this june 1622. return home some goat hen lemon and coco-nut and I persuade myself they be very treacherous the four and twenty of September we ply up to Swally ride there anchor and bring the merchant aboard the general the principal factour name be Thomas kerridge the voyage to jasques the five of November I go over the bar of Swally find for jasque in persia. November 6. the ten the island of Diu do bear north from we three league distant the eleven latitude twenty degr twelve min. I send my long boat and pinnace think to have speak with a fisherman and they find he a man of war and seven or eight in the pinnace be hurt with their arrow the long boat not able to succour they the two and twenty we be in latitude four and twenty degree ten minute Goudel variation eighteen degree from north to west this day we see the land of Goudel north and east nine or ten league distant when you be within five league of the shore you shall see the cliff whitish like the Forland in most place the five and twenty in four and twenty degree seven and forty minute we be off a ragged mouldy land call by the portugal seat setheaye by we the seven city show like seven castle stand a league from each other the high like a wall city and lie west northwest from cape Goudel six and twenty league you may see it fourteen or fifteen league off like land and may run within a league of the shore in ten or twenty fathom within a mile soft Ozie ground without danger variation eighteen degree I find no current out or in on the seven and twenty latititude five and twenty degree two minute variation eighteen degree thirty minute land as before the first of December we stand off with the persian shore December 1 have be put over on the coast of Arabia with a northwest and north northwest wind we have much rain diverse day and on the second at night we anchor five or six league to the west of jasques in two and twenty fathom Ozie ground the next I ride still and send the pinnace to see if they can speak with any people but they can see no mention of any at three of the clock I set sail cape of jasques and stand towards the cape about a league and anchor in eleven fathom Ozie ground the four I send my chief mate with the frigate and pinnace to see if he can discover the road of jasques but before he come ashore the governor of the place see we lie off and in with the shore send a fisherboat to they and they return aboard with she after some conference we send master Bell ashore to the governor with his man and a guzerat to his castle a little mile from the water side with a present to sound what welcome I keep two of their man for a pawn the five I weigh and go two league near the shore and anchor within a league of it in five fathom at low water tough Ozie ground and a fair Bay there run no stream but it flow a fathom in the spring and three or four foot otherwise a southeast and by east moon make high water the eastermost low point have a pagoda or meskite on it and the fisher-towne do bear north-east in latitude five and twenty degree five and thirty minute and longitude from the cape of Diu ten degree forty minute west and the variation nineteen degree twen^y minute from north to west m. bell return with two of the governors soldier commend his entertainment and promise welcome to we the eight m. conock our cape merchant go ashore with m. Barker and two other factor and return at night with like news the seven the purser buy we four beef and goat not fat at that time of the year but such as give we content the ten our merchant go ashore with their baggage for their journey to Mogustan and on the twelve take their way thither Mogustan the thirteen I send the boat and pinnace to fetch water the countrypeople that bring it down have after four shilling english-money the ton it be rainwater for they have no other it rain but little in December but in january it will rain six or seven day together that it fill all their cistern and place of provision for the whole year follow rain scarce I take it not wholesome be full of small worm that we be fain to strain our beverage the sixteenth I send my mate about ballast wherein they find they unreasonable I send the pinnace to the eastermost low point for stone for ballast fish and ballast it be the worthy place for fish in all the indies they lade eighteen or twenty ton of ballast on the nineteen we receive a letter from m. Connock half on-ward of his way to Mogustan of their peaceable travel the first of january I receive a letter from jasques which come from our merchant january 1 costake and make we glad on the five m. Connock will have have i go with the ship to a place call costake within seven league over against Ormus whereto I be loath to yield be out of season of the year the next day they talk of pilote the ship to sireck but I be the same man Sireck persian trade hopeful the merchant report that they hope it will be a good place of trade and in time as good as any in India the pilot confess it be dangerous then to carry the ship to sireck it be so foul stormy and a lee shore the sea high anchorage unsure and master Connock see the storm we there abode so extreme alter his mind and speed to land the good at jasques the twenty I set sail from the road of jasques and the eight of February at ten of the clock we anchor in Swally Road. chap. 3 a letter of master THOMAS SPURWAY merchant touch the wrong do at Banda to the english by the hollander the former unkind disgust and brabble quarrel break now out into a furious unexpected injurious war write in a letter to the company in Bantam the twenty of November 1617. honourable and right worshipful my humble duty always remember and may it please you to understand etc. the beginning of this letter be tear and therefore as that so this a little imperfect but what be here defective hereafter you shall find supply in master Nathaniel corthop relation with the continuation of these Bandan affair and dutch insolence in he master Haies and other this I think good to pr^mise as in time so in cause precede the fight in the ensue voyage mention the king of moccasor and all the king ther^ about mortal enemy to the fleming Nou^mb 7. two hollander land at moccasor the king of Moccasor levy two thousand man the english procure the life of the hollander the hollander attempt to land again at moccasor who the moccasorians intercept slay they all be sixteen the english courteous to the hollander go towards Banda the nineteen of November 1616. we arrive at moccasor the swan and the defence where we stay to take in one hundred quoyne of Rice in the time of our be there and the four of December we descry off at sea a great ship and come at a anchor five league off the five they send their skiff ashore make direct to the english house have eight man in she which as soon as we perceive we run to the sea side and before we can come to they two of their man be land so we acquaint they with the danger they be run into for that the king of moccasor and all the king thereabouts be their mortal enemy in regard of the many abuse their people the hollander have do unto they and that late the hollander have carry away a principal Sabander and other of moccasor perforce and therefore will be revenge also acquaint they that if the king be not the more merciful they be all dead man so they will present have go into their skiff but the moccasor flock about we lay hand on they I present the factor and other english road post unto the king acquaint he what have happen we have a guard of english near the hollander for our better discharge that the king may not conceive amiss of we and that we be not accessary to any treachery that they may pretend the king give we thanks and will we to take two man which be come on land into the english house and to learn of they their intent in come thither which we do they say they be of the fleet late from Holland have lose the rest of their consort and fall with the backside of java the one call John staunch under-merchant as he report the other a english man a sailor who perceive the great danger they be in desire we most earnest that we will stand their friend and get they free again bewail their hard hap we promise to do our best for their good and so to be go present come the king of moccasor the king of tallow and diverse other to the number of two thousand man present levy and come by the sea side upon the sand and sit in counsel upon these man the king of tallow will have have they all kill but we use our best mean for their freedom at last command be give they shall into their boat and be go the king say they be too small a revenge he expect a great so they depart into their ship they have all be present kill if we have not be the next day we perceive another boat come towards land from the same ship the king have notice thereof by his people present command twenty prawe and correcorry to be man and to go forth which be on a instant effect and make towards the hollander boat the hollander still row in for the shore and direct to the english house the prawe and the correcorry still edge near the boat between the shore and they the hollander perceive their intent turn their boat and make towards their ship again be four league off but it be too late for the moccasor in short time have fetch they up and board their boat on each side enter and instant kill every man of the hollander be in number sixteen and bring away their boat we be that time command to keep house there be about that time near five thousand people on the sea side this holland-ship call the indrought imagine we find for the Moluccas or Banda stay off at sea we set sail out of moccasor ride the eight of December 1616. the say holland-ship see we under sail they also weigh and keep we company we will glad have go from they but can not in regard of the defence her bad sail they send their boat aboard of we desire two quoyne of rice four ton of water and hen all which we spare they pay only forty rial of eight for two quoyne of rice the rest we give unto they we demand of they why they will attempt to come to land at moccasor they say that their first boat be not then return unto their ship so they think their factory have still be there but I very believe it be their obstinate boldness and presume that their first boat be deny only upon the instigation of we the english wherefore they will make trial again purpose to have flatter the king and to have come there again and to have settle a factory and so to have hinder the english for it be a manifest token of such a project both of their boat come by our ship and within musket shoot yet will not come aboard to inquire what news on shore as they go on shoareward which if they have we can have forewarn they of that danger so now their obstinacy and rash proceed purchase they a just reward etc. they keep we company until we come near and so stand in for that place we stand our course now the hollander slander we since we understand that they have report that we be the occasion that their man be kill at moccasor which be most false for I protest we use our best mean to free they the first eight man have else also die the thirteen of December surrender of polaroone for their pollicitation of the english to this trade s^e Milwards journal also capp keeling Midd^^tons etc. 1616. the swan and defence arrive in the road of polaroone the fourteen the people of the say island come aboard the ship with who we have conference about the surrender of their island of polaroone also our nation have many time be at their island to our great charge and partly upon their request to settle a factory and to have friendly trade with they in bring they commodity as Rice cloth and other provision for their spice and that we desire not to usurp and bring they in subjection or bondage as the hollander and other nation have former and that we now come to settle a factory if they will surrender their land of polaroone unto our king majesty of England by writing also by deliver earth with a tree and fruit of the say ^land as true token of their fidelity and so every year a nut-tree in remembrance and in so do we will furnish they with Rice and cloth and other commodity for present and also yearly and be settle on the say island of polaroone sufficient supply shall come every year in better manner than now at present and that we will to the uttermost of our power with our man and ship defend they against any their enemy if they come to do we or they wrong we also demand of they whether they have make any contract with the hollander and give they any surrender they all reply they have not nor never will but hold they as mortal enemy the man of polaroone and p^laway protest that they nor have nor will make contract with the Hollander polaway be deliver over to the english be^ore the hollander c^me into their road the b^ndaneses desire to have the english colour set up confess and aver unto we both polaroone man and diverse of the principal which once live upon Polaway and flee to polaroone upon the hollander come there and get it by force of arm they do all still aver and do maintain the island of Polaway to belong unto our king majesty of England by a lawful surrender unto Richard hunt before the hollander come into the road and cause the english colour to be set up in the castle which the hollander shoot down several time and use many disgraceful word of his majesty this the bandaneses do still confirm and that they do defend it as long as possible they can to his majesty use until perforce they must leave the say island and so flee to polaroone Lantor and Serran this council continue all the day and so conclude the writing be draw and confirm by the principal of polaroone and polaway and so deliver by their own hand unto we viz. Nathaniel Corthop Thomas Spurway and Sophonie cozocke to his majesty use also the same instant deliver we a nutmeg-tree with the fruit thereon in the earth with other fruit and a live goat and further desire to have the english colour set up upon the island and to have gun shoot off all which be present effect the colour set up and six and thirty piece of ordnance shoot off and so at night they part in friendly manner repair to the shore hollander invade polar^one with bravado and bloody ancient the five and twenty of December be Christmas day we discover two great Holland ship edge near polaroone they discover our ship in the road bear room for Nero and the six and twenty another do the like the eight and twenty another Holland pinnace stand right over for polaroone come brave within shoot of our fort have the flemish colour on the poop and present tack about and take they down set up in lieu thereof a bloody ancient and stand over for nero. by this we expect their come daily according to their old custom of injure we on the thirty the english fortify we land four piece of ordnance beside two other on Christmas day and go to work to fortify for our defence and with the help of the bandanese we make two fort one call the swan-fort the other the defence-fort and mount on each three piece the swan fort be within caliver shoot of the ship command the road at pleasure to the eastern side where the principal road be for the westerly monson holland-ship approach to our ship at polaroone the three of januarie there come into the road three Holland ship from Nero the horn of eight hundred ton the star five hundred the yaugar one hundred and sixty which come to anchor close by our ship the horn by the swan the star by the defence the yaugar a head of all to cut off supply from the shore all these sh^ps full of man etc. now our commission direct we that have receive the surrender and settle at polaroone we shall give notice unto the hollander thereof by writing that they shall not come there to molest we as former they be accustom pretend ignorance a letter to the same effect we have ready write but can not tell how to convey it to they not dare to send english or Bandaneses for fear of detention these ship therefore come into the read we send George Muschamp aboard their admiral the star and he deliver the letter to the commander call dedall advise they to depart the road before six glass be run the english make know to the hollander that the island be English for that the islander will not have they stay in the road nor come near they and will have shoot unto they from the shore have not we cause they to forbear present their commander dedall and their predicant come aboard the swan to know the reason we tell they that their come be to do we injury as former they have do at Polaway Cambella and other place and how they have turn the glass for master ball have he in their possession and threaten to hang he present if he cause not the english to come from land forthwith the hollander can make no claim to polaroone also we then show they the surrender of polaroone and our right and possession there for his majesty of England which we will hold and maintain to our utmost power and wish they to be well advise what they do and that they will be short call to a account for their disgraceful word and ab^ses do to the english demand also of they the island of Polaway as in right due to his majesty by lawful surrender further demand of they if they have any surrender of the island of polaroone but they can not say of any they have and when we show the surrender we have unto they the predicant have the same in his hand aboard the swan peruse it say with these word this be a true surrender all this time the glass run in the great cabin before their face put they in mind of be go we also tell they that their come be only to betray we and to put we from the island by their treachery which our nation have diverse time have experience of wherefore we neither can nor will trust they any more and so put they in mind of be go for the glass six time run they must expect shoot from the shore and if in case they do reply and do shoot unto the land or show any discourtesy or wrong unto the people of polaroone we will take it as do to we and will defend they be now becomne our king subject they will have stay until the next day but we will not grant it doubt that more of their ship may have come over they then desire till midnight which we grant if we may see they about to way their anchor and that we will send unto the shore and persuade the bandaneses to forbear also I demand of dedall the cause of their come to molest we who answer it have be former a custom in pass by the island I tell he that be untruth the english be the first christian that ever come into the road of polaroone for that the people of the island have report unto we that there be never any christian ship in the road till we come and that we be the first so he be silent and will not maintain his report they come into the road about three of the clock in the afternoon and depart thence about eleven at night we have be since inform that they come purposely to betray we and to have beat we out of the road or to have take our ship and have give the attempt but that they perceive we be fortify on the land if they have then begin the hollander come to beat we out of the Road. we doubt not but to have make our party good with they for we have both fort ready and our gunner ready to give fire upon our watchword or sign from the ship the ten of januarie a holland ship and pinnace come forth from Nero the pinnace come edge near the small island or high sand adjoin to polaroone call belong unto polaroone and consequent to the English there be no inhabitant upon the say island or sand but it be full of tree and bush and polaroone man resort thither daily to fish about the say small island the hollander send a pinnace to sound the depth by polaroone and to invade we now the say pinnace come near the say island and do sound the depth as she go which we perceive make four shot at she from the defence fort not intend to strike she but shoot wide give they notice to forbear and be go the pinnace at every shot reply with a base or some such like piece unto the small island among the tree where there be some english and some bandaneses of polaroone which be in danger of their shot and see they brave we in such manner the gunner be bid to do his best who then make a shot which fall close over they at the stern of their pinnace or frigate which make they cry out and present get off they be hollanders and seem man which come to sound the depth and where to land purpose to come with their force and there to fortify and so to put we from the great island John Davies in the swan will go out of the road to fetch water januarie the thirteen master davey complain he want water and purpose to go over for wayre upon Lantore side and there to water we acquaint the people o^ polaroone herewith who will by no mean consent he shall go out of the road neither will we doubt some injury from the hollander and the people of polaroone tell we that they will rather fetch they water over upon Lantore with their prawe I go present aboard and acquaint master davey herewith but he and the company will not yield hereunto but speak all in general against it and say that the bandaneses wo^ld bring they rain water or such as may be unwholesome for his man to drink say it be but six or eight day time the same time there come over unto we from wayre a free town upon Lantore also from the i will of rosinging a island of itself the principal of both those place to have parley with we to surrender both the say wayre and rosinging unto his majesty as the people of polaroone have late do now the surrender of both those place be draw and all conclude upon at polaroone the i will of rosinging and town of wayre desire to surrender themselves and to have some go to take the same surrender the swan and four merchant go to Rosing and take the surrender the people of rosinging and wayre go with good to the swan the star take the swan slay five man use cruel violence and proud insultation they desire that some english may go over to receive the same from all their hand and to see all right thereunto perform now master davey resolution be to go over to water we conclude that master Sophonie Cozock George Muschamp Robert Fuller and Thomas Hodges shall go over for wayre and rosinging in the swan to perform the say business or see it do and the swan there to water after which dispatch it be order that master Sophonie shall return again in the swan and the other three shall remain upon the island of rosinging for possession till further order all business be there end according to our expectation diverse man of wayre and rosinging desire to lade nut and mace in the swan and passage for polaroone there to sell their spice to we for Rice and Cloth all be grant they ship twelve of themselves with nut and mace a great quantity the swan set sail and go for Geulegola be but a little way from wayre as I understand and there water after which they set sail and eight league of land a holland ship or two give they chase which they in the swan perceive ask the master what he mean to do think that he purpose to fight with they master davey answer they see my colour and I see they I know he to be a Hollander they i to be a Englishman I know no hurt I have do they and I stand for my port of polaroone and in short time the holland ship the star be come within shot never hale the swan nor say word of their intent but let fly great shot and small in most violent manner the swan have receive two or three great shot through and thorough before she ever reply and some of the man kill the fight continue as master davey write one hour and half wherein five man of the swan be kill viz. Sophonie Cozock merchant beat in piece with a great shot Robert Morten quater-master and drummer Christoper droop Edward Murtkin and a bandanese of wayre a passenger three other be main have lose leg and arm and almost all hope of life if not dead already more eight man wound most of their wound deadly and in this their cruelty a villain of the star stand upon the poop with a draw sword brave with these word english villain and rogue we will kill you all thus he speak in dutch. it seem that the swan man be much discourage see many of their man lie dead wound lament insomuch that none will stand by the sail to trim the ship for their best advantage so that the holland ship lie still in her quarter pour in small shot and great and so take she board she both soldier and other break up cabin and pillage they and the man also in most base manner both of clothes and all thing else throw over board what they like not the Spaniard never use more cruelty in their profess war the star have in she one hundred and three score man most soldier take from Nero and Polaway castle the swan have not above thirty able man to fight the rest sick and lame and the man somewhat weary out in toilsome labour at polaroone in land the ordnance and make two fort ten also of their company be leave in polaroone to defend the fort two of which be gunner viz. Harman Hammon and John day the swan be take they carry she present under Nero castle and all the man the surrender of polaroone be take in the swan so we procure another verbatim from the polaroone man which I have bring with the surrender of rosinging and deliver bo^h at Bantam etc. she be much batter and tear they much glory in their victory and show the bandaneses their exploit in the great disgrace of the english what they can say that the king of England may not compare with their great king of Holland and that one Holland ship will take ten of the english ship and that saint George be now turn child and that they care not for the king of England the swan be bring to Nero they present send our man on shore and keep they all prisoner many of they in iron neither man nor boy have liberty the swan set sail from polaroone the sixteenth of januarie 1616. we expect her return in eight or ten day at further but never hear of she till the five and twenty of February by Robert Fuller who be at rosinging and wayre hear of a english ship under Nero castle and come over to polaroone to acquaint we herewith present we dispee away Robert hayes Purser of the defence with some principal man of polaroone to land upon Lantore side be our friend so to go as near as may be to the holland ship and to make sign to they by a white flag of truce our messenger stay almost two hour at last they come with their boat to fetch he a messenger send to know why they take our ship their boorish usage of he but make he wade to the middle and so carry he aboard one of the holland ship the principal and assistant of Nero meet he aboard our messenger demand why they have take the swan and what be becomne of the man the reason of detain the ship man and good they answer that time shall bring to light our messenger still urge to know and therefore he be send they use many disgraceful word of the english their vaunt and threat and that they will come over to polaroone with their force and drive we from the island and other place hay reply they have already do more than they can answer and return without sight of any man of the swan company the poor ship there lay rend and tear in view of the country people in short time after they send over unto we a messenger with a letter which we answer as we do other after send their messenger still come with a flag of truce all which say letter and surrenders I bring with i to Bantam and deliver to captain ball. now we be still threaten by their letter as also by word of mouth from their messenger report that the hollander be prepare ship against Polaroon that as they have the swan so will they also come to fetch the defence and drive we from the island we still answer that we expect their come in regard they have so often threaten we and that we will defend it as long as life last many brauado they make daily shoot at Nero and Polaway forty fifty and sixty piece of ordnance think to affright we therewith also the people of Lantore bring we word that they be fit their ship and ship plank and earth which we imagine be for land service have then seven ship four galley and frigate and many man and that they pretend to come over to fight with we hollander practise to fire the ship defence and that they have instigate their black which be slave that if they can by any mean go over to polaroone and there set on fire the defence they shall be freeman as also some other reward they shall have also the hollander report that we shall carry no spice from the island hollander threaten that we shall have no spice from those land or any the land of Banda hereupon we consider that have make a contract with the people of polaroone wayre and rosinging and have trust our good unto they also a good quantity of nut and mace be ready to dispatch away lie ready upon polaroone the hollander threaten to come over and force we from the say island of polaroone and to take the defence hereupon we resolve to maintain the honour of our king and good of the honourable company our employer to land all the gun out of the defence our people fortify polaroone and all provision else and to fortify upon the small island adjoin unto polaroone there be no people on the small island but full of tree and bush and there the hollander purpose to have land and to have fortify which have they perform they will have command the road and do we much injury for that the people also of the island polaroone can not have fish as they be acuustome neither can the english have come into the road but that they on the small island will have beat they off and to prevent all danger we land all the defence ordnance only four great piece and some bread and two butt of cider also a terce of wine and be all fortify upon the say small island with the help of the bandanese the master of the defence master Hynsley be also on the small island and all man else at work and land thing some man be leave aboard the say defence to keep the ship a conspiracy be plot nine man go away in the defence unto the hollander John Christmas Boatsons mate John Owers William Carter Richard Taylor Edward Bridges John Harris Will rockwell Hugh woodlock and the same night the twenty of march 1616. either they let the ship drive or cut the cable and so drive off in the night which we perceive from the small island present send a boat after they advise they to return with the say ship but those villain will not hear they neither suffer the boat to come near they but bend their piece against they and discharge a musket shoot at they they be not able to overcome they forsake the say ship and come back unto we at the small island acquaint we what have pass the next day we perceive they run into Nero road under sail and under the command of Nero castle some of the man go present as we understand on shore and mee^ing with the hollander report unto they of their exploit and contend among themselves who shall be the best pilot in conduct the ship thither one report it be I and another it be I and as the hollander messenger report unto we afterward come over unto we that they bring a can of wine ashore and drink unto the hollander as soon as they come on shore present the hollander take possession of the say ship the defence and have all the villain into their castle and examine they of all our proceed at polaroone and they discover all how we be fortify and what pass among we these villain take the course to cut all our throat upon polaroone the hollander encourage by the villain that run away for the go away of the ship breed a jealousy in the bandaneses that it be a pretend plot among we to join with the hollander and so to betray they also their discover our weakness upon polaroone may have encourage the hollander to have attempt that in which else they perchance will have doubt of victory and indeed many sharp threat we have after the run away of these fellow and expect daily their come over which have they come it will have cost many man life for their have take the swan and kill our man abuse they with imprisonment and fetter and all the disgrace that may be have much harden the heart of the english against they the three and twenty of march 1616. we dispee away a letter unto the hollander at Nero by Robert Fuller who be land upon Lantore the people of Lantore be then in parley with the hollander about a factory that the hollander desire upon Lantore and also will build a fort there the people of Lantore will not accord with the hollander but the people of Lantore will not grant it this time our messenger can not pass but desire to stay three or four day with kind word from the Lantore people so our messenger return the effect to demand the defence man and good the five and twenty a messenger come over unto we from Laurence Ryall principal general be new come to Nero from the Moluccas understand what have pass desire to have parley with we and will have master Corthop and myself to come in a praw offer of parley betw^ene the hollander agent and factor of polaroone and two of his principal merchant shall do the like and so to meet each other half way betwixt polaway and polaroone to parley but we refuse their demand doubt the treachery for they may have man lie secret and so carry we away perforce also the same time and by the hollander messenger we receive a letter from master davey be prisoner at nero. the effect dislike of what we have do and still do maintain John davis his judgement by information of the hollander in keep the say island of polaroone and that our commission can not warrant what we have do and advise we to have parley with the general Laurence Ryall and to come to some agreement that no more blood may be spill all which he have write I conceive be by the instigation of the hollander possess he with many untruth as hereafter it plain appear the first and principal they have so wrought he in humour he and make he believe that they have our king majesty letter to take any english ship if they find they to the eastward of the selebe which news make we much to marvel and that if any such thing be we must obey it hereupon we do write a letter unto Laurence Ryall general by his messenger that if he will send over unto we two of his principal merchant viz. Henrick de Watterfoord and Peter young and to land they upon the small island and have receive they into our charge master Corthop and one more to attend upon he will present go over so their m^ssenger depart and two day after viz. the three of April return with this answer the two merchant before name which we desire for pledge can not come the one go to sea in the horn the other his business such be principal book keeper can not be spare the say Laurence Ryall propound two other late come over and principal merchant call Cornelius neep and Hans Rogers we return the say messenger accept they and the six of April their galley come over unto we and bring these two man present receive they into our charge and a tent be set up near the place where they land there lodge they because they shall not come near our fort to take any view how we be fortify and place a guard always about the tent twelve english man with small shot and that they may receive no wrong of the bandanese nath. Corthop upon pledge go to parley with the hollander at Nero present master Corthop go into their galley and go over to Nero and arrive there near night and be receive no word pass that night but refer until next day so the next day do discourse many opposition on both side which I leave to relate because of the letter of master Corthop which I bring from Banda and deliver unto captain ball will certify your worship at large only a little I will touch many threaten word they use and speak of many abuse they have receive by the English the hollander accuse our people of untruth that sir Henry Middleton do wear the holland colour in the red sea in the trade and give out they be hollanders master Corthop reply that be a untruth for that he come forth in the say ship and continue in she as long as she reign and never know she to wear Holland colour and reply that sir Henry be a gentleman that much scorn to wear the holland colour also report the hollander report ^hat they have our king ^ for take of ship etc. all untruth that they have the king of England letter to take any english to the eastward of the selebe so master Corthop urge they that he may see the same and that if they can show he that we will obey it and begone but they can show no such letter diverse other thing they allege but no truth and many persuasion to leave the island of Polarcone persuade he the great error we be run into in hold the same all this while master davey neither any the english be permit to come near master Corthop the general Laurence Ryall see he can not pervaile and to have his desire grow much discontent and throw his hat on the ground and pull his beard for anger master Corthop answer he that he can do nothing of himself but be join to a counsel be assistant and will relate what have pass when he come to polaroone and that we will consider of it and so write our direct answer thus I advise he to say that he may get the more free away the Hollande^ deny to restore our ship but upon condition to render polaroone also master Corthop demand the defence man and good in their possession but they will deliver neither ship nor man except upon composition thus be Laurence ryalls demand that we will permit he to come with his ship and galley unto the small island adjoin to polaroone where our castle be and twelve piece of ordnance and there to land his man and his ordnance and be possess will deliver unto we the swan and defence and all our man and for the good he will make restitution to all to a penny all this will not do then to conclude desire master Corthop to set his hand unto a note which he have draw the effect that the say Laurence Ryall have make these proffer unto we master Corthop likewise refuse and will not put his hand hereunto now they have so wrought with master Davie that they be persuade that he will persuade somewhat he be send for by the general and admit into the room with master Corthop so master Corthop and he have much discourse speak of the letter which they shall have and be persuade that it be true and that we continue in a great error then master Corthop acquaint he what have pass in discourse with Laurence Ryall Laurence ly-all and what proffer we have make he if he will show we the say letter which master Davie perceive so reasonable a proffer the man of the swan do complain of want of food and clothing in their imprisonment in the hollander hand and that they have sit in judgement upon they and give sentence upon they a praw send towards Bantam from Polaroon which they can not according as they have verify unto he make good master Davie present in great fury rail against they all say they have do he great injury in tell he and possess he with so many falsehood and further say that they promise he and his man good quarter but his man complain much of want of food and clothing and hard usage and that they have sit in judgement upon he and his company and have give they all condemnation there to remain until they hear out of Holland and can be content to remain so as we can keep they from the island of polaroone etc. so master Corthop take his leave and be bring over again unto we and be land we present release their hostage and so depart for nero. now the easterly monson be come we fit a Bandan praw to dispeed away from Bantam to give advice what have pass it be conclude myself Mr Hynsley master of the defence and other to the number of four english and fourteen bandanese of polaroone shall go we have the great number of man doubt of the hollander lay wait for we whereby we may by row free ourselves and indeed the principal of polaroone desire it these which we bring five of they be principal man one be the sabandors son the principal of the island his father be the other four be Orencayas and the rest their servant these also come to deliver the nutmeg tree and earth of the say island and to manifest their love unto the English we set sail from polaroone the seventeen of April 1617. and as we fall with Bottone stand our course for moccasor a Holland ship and pinnace give chase we discover a great ship and pinnace they see we give we chase bearing a press sail so that we have no way to escape they only we must perforce stand in for Bottone and do half a day they give we chase and have fetch we up have we not row hard so we be near the town of Bottone by night think they will not have come so far into the river next morning we perceive this ship and pinnace almost within musket shoot of we present we land most of what we have in our praw and carry it into the wood and go present unto the king and give he a present such thing as we have to the value of thirty rial desire his protection which he promise we in all kind manner and send his servant to put all our thing in house and put we into two several house to lodge and to keep in heathen kind than hollander to the English that we be not see abroad so we take our leave we be no soon go but present come the hollander and give a present three time the value of what we give inquire what we be that be land but the king reply that he do not know the king demand they how long they mean to stay they say six day hereupon the king advise we to stay so long time to see if they will go or not that we may go with the more security the six day be expire they will stay six day long to mend their mast as they report so see their intent and our praw lie in view of their ship and pinnace that we can not go about to fit our praw but they will have take notice thereof wherefore I buy a praw and the king command all our thing to be carry by his slave into the same we by the help of the king of Bottone get another praw and come to Bantam lie out of sight of the ship and all thing be fit send his man out of the river pass near the holland ship with the praw and to carry she about on the backside of the island and send fifty man with we and convey we over land unto the say praw where we go present aboard and keep under the island until near night and so stand our course for moccasor hear no more of they we be inform that the hollander keep watch every night upon the water near our Bandan praw at Bottone we arrive at moccasor the seven of May 1617. and there we find the attendance pretend for Banda but can not beat it up the easterly monson be come so we ship in the attendance a hundred and eighty sucket of mace which be buy at moccasor and sedt the praw for Beniarmasin and Suckadania for advice and that a supply of good be not yet come to furnish those part as be pretend for that the Solomon be not arrive yet at Bantam be long expect the three of june we arrive with the attendance at Bantam understand of the death of captain George Barkley the surrendry of the i will of Banda bring to Bantam and deliver to master ball. and master Ball succeed he captain of the house unto he I deliver all thing viz. two surrenders the hollander letter and other copy of letter to they write by we and all thing else of our proceed in Banda all which I doubt not but your worship shall receive by the first conveyance also may it please your worship to understand the messenger that come over first unto we from the hollander have be with we two several time with letter from the principal of the hollander at Banda this fellow call Christopher Vande loare as he report come over unto we in a praw and three black with he say that he be run from the hollander upon discontent the captain of Nero have abuse he and that he love the english and will serve we also be exceed earnest with we present upon his come over and importune we extraordinary that we shall go that night upon the island of Polaway with fifty man and he will warrant we the island of Polaway and will bring we so that we shall take the castle discover unto we his plot I can not believe he but tell he that he be send to betray we this fellow hereupon protest and swear most deep to the contrary and that the hollander will present hang he if ever they do take he we tell he we will not seek it by force of arm for we have no commission so to do not doubt but they will be make to deliver the say island by right of law and justice the i will of Polaway take from we by force of Arms. a counterfeit messenger or dissemble runaway the english have the first possession and surrender of the say island and be by force of arm put from it upon his protestation master Corthop accept of he and give he liberty and go with he wheresoever he go upon the island so that he see all our fortification and occurrence of business which much grieve i for I counsel he many time to lay he fast at the first place where he be receive which be upon the defence-fort and tell he often my opinion that he be a villain and be send to betray we also it be the opinion of the bandanese yet all will not persuade master Corthop so I think good to have he with i to Bantam and that he may be send for England for that he know of all wrong the hollander have do unto we and he have say unto i and other that the three ship that be with we at polaroone which before I note come purposely to fight with we and to have beat we from the island and that the horn have plank brick and lime and other provision to fortify upon polaroone or the small island but that we be before hand also he do manifest unto we of four other great ship that be send from Nero which ship we see come forth and ply for polaroone but they be by the strong currant put to leeward and so force for Amboyna also he tell we the hollander suborn their slave to set fire upon the ship defence that their condemn slave be set to work to fire the defence at polaroone and if they can perform it they shall have their liberty and be freeman all this he manifest and aver to be true within three day after our arrival at moccasor this fellow publish that the swan be take by one of their Pinnasses and other disgraceful word tend to the disgrace of the english which as soon as I hear thereof I present charge the master of the attendance with he and so send he aboard hereupon he vow to have my life short after we set sail for Bantam and come near put he in the bilbo and search he and his chest for letter which he may have of advice to convey unto the hollander and find a draught which he say be of Polaway castle also a letter pretend unto the principal of the hollander or english at Bantam all which I deliver unto captain ball. captain ball. this fellow report he be a director in the build of the fort at Polaway and that he have experience therein and when he come over to we bring two hundred rial of eight so at my arrival at Bantam I do acquaint captain ball of business and advise that the fellow may be careful look to and keep prisoner that he run not away to do we hurt he will to have he bring ashore myself and other go and fetch he and deliver he prisoner in the house the counterfeit Hollander suffer to escape by the toleration of g. ball. captain ball have some discourse with he who it be likely give he good word as former he have do with many protestation of his loyalty and have his liberty in the house never make fast with iron nor in any room and many time I speak to captain ball to make he sure and tell he he will watch his time to run away who answer be he shall run if he will little regard it it much grieve i to harbour a traitor in our bosom he have be two month in the house the second of August 1617. get out and run into the dutch house whereas I have advise to keep he sure and send he in the first ship for England so to have witness against the hollander as he must have acknowledge and speak truth upon oath which will much have advantage your worship in the prosecution in law touch the main business the four and twenty of August hollander send ten english man from Bantam to Holland 1617. depart from Bantam a Holland ship of advice direct for Holland and two day after her departure they report here that ten englishman be send in the say ship for Holland what they be we can learn but imagine they the man that run away in the defence the hollander think to make they say any thing by their instigation which may make for they and it may be they will say that the defence be leave as a wrack which be not so the master and company will have go away for Bantam but we hold it not good for that the people of Polaway understand thereof be discontent and say that we have build a fort for the hollander the master write a note that he will set sail that night have no good at all in the ship master Corthop be go aboard to persuade the master and company to the contrary which the polaroone man understand call present a council and show many reason that it be not fit the ship shall go away and will not let master Corthop go aboard by any mean doubt of his go away it be propound that I may go aboard to persuade the master or to command he and the rest to stay and to charge they that if they go if we lose life and good it shall be lay to their charge long it be before the bandaneses will permit i so jealous be they but at last through o^r earnest request grant it and send six man with i of polaroone i acquaint master Hinsley the master and the company of the many inconvenience and danger both of loss of go^ds and life and scandal to our nation and that if we shall have go about to have lade spi^es the hollander will present have have notice thereof and lay wait to have take the ship and bring all into their hand the mariner be keep at polaroone with much difficulty neither have we man munition or victual to maintain the island of polaroone nor the small island Nelaro adjoin all the ship company will have go away be unruly and perverse say they come not to be soldier nor will they stay so that we be fain to give way and entreat they by fair mean like child so little in their resolution regard they what may ensue care for nothing so they may get free the people of polaroone perceive a difference among we do murmur tax we with our promise before mention and that if the defence and man go away we can not resist the hollander our mortal enemy who we expect daily and if they come and have the victory we that shall there remain must expect none other but rigour on both side the people of polaroone will have conceit that we betray they and the hollander will have have no remorse set their slave a work to murder wherein themselves will not have be see and shall they have gain either the great island or the small as they may and will have do have not the ship stay we have lose all good debt credit of our nation without hope ever to be there respect the runaway in the defence in many respect worthy of death all thing consider we resolve the defence to stay and land all thing and to let she ride it out until further opportunity but in the mean time these villain run away with the say defence endanger all and therefore worthy of death at my come from polaroone it be conclude by we that another praw shall be send for Bantam for advice twenty day after our departure doubt the hollander may have pursue and take we as they do their best and so all our proceed have be obscure according a praw be send 170. suckle of mace ship in a junk w^th eight English which be lose by the negligence of one Stacie who have charge of she and therein lade a hundred and seventy suckle mace contain three thousand three hundred sixty six catee at a rial the Catee each Catee six English and near two ounce better which if it may have come safe it will have yield in England five thousand pound in the say praw be eight english and thirty Bandaneses the charge commit to one Walter Stacie once master Hinsleys mate in the defence but it seem his knowledge and care answer not our expectation for near the island of Bottone he run the praw upon the shoal be rocky ground and there bilge she and lose all the mace the man get ashore Stacie be put in fault by the rest of the company for that some of they tell he they see land on the lee bow but he be peevish and headstrong call they all fool not regard it also may it please your worship to understand that the hollander have be by some of our people tell of their vile abuse do unto we and that it will lie heavy upon they at home be know the better sort of they have reply that they can make as good friend in the court of England as you the honourable company our employer can and that this which they have do hollander brag that they can make friend in court etc. will cause you the honourable company and they to join and that a chain of gold will recompense all and that they have rial enough in holland to pay for a ship or two so as they may hinder we from the trade at Banda all be consider we hope you the right honourable and worshipful our employer will so prize the blood of your servant by they murder maim and wound the rest all prisoner also all damage interest and hindrance in the return of ship and good also poor man percitular loss as also master Corthop myself sophonie Cozocke and George Muschampe we all presume what we have in the swan to be as sure as on the shore and now have lose all that they may better advise themselves how they attempt the like again likewise master Davie tell i many time John Davie have 700. rial of eight by he when he be take and further fear that if it please GOD to send he well home he will come forth no more find himself decay and weak in body and that he have six or seven hundred rial to employ with which return and other his wage he shall have a competent live all which money as far as I can learn he have by he when he be take now these cross I be persuade will kill he or else I doubt they will make he away by poison he that he shall never see England again now for advice as touch the trade at Banda the island of polaroone be report to be the worst island and be about eight english mile compass and the small island adjoin call Neluco about one english mile compass there be pretty store of mace and nut grow upon polaroone and more will be if it be well husband Lantore and rosinging yield great store rosinging be a fine island and yield the large nut and Mace now if we hold polaroone description of polaroone etc. we can want spice for the people of Lantore rosinging and other place thereabouts will come over to we and bring their spice if we bring rice cloth salt pepper mellase and other necessary for food and some moccasor gold which will pass at Banda as currant as rial of eight and at the same rate be worth at Bantam but two shilling four penny the profitable trade or two shilling six penny the piece call mass our Cargason which we have be but small have but one hundred quoyne of rice our cloth at moccasor much decay lie there two or three year if we have have three time as much cloth and spice we can have sell it all for nut and mace at polaroone and be entreat for Rice and cloth by Lantore and rosinging man and other but have it not for they and some return with part of their spice home again they come over to polaroone with prawe and correcorry in the night the mace and nut be very good but lie so long must needs decay by the many molestation of the hollander we have no time nor lime to make wherewith to preserve the nut the trade will prove profitable if we may quiet enjoy the island and we must buy rice at a low rate than at moccasor it be by report at jap^n about half the price may it please your worship to understand that after my arrival at Bantam a land quarrel at Bantam with the hollander the steward of the house be at the market to buy provision the hollander steward there present quarrel with he whereof while they contend notice be give at the dutch house and present Timon the second merchant run forth with twenty japon and hollander a very Timon and black to the Basar or market run upon our steward with their draw weapon he have but two english all disarm enforce they to shift and give way mean while Richard hunt chance to come by and draw his sword who present they assault and give he three wound whereof he die within fifteen day after on the four and twenty of july 1617. notice hereof be bring to the english house we with our japon run forth and meet with they before they can recover their house and wound two hollander whereof both die short after also one of their black then kill outright and one or two more of they be hurt and so drive they home to their house they give after that great word that they will put we all to the sword and do lie in wait for our people with their pistol and piece whereof we have notice by the javan and stand upon our guard night and day to receive they if they have give any attempt on the house or abroad now concern the land of Banda and especial polaway captain castleton may have make it sure unto the english as I have hear report by diverse our right by law and equity unto Polaway and the english have still more right on that island both by law and justice than the Hollander although by force of arm they put the english from it the easy obtain and captain castleton deny the right and possession the english have there as it be report embolden the hollander to use the violence at polaroone and except it be supply this year and the possession maintain the name of English be utter disgrace and little hope of be receive there again which if we hold until your worship have resolve what to do herein we shall in short time procure as much nut and mace as they which may in time prove a entrance into the Moluccas for clove the hollander pretend they have right unto the Moluccas and Banda by the king of Ternates * * in the quarrel first move betwixt capt. keeling and they 1609 they never make such title but pretend agreement and intend and extend force see above pag. 202. their own article of their right son have he prisoner but the bandaneses deny any right the king of ternate have in their land every island be free of itself and govern by sabandor and Orencayas general appoint now it be meet that a supply be send the bandaneses and English for rice victual and cloth and other necessary to hold the possession and bring away the nut and mace there in readiness in godowne the hollander give out that they will take your ship that shall go into those part and cut they off so to famish both english and Bandaneses so your worship may charge they of all damage already do and may expect to hear of further abuse from they wherefore it require a earnest and speedy prosecution that we may quiet trade without molestation unto those part that have surrender and desire trade with we viz. polaway a paradise by report the hollander report it to be as good unto they as Scotland to his majesty polaroone rosinging and wayre wayre be a town upon Lantore and if in case of necessity your worship can agree for Polaway yet if you may enjoy the three last we shall procure nut and mace enough for England as also to transport both thence and hence for surat and other place in the indies now be the time or never upon the vile abuse of bloodshed and murder commit by the hollander and for the trade there it will prove very profitable I make no doubt what have pass former I doubt not but captain jordan have certify at large what since myself it be requisite that I shall relate the particular of all occurrence in respect the business be of so great importance here be find home for England the Charles and hope I pray God send they well at London I have send your worship a brief abstract of our Cargason for Banda and sale there make if I seem tedious I humble crave pardon with my humble duty I end beseech the almighty to prosper and give good success to all your design humble take leave your worship most humble servant in all duty THOMAS SPURWAY endorse to the honourable and right worshipful company of the merchant of London trading to the east indies these be deliver by captain Henry Pepwell who God preserve chap. 4 relation and remembrance take out of a large journal of a voyage set forth by the east indian society wherein be employ the james the Anne the newyear gift the bull and the bee write by JOHN hatch master of the bee and after in the newyear gift and last come home in the james. the five of march 1616. we set sail from the down the seven and twenty 1617. we see the canary 1617. April the ten we meet the Tornadas in six degr from thence to the twenty we observe a current set to the north. the thirty the Tornadas leave we in latitude thirty minute north longitude three hundred and fifty degree fifteen minute that night we cross the line june the one and twenty Soldania Bay we come to anchor in Soldania bay accompany with the gift and the bull have lose our admiral and vice-admiral the night before by fog and hazie weather the hound they come in the next day there we find ride the hound wherein be master William jourdaine here we can get no refresh for our sick man wherefore on the first of july some be send to march up into the country to get provision which they do without loss of any only two hurt in great abundance the thirteen we set sail from the Bay Molala or Mohelia August the thirteen we anchor in the road of Molala the seventeen we have both our cable cut with the rock the eighteen we set sail from thence the five and twenty in latitude at noon four degree forty four minute longitude fifty three degree five minute by judgement we find ourselves hinder by some current at six in the evening the water be change white sea white and at seven as white as any whey which make the sky also white and hazie this night we sound often and have no ground thus the water continue all night in the strange manner that ever I see current to the south south w^st until the day light do alter it it so continue together with the current the six and seven and twenty be but little whitish and the current also forsake we the four of September we pass by Socatra but come not within sight by reason of the monson lest it shall be do before we come to surat we find in the four day before that a great current to the north. by help of a current the ship have pass three score league more than otherwise she can have run which now leave we the seven a leak spring in the admiral which master copeland their minister have with much feel relate how dangerous danger by leak of this yo^ have master bring own report in his relation write since this which hereafter follow a (@) english man of war either by villainy or negligence of the shipwright as after appear when they come to careene she being a great hole slight stop and much hazard ship good and man they have none other mean there in deep water to stop it but by stitch a bonnet or piece of a sail full of Ockam or calk stuff which by force of the water run into the ship be hale down to the place be suck and force in and so stay the leak till itself decay in time than the leak renew and again stop which in the careen be find and remedy on the eleven it be stop the twelve we take a Portugal ship which come from mosambeek lade principal with elephant tooth and find for diu. in the sixteenth we see two junk one of they chase by two ship which be the Francis and the lion ship set forth by the junke they chase be the mogul mother of the burden of twelve or fourteen hundred ton have in she above a thousand person and nine and twenty tun of silver some report more a great deal we chase the chaser and in the evening come up unto they with the bee and the gift and so save the junke with who and she two chaser we anchor on the twenty between the river of surat and the bar of Swally surat the thirteen of march we weigh the fifteen at night we anchor to the south west of Damon Damon 1618. the seventeen the Anne depart from we to the * * this voyage you have hereafter red Sea the seven and twenty 1618. we espy many sail and fetch they up with the bee be five and twenty sail fourteen sa^le of frigate man of war eleven of merchant the Molucca fleet and two great galley of Goa which exchange some shot with we but assoon as they can clear themselves from we go away and be so far off at sea they all escape we not without great trouble in three vessel whence they heave chist and other thing overboard to make room for their oar and eight of they get into cochin the rest to Goa the nine and twenty come aboard a boat with one woman and four man from the king of Calcutta the woman be interpreter and speak Portuguise April the first we come to anchor two mile to the north of the road of bring John bri^ion brim John or bring John how to know it about two league to the north of brim John be a red cliff and to the south of it a low sandy shore and the next high land or cliff be within a mile of the road of brim John where on the second we anchor master coytmore and I agree the next day with the governor for forty rial to water there and seventy man be land to guard the water place for fear of poison for they be treacherous people which also come arm the next day very strong and will not permit we under twenty rial more the twelve of April we have much ado the current set we right on the island of Zelon half a league from cape to double it with tack off and on that night master hatch make master of the newyear gift Nicobar the thirteen the general come aboard the gift and establish i master of she the fourteen the bee depart from we for the coast of Coromandell the six and twenty we be near the southerly island of Nicobar the nine and twenty we anchor on the main of sumatra the high hill Lambre by some call bear south south east half east from we and the east point of Achen road west by north half north four league and hal^e off the king his courtier with his woman be there on hunt who the next day send his chop by the Sabander and William Nicholas our chief factor there at who part we give twenty piece of ordnance to honour the king presence and his woman which be well take and go the same night near to Achen and anchor the first of May a little to the west of the court. the ten of june we weigh to go for Teco but with foul weather be put back again the nineteen we again set sail the four of August we come to a anchor in the road of Teco the first of September we set sail for Bantam where on the two and twenty we anchor on the five and twenty arrive there the french pinnace from jambe on the coast of sumatra on the thirty come in the unicorn from Musulpatan the four of October we set fail for jaquatra and then anchor on the six and thence again on the twenty to Bantam with the james unicorn and Bee the seven and twenty the james have her leak break out again which do increase by report two foot water in a glass Leake again in the james. and five foot in hold before they know of it the eight and twenty they stitch a bonnet with Ockam and hale it under she which have be there a quarter of a hour the leak stop so that the water increase not above half a inch in a hour they resolve to careene she and we haste to get out our ordnance and provisions the twelve o^ November she be in like case and man be send from every ship to pump she and hale the bonnet again to her keel she be sight as before at the island where she be to be careen the fifteen the rose anchor at palamban point from Teco the nineteen four ship out of England the moon the Clove the Samson and the peppercorn sir tho. dale sir Thomas dale and captain jourdaine be both in the Clove the sun be lose at the island of Inganio and the globe lose their company between the cape of good hope and saint Laurence they have most of their man sick at their arrival the eight and twenty they anchor by we at the island be in all thirteen sail the james gift unicorn Clove Samson moon peppercorn Thomas english ship thirteen sail together bee advise Rose little Francis and the prize this afternoon the sun Skiffe come aboard the moon from Inganio with the master and cape merchant the minister and twenty man more the ship be split in piece and all her sick man drown be eighty or ninety of they the inhabitant of Inganio come down on they which be get on land sun perish and slay seven or eight hurt the master and other with wooden dart then they make they another boat of board and break piece that come from the ship so there come sixty or seventy man in the Skiffe and this boat and nineteen or twenty be leave on the island sick and hurt which be after take in by jowa prawe and bring aboard the ship be in miserable case with want of clothes bruise with the rock and burn with the sun and salt water the nine and twenty the globe arrive the three of December the bee set sail for Inganio to see if they can have any thing but be force back with cross wind the four black lion the black lion of the hollander arrive from the coast of China Palatina and other place her lade pepper Rice Sugar and some China commodity by report to the quantity of six hundred ton this night sir Thomas dale cause man to go out of other ship aboard the moon the Clove the Samson the globe be but weak man which the next day anchor close by the black lion which yield on composition shee be by report of eight hundred ton have in she eighty man and two or four and twenty piece of ordnance the nineteen sir Thomas dale in the moon captain bring in the gift with the unicorn Clove Samson globe peppercorn Thomas bee Rose and black lion set sail for jaquatra where they find ride seven sail of hollander ready to fight the one and twenty come a holland ship from jambe which send their boat for jaquatra with twelve man two great murderer and eight small shot with each man his sword but we way-layed she and take she with the barge and the ship put to sea again the two and twenty we think to have fight and ply to and again as occasion offer the three and twenty we begin the fight and the jambe ship get in among they this fight continue about three hour fight with the hollander fleet see capt. bring and master corthop journal hollander flee in which time we receive in the h^ll and mast between fifty and sixty great shot most in the Hull yet have but one hurt in the fight and he die of it the hollander and we come to a anchor all night close by each other the next morning we set sail and ply to windward but the hollander see we will get up to they weigh and flee between half way island and the other island to the east and so bear away to the east between the land and the main and when they come thwart of their island they see a little english pinnace which in flight from they have run on a ledge of rock little james sink and be there cast away they send their boat which by our pursuit they be force to recall and we stand after they amain and chase they be now by addition of another from jaquatra nine ship three or four mile to the east of jaquatra and night come on anchor the five and twenty come a China juncke on fire drive thwart our half but we perceive it betimes let slip and avoid it so that it do no harm at all we make after they but they be under sail to the east and the wind at south south-west the same day we take out the Thomas ordnance be a old ship and sink she near the hollander island the eight and twenty Thomas sink black lion burn they aboard the black lion cry out fire and she be sudden on a light fire and nothing save but her company which go into the boat and Skiffe this happen by some which have be at dice all night and go and break up a scuttle where there be Rackupee Rackupee or Aracape a hot drink which so soon as they have broach take fire with the light they have as it be report the three of january master jackson the land captain of the james die of a shot which have take away his leg at jaquatra the seven shoot and powder be send to the king of jaquatra to take the hollander castle the nine we weigh from this place to the westward the twenty we espy two sail to who we give chase in vain they sail better than we the next day we espy four which we chase as the wind will give leave till night the five and twenty the bee be send to Marough for provision the one and thirty we anchor in the road of Bantam the three and twenty of February sir Thomas dale weigh to go for jaquatra with the moon Clove globe Samson peppercorn hound bee Rose the seven and twenty the great james the gift the unicorn and the little james weigh from Bantam leave in the road the advice and the mosambeeke or prize the first of march the fleming see we and weigh and we make all the sail we can to get up to they and they keep the weather of we their admiral let fly two piece at the great james first another fight and then we go to it on all hand as we fight one of the fleming run aboard their admiral by chance and bear overboard his own botspret and beak-head and the admiral ancient the other two fleming see that shoot a shot or two run away and the rest after we tack and chase they but they go better go from we exceed and we give over the thirteen the bee come to we in Bantam ride from sir Themas Dales fleet at jaquatra the seven and twenty of April 1619. there come a juncke among our fleet from Patania with Fleming good and a Fleming in she which we take the eight and twenty the dragon claw come to a anchor at Palambam from surat Marough the twenty of May we set sail in the road of Marough to go for the coast of coromandel be eleven sail in company the great james moon gift unicorn Clove globe peppercorn bee Rose advise and the surat pinnace at five in the afternoon we anchor betwixt Bess and * * the black call the salt hill so Owen bodman Cracatawe the one and twenty a council be hold aboard the admiral the moon wherein Owen bodman be condemn for burn the black lion and other trespass who be hang the next day aboard the moon at the yards arm the thirty of june we come to a anchor nine league east from Masulipatan we stay in these part till the ten of December the nine and twenty of july the unicorn shallop be cast away at Penara wherein m. Rice and Harris and four man more be drown the five and twenty we anchor near Teco and see three ship which the next day come to we a new fleet be a new fleet the palsgrave admiral the Elizabeth vice-admiral the merchant hope rear-admiral we all weigh and go into the road of Teco the four of march we all set sail in Teco the five the james meet with a shall and they have much to do to save she from ground this shall lie from the white island southeast two three east three league within two glass the james and unicorn meet with another shall shoalds and stay upon it at five fathom water and within a cable length of fifty fathom and then the white island bear northwest by west eight mile and a half off the nine Nimtan we bear up to go to the south of Nimtan this island be near twenty league long and lie south southeast and north northwest on the westerside be great shoald on the east deep water hard by the shore the twenty at night we have a great storm and have many Corpo-Santos four Corpo-Santos viz at the head of the maine-top-mast and on the meson yard the fore-top-mast and the Mezon topmast the next morning the storm begin to break up and we see the high-land of manning cabo the five and twenty of march 1620. we anchor near the point of Ballambin where on the six and twenty our cable be cut a-sunder with a rock which we recover the the seven and twenty pola Tellore and Ballambin at the south-west point of sumatra lie the island pola Tellore in five degree fifty seven minute of south latitude south southeast from which be Ballambin where be good refresh and water thence to the south point call cape be two league south southeast three quarter east and from thence to the next easter point be three league and in the second bay from the say point be a river where we water but the water not very good the six of April 1620. we weigh to go for Bantam with a full resolution to make a end with the hollander one way or other they be eighteen sail and we ten little and great the eight between two and three of the clock in the morning be short of Sangang we meet with the bull and two hollander find to look we to bring news of the peace betwixt we and they the eleven peace betwixt we and Hollander^ their fleet be thirteen beside the former two come unto we from jaquatra and we salute each other with many piece of ordnance the twelve we go for Bantam where we find two hollander more the seven and twenty the james and the unicorn depart from we for japan to careene there the thirty we anchor in jaquatra Road. the one and twenty of May the Elizabeth the bull and the hope set sail with the Harlem and the dutch hope the elizabeth and Harlem be find for Pequena Pequena there to stay for the bull and the dutch hope which be appoint to go for moccow and the english hope for Patania and then to meet with the other four at Pequena thence to go all for japan there to meet the rest of the fleet for the Manillas the thirty peace be publish at jaquatra on shore and aboard the ship fleet for japan and Manillas the four of june the moon the palsgrave the Bantam and the praw set sail from jaquatra for japan and the manilla the seventeen we set sail to go to cracatow to cut new mast and timber to sheathe our ship and be a league and half from the road meet with a shall where we have but two fathom water be sudden on ground at the ship head and five at her stern but praise be God get o^^ without hurt shall it be rock and coral and lie half way betwixt jaquatra road and the sand to the east of Hector island if you keep the flemish castle and the top of the high hill one right over the other you shall go clear in or out if you can see the hill keep the castle south southeast but if you keep it south by east you will be near it or on it on the near part of the next island to the east of pola be a dangerous shall two mile off and seldom show itself the one and twenty we anchor and moor our ship a cable length northwest of the little round island and ride till the one and twenty of july in which time we cut about seventy piece of square timber for our decay ship crocatow a very sickly place and to pay the hollander two and twenty borrow for their house at jaquatra by our merchant this place be so infectious that most of our man be take with swell leg or body some break out with sore and boil other take with dizziness and dimness of sight almost every one lose his stomach and give to vomit with a strange costiveness six die and thirty seven be sick and lame all weak vomit sack rack beverage nothing stay the seven and twenty we anchor in Morough ride near the shore Morough which be no good road but we be force so to command the town wi^h our ordnance in succour of our boat if the people shall have betray they as they have do the hollander of who they slay eight man we lose a anchor there they cut off the boy that we can not after find it and can get little refresh or none the nineteen of August we anchor at jaquatra have be from thence two month and in one month which we be return from Cracatow we lose with the former six one and forty man beside forty five sick in the ship nor have we above twenty of our own company that can go up and down the ship the eight and twenty the hollander surrender the star again to the English star render the first of September come in a Fleming from Holland which tell we of the lion arrive at the cape from surat and of six english ship with she in Soldania from England news of english ship two find for Bantam and four to surat which be to stay in Soldania for four fleming to go to surat with they the one and twenty the dragon claw arrive from Achen with news that the Charles the ruby and the diamond be all at sea come for jaquatra and that the bee see a Frenchman of war on the coast of sumatra french man of war which will by no mean speak with she they be in all four ship but she have lose her consort the first of October the Schedam arrive with news of three english ship in the straits of Sunda the royal exchange the unity and the bear the bee also with they new fleet which on the second and the ten arrive here the four and twenty the dragon claw depart hence for the Moluccas the six and twenty one of our man suspect for steal clove be drown he have wish before i a little afore if he know of the clove that he be so far under water that he may never rise again and go over the ship side a step of the ladder break and he fall overboard and never rise again the thirty the bear and diamond be send for jambe in hope of pepper the eleven of November the globe depart from jaquatra for japara to fetch sheathe board and cattle and the fifteen the unity set sail for Achen japara the second of December the roebuck arrive from Teco with pepper the three the Samson arrive from Patania and bring in she the purser and three other of the unicorn unicorn lose which be cast on the coast of China the fifteen the globe arrive with board and plank from japara the sixteenth arrive a juncke which bring some of the samson man some of the unicorn and those which be leave on shore at Patania when the Samson and the hound be take the one and twenty the ruby depart for the Moluccas the six and twenty the Clove arrive from jambe and Patania the nine and twenty the royal exchange the star and the roebuck set sail for Amboino with a holland^hip ^hip in their company the second of january the bee go to Hector island to careene the same day the hollander have four ship that go for the Moluccas the dragon still serve the dutch. the dragon be one and the next day the new Holland and in her John peterson Coen general of all the indies for the hollander who carry a float with eight or ten demicanon and forty great prawe to land man and a great company of soldier return of the james. the eighteen the james royal arrive in jaquatra ride from japan where she careen both side to the keel the one and twenty arrive the new Zealand from Masulipatan and bring in her captain ball Thomas jones and Richard Thomas the thirty the james begin to take in pepper to go for England the one and thirty the bee return from Hector island careen to the keel and the globe four or five strike on a side^ in the james royal find for England the six and twenty of February we set sail their return home 1621. the nineteen of May we anchor in the bay of Soldania where we set sail the second of june we find there ride the anew wherein be captain Walter Bennet and the fortune a victualler and three hollander find for Bantam the one and twenty of june we see the island of saint Helena bear west by north sixteen league and on the two and twenty anchor there saint Helena here we take store of fresh fish by the ship side the nine and twenty we set sail and the eighteen of September anchor in the down chap. v. the voyage of the Anne royal from surat to Moha in the red sea for settle a english trade in those part dom. 1618. extract out of master EDWARD heynes his journal write thereof sir Thomas roe lord ambassador for his majesty with the mogoll have give diverse article of instruction unto captain Andrew shilling master of the Anne royal together with joseph salbanke Edward heynes and Richard barber merchant for trade at Dabul and after as they see occasion in the red sea it be think meet by captain Martin bring general and Thomas kerridge and Thomas rastell the twelve of march aboard the james royal the time be too far spend for Dabul that the say ship shall sail direct for the red Sea thus they sail from the road of Swally aden the ten of April we have sight of aden the thirteen we pass the straight of the Bab or Babel Mandel a island in the entrance or mouth of the red sea which cause the straight about seven in the morning Mocha and about five in the evening we have sight of Mocha five league off night come on we anchor and a canon come aboard we from the governor to know what we be and our intent which we answer and they have beg a few biscuit depart the next morning we anchor a league and half from the shore and salute the town with nine piece the water-bay bring we a present from the governor a young bullock two goat mango limb cucumber and water melon welcome we and desire to send one on shore to acquaint the governor with the cause of our come we answer we be englishman which come to seek trade there but dare not adventure on shore without sufficient pledge about three in the afternoon come a jew aboard bear in Lisbon together with a old venetian turn Turk one in good respect with the governor which from the governor assure we of all content the fifteen Allee Asgee the chief Scrivano send a present of goat and fruit to welcome we with two old man of good quality send from the governor to remain as pledge for such as go on shore they go on shore with many protestation of good usage hereupon master salbanke and I go with our two linguist and one attendant with a present for the governor viz. six yard of broadcloth stammel six yard of green a fowl piece and looking-glass at our land a thousand people expect and diverse officer be ready to receive and conduct we to the governor his house be fair and large build of stone and brick at the entrance be a fair gate with a porter lodge and diverse servant there attend within be a great court the governor house and state whence arise wind stair about thirty step to a square Tarris out of which we be bring into a large room have at one end a great bay window open to the sea in which the governor sit on the side other of like bigness look unto the wharfe or land place the be cover with fine mat and near the governor with fair turkle carpet and persian felt that whereon himself sit be a party colour satin quilt with rich damask and velvet cushion he be clothe in a violet colour satin vest his und^r-coats fine India linen have on a satin cap wreathe about with a fine white Shash he be accompany with the chief Scrivano the principal customer some turk of better fashion many indian merchant and one hundred servant he be about fifty year old and name Mahomet aga. when we come near he bow himself and we do reverence then bid we sit down and demand our nation and business we answer we be Englishmen of London their conference merchant who by command of the ambassador of his majesty of England resident with the great mogoll with who we hold league and amity be come to this town to treat for licence of free trade that we be friend to the grand signior and have traffic at Constantinople Aleppo and in other place of his dominion and ^oped the like here that we be come to desire his and the bassa firman for like liberty here as be grant we by the grand signior both for present and future time as intend to visit their port yearly with plenty of english and indian good that we have likewise in command from the say ambassador which have hear of diverse pirate english dutch french portugal malabar and other which infest the quiet trade of this port and principal the guzerats our friend to take they and free those sea of such encumbrance protect all honest merchant ship and luncke from injury and these be the true cause of our come he than rise up and bid we welcome they still suspect our ship a man of war by reason of some excess of some of our countryman in those sea applaud our design and demand why we be so fearful to come on shore without pledge we answer that about six year since some of our countryman be here with kind show and promise entice ashore and by the then governor betray imprison and many murder who harm make we cautelous for our own safety but that we be no otherwise then we profess they shall short know by the testimony of two guzerat junck one of which have not come this year but for the pass and promise of the say ambassador that our ship shall defend they homeward find from man of war in these sea have escape rifle last year by man of our nation through our opportune come to our rescue who deliver her safe at her port and send their chief commander into England to answer those wrong to our king friend he acknowledge our nation good and friendly promise that we shall live on shore and negotiate as secure as in our own country that he will also procure the bassa to confirm the same and will give we any content that for the ill usage former the governor than be a ill man long since remove and now live in disgrace at Stambola and swear by his Mahomet and by his beard that not one hair of we shall be diminish nor any wrong offer Constantinople that he will therefore proclaim our liberty that none may pretend ignorance to discourtesy he wish we also to look out a house in town fit for our person and good command two of his principal chanse to attend we and till we can fit ourselves better recommend we to the jew-merchant his entertainment desire he to assist we in all thing thus after our present deliver as from our captain and many kind thanks the visit the Scrivano we go by the jew persuasion to visit the Scrivano who be likewise chief customer who servant himself not be then at home entertain we with much civility and bring we into a fair room not much inferior in building or furniture to that of the governor where we have leave he and whence he soon return and welcome we with much courtesy assure we of whatsoever the governor have promise and that he himself will see all execute who have power also to right we we be inform that this man authority be no less in the town than the governor who be by he direct in matter of weight he seem a hearty old man after he have make we drink Coho and Sherbet we take our leave and rest that night with our jew. the next morning we spend a hour to view the town and observe the countenance of the people towards we who we find gentle and courteous they view the town the description thereof especial the banians and guzerats of which here live continual great store as merchant shopkeeper and mechanike trade their shop neat build and clean keep their market or Bazar appear well furnish with all necessary beside fruit daily bring out of the country the town for the most part build with brick and stone fair plaster over with plaster of Paris the building flat-roofed some two story high with Tarrises on the top whereon they build summer house of cane and mat in which they rest in the night and pass the first quarter of the day have at that time a fresh breeze from the sea all the rest of the day so hot heat at Mocha their neatness that man can well endure any clothes not so much as a shirt it lie level alongst the seaside be about two mile from north to south there be many fair house and three principal mosque the street keep clean each man door every morning and evening water and sweep seem like sandy bowl ally than street no filth suffer to be cast abroad but carry to a place appoint scour by the sea in fine I have not light see a sweet clean better govern town then this of Mocha betwixt the governor and scrivanoe be the wharfe about twelve score square near which adjoin to the governors house be a platform raise build with hew stone with battlement towards the sea about forty pace square in which be mount thirteen or fourteen small piece of little force against the landing-place be two fair brass piece about five foot in length on the other end be the Alfandica and a brass piece of six foot which carry a bullet as big as a canon this be their strength for defence of the town yet at the north end be a stone house in manner of a fort and in it some few piece but they put small trust in their ordnance rely most on their soldier of which two hundred reside continual in the town the rest be in all to the number of five hundred live within a day or two day journey and be in readiness upon any occasion Hoia nassans son the principal India merchant of the town profess and promise all kindness for we go to his house and after a cup of Coho and tobacco which be usual among these people we go again to visit the governor before we go aboard who rose and meet we cause we to sit by he welcome we promise as free trade here as in any other place of the grand signior dominion another governor expect nor will deny we any thing reasonable say that another governor shall short succeed he but one as his brother honest than himself who shall perform all the promise which he have now make at our request command the water-bayliffe to furnish we with boat at all time to carry we or water from shore for the ship aboard after this we visit the Scrivano and find he very courteous promise to come aboard to see our ship and bid our captain welcome and after a health of Coho dismiss we to return to the ship where our two pledge approve their kind usage who departure be honour with five piece feast on shipboard on the seventeen the Scrivano our pledge the jew and twenty person attend come aboard bring a bullock bread quince and other fruit and a cake of great roundness and thickness like puff-paste wherein be bake hen and chicken very well dress and please enough to a dainty palate we also with a quince Pie crab sack and strong-water add our best welcome he will needs be swear brother to the captain which be solemnize with a cup of sack and after much mirth and view of our ship he depart with great content we have water bring by poor people at reasonable rate we also have give good reason to the governor and Scrivano who approve it to make every juncke that shall arrive to anchor by we and there to ride till they have discharge their good the governor be willing we shall examine and compel they hereto because some juncke pass by their town to other port for trade to the loss of this storm and heat the one and twenty six at night we have a storm of wind off the shore with thunder and lightning very vehement but no rain which continue half a hour the rest of the night extreme hot this storm bring sand and dust aboard in abundance notwithstanding we ride a good league from shore the five and twenty we have a message from the Scrivano that the governor and himself have receive letter from the bassa of Sinan command they to receive and entertain we with all kindness to permit we to live and trade among they free and quiet new governor arrive ignorance of a new governor must excuse we of the charge of a new present to he his arrival be on the seven and twenty the ordnance of the town and junke and of our ship welcome he he send our former pledge aboard with thanks and a present of limb Mangos melon bread and one Bullocke promise in the bassa name like trade here as at Constantinople the two pledge remain aboard all night and go with we on shore the next day where we find the new governor and the old sit at the end of a large room adorn much what as at our first arrival or better he be about four year old name Raiab Aga be accompany with diverse principal turk and all chief merchant now in trade of surat Diu Dabul Sindu Calicut and Cananor at our approach he only move so do the turk the merchant rose and salute we he cause we to sit down by he tell we that the bassa the Vizier of the province inform of we have command to give we content and beside his lord command he know we to be friend of the grand signior and to have trade at Constantinople Aleppo and other place of his dominion a nation of friendly and honest disposition and therefore we shall find he our good friend and ready to do we any courtesy and give we as free trade as we any where have under the grand signior or great mogoll english fleet of five ship we tell he we be merchant and our ship vide-admiral to a fleet of five ship one of which be depart from surat homeward three from Bantam and other place to the south and our ship by his majesty ambassador employ hither with such circumstance as before be deliver that if our just request of free trade be grant we purpose at our next come to settle a factory here and yearly to frequent this port with ship with english and indian good signify our intent against rover and what already we have do in that case against our own countryman factory intend at Mocha intimate that it be needless to press with the inconvenience which may arise from deny we trade who be able to force it and hinder other from come the fear of which have cause some already to pass by this town to Gudda the port of Mecca one hundred and fifty league far up a town of great trade and other to other place he reply we shall be as welcome as to any place in our own country and vow by GOD Mahomet his head and beard we shall live as secure from hurt as in our own land we ask what security he will give we beside his oath he answer his firman under his chop and procure the like from the bassa with this we seem content and give he thanks nor do ever people seem more willing to give content than they which I think arise not from conscience or love but fear see we able to their trade after some question of our ambassador now reside at Constantinople and touch the portugal and spaniard which he say be proud and unfaithful nation some speech happen of sir h. Middleton we demand the cause of that treachery towards he he answer the Vizier at that time be a bloody cruel cause of turkish treachery to sir h. Middleton let english christian read blush and amend and ill-minded man of himself and make worse by the instigation of other turk and arab of this town who observe the uncivil behaviour of our people as piss at the gate of their church force into man house to their woman and be daily drink in the street will fight and quarrel with the people thing hateful in these part these thing be in part but the governors covetousness hope to get their ship and good be the main cause of that ill deal for which and many other bad action he be not long after send to Constantinople to answer it and be either dead or life in disgrace to this day we dine with the Scrivano and hire a house of Hassana give one of our pledge at seventy rial of eight the monson which be all one with the yearly rent the Scrivano will needs swear himself our friend on his Koran yet deny this governor to be the man which captive sir h. Middleton which be after find turkish faith we agree for custom three by the hundred both inward and outward which he vow all other pay five and for silver and gold and money to pay none we sup with he also and give he a present the nine and twenty we have think to have have our firman read before all the merchant and proclaim to the people death of the grand-signior achmet but the most part of the day be spend in a ceremony by the governor and chief at their high church for the death of the grand signior and the establish his brother in his room they come ride afront our house we sit in our window open to the street they see we bow themselves and we do reverence their horse be accommodate with rich furniture at four of the clock we be send for but our linguist have get to a jew house that sell rack and be drunken and we pretend master salbanke present in disposition promise attendance the next day on the one and thirty the governor send for we and make know to all the merchant our welcome cause his Scrivano to draw a firman as large as we can require which he will sign with his chop and at his principal scrivanoe in the afternoon we shall have it the copy whereof be as follow translate out of the arabic a faithful and perfect firman give by the grace of GOD to the worthy captain of the english andrew shilling to the merchant and to all such as be come with he at this present and to all the nation of the english which shall come to this port hereafter for their good usage and friendly entertainment by the grace of GOD and by the faith we have in our holy prophet Mahomet with the licence of our great lord and king to who the great GOD of the world give long life by the fidelity truth and authority of the great Vizier of Sinan Mahomet Ba^ha Mahomet bassa Raiab aga. who the great GOD give strength and power in his kingdom and by the faithfulness and true meaning and command of i Raiab Aga now governor of the town of Mocha to be give to the great nation of the english with all faithfulness i the governor Raiab Aga do give liberty and licence to the english nation to come hither to this port to receive friendly entertainment to bring ashore their good to buy and sell with all freedom to carry such good as they buy aboard without let or hindrance and have make contract with they that for all good they land they shall pay three by the hundred not in ready money but in good and for what they carry away aboard so it be merchandise and not provision for their ship as victual or such like that they shall pay ready money at three by the hundred likewise neither more nor less but as it be contract by our agreement that no inhabitant of this town nor people of the country neither Turk nor Arab shall injure they but they shall have their liberty to their content and that this my firman and contract be give they with a good heart and true meaning to see it perform I witness the truth before the most high GOD and our holy prophet sign with my chop the fourteen * * either the difference be from their different computation or that the seal be defer to this day day of May in the year of our prophet Mahomet 1027. I have think good to add the bassa of Sinan his firman translate as before in the name of God this letter write with the word of truth of the most high GOD to all nation governor and officer over the people under my government GOD keep you all know you that we have give our faithful firman unto the hand of signior Andrew shilling captain of the english joseph salbanke his companion and to their friend Edward heynes merchant which be come to the port of Mocha for they to go and come with their ship to the say port and there to buy and sell all manner of merchandise free and with all content and we do further give they by virtue of this our firman in the faith of the great GOD and our holy prophet Mahomet in the faith of our great lord who GOD preserve and in the faith of ourself governor of the province and city of Sinan free licence for to sell and buy there here and in all other of our port and town of trade within our government as free and quiet without injury let or molestation as any of the trader and merchant which come to that port of Mocha or any other of what nation soever and do consent and agree with they to pay for custom of such good as they bring three by the hundred and for what they buy and carry forth three by the hundred likewise and do promise and swear in the true way of a oath to keep our word with they in this agreement and give you all hereby to know that they shall pay neither more nor less and further that they shall receive neither injury hurt nor danger nor any discontent give they either to their person or good but they and their nation shall have as from their first ship that come to this kingdom now this so ever to the last ship that shall arrive hereafter the like friendly entertainment and good usage as we have command to be give they at this present and that this be my faithful meaning this our firman which come to your hnnd shall be a witness of the truth write and sign with my royal chop from our court of Sinan this eighteen day of julie in the year of our prophet Mahomet 1027. the copy of the governor of Moha his firman give to master Salbank for good usage in his way to Sinan be this in the name of the great god. this letter of commandment in the name of our great lord who GOD keep to all people governor of town and city know you that it be our will and commandment that when the bearer hereof joseph Salbank or any of his people or any of the nation of the english come to your place of government you use they he and all whosoever friendly and with all courtesy that you make they pay for victual or other necessary no more than ordinary but rather make provision for they and assist they and for what good they shall carry away or bring up into the city of Sinan you shall take no duite of they as it the custom to other man but let they pass free do they neither wrong nor injury wherefore all you to who this letter or command shall come which I have give into his hand I command you all in the name of the bassa who GOD bless to see this perform with all diligence give at Mocha the twenty of june a. 1027. of our prophet Mahomet it be agree betwixt we that master salbanke and I shall follow the business on land and Mr barber shall remain aboard to prepare such thing as shall be send for the five of May we go to the Scrivano to get leave for rack to be make for our sick man rack be a wine or strong drink make of Rice for by reason that our linguist and other of our company have be drink in a jew house we complain and desire the jew may be prohibit to sell they any whereupon the governor forbid the jew and turk the sell of wine or rack in the town the governor at our and the scriuano request give leave only that a jew by his appointment shall brew it in our house but to prevent disorder will permit none elsewhere on the eight in the afternoon understand the governor and principal man be set in the custom house ^^pecting the surat captain then come ashore he go also to see the manner of his entertainment at our come we find the governor sit at the upper end of a long room upon a bench of stone on a carpet by he in a row on the same bench cover with fine mat diverse merchant and man of quality about twenty on the other side against he be about as many set in chair between they be make a lane reach down to a square place three step high from the floor rail in and mat in which the Scrivano and officer of the custom house sit on carpet the governor bid we welcome tell we he have give the chief broker order to come see our good and procure their sale cause we to sit down entertainment of the surat captain two merchant offer we their place and call for cohoh and tobacco after half a hour thus spend the captain come ashore in his own boat curious paint row by twenty of his own servant all in white linen with a tilt of red silk many silk streamer his sail of fine calico with diverse drum waits and ill trumpet his own junke and the towne-chamber add their report to make up the music if such confuse sound may be so call attend by a few slave trim up with silk and course satin he enter the place where we sit where the governor rise and salute he and place he next he and many compliment of welcome pass from he and from the rest of the merchant only he in the height of his pride neglect we and we accord he though we think the captain courtesy to he send his longboat and man to free his junke be four or five hundred ton and aground with his kind entertainment aboard our ship have deserve better respect after a little time in compliment cohoh be again bring to all the company and after it six vest two give to the captain and four to his four merchant which be put on and Salams give they again take their seat sit like so many paint image their coat be of course gold and silver velvet one thing we observe as the usual custom of this town at the arrival of any junke and the land of the captain there be free liberty to all the mariner and passenger of the same junke to bring ashore as much of their good as each man can carry on his back free from pay any custom in which manner pass by at this present three hundred person of that junke with their luggage to their habitation without molestation on the nine our landlord and the Scrivano tell we of three junke of Diu and four malabar that stay at aden hear of our ship fear of the English and will not come without our pass which they entreat we to grant the form of our pass subscribe by the captain and three merchant be this whereas the governor of the town of Mocha understand that there be diverse junke now ride before aden fear to come to this port as doubt good usage from we the english have entreat we to give unto he our certificate or pass for the say junke or for any other that usual trade to this port to come in free without any injury do unto they either in body or good by we and to have good and friendly quarter as love friend and merchant among we we find good usage by the governor himself and forwardness by all man to give we free trade and commerce and as well out of our good disposition and inclination to peace as for the satisfaction of the governor in his request we by these present do promise and give they all freedom to pass quiet and assure they friendly usage to their content so as they be not enemy to our dread sovereign the king majesty of England or his subject in witness whereof we have put to our firme etc. a large pass at the governors request and more general for the quiet departure of all junke etc. be after make which I forbear to transcribe the ten the captain of the dabull juncke invite we to his house to a banquet where we find the governor with fifty principal person beside attendant Dabul captain his feast all rise and bid we welcome we sit not long but Coho and Sherbet be bring tobacco and diversity of fruit as plum apricocke and Mangos we think these to be our feast and ready soon after to depart but the governor and captain desire we to stay and eat bread and salt with they which we do at last though late our great cheer come be about sixty dish of sundry sort of meat bake roast boil stew and sod but all mingle with Rice with diverse sort of salad in manner as in India our Cargason be of bad ware for the most part which have lie in India till they be near spoil and so hang on our hand we therefore importune the governor freedom of egress and regress and he charge the broker to procure our sale with great earnestness we obtain leave also contrary to the common custom to come and go aboard and ashore at our pleasure without demand any leave and charge the water-bayliffe not to molest we on the twenty it be observe in general that the monson change the four and twenty the Scrivano tell i that he understand that our man of the ship peddle of some at their come ashore sell in the Bazar Baftas and sword blade he say the governor have promise for the poor man good to demand no custom and therefore they shall not fear to bring it ashore but to sell it at the house for at the Bazar be a disgrace to we and our nation on the one and thirty the ship be in danger to have be burn one take tobacco in the spritsail yard arm and the coal fall in a fold of the sail danger by tobacco which there burn two or three breadth and be long smell before it can be find and tobacco take be prohibit except in the cookroom or captain cabin in regard of recover our sick man discover the cost and procure ballast in stead of lead take out of the ship it be conclude that the ship shall go over to Assab on the coast of Africa the ship go over to Assab and master Baffen master mate be send to sound and discover before the ten of june we have speech with the governor and in other discourse learn of he that he be governor of aden when the ascension come thither where he imprison the captain and jos. salbanke two day as he say doubt they be not merchant but a man of war that he be governor here at sir h. Middleton apprehension which he excuse by the ill rule of our people and bad disposition of the bassa that he be blame for the fact but the bassa who servant he then be command that and a great deal more God know his unwillingness to it and sorrow for it but these thing be past fear you nothing here we see how far he and the Scrivano be to be trust on the thirteen the governor send for we tell we that he have acquaint the bassa with our purpose to send up one to he for his firman who have promise his welcome whether we come or send he think it our best course that one shall go and we shall have horse camel and servant of he to attend we and he will write in our behalf loss of a monson how dangerous the nineteen arrive a junke expect from Gudda which bring chamlet bad coral amber bead much silver to invest in spice and indian linen many passenger from Mecca shee bring news of a ship lade hence the last year for grand cairo by loss of her monson through contrary wind force to stay a little above Gudda till next year by this junke the governor receive letter that the signior have send diverse ornament of state to the bassa of Synan and have confirm to he his government for seven year long and himself in this town of Mocha under he for the like time whereof he seem not a little proud in regard of my continual indisposition it be think fit master Salbank shall go and a present for the bassa to be prepare with some merchandise also to carry with he the Scrivano offer master Salbank his mule to ride upon m. Salbanks journey to Sinan which he accept with thanks he be furnish with two camel one cook one horsekeeper three servant of the governor who wage he have compound to pay with Alberto a linguist and take leave and letter of the governor on the three and twenty he depart about six in the evening the night be the accustom time of travel that morning we receive a letter from our captain of his safe arrival at Assab of their good health and find ballast and other provision on the six and twenty the governor send i a horse by one of his servant desire i to ride with he in company of other merchant to his banquet house some half mile out of town there to spend the day in mirth about half a hour after come the chief Scrivano to call i with who I rid and meet the governor in the way who we accompany to the place it be in the midst of a grove of date tree in which be a fair house and within it a large Tanke and other room of pleasure to sit in after a little while he with diverse other go into the Tanke and sport therein half a hour then be cohoh bring and give the company the governors feast after that grape peach musk and water melon almond blanch with other raisin in great abundance for he have at least fifty or sixty guest beside attendant and always between while Coho and tobacco thus with music indifferent good he spend the forenoon after prayer he go again into the Tanke with other wherein he spend a hour in sport with his company after which the rest of the time be spend some at card some at chess himself behold juggle trick until four at evening then be bring in at least a hundred dish of diverse sort card chess juggler good meat but cold and ill dress every dish may well have serve four man with good stomach he use i well and be earnest to have i into the Tanke which I excuse by my late sickness he answer if at any time I have a desire to wash he will have i come hither and take my pleasure and the keeper shall permit i and use i well the twelve of july at evening be a great show make by the surat captain before the governor be the time of the new moon many figure artificial make in firework rare and excellent good firework figure the governor send for i to see they place i in a chair by he tell i of letter that day receive from Sinan of the bassa firman grant before master salbanke come who hear of his come stay it and make another as he give instruction and deliver it he with his own hand Gudda of great trade Kitchine on the thirteen pass by the road of Gudda a junke of four or five hundred ton find for Kitchine a day sail within the entrance of the red sea I suppose it not far from cape on the coast of Africa shee be report to be rich in gold royalls of plate and many sort of merchandise yearly come to Mocha bring myrrh trunk for Coho seed at the first beginning of the westerly monson Aliambo and dispatch here go up to Gudda or Aliambo and there sell her Coho and indian good which she take in at Kitchine bring thither by Portugal frigate from Diu Portugal junk and other place her lade outward be indico all manner of indian linen gum lac and myrrh she be freight by the portugal and the governor wish we may meet with she which it be likely we have do have not our ship be absent which return into the road on the one and twenty I go aboard and be tell that the king of Assab with his brother and brother son return of the ship have be aboard and receive good entertainment in requital whereof the king promise to send for store of beef and goat but in the evening by sign of a light give flee with all his people up into the mountain pretend a pursuit of his enemy and never return so much as thanks the seven and twenty before day master salbanke return in perfect health and content with his m. salbanke his return he relate to i of his hard journey good respect give he by the way in all place be always meet before he enter any town of note with horse and foot to guard he to the governor and of they receive with good welcome his provision provide by their officer but at his own charge the governor of Moha^ servant in the name of the bassa relation of his voyage and entertainment procure his good usage before he come into Sinan he be meet a mile without the city by forty or fifty brave turk well horse send by the bassa to bring he in which convey he to a house ready and rich furnish against his come he receive friendly entertainment of the principal xeriffe and the bassa chief treasurer which be both appoint to welcome he and two day after the bassa himself give he hear of who he receive courteous entertainment and two both of one tenor but one write in a fair character than the other to show to the grand signior if occasion require I find by his report that the city of Sinan with the country adjoin will vent yearly some quantity of english cloth those part for three quarter of the year be cold yea sale of english cloth likely in this summer time a man may well have endure a fur gown beside there be a court keep to which belong forty or fifty thousand gallant turk most of which wear garment of venetian cloth of great price also not far from thence lie a leskar of soldier to the number of thirty thousand Arabia not whole subject to the Turk that continual be in the field against a Arab king not yet conquer which live in the mountain adjoin all which he say be report to wear coat quilt of Cotton make of India pintado which be dear and little serviceable for want of cloth to keep they from cold which there be extreme to this I may add the city of Tyeis and the leskar of thirty or forty thousand soldier govern by a Almain turn Moor subject to the bassa of Sinan where be much cloth wear not above five day journey from Mocha yet very cold the second of August the governor send our captain a vest a rich one by his chief Shabander with drum and trumpet the captain vest his boat bedeck with flag and streamer in great bravery which be deliver with great reverence and receive according the eleven the captain of Dabul melic Maruet and Nakada rooswan the Chau captain send we their letter of recommendation to their king according to our desire certify of our friendly usage here and promise to defend they homeward find from pirate and therefore beseech in our behalf freedom of trade and friendly usage in their kingdom the fourteen we give our pass as at other time to other unto two captain of the malabarre Ben Mahomet of Cannanor under sultan ala Raia and to Abu Buker of Calicut under the Samorine this day come into the road a small galley from cairo with many passenger turk and jew rich in royal chekine coral damask satin Chamlet opium velvet and taffata shee have be in her voyage but thirty day I have conference with the jew one of which have be of my acquaintance in Barbary they report that the grand signior brother be make emperor have imprison his two nephew do to death some and otherwise discontent the great one and that he be depose imprison and the elder of his nephew create that there be two hundred thousand soldier send against the persian for the conquest of Gurgistan with other thing whereof some prove true other false according to the fate of merchant news many passenger both for merchandise and pilgrimage to Mecca some jew and turk desire passage for they and their good in our ship to surat and it be likely when they know we better much profit may be make this way their junke be so pester usual with uncivil people thus have sell and barter our good as well as we may hope of such a Cargason and dispatch our business we visit the governor and desire his letter testimonial to the lord ambassador which he give we we take our leave the nineteen of he the Scrivano and principal man of the town from who we receive protestation of much kindness always come aboard intend the next day to set sail for India in company of the surat junke according to our instruction chap. 5 brief note of two voyage of master MARTIN bring into the east indies the first with captain NICHOL^S downton general of four ship in which he go master in the newyear gift admiral from England to the canary we use our channel compass compass and from thence our meridional while we use our channel compass we give not any allowance for the variation which afterward we do in all our course Wednesday the fifteen of june 1614 we anchor in the road of Soldania the latitude whereof be four and thirty degree Soldania the longitude from the lizard eight and twenty degree of a great circle east the variation one degree thirty minute north we the four of july we have the cape of good hope east seven league off on Saturday the river of saint Augustine the six of August we escry the land of saint Laurence the river of saint Augustine have in latitude twenty three degree thirty eight minute and longitude from the cape of good hope twenty three degree of a great circle we leave it on the twelve and the thirteen we have Westminster hall which be a flat hill lie north-east by north from the road of saint Augustine southeast by south nine league off Westminster Hall be in latitude three and twenty degree variation seventeen degree and twenty minute north we on the fourteen and fifteen we find that the current have set we to the north of our account six league on the eighteen by observation of the sun at noon we find the elevation of the south Pole to be seventeen degree and twenty six minute the three and twenty we descry the land of joanna joanna the second of September we pass the line the nine we anchor in Delisha ride on the north side of Socotora in twelve degree and thirty five minute variation eighteen degree and thirty minute longitude eleven degree and twenty minute of a great circle to the east of saint Augustine their anchor and what pass at Swally you have before in captain downton the second of march we leave the road of Swally on the four we be as low as Damon and see the viceroy with his armada which chase we till the six at noon and then left we the night before we come in sight of Damon whirlwind we have many whirlwind the weather be clear as if the two monsons have be strive for victory the sixteenth cochin bear three league of east half north. it stand in ten degree close by the water side the land so low that we can see nothing but tree but up in the country be mountain variation fifteen degree north north-easting this evening eclipse the nineteen at noon be Sunday there be a eclipse of the sun the end whereof by my observation continue till one in the afternoon and forty five minute the distance of the sun from the zenith be twenty seven degree and thirty minute just as the eclipse be end Monday by observation of the crosier we be in six degree and by the star of the great bear also Z^ilan Tuesday at five in the morning we descry the coast of Seyloan five league off which near the water side rise full of small hummock and up in the country be mountain whereof one like a friar cowl Friday north-east half north eight league off we perceive that the current set westward by observation of the star in the great bear back we be in five degree and thirty minute the four and five of April we perceive the current have set we five league and two three part to the north 1615. current be in one degree and fifty minute when by our way we shall have be in one degree thirty three minute we find a like current on the nine the two and twenty we find that the current have carry we in four day thirteen league to the south of our computation the three of May at noon we be in four degree and thirty minute and find that since the former noon the current have carry we four league south of our computation we have sight of sumatra the like we find at noon the next day we see the i will of Enganio the north point bear south-west eight league off the six at noon we be in five degree and thirty seven minute carry to the south of our account five league by the current salt land pumicestone i will these marine discourse be here abridge and cut ^ff part ^^c^use I think few will much affect that part and now many mariner kn^w^th ^m by experience and in the borrowed book of the company I be force to be scribe myself the tediousness of w^ich wearied m^ Ye^ have I now in on^ and another while in another express the most material in this kind we see the south point of sumatra east southeast low by the water on the seven we be at noon in six degree and ten minute the current have set we six degree and a half to the south of our account this morning we see the salt i will which be in the entrance of the straits of Sunda bear east two three part north. the ten of May the southeast wind begin to blow fresh only now and then a gust which will sometime alter it and that about the change or full of the moon or else we have it always between the south southeast and the east southeast but most common at southeast on the ten the general we be able to do no good the other way think best to bear up to the north of the salt isle where under the north end of the northermost we anchor in twenty fathom oaze within three quarter of a mile of the shore find the like depth all alongst the north end of this island in that distance between the high salt-ile and this be pumicestone-ile which always burn and cast forth pumicestone like to Fuego the northermost we call Coco of the fruit find there these pumicestone we cast into the water which swim like cork the twelve the pinnace be send to pulo-beced for water it be brackish on the sixteenth our man find a pond of fresh water on the north end of the salt i will in the flat ground by the water side and fill water there we set sail think to have get to the south of the salt i will the wind be at north-east but can not prevail against the currant the nineteen we be in six degree five minute of south latitude the twenty the current north northwest and northwest whereas before for ten degree it have set direct west between those land after much contend with the weather and current have have very good water from palmeto i will half a mile within the east point in a sandy cove. the first of i^ne we set sail and stand to the south make a south-west way by mean of the current that set west south-west alongst the shore on the three and twenty of june master jordan come aboard and the next our general send a present to the king of Bantam note that while we ride in the straits mouth we find the current from twelve at noon till four in the morning to run very swift and from thence till noon very easy Sunday the six of August our general depart this life the ten of October captain jordan come in the juncke from jacatra and relate his kind entertainment the king be whole devote to we and hate the dutch. the seven and twenty of November the fleming set upon Kewee his house he be our merchant to buy pepper for we with intent to keep he prisoner in their own house but captain jordan have notice thereof present go and rescue he in despite of the fleming and bring he to the english-house the two and twenty of December have receive our lade we leave the road of Bantam their return the seven of january we be in seven degree five minute of south latitude we find that the current have set we south southeast nine league in twenty hour the variation this evening be three degree forty minute north-westing the two and twenty our general master Thomas Elkington depart this life the first of march we anchor in the bay of Soldania Soldania our company most part in good health the next day we set up our tent ashore land our sick man and our water cask on Sunday the three Cory come down unto we who tell we of one captain cross Cory which live upon penguin island with eight man and a boy to who master Dodsworth have give a Boat I send the pinnace which bring three and leave there other three these report that on Saturday last captain cross with two other their boat be split in piece cross with other condemn person leave to inhabit there cross lose make a Gingada of timber and have get half way betwixt the island and the ship when two whale rise up by they one of they so near that they strike he on the back with a wooden spit after which they sink down and leave they captain cross thus terrify with the whale and benumb with the water return to the island and have shift a shirt and refresh himself adventure the second time give charge to one of the company to have a eye on he so long as he can see he this fellow say he see he a great way from the island and on the sudden lose sight of he which be the last news of he the eight of march all thing ready we depart have get good store of sheep and some bullock from the tropic till we be in one degree eighteen minute of south latitude we meet always with a southerly current which set we to the south about seven or eight mile in four and twenty hour the reason I guess to be because we be always to the east-ward of that current which set towards the northwest from saint Helena so that we go in the edge of the eddy of the northwest current the five and twenty of june 1616. we arrive in the down chap. 7 the second voyage of captain bring into the east indies or a relation of the five voyage for the joint stock set forth by the honourable and worshipful of the east Indie society consist of five ship viz. the james royal of burden a thousand ton Rowland coytmore master the Anne royal nine hundred ton ANDREW shilling master the gift eight hundred ton NATHANIEL salmon master the bull four hundred ton ROBERT Adams master the bee one hundred and fifty ton jonh hatch master all under the government of MARTIN bring @. i. occurrent in the way at surat Bantam and jacatra 1616. the four of February our fleet depart from Gravesend Thursday the six master Maurice Abbot deputy with diverse of the commissioner be aboard the ship and muster all our man and pay their harbour wage the next day they depart and all our man be enter into whole pay after much foul weather the five of march we depart from the down march the seven we have the lizard north four league off which lie in fifty degree ten minute from the lizard we steer away by a meridional compass give allowance in all our course for the variation the seven and twenty 1617. at noon we have in latitude twenty eight degree ten minute the north-east point of the canary west northwest five league off the two and twenty of june we have sight of Soldania point and the same afternoon anchor in the bay whence we depart on the thirteen of july on the three and twenty we descry Terra de Natal the three of August we descry the land of saint Laurence in twenty two degree forty six minute of latitude on the eleven we see the i will of Molalia the king name be Fanno marry o fannad^ll Paemon the name of the port where we * * a eclipse ride by the inhabitant be call Angazija the next island to the east be joanna and the next to the eastward of that be Mawotta the six of August at night the moon be total eclipse when the foot of the crosier be nine above the horizon it begin at eight and continue till it be pass eleven and be total eclipse for the space of a hour and half the five and twenty of August at night between seven and eight a clock in south latitude four degree twenty minute the water of the sea seem almost as white as milk and so continue till the next morning and then as the day come on the water begin to alter again the next night we be in the same water again but not altogether so white the thirty before day we see the foresaid white water again and likewise the next night but can find no ground the eight of September we mount the rest of our ordnance this night at twelve of the clock we have six foot and a half water in hold which in four hour with both pump be free and after that the pump do suck so much in the space of half a hour that it will rise twelve inch water the nine in the morning I cause the chief commander of the fleet to come aboard where after that I have give they notice of the accident I will they to send for their carpenter to have their advice in search for the leak a great and dangerous leak and some of their company beside to help our man to pump other to rummage in hold and the rest to stitch our sprit-sayle with Ocom wherewith we make trial diverse time under the bildge of the ship but can not find the leak yet by diverse experiment within board we find that the leak be before the mast and therefore the next morning be the ten we fit our sprit-sayle again as before and let it down before the stern of the ship and so bring it afterward on by degree until by our judgement it be under the scarf of the keel and the stern and there God be praise our leak be partly stop for it rise not above six inch in a glass where before it rise twelve inch after this comfortable news we steer away our course and within three glass after the ocom be wash out so that we come to our old stint again this night we send for one of the bull pump to free our water from before where there be always till then a foot and a half water more than be in the well the eleven we fit our spritsail with Ocom and let it down again in which action it please God so to favour we that within a hour after our ship be thight than at any time before which I pray God long to continue the twelve in the morning we descry a sail which the gift do fetch up in the afternoon this ship do belong to don Pedro Alm^yda and also mo^t of the good Mocambique captain Neuce and jones at our arrival at Swally we hear of two dutch ship c^st away at gowdever viz. the Rotterdam o^ a thou^and tunne^ and a small pinnace the one force ashore the 18. ^he other the 19 of july 1617. one in sight of another Portugal spy this be a Portugal which come from Moc have about fif^ie kintal of elephant tooth in the morning the bee come to we from Swally ride and give we intelligence of the rest of the fleet that they be all in safety in the road of Swally which be no small joy unto we likewise we understand that they have bring the juncke and the two ship which they chase the s^xteenth of this month into the road with they the juncke be a great ship of surat belong to the mother queen the other two english ship which have she in chase the one of the ship be call the Francis a ship of one hundred and sixty ton belong to the other the lion of one hundred and twenty tun set forth by Philip Bernardy a italian merchant in London the captain in the Francis be neuce and of the lion Thomas jones who in former time have be boatswain of the Hector this evening God be praise we arrive in Swally ride without the sand where we find the rest of the fleet the foresaid juncke and the two englishman of war the bull and the lion be get in on the bar the five and twenty I give order that the Francis shall go in also that we may be more secure of she and her consort the same evening the bee and the prize go in also the nine of October at night I send up one and twenty chest of coral to surat which be land from the Anne two day before at night I send eight ton four hundred of elephant tooth to surat from the prize in the morning we have a consultation aboard the james where it be determine that the Anne or gift shall by God grace be lade for England this afternone twenty sail of frigate from Goa arrive at the bar of surat the captain Maior don Pedro de Asadedo from one of those frigate five of the country people come ashore among our man which be discover three of they flee and two be take by our guard who confess that they come from Goa a month before be command by the vice-regent to range the coast to discover the english which find they be to return again if not descry to proceed on for Cambaya to waste the Caffallo the fourteen * * this morning the 17. sail of frigate depart for Cambaya pass fair by we in the morning I send fourteen ton of elephant tooth to surat from the prize which be guard up with thirty six man that go for the convoy of our money to Amadavar the seventeen we send up twelve ton and four hundred tooth the seventeen frigate aforesaid return again fair by we and stand to the southward we send the rest of our tooth to surat on the two and twenty and this afternoon we land sixteen chest of coral and two of tooth from the bull. the fourteen of November be Friday we dispee the bee for jasques a month pay be give to all the company in the fleet the chief commander and the merchant except which amount to three thousand three hundred and two rial of eight and after that this afternoon we land cloth tin case of wine and strong water with the rest of the present that be in the cabin the seventeen of january be Saturday the bee return from Persia this day seven Mallabar juncke ride in the off to who I send out the Francis who bring in two of they and the be other two Thursday the twelve of march we depart from Swally ride the same evening we anchor near the bar of surat the seventeen in the morning the wind veer up northerly and in the afternoon the Anne depart from we find for the red Sea Tuesday the eighteen I dispee the bull. at noon we have go southeast by south twelve league latitude eleven degree twenty five minute the wind as four or five day before at night a little breath off the shore by day in the afternoon a fresh gale from the sea this day in the forenoon we see eight sail of ship to the southward of we and three between we and the shore moreover two galley and ten frigate these be chase to the north-ward by the bee and the Francis which I have send the night before to keep fair the shore the eight and twenty in the afternoon the Francis and the bee be near the shore k. of Calicut and thwart of calicut the king send off a boat pretend to be very desirous to speak with i but I be too far shoot to the southward before that I hear the news the second of April 1618. in the morning we get into the bay of brin jan brin jan and the refresh there where we anchor in fourteen fathom water within half a league of the town a high pick hill like unto a sugarloaf bear north-east by east by the compass which be the best mark if it be clean to know the place here be good refresh to be have hen and Coco nut in abundance goat and great store of fish also good fresh water spring from a rock but we be fain to pay seventy rial of eight a vest of cloth a small piece a looking-glass and a sword and all too little to give her content for after the governor have receive the present with the money and grant we leave he come again with seven or eight hundred man perfidious people and demand more money and have we not keep a strong guard at the spring he will have put we by it after our money be pay Sunday the five at one of the clock at night the wind come off the shore we weigh anchor and depart this evening we be thwart of a headland which lie southeast by east from brin jan eight league from whence unto the cape east two three south be seven league near unto the first head-land lie two rock a good height above water and a mile without they there be a most dangerous rock dangerous rock which be ever with the surface of the water but if you come not within twenty six fathom you shall go clear enough on the seven in the evening at six we have cape Commorin north north-east one three north five league off be in thirty fathom the nineteen of june cape Commorine captain ball and master Pickham come aboard this afternoon God be praise we arrive in the road of Bantam the four and twenty I go to the pangram Bantam to compose the matter between captain ball and the chinese who juncke captain ball have arrest for certain debt due by the chinese where according to captain ball desire I make proffer of the re-delivery of the juncke conditional that the Pangram will do we justice which he pass his word to perform Monday the six of july in the afternoon I go again to the pangram Pangram of Bantam his unjustice master George ball master rich master Pickham and diverse other merchant in company his malice be so great against master ball that he will not grant he access whereupon I send he word that master ball have bring the bill of debt and be only able to give a reason of all passage betwixt the english and the chinese whereof I be utter ignorant his messenger return the second time and tell i that master ball may not be admit and so we leave the court. the first of September in the morning the wind be off the shore we weigh and stand towards point air keep along in seven fathom upon the main point air until we be within three mile of the say point where we have seven fathom want a quarter the one cast and the next but three fathom the dutch have 3. great ship which do ride right in the way that we be to pass 3 at the careen place and 1. in the road of jacatra deliverance from 3. danger the 19 of this month the angel a dutch ship of 500 ton come from Amboyna lade with nut and clou^s and depart from thence the 25. of the same some suppose that our ship do touch but I can not perceive it off this point there lie a flat shall almost with the frame of the water but you have seven fathom within two cable length of it this afternoon as we stand in with the dutch ship which ride in the fair way betwixt the two land even as we come within a mile of the ship our ship come aground but GOD be praise we get she off again without any hurt at all and so stand in the bay where again we come within two cable length of another shall which lie southeast by south from the flemish isle one league and a half off Wednesday the second of September in the afternoon it please GOD to bring we into the road of jacatra in safety have deliver we from three imminent danger the day before GOD grant we may always remember it with praise and thanksgiving to his holy name the six and twenty of September be Saturday early in the morning I go to visit the king the second time remain in his park and find he in a pleasant vain I move he concern of former business and before I leave he we come to a final conclusion which be this first in consideration of our free importation and exportation of all manner of commodity to give he seven hundred rial of eight and fifteen hundred rial of eight for a plat of ground to build on @. 2 dutch wrong and the fight betwixt sir THOMAS dale and they SVnday the seven and twenty in the evening master bishop arrive in this road in a praw which come from japparra wherein be a Cogee which bring the matran his letter to captain ball wherefore I dispee he for Bantam the same night he leave two english behind he at japparra one of they be flee from the dutch dutch injury to the English and have letter from diverse of our people that be prisoner in the Moluccas and among the rest one be direct unto i from master Richard tatten wherein he complain very much of the boarish usage of the dutch that will hardly allow they rice to put in their belly and that upon every idle news of the come of any ship they be still put in iron the thirteen of October in the evening Cornelius marthon commander of the french ship take by the dutch french ship take by dutch. come into the road and the same night come aboard of i and after some discourse tell i that we have six ship come for this place out of England sir Thomas dale admiral sir Thomas dale admiral of six ship a leak again for some special business at the Moluccas and that he be find thither with the french ship the Souldhailer and the Neptune to attend the come of good friend the seven and twenty in the evening we have four foot and a half water in the james royal which we free in two hour with both our pump and afterward keep our pump go until the next morning about ten of the clock at which time by let down of a sail baste with Ocum it please GOD to stop the leak again the one and thirty I discover a place for the careen of the james royal point upon the little island that lie next within point in the bay of Bantam we make all thing ready to repair unto the foresay island the fifteen of November the rose arrive from Teco bring news that the hollander have a factory there establish soon after that we be dissolve the ninteenth the moon the Clove Viun point polo Paniang the Samson and the peppercorn arrive from England and anchor between Viun point and poolo-paniang this day I go aboard of they take with i such fresh victual as our ship do afford to congratulate their come come near I perceive the Clove to be admiral and therefore go first aboard of she where I find sir Thomas dale the chief commander and captain jordaine the precedent I understand by they that they lose company of the globe to the westward of the cape and which be far worse that they leave the sun admiral of the fleet in great danger of cast away sun lose at Engano upon the i will of Engano they themselves have much ado to double the island two day they ride still in this place expect her come which be long before bildge upon the rock as afterward we understand to our great grief the two and twenty in the morning the foresay ship stand in for Bantam ride and as they pass by the island where our ship lay we salute they with fifteen piece of ordnance which we have former plant on the shore and withal take in our flag to show our respect to sir Thomas dale the admiral of that Fleet. the eight and twenty of November come two boat from Engano with sixty eight of the sun man who bring lamentable news of the loss of the say ship with many of the company upon the foresay island the nine and twenty in the morning the globe arrive this day our leak break out again Leake again but be quick stop GOD be praise by remove of the bonnet the thirty our ship be clear from stem to stern the carpenter go down to search for the leak and as they pass forward still take up the ceiling as they go in the foremost room save one they find the leak be a augur hole leave open in the middle of the keel which be four inch and three quarter about their leak find be a agur hole leave open which leak if it have spring upon we alone in the sea will have tire all our company in four and twenty hour herein the great mercy of GOD do manifest appear in that it never break out but when we have a fleet about we for our aid GOD give we grace always to remember it with praise and thanksgiving to his holy name the second of December be Saturday sir Thomas dale and captain ball come aboard because we have proclaim a fast through both the fleet a fast in both fleet and the exercise to be aboard the james the next day which be the sabbath on which morning the precedent and diverse merchant come aboard bring master wren in company the preacher of the sun who exercise in the forenoon and master copeland our minister in the afternoon master wren and Copland this day the bee set sail for Engano be former ordain to go thither in hope to recover some money and good they hold of the sun the four in the afternoon the swart Leo arrive from Potania and ride to the westward of Poolo Paniang master Denton in regard of his acquaintance among the dutch be send aboard of she in the barge to inquire from whence she come who when he come aboard find one hendricke janson his old acquaintance a man that have be chief factor for the dutch in Potania a long time this man with another inferior factor come aboard the moon with master Denton where they be well entertain till sir Thomas dale come aboard and soon after be set on shore at Bantam the same night before day we resolve to go forth with four ship the moon the Clove the globe and the Samson that we may the better encompass she at break of day we be fair by she and after a few exchange of they yield up their ship the b^acke lion a dutch ship take upon condition that they may depart with all such good as do proper belong unto they on the six we bring she in near the island where we have leave the rest of our Fleet. the fourteen the bee return again beat back with foul weather that she be not able to get out of the straits on the sixteenth in the afternoon there come twenty portugueze aboard the james royal flee from the dutch at jacatra which be free receive and kind entertain this evening we be ready to set sail with eleven ship great and small for jacatra in hope to beat away the dutch ship from thence the english ship the name of the ship be the moon in which sir Thomas dale go the gift wherein I go myself the unicorn the Clove the globe the Samson the peppercorn the Thomas the bee the rose and the swart Leo leave behind we the james royal there to take in her provision also the prize and the advice because they have most of her provision in they the ninteenth in the morning we set sail with our fleet aforesaid and the same day we anchor between Poolo Paniang and the twenty in the evening we anchor with all our fleet about a league to the northwards of hector-iland this night we send the barge to the flemish land where they find no people at all upon the souther island there lay a dutch galley which they set on fire and so return aboard the same night this evening we descry seven roder in the bay of jacatra the one and twenty early in the morning these seven ship stand off with we until they be somewhat near the land and there they come to a anchor altogether this afternoon we stand in towards they and anchor a mile to windward of their Fleet. this evening we have a consultation aboard the moon where it be resolve consultation for the fight betwixt the english and dutch fleet that the next morning we shall assault the holland fleet in manner follow the globe and the Samson for the sun and the Thomas to pass in between they fit with combustible matter to set she on fire the moon and the Clove for the golden lion the gift and the bee for to attempt the angel the unicorn and the rose for the devil of delfe the peppercorn be send forth to surprise the boat come from jambee ride about three league off who boat with thirteen man our barge have take as she be stand in with the holland fleet about seven of the clock at night this our determination be write down we depart aboard every man to his charge but after we be go sir Thomas dale send his boat aboard the Thomas for three saker which hold they in work till eight the next morning so that the hollander be all away b^fore these ordnance be aboard the moon which make we all in a hurly-burly to weigh and get to seaward that we may have sea-room and the advantage of the sea-turne the which at length we attain get without the isle of point Aire the holland fleet pass between they and the main of java so that the same night they anchor fair above the coast of java and our fleet in the off without the land on the three and twenty in the morning the holland fleet stand off to the westward close under anti-lackie the devil of Delft borrow so near that she come agroand and sit fast for a quarter of a hour which be no soon perceive by we but forthwith we make towards they with all our fleet yet before we draw any thing near she be slip off again the fight see (...) ma^^er cortho^s journal wh^r^ you may (@) sir though (@) lett^r and^ master jordan and she with all the rest of the fleet stand off to the northwards our fleet have the weather gadge we pay room upon they till we come within spot and then the moon wherein be sir Thomas dale the admiral begin the fight with the headmost ship of the dutch name the sun our fight continue the space of three hour during which time we spend some twelve hundred great shot among they and so leave they for that night they stand off so far to the northwards that they get the burger boat into their company and then anchor to the westward of we about half a league there they ride all night the four and twenty both fleet weigh anchor we ply to the westward to gain the wind and the hollander run in to the shore towards point Aire in the mean time we descry three sail come from the westward afore the wind which come near we perceive to be the little james the hound and the Francois and after they be come near we we join all together and chase the holland fleet through the bay of jacatra unto the eastern point of the same where we all come to a anchor in the evening this night there be a junke send from the fleming at jacatra fill with combustible matter and set on a light fire which come so near unto our fleet that we be fain to weigh o^r anchor and be go the five and twenty be Christmas day we see the flemish fleet again stand to the eastward and the same day we send out our barge to follow they all night and see what course they take because we have leave the james royal in the bay of Bantam with the advice and the prize which ship they may have surprise if they shall get Bantam before we for there be no ship of defence but the james and she unprepared by take in of her good the seven and twenty after midnight the black lion be set on fire by the wretched carelessness of three wicked fellow and burn down to the water the thirty in the morning John jordan go ashore at jacatra master jackson slay the precedent go ashore to the king of jacatra with master John jackson in company to view their fortification where a unfortunate shot take away his leg and so consequent his life the first of januarie the james royal the advice and the prize arrive from Bantam the second sir Thomas dale go a shore to visit the king of jacatra and to understand his resolution concern the dutch fort the king give both the precedent and he great content in word promise to grant any reasonable request if the english will assist he in surprise of the dutch castle this morning before day the Francois depart for polaroone with diverse provision for relief of that worshipful gentleman master Nathaniel Corthop and his company aid to the king of jacatra GOD send she thither in safety the six day we hold a consultation aboard the moon where it be resolve that out of our great ship we shall land six piece three culverin and three demi-culverin with powder and shot convenient to assist the king of jaccatra against the dutch also that sir Thomas dale shall remain in the road with eight sail to countenance the business and myself with six ship to ply for the straits of Sunda to lie in wait for the holland Fleet. the five and twenty be Monday we get into the road of Becee and anchor in fifteen fathom oze about two mile from the shore the south point of Becee bear south-west one quarter west and the north point of Sabaioa the wester i will of Poolo Tiga be shut in upon it do bear north by west three league off the twenty seven and twenty eight we water our ship and cut wood and myself with master coitmore and other master go ashore twice to view the harbour which we find to be a excellent place for refuge of a small fleet against a great force the one and thirty by order from the precedent we put into Bantam ride with our Fleet. the first of February captain John jourdan the precedent come aboard who acquaint i with all the passage betwixt they and the dutch in the castle of jacatra during the time of my absence this agreement be cross by the pangram of Bantam who give we leave to beat the bush and think himself to have catch the bird but in fine be deceive which be that the dutch have condescend to deliver over their fort unto the english upon condition they may depart with bag and baggage and a ship for two thousand rial of eight to carry they for Coromandell on the four sir thomas dale with six ship viz. the moon the Clove the james the peppercorne the hound and the advice arrive in Bantam Road. this afternoon the rest of the ship come in here after our arrival understanding that the pomgram of Bantam have deal underhand with the dutch to have the castle of jaccatra deliver into his hand who before have unjust disappoint we of it we think it fit that the precedent and the rest of the principal shall repair aboard and forthwith to get all their good and provision from the shore the ten eleven twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen and sixteenth we be employ in get the honourable company money and good aboard the ship during this time the Pangram send diverse slight messenger unto the precedent to demand as from themselves the reason of his departure he as he say give they no other just occasion so to leave his country whereupon the precedent draw certain article of the several wrong and grievance that the english have receive from time to time at his hand which be to be translate into the java language and send unto he the seventeen master Vfflet advise from jacatra that the fleming be fortify daily and also that when the messenger of the Pangran demand the surrender of their fort with part of their money good and ordnance they answer that it be their master good and therefore not fit for they to give they away about noon we hear of the arrival of two dutch ship in the road of jacatra the same night sir Thomas dale with eight ship go for jacatra in quest of the say ship and I remain here with four to attend upon the precedent the six and twenty we have certain intelligence that four Holland ship be at anchor in the mouth of the straits of Sunda this evening we go out with the james royal the gift the unicorn and the little james and the next morning anchor near poolo-pen-iang to pridy up our ship and to take in water and plank that lay by our side the first of march in the morning we weigh again and ply towards the mouth of the straits where we descry the four dutch ship aforesaid at anchor near unto the island call Tamporon which lie about three league to the westward of Viun or Pallambam point so soon as we descry they we make towards they with all speed and they in a careless fashion ply it to and again with their top sail half mast down dutch bravery and at length as we draw near unto they the admiral and the rest bear up with our ship be the window most of our fleet and give we two shot one through the ship side under the half deck and the other in the steeridge side this I declare because man may the better understand the insolency vinivalencie of the dutch. or rather vinivalencie of of this arrogant nation to come on with such a spanish bravado and so soon to run away they have no soon begin but they be as quick answer from our ship in such a measure that within the space of two hour by the gracious assistance of almighty God we make they as quiet as lamb the admiral that first give the onset be the first that run away their flight and after he all his fleet who we chase until night and then find they too light of foot give over the chase the night we stand over towards the second in the afternoon we anchor again in the road of Bantam this day we have news from jacatra that one of the two dutch ship aforenamed be fast on ground hard by their castle and that they themselves at sight of sir Thomas Dales fleet have set she on fire dutch ship burn and another cast away the other ship which take in some rich good out of the castle be likewise cast away upon certain rock ten league to the eastward of jacatra the four we receive the letter from io. powel reside in jacatra that sir tho. dale depart from thence the first of march with the moon the hound the rose and the bee to search out the Fleming that be cast away the fourteen in the forenoon we have news from sir Thomas dale that he have get almost in shot of these four ship and then they be take with a calm the space of twelve hour and after this calm there do arise a tempest in the night which scatter they so far asunder that the next morning they be out of hope of their chase and so return to point air again a tempest determine forthwith to come unto we with the moon and to leave the rest of his fleet to take in some provision from jacatra the of march we consult aboard the unicorn of our best course to be take with the fleet where it be resolve that we shall go for the coast of Coromandell which as we be inform be a good country for the health of man and abound with Rice wheat butter gravance etc. which can not here be have for any money @. 3 their departure for Coromandell occurrent there sir THOMAS Dales death english ship take by the dutch. consultation and provision at Teco and departure thence APrill 19 1619. being Monday all our ship be together that be in this place and the three junk at anchor among we we resolve in counsel to put the honourable company commission in execution which be to appropriate the chinese good unto they for former debt on Tuesday Kewee come aboard to the precedent accompany with the three nochada or captain of the junck to know his intent who answer they that if the young king of Bantam will displace the pangran he will then come and bichir with he and deliver over the junck again the eight and twenty in the morning all our fleet be ready to set sail intend to go for Morrogh there to take in water Morrogh and to discharge the junck we descry a sail come in from the westward about Pallambam point which we find to be a Portugal frigate take at jasques and have twenty english man aboard of she and be send from captain Bonner as a advice to the precedent in Bantam these man give we to understand that sir Thomas roe the lord ambassador sir tho. roe return to England be go for England in the Anne royal have quit the country with great honour and reputation both for himself and the honourable company our employer bodman who be the cause of set the black lion on fire be hang on the two and twenty of May this night we set sail from hence the thirty we part with sir Thomas dale who hale in with his fleet under the island and we hold on our course for Messulapatan have in company the gift the unicorn and the Bee the thirty of june in the morning we anchor in nine fathom about two league of the shore on the coast of Coromandell here we ride for the space of four day during which time the cause that put we to leeward of Messulapatan be the violence of the westerly wind and the current set so strong to the eastward from the place where we first anchor unto the foresay point which we suppose to be nine league we have seven fathom water all alongst two league or two league and a half off soft Ozie cape comfort we be hardly able to visit one another by reason of the west south-west wind and the continual current set to the east north-east the breach also be so lofty on the shore that we dare not adventure to put to shore with any of our boat at length when we meet together master Roberts master of the unicorn give i notice of a bay lie in seventeen degree upon this coast about five league to the eastward of Nassapore where there be good ride for a westerly monson which be the only thing I now desire see there be no hope against wind and tide to recover Messulapatan the four in the morning we set sail and stand to the eastward the coast lie west south-west and east north-east and have run about nine league by judgement with the wind and current we find the land to lie away north and north and by west which give i some hope of a good road by this point of land there come out a great river the stream whereof have raise a great rise or shall of the sharp of the point extend itself half a mile into the sea which make the smooth road about the point for you may bring the say sand south south-west and ride in six degree and a half fathom oze two mile of the near land two league from the northwards of this point which for distinction sake I call cape comfort issue out another branch of the former river which make the head-land itself a island of the mouth of this river lie likewise a long ridge of sand which be dry at low water the northermost point of this ridge bear northwest half a degree west from we where we ride in six fathom and a half three mile off and the shall of cape comfort bear south south-west three mile from you and the near land between they both about two mile off the next point to the northwards of cape comfort be three league and a three part distant from it and do bear from we whence we ride north northwest half a degree west two league and a three part off to the eastward of this point lie another sandy shall the eastermost part of it bear north from we about four mile off in the set of all these point and shoalds I have allow the variation which in this place be twelve degree near the four of july in the afternoon we send the unicorn shallop into the second branch of the river which we call mullet sound to see if they can discover any town mullet sound where they may procure a guide to conduct Robert pickering and William clerk unto Messulapatan by who we have send our letter to master Methwould Tuesday the six in the morning the shallop return aboard report that they have get a guide to direct our messenger at a little village three league up the river they bring aboard twenty hen which cost two shilling Friday in the afternoon the barge return aboard from captain ball with one and seventy goat and sheep and nine and thirty hen leave captain ball and the rest at a town call Narsapela which be six league up in the country the twelve in the morning provisions master Methwould come from Messulapatan in one of the country boats and bring with he twenty hog two great jar of rack six goat and two basket of bread he bring we news of a dutch ship rich lade in the port of Messulapatan and ready to depart for Holland the six and twenty in the evening I go in the barge to seek out some barge which may lead we unto Vingeron Vingeron Coranga the chief town that be near the sea side the same night I pass in over the bar of Coranga and about two mile up in the river I lodge in the town of Coranga where I find the chief of the town very ready to entertain we in the best manner they can and give the governor of Vingeron notice of my come the same night the next morning have row up about three mile in the main river and two mile in a little creek we have sight of Vingeron about twelve mile off here I land and go towards the town but before I come to the town end the governor send his horse for i with all the music that the place afford among other instrument there be two huge brass horn in stead of trumpet the governor receive i very kind but more kind my present which be two piece China velvet and six piece China taffeta our congratulations end I take my leave of he who have then cause his Pallankeen to be make ready to convey i unto my lodging which be a house near at hand that he himself have allot for i the first of August I return aboard the james where to my grief I understand that the unicorn shallop be cast away three day before man drown near to Ponara near unto Ponara master Harris be drown with two of the coxson gang and one black captain spaulding master yard and the rest very hardly escape the danger Saturday in the morning the governor of Vingeron come aboard to see our ship in expectation of some great present on who I bestow a piece of China damask and four piece of China taffeta which give he more content than the sight of a thousand ship and so he depart when he see that beg can no further prevail on Monday the three and twenty I cause our man to repair aboard intend to ply up towards Messulapatan this evening we get aboard two hundred and fifty goat for our provision at Sea Tuesday in the afternoon here arrive a ballegat from bring in her twenty six candee of gravance provisions a candee of butter and one hundred gallon of rack this day I receive letter from Messulapatan import the doleful news of the death of sir tho. dale the death of sir tho. dale he depart out of this l^fe the nine of August 1619. in Messulapatan Monday the six of September in the morning have road most part of the former night about three league south southeast from the bar of Nassapore in nineteen fathom of the river of Nassapore we find the current by day to set south southeast by night north north-east after half a league a hou^e they arrive at find the wind at northwest we set sail again and ply it up towards Messulapatan this night we anchor four league to the eastward of Messulapatan the seven in the morning we see the english ship in the road of Messulapatan four league off this afternoon the bee be far southerly we stretch it alongst the shore and in the evening arrive in the road of Messulapatan where we find the moon the Clove the globe and the advice which be find unserviceable be here cast off and her provision put aboard the moon and the Clove Wednesday in the morning master spaulding master ball and master Methwould come aboard the james give i notice of all matter that have pass in my absence also of the state of the honourable company business at present this afternoon I accompany they ashore that we may the better consult and determine how to proceed in these weighty affair the first thing propose be the union of both fleet which be think most necessary and therefore soon conclude which business end both fleet unite capt. bring ^ of both the lion at Mocha in the red Sea Novemb. 6. they make choice of i to be admiral and chief commander of all these ship and man thus unite according to the honourable company direction the eighteen of October be Monday here arrive a ship from Mocha belong to the town who bring we news of the lion be at Mocha and a small frigate in her company the bee arrive from Nassaporpete with provision from the Fleet. the nineteen the dragon claw come from Nassaporpete almost lade with Rice and Paddie Thursday the nine of December in the afternoon master ball master Methwould and the rest of the merchant that be to remain in this country go ashore Friday the ten in the morning we leave the road of Messulepatan and in the afternoon anchor of the head-land to stay for the peppercorn which come out to we in the evening between the i will Engano and Messulepatan the longitude between Engano and Masulipatan I make nineteen degree and thirty minute of great circle in longitude which although it give not the true longitude in these part near the equinoctial custom have call it so and so do I because I will not savour of innovation the next morning very early we descry the land of sumatra the hill of Passaman bear east north-east half north twelve league Passaman in sumatra two shoalds and their escape and the high land of Priaman east half south fourteen league off here we meet with two shoalds the one within a mile to the eastward of the other the gift come over the eastermost and have no less than four fathom and a half over the wester shall I send the claw who find four fathom in the first place she cross it and have but two fathom as she return which be a little more to the northward this morning before day the wind begin to dull again which be the only mean that please God to use for our preservation his holy name be praise for the same this morning about nine the wind come up southeast and so continue until three in the afternoon which bring we to the southward of all these shoalds again and so with little wind we spend all the next night between the foresay shoalds and the i will of Battoo i will battoo a sag current set to the northwards bring we so near unto these shoalds for have the current as in former time set away to the southeast our course will have lead we near unto tecoo tecoo but contrary to our expectation we find that it have carry we to the northward and this deceive our judgement the four and twenty of januarie in the morning the hill of Passaman do bear east north-east one three part northerly and the high land of Priaman east one three part south twelve league here we see a dry shall in form of the Hull of a great boat lie south-west by west of the hill of Passaman about ten league from the shore and west northwest from this shall four league we see the breach of another shall which by God gracious providence we happy escape this evening at six of the clock we have sight of the isle of tecoo and half a hour before eight we anchor in forty four fathom streamie ground the say isle of tecoo bear east by north seven league off Tuesday the five and twenty in the afternoon with the first of the sea-turne we weigh again and steer in towards tecoo as we draw near we descry three sail stand to the northwards of the i will of tecoo three sail of Engl^sh which ship come to anchor fair by the shore the same night and we with all our fleet about a league without they Thursday in the morning they weigh anchor and come up with we which be find to be the palsgrave the Elizabeth and the hope by these we hear the doleful news of the take of the dragon the bear the expedition and rose by six holland ship as they be at anchor within the isle of tecoo the dragon bear expedition and rose take by the dutch. the star Samson and hound take also of the loss of the star in the straits of Sunda take by the dutch. moreover how they have send four great ship double man in quest of the Samson and hound of the safety of which ship we be very doubtful so that the english ship which they have take do almost equal the number of our three fleet now join in one Monday the one and thirty of januarie we hold a consultation aboard the james royal concern our future proceed consultation where it be with one consent agree and conclude to go to Achin in hope to meet with our ship from surat that we may keep our force together according to the honourable company direction the reason move we hereunto be the want of rice and other provision which can not at this time be procure at Bantam second the consideration of the hollander force hold it no wisdom for we to adventure the whole estate that the honourable company have now in India upon such desperate term they have at this time four ship for one of we and last the necessity of careen of three of our ship which may no long be differ without imminent danger of all three viz. the james royal the gift and the unicorn and therefore we have resolve by the grace of God to go for japan where we be give to understand that there be all thing necessary for the careen of ship and store of provision for the relief of our man the eleven at night master Mills arrive in the bee with three hundred sack of very good rice and eleven hogshead of oil give we great encouragement to send thither again Saturday the twelve at night the claw be dispee again for pedang and Cuttatinga to procure rice etc. Tuesday in the night we return the bee to Priaman to provide more rice and oil Saturday provision in the afternoon the claw return with four and thirty bag of rice sixteen thousand coquer-nut ten goat this night the bee arrive from Priaman with nine hundred and eighty sack of rice procure by the great labour and industry of master Mills merchant of the Elizabeth master Mills his care Friday the three of march in the morning we depart from the road of tecoo intend by the grace of God first to touch at Nimtam for the dispatch of the bee for England and from thence God willing to go for Achin in hope to meet the Charles and the ruby from surat this day afternoon we anchor in five and twenty fathom Ozie the middle i will of tecoo bear east southeast about two league off Saturday in the morning we set sail again and stand off west and west by south this afternoon we anchor again in three and forty fathom ground the isle of tecoo be east from we about eight league off and the white rock west by north half north four league off this white rock lie west one three part north from the isle of tecoo upon the high of this shall our boat find but three foot water from this shall the white rock do bear west northwest four league and the hay recke which be the ^lattest of the three hammock to the northwards of Teco do bear east north-east half east nine league off escape of danger from rock Samanca Ballambeen Anniar cracat^w and Becee distant eleven league Sunday in the morning the wind at north we weigh anchor and steer away south-west for that the current do then set to the northwards we have not go above one league this course but the wind veer up at south-west by west so that we can lie but south by east and before we have run three mile south southeast our man from the spirit sail top descry rock under the ship at sight whereof we bring our ship astaye and shoot off a piece of ordnance for a warn to the Fleet. before our ship be come about we have but three fathom and a half yet I thank God we never touch our ship be tacket we stand to the northwards think the safe course to return the same way we come but we have not make above two mile north and by west before we see other rock again under our ship head upon which we have but seven fathom the depth that we find all this day when we be free from these danger be forty and two and forty fathom and therefore see it have please our gracious god to free we from both these danger we edge in again a mile or little more within they and there anchor again until the next morning the thirty of march 1620. we all anchor in the bay of Samanca about a mile of the shore where we take in water and wood and other necessary the last of march our shallop be send unto the bee at Ballambeen to call she away the first of April we send the unicorn shallop for Anniar to inquire of the dutch force and how the Pangram stand affect towards we at eleven at night two and twenty of our man run away with the barge in the morning the shallop return from Anniar and bring news of fifteen sail of hollander at Bantam and jacatra whereupon we resolve to go for Bantam to treat with the pangram hope that the hollander will not venture upon we this afternoon also the bee arrive with our shallop from Ballambeen the six we set sail for Bantam the seven we come in between Crackataw and Becee where we meet with a praw with some of our people come from Anniar @. 4 news of the peace betwixt english and dutch the mutual congratulation voyage to japan return thence and home Saturday the eight in the morning at four of the clock we meet with the bull come from England with the joyful tiding of peace between the dutch and we which god in his mercy long continue she have a small ship in her company call the fly hart which be send out with she have letter from their general to advise we or any of their ship of the agreement and unite of both the honourable company this afternoon we anchor all together near the point of Pallambam on the eleven of April in the morning we descry the dutch fleet who come from jacatra to meet we and to congratulate our arrival general Coen be there himself in person so soon as the hollander general be come to anchor general Coen we begin to salute each other with our great ordnance to signify unto the country people our great joy that we conceive in this happy tiding the twelve we come into Bantam ride with both our fleet we consist of twelve sail they of fifteen beside two of their ship which we find in that Road. this day master johnson commander of the dutch fleet come to visit i with the fiscal and diverse other master Brockendon master spalding and myself be invite aboard the admiral ship where we confer with the general concern our future business and after we have compare the article and letter he be content that we shall proceed joint according to the honourable company instruction but will not publish the same until the arrival of some ship from the low country Friday the fourteen in the morning by a general consent we send m. Beaumont and Philip baduge with one dutch merchant ashore pangram hate to the dutch. to the pangram to make he partaker of our good news and that we be now unite desire only a good composition and reasonable agreement that we may remain in his country in peace and enjoy free trade as we have in other part of India but the Pangram be so impatient at the news that he will afford no answer but oftentimes demand of they why we will be friend with the dutch and so they be fain to return without any answer Saturday the fifteen we send the same message again unto he but then they be not suffer to come on land Wednesday at four in the morning I depart from Bantam ride in the james royal voyage to japan have the unicorn in company intend by the grace of God to go for japon there to careene and trim our ship master Brockendon the same time depart with six ship for jacatra have resolve about one month after our departure to send five good english ship and five good ship of the dutch after we to japon * * the voyage I have set in a paragraph or section by itself that the studious of marine knowledge may make use of that which will perhaps to other seem to interrupt his more easy and delicate muse with a sea-sickness here we find the swan and expedition send hither as I suppose to the disgrace of our nation in tho^e remote part of the World they arrive at Firando sashma Charles Cleavengar that from thence we may take the fit time of the year to go for the Manillas we arrive into a port of Ferando call Cochee which be about four english mile and a half to southward of the haven Ferando Tuesday the five and twenty of july captain Cox send good store of funny or toe boat aboard of our ship to help we this day in the afternoon God be praise we arrive in the port of Firando this day before we get into Firando the Elizabeth bring in a frigate with she wherein there be find certain silk hide and some sugar the mariner be japoneses with certain portugal whereof some be friar the Elizabeth come into Cochee also captain Adams admiral of the unite fleet arrive in the same place about three hour after i in the moon likewise William johnson in the trow the six and twenty in the morning a general council of English and dutch be assemble in the english house at Firando where it be resolve that the ship which lay near the coast of sashma shall be call in because we be certain inform that the frigate of Macao be new arrive in Sunday the thirty the king of Crats come aboard the james royal and seem much to rejoice to see such a english ship demand of the jurabassa if this be one of the english frigate whereby we suppose that the dutch have give out that we have none but small ship like unto frigate Tuesday the first of August a general council be hold at the english house concern the choice of two man the one English the other dutch to carry the present to the emperor where after it be consider that I can not so long be spare from the royal james nor captain Adams from his fleet at length we make choice of master Charles Cleavengar commander of the palsgrave and joseph Cockram cape merchant of the fleet to go in the behalf of the english and jasques le Febre of the Harlam with Matthia de Brooke for the dutch. on the six the palsgrave arrive in the road of Cochee the seven the bull come into the road of Cochee have cut off all her mast by the board as they say to save ship and good captain Adams and I do visit the king of Firando carry with we a small present which be very well esteem and we of ourselves very courteous entertain Wednesday the nine the king invite the english and the dutch to dinner where to show his respect unto our nation he cause we to sit down on the right hand and the dutch on the left and the first dish of every course be present unto we a tuffoone or tempest Monday the four of September we have a great Tuffone with the wind northerly which force the moon on shore and overset the expedition so that she sink down sudden the trow have likewise be overset have not the master of she soon prevent it by veer of her stern ashore Tuesday the five I cause many of our man to come aboard the moon to help hale she off where we all strive along time to no purpose the thirteen the moon be get off again to the great joy of we all have receive no hurt at all by she lie so long on shore the nineteen the james royal have all thing take out but only certain bar of lead to help trim her over be heave down almost half way to the keel Thursday the one and twenty in the morning the james careen the james royal be bring down so low that we see part of her keel and so begin present to sheathe she in four day the carpenter sheathe one side of the james from the keel up to the low bend Wednesday the seven and twenty I send a Cooper two quarter master and a butcher to to kill and salt such meat as be provide for we Thursday the twelve of October we have the james down to keel again on the otherside on this side we find four dangerous place where the main plank be eat through by the worm in each of those place we grave in a piece of plank and in one of they we drive a trunnell where there be never any before also we nail a piece of lead upon the end of the bolt which be former drive through the keel to stop our great leak our ship be right again both side be finish up to the low bend Saturday the one and twenty the moon be finish on both side Tuesday the four and twenty we have news that be burn burn that a fire beginning in the Portugal street consume four or five of the rich street in the city their departure from Firando the seven of dec. be Thursday we depart from Firando and the same evening we anchor in the bay of Cochee Saturday the sixteenth captain Cleavengar and captain Febre arrive in Firando from the emperor court with the joyful tiding of good success in their business Sunday the seventeen in the morning I take my leave of they and about noon the wind be fair and the weather clear we leave the road of Cochee Thursday the sixteenth of january in the morning see four ship in Bantam ride we weigh and stand in a little within paniang at length there come the pepper-corne boat aboard our ship with the master come to Bantam one Morton he tell i that there be two dutch ship in the road and one french ship to who the Pangram have grant trade and that the english and dutch have consort with he to share the pepper in three among they I also understand by he that the most part of our lade be ready for we at jacatra Wednesday in the morning I set sail for jacatra and the same evening anchor near unto antilaky arrive at jacatra unicorn lo^t on the coast of China Thursday the eighteen at night we arrive in the bay of jacatra where we find the Charles the gift and the Clove and two dutch ship viz. the Leyden and the sun and at Hector island the globe and the Bee here I meet with the master of the unicorn and diverse of his company who come hither in a juncke their ship be lose upon the coast of China the james have discharge her lade be ready to relade for England here be at this time in the Charles the Clove and the gift about six hundred tun of pepper and the bear daily expect from jambee with two hundred ton more which give we good hope that we shall very near make up our ship lade with pepper Benjamin Clou^s and silk Monday the six and twenty of February in the morning I depart from the road of jacatra in the james royal have take in our whole lade of pepper save fifty five pecul also certain Sapetas of silk and some clove this business end about ten of the clock this forenoon return for England we set sail for England I pray God in his wont mercy to conduct we unto our native country in safety in his good time appoint Soldania Sunday the twenty of May 1621. in the afternoon we arrive in the road of Soldania where we find the Anne royal and the fortune ship belong to the honourable company of London and three dutch ship viz. the Gawda the black bear and the herring all find for Bantam and jacatra the one and twenty we romage our ship Tuesday the two and twenty we send some water-caske on shore and set up a tent for our sick man and Cooper and send five and twenty man on land to guard they this night I ordain sixty man to go in company with sixty dutch in quest of cattle who return the same night in vain the second of june in the morning we leave the road of Soldania with the wind at south southeast southeast from the twenty at noon until the one and twenty at six in the morning saint Helena west fifteen league at this instant God be praise we descry the island of s. Helena the body of it to our judgement bear west two three part north about fifteen league off this evening we get within five league of the island and there ply it off and on until five the next morning and then we do bear in about the north point of the island and the same forenoon chapel Bay about ten of the clock we anchor thwart of the chapel bay half a mile from the shore in six and twenty fathom the north point of the island bear north-east two three part east one league off and the other point south-west by south one league and a half off between which two point there be seven valley and the southermost of the seven lead upright to the Limon tree Monday the five and twenty we weigh anchor again and ride off the valley about half a mile from the shore in twenty seven fathom black sand and small coral the northermost pick point bear north-east half east from we two league off and the southermost point in sight south-west half south two mile off this be the best valley for refresh that I know in all the island at this island we remain seven day during which time we fill our water and get at least fifty hog and goat and above four thousand lemon Friday the nine and twenty of june in the morning at nine of the clock have very well refresh ourselves the great variation on the western side of s Helena which we find be fi^ty deg fifty six min. easterly through the good providence of almighty God we depart from hence and the same evening at six we have the body of the island southeast by south eight league off the wind at southeast the weather overcast the sixteenth of August at noon we see the high-land of Pico east north-east about fifteen leaague off the seventeen at noon we have the top of Pico north six league off be in the latitude of thirty eight degree twelve minute whereby I perceive that the southside of Pico lie in thirty eight degree thirty minute near the fifteen of September we have the land end of England eight league off Tuesday the eighteen we arrive in the down @. v. the voyage from Bantam to Patania and thence to japan with his return to jacatra set by itself for the use of mariner the seven and twenty of April be Thursday we take leave of this fleet and steer away to the north-ward borrow within half a league of the easter point of and in the evening come to a anchor about a league of the north-east point of it in twenty three fathom water ozie where we ride until the western stream begin to return to the eastward again which be about ten at night the eight and twenty at night we anchor in twenty eight fathom ozie Poolo Antekero bear north-east three league off Antekero lie from Poolo Antekero north north-east half east about eight league off the depth between they from sixteen fathom to six and twenty and so to twenty two twenty eighteen sixteen fourteen and twelve fathom ozie Antekero be the wester-most of all the row of land which extend themselves from the mouth of the bay of jacatra to the westward Saturday the nine and twenty to the evening we be in fifteen fathom jacatra Bay Kero bear north by east half east of we two league and a half off Kero Kero lie from Poolo Antekero north north-east near distant six league from the time that we have Antekero north-east three league off we have twenty eighteen sixteen fourteen twelve fathom ozie Sunday at noon we have the Poolo Kero south half east six league off our depth continue thirteen twelve and eleven fathom the same ground the first of May at noon we have Poolo Kero south half west nine league off be as much as we can see it at our top-mast-head the depth twelve fathom here by observation of the sun we be in south latitude four degree forty five minute from noon latitude until five north north-east four league here we anchor again in twelve fathom ozie have Poolo Kero by estimation south by west from we thirteen league off this night at nine as we be at anchor in the same place by observation of the crosier I make the ship to be in four degree forty minute south latitude allow twenty nine for the compliment of the declination Tuesday the second in the morning between four and five of the clock we set sail again and the same day at noon we have run about six league north north-east the depth continue as before thirteen twelve eleven fathom from the second to the three at noon we make a east by south way five league find such depth as the day before the ground from Bantam ride hitherto all ozie from Bantam for the space of two day we have sea-turnes and land-turnes from thence until the second of May in the afternoon the wind between the east and the southeast and then the wind come up northerly and so continue until the three at noon Peniang current from Poolo Peniang unto Poolo Antekero the current do set we to the westward for the most part somewhat strong but from thence until we draw near unto the straits of we find but a easy current which do run almost upon all point of the compass every twenty four hour from the three at noon until the four at noon north north-east eleven league the depth from twelve to ten half a fathom ozie from noon this day till seven at night north five league and a half where we anchor in ten fathom and a half less Friday the five in the morning we weigh again have little wind and variable until half a hour after six and then the wind come up at south-west and blue fresh from four to nine we make north-east half easterly three league and from nine until noon northwest by north half a league the depth ten fathom near this day at noon we be in three degree and thirty minute south latitude a little island where we descry a little island north north-east half east four league off which appear at first sight like a great tree rise out of the sea from noon to six northwest five league here we see two or three hummock like land north by west from seven league off from hence until three after midnight west six league at six we have nineteen fathom which as we stand to the westward in the night increase to ten eleven and twelve fathom and afterward it decrease unto eight fathom where we come to a anchor the stream by night set southeast by day northwest Saturday in the morning we weigh at six again and steer away west northwest one league and a three part here we have sight of many hummock rise like land which at length we perceive to be all one land as we draw near to it after we have go one league and a three part west northwest as aforesaid we come into seven fathom a half less and therefore tack about to the north-eastwards make a north north-east way until noon about two league and a half at which time by observation of the sun we be in three degree and twenty minute near south latitude be get into eight fathom water again where we find the current to set away northwest by west here also about noon this day Cheribon a junck of come up with we which have be at Cheribon upon java and be now return to this afternoon we steer in with the eastern part of this h^mmockie land and make our way as the eastern point do bear from we which be north north-east half north in this our course we come again to seven fathom and so increase to four and twenty fathom and from thence decrease to seven fathom a quarter less where we anchor again the say point of land bear north north-east one three part north four league off Sunday the seven in the morning we weigh and stand in near unto the point in hope to have pass through between this point and a island which lie three league to the eastward of it but as we stand in we find the depth of the water first to increase from seven fathom unto seventeen fathom and from thence again unto six and four fathom a quarter less and about two mile of the point in the fair way we have but six foot water which our shallop find as she be sound of the channel to the eastward of this place there appear many small land many land and by the report of the people in the juncke the sea be full of land between the southeast end of banco and the i will of Burneo now this be the southeast end of banco which do bear north north-east half north about two league off and the land from this point unto the entrance of the straits of banco sea full of land betwixt banco and Burneo do lie west by south near about thirteen league there as we be at anchor the foresay point bear north by east half east two league and a half we find by observation of the sun the ship to be in three degree and eight minute south latitude Monday in the morning have little hope to find a passage between the southeast end of banco and the foresay land by reason of the fearful shoalding which we have already find we resolve by the help of God to go through the straits of banco straits of banco and there withal present come to sail steer off as near as we can judge the same course that we come in in which course we find more dangerous shoald in our stand off than we have do in our come in before after we have get about eight league of south south-west from the southeast point of banco current we steer away south-west by west the current set north west which make a west by south way near this course we run five league and anchor in eight fathom Ozie about nine at night the nine in the morning we descry north northwest seven league off and steer in near with it until we have it north two league in this course we come over a spit where we have but four fathom and a half and five fathom a quarter less but draw near unto we have five fathom and a quarter and when it be north two league of all Ozie ground and so all the way before now and after that we have bring it north two league off as I have say we steer northwest by north until be north-east of we and have five fathom the same ground and then we go west northwest have always Ozie ground till we be within two league of sumatra shore in six fathom here we have our isle of east southeast three league and a half off and a hill upon banco with a deep swampe north by west near be a sail breadth open of the point of sumatra which be then north by west half west from we about three league off we steer from hence away with the foresay point north by west and have six and a half and seven fathom soft ground until we come within a league of the point where edge too near the same we have but five fathom and a half and four and a half in the boat hard by we but have we keep a little further of that point we may have go away in seven eight nine and ten fathom and so all the straits alongst borrow careful with our lead upon the sumatra shore but he that keep any thing near unto banco then unto sumatra shall have very uncertain shoald sometime deep and otherwhiles shall and common soul ground whereas on sumatra side if you shall come into shall water yet the ground for the most part be soft ozie and the sound far more certain all which will more plain appear by my description of this place Friday the twelve in the evening have bring the northwest point of banco north-east we open two smooth hill with a little hummock between they the northermost of they be the northermost land of banco and bear from the northwest point aforesaid north-east nine league off this night we steer north north-east to go through the channel between Linga and the north end of banco find twenty three twenty two twenty eighteen and sixteen fathom ozie until we come near the entrance and afterward fifteen fourteen thirteen fathom go through the passage rise at first in three land the northermost being big than both the other rise full of hummock be near two league in length the isle of Linga have certain fragment of isle intermix among they show like haycock which be a good mark to know they from the smooth hill which be the south end of banco until the south westermost i will of Linga north by west ten league east north-east half north. from the middle of the great isle of Linga which be the north eastermost of they lie another smooth island nine league off and about two league to the east north-east half north. from that there be another flat island and off the north point of the round smooth island lie also a little fragment like a rock in the way between this smooth island and Linga you have fourteen and thirteen fathom water also be in the midway between they your course be north to pass alongst by the easter-side of Bintam this day at noon we be in one degree south latitude the great isle of Linga south-west five league a little island whereby we gather that the great i will of Linga stand in one degree and ten minute near this afternoon we see a little island to the westward of we about eight league off which lie north northwest near from Linga Sunday the fourteen at noon have make a north way four and twenty league by help of the wind and current which do set north we have sight of the high land of Bintam rise with two hill and a deep swamp betwixt be to our judgement twelve league from we at this time also we have sight of three or four hummock rise like land south-west by west eight league here we sound and have ground in twenty fathom from Linga unto this place we have fourteen fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen and twenty fathom as we suppose streamy ground for we have not mean at all time to try it from midday the fourteen unto the fifteen at noon north a three part west seven and twenty league this four and twenty hour twenty one twenty two twenty three and twenty four fathom this day from twelve to three three league and a half here we see Poolo Loar Laor bear northwest half north from we by our judgement about twelve league off at this instant we have seven and twenty fathom the ground like unto fuller earth this night Poolo Loar be northwest by west eight league off we have nine and thirty fathom ozie from the fifteen at noon unto eight the next morning we make a north northwest half west way fifteen league the sixteenth at eight Poolo Loar do bear south-west by south of we six league distant the very body of the island Layo west south-west half west seven league off and Poolo Timon the south end west half north ten league and the north-east end west northwest half west ten league off this evening we anchor within four mile of the north point of Timon in four and twenty fathom streamy ground the point itself bear west by south half south this evening I send our shallop about the point where they descry a town and a junke ride close by the shore and diverse praw a fish whereof one come to they to inquire what nation they be and tell they that at the town there be good fresh water and buffel goat and hen Wednesday in the morning about four of the clock we send the unicorn long boat with we to the say town who return in the afternoon with four butt of water a piece not willing to fill more because it be brackish at the water place they find a junck of jor a juncke of jor. which be set out for a man of war and have twenty small shot beside lance and javelin he report to our people that he have take a china juncke and sell she on the coast of jor. and send i word that he will take my part against the Portugal as long as his life do last in the next bay to the southwards of the north point of Poolo Temon we find very good fresh water but we can not convenient take it in with our long boat for she draw five foot water be load thus have spend our day in this place to little purpose I set sail the first of the night direct our course for Patania steer away due north with little wind all night Patania Thursday at noon we be in three degree and forty minute south latitude have make a north half west way by mean of the current which do set a way north by west about a mile a hour this afternoon at four have make a north half west way about eight league we descry the i will of Tingoran north northwest fifteen league off Tingoran this night we pass along by Poolo Tingoran about six league to the easterward of it have twenty eight thirty and thirty two fathom soft ground Friday at six in the morning we have Poolo Tingoran west south-west seven league off here we have six and thirty fathom the same ground this day at noon we be in five degree and thirty minute Tingoran bear south one three part east fourteen league off whereby we conceive that the i will of Tingoran stand in four degree and fifty minute this day at noon we have likewise the south-ile of Poolo Rowdon nortwest by west seven league off and in the same night at eight of the clock I observe the crosier and make the ship to be in five degree forty eight minute Rowdon the eastermost which be the great of the isle of Poolo Rowdon bear west four league off from eight at night until noon the next day our way be near northwest by west nine league in this course the depth we have from twenty eight to seventeen fathom then the northermost island of Poolo Rowdon be south one three part east four league off be a round hummocke much like to Pomo in the gulf of Venice but somewhat high and more complete these isle of Rowdon be good high land and a fair depth from the one end to the other on all the easter side and as I be inform a fair channel between they and the main there be in all thirteen or fourteen land great and small Saturday from noon until Sunday eight in the morning our way be west northwest nine league here we see two hill by the water side bear west of we five league off rise like two tortugas from Poolo Tingoran unto Potania be very high land alongst up in the country and low land by the water side with a sandy strand at least twenty league to the southward of the point of Potania and how much far I know not but so far I have see this Saturday in the afternoon as we stand in west northwest to the two hill aforesaid we come from seventeen unto fourteen and thirteen fathom hard ground and as we draw near the hill the depth increase again to nineteen fathom ozie and thence to eighteen and seventeen fathom the same ground Sunday the one and twenty from eight in the morning unto seven at night our course be northwest three quarter west thirteen league keep for the most part within four league of the low sandy shore the depth all the way fifteen fourteen and thirteen fathom here at seven we anchor in thirteen fathom and a quarter streamie ground the northermost point in sight fall down from a reasonable high land at the end of all the low land do bear west northwest half north near three league and a half off six league southeast by south from this point lie a rock a rock as high above the water as the Hull of a small ship we pass along about a league and a half to the eastward of it find no alteration of our former depth gurnet Head this point aforesaid I call the gurnet Head from this point the land trend away west northwest and west by north unto the entrance of Potania road be all low land from the gurnet head unto the very point of the road and low of all at the same point from gurnet head unto the say low point the distance be six league and all the way of fair depth until you draw near the low point of the road but there you must give a good birth because there lie a shall from it half way over unto the wester shore therefore you must not borrow too near it before you have the shoald of the wester shore and there you shall find the soft ground from the low point as you range over the bay unto the wester shore you shall not have above five fathom and four fathom and a half when you be in the road where you shall have the low point east north-east one three part east and the high mountain on the wester side of the bay will then bear south south-west one three part west anchor at Potania or Patania jambe Thursday we anchor in the road of Potania where we find the Samson and a dutch pinnace the day before we come into the road I go ashore to the english factory where I find master Adam Denton and master Richard welding late come from jambe in a praw with diverse english of the samson company who be all glad man to see such english ship in that port. at my come to the english house I acquaint master Denton with the cause of my come which be for rack and fresh victual whereof we stand in great need whereupon he present give order to lay out for all thing necessary that within six day we be furnish with sixteen butt of rack and rackapee rack and rackapee whereof three butt of rackapee we have from the dutch which courtesy they do we to hasten our dispatch beef goat and hen we have here in plentiful manner here also we buy dammar and oil for the trim of our ship because I understand it be very dear in japan here also I find a small frigate buy by the english which be of no great use in this place by general consent it be think fit that she with most of the english sailor shall go along to attend upon the james royal the last of May we depart from Potania a rock dangerous Camboia the first of june at seven in the morning we descry a small rock which appear but little above water lie very dangerous for ship that go from Potania for the head of Camboia when this rock do bear north north-east half east a league off than the high-land over gurnet head be south south-west half west thirteen league off and by computation the low point of Potania road be eighteen league off west south-west half south from we after we be out of the road of Potania in seven fathom the depth increase orderly to eight ten twelve fourteen sixteen eighteen twenty twenty two and twenty four fathom until we have sight of the rock and about two league from the rock five and twenty fathom ozie and such be all the ground from Potania to this place this day at noon this rock be west from we about four league off we find the ship to be in seven degree twenty minute from hence until the three at noon east half north forty five league here we see Poolo Hube east north-east half north eight league off have fourteen fathom ozie all this eight and forty hour we have ozie ground the depth from twenty seven to thirty six fathom and from thence decrease again to fourteen fathom which be the depth we have when we see this island this Poolo Hube rise first with one round hill then as you come near you shall see a shoulder of somewhat high land rise in hummocke but not above two three part as high as the round hill be all one land with it and then shall you see another lesser round island rise which be near about the height of the hummockie land and lie close aboard the great island at the east end of this lesser round island there be two little land very near it and a mile to the eastward of they lie a long rock like the Hull of a galley two little land and a rock this night we anchor in thirteen fathom and a half ozie about three league of the great island which be also the high the next morning we weigh again and stand away east by south and east by east have but little wind this evening at six we have the body of Hube west by north four league off from hence we steer away east by south and east until six the next morning but the current check we to the northward current by which mean we make our way to the northward of the east the five from six at night until six in the morning we run fifteen league the course aforesaid and here we have sight of a very little round island bear four league off and to the southward of it about a mile distant a long flat rock a good height above water from Poolo Hube until we come three league of this little round island we have thirteen fourteen fifteen fathom and fifteen fourteen and thirteen again all ozie ground when we be within two league of this small island we have thirteen fathom sandy ground here we descry Poolo candour the norther end of it bear east by north Candor from this island about seven league off this day at noon we find the ship to be in eight degree forty two minute north latitude the high land on Poolo candour be east from we six league off from Potania until we be in sight of Poolo Candor the wind for the most part be at south south-west this day at noon we steer away north-east north-east by north and in the night north north-east so that we make north-east by north in all until the next day at noon about four and twenty league in this course we find thirteen and fourteen fathom ozie Tuesday the six at noon we have sight of two hummocke upon the coast of Camboia Camboia bear north by east and to the westward of that low land from Poolo candour until we come in sight of this coast we find the current set east by north here also when we see those hummocke bear north by east nine league off we have twelve fathom streamie ground Wednesday the seven at noon we find the ship to be in ten degree forty two minute have run from the former noon until this present north-east a quarter north five and twenty league hereby we find that the current set east by north have carry we ten mile to the northwards of our computation our depth from twelve to sixteen twenty and twenty four fathom and so to twenty eighteen sixteen fourteen again sandy ground from the aforesaid two hummock as we do coast it along within eight league of the shore and sometime more sometime less we see high land all along up in the country and in many place by the water side a smooth land about the height of the lizard with many plot of white sand upon it as well as by the water side the first white spot that we see upon the smooth land be upon the very point that be ten league to the westward of the cape Cessier cape Cessier which at first seem to be a town with fair house and white wall this cape do bear west northwest half west from we about six league off this present day at noon when we be in ten degree forty two minute Thursday at noon we be in eleven degree thirty minute have go twenty league north-east half north from the former noon the night before at eight of the clock we come to a anchor in twenty two fathom streamie ground where the current do set east half north until twelve and then find that it have recourse to the westward we weigh anchor again and steer away north-east and north-east by north all the night and so until the eight at noon aforesaid in which course we have from twenty two to twenty eight thirty two thirty six forty forty four fathom and a little before noon forty seven and after that we have no ground the cause why we anchor that night be that we find very uncertain shoald have have eighteen twenty twenty two and twenty four fathom and after noon on the sudden we come into sixteen fourteen twelve and the unicorn be fair by we have but nine fathom and a half from the eight until the nine at noon we steer alongst the shore north north-east sixteen league north by east six league north six league and north by west nine league which make in all a north by east one three part easterly way thirty six league here we have cape Varrella west south-west eight league off cape Varella be in the latitude of thirteen degree thirteen minute this cape be call by the chinese jentam which in their language do signify a chimney because it have a sharp hummocke on the top of the hill much like unto a chimney on the top of a house from the nine until the ten at noon north two three part west twenty six league the latitude fourteen degree thirty minute here we be about ten league of the land and the day before we come not above six league of cape Varrella by which I gather that the land trend away north by west from cape Varrella Sunday at noon we be in sixteen degree ten minute have run from the former noon thirty three league and one three part due north. Monday at noon twenty six league north north-east half north latitude seventeen degree forty minute the current have set we six mile to the northwards Aynam this evening at six we descry the i will of Aynam the high land bear northwest by north twelve league we have go from noon seven league north-east from hence until noon the next day north-east by east twenty two league here we be in eighteen degree and a half this morning we chase a Portugal frigate but she be of so light burden that we can not come near she the fourteen day at noon we be in nineteen degree thirty five minute our way from the former noon north-east twenty six league whereby we find that the current have carry we four league to the northwards of our account and yet this day at noon with our boat in seventy three fathom ozie current and find no current at all here we see many rippling like over-falls rippling as though there have go some great tide but find none as yet this afternoon at six we anchor again with our boat in sixty eight fathom ozie sand and find a small current to the southward the fifteen at noon we have run seventeen league north-east by north here we be in twenty degree thirty minute the current have carry we seven league to the northward here we have forty five fathom sandy ozie the sixteenth at noon in twenty one degree and twenty minute we have sight of three land the eastermost bear north north-east the westermost northwest the near land nine league off here we have twenty two fathom ozie sand we meet with the wind here at east southeast which blow very fresh but from cape Varrella unto this place we have the wind always from the south southeast to the south-west the next morning at eight of the clock we have twenty eight fathom ozie have run from the former noon south-west eleven league where perceive the wind and weather to increase we think it better to anchor then to run back the way that we come Sunday the eighteen in the morning the weather somewhat fair we endeavour to weigh our anchor but even as our anchor be apeeke the cable break in the half be new and never wet before by which accident we lose a good anchor the unicorn as we be almost apeeke shoot off a piece whereupon I send the shallop speedy aboard her to know what be amiss who bring i word that she have spring a great leak which have almost tire all their man with bal which as soon as I hear I send thirty man aboard of she to ease their man by spell until it shall please GOD to discover the leak this day the wind at southeast which stand to the eastward make of a north-east way until six at night at which time we see the former high island again north north-east one three part east ten league off have twenty three fathom this evening our man return from the unicorn and bring we news that the great leak be firm stop whereat we all rejoice from six to twelve at night we make a north-east way fourteen league where we have twenty fathom ozie from twelve to five in the morning we stand to the southwards make a south-west way three league and a half here we have twenty six fathom again ozie ground the nineteen from five this morning we cast about to the land the wind at southeast wherewith we make a north-east way and at six of the clock be within eight league of the aforesaid high island bear north by east from we and at eight this morning master Roberts unicorn leak master of the unicorn come aboard of we and tell i that they have another great leak break out and that they must needs seek out some smooth place to ride in the better to search their leak and to fit their foremast better in the step hereupon I resolve to bear up under the great island which be now north by east from we in hope to find a smooth road the more speedy to effect their business there be many more land in sight both to the westward and to the eastward of we but this be the near to we and the likely we steer with it be within three league of it the wind begin to dull and the night be at hand therefore we ply it to and again until the twenty in the morning and then the wind be so far northerly that we can not cease the place this day I go aboard again of the unicorn to know what they intend to do where I find they all very willing to stand it alongst because the wind be fair not doubt but that they shall be able to overcome it when I hear their resolution I cause all my laskayre to remain aboard the unicorn to assist they as occasion shall require and so we stand away all that afternoon until midnight with a fair wind and fair weather but than it begin to blow so much wind that we be enforce to lie here a try with her main course all night the one and twenty in the morning we see the unicorn a league and a half asterne of we have a foresail and a spritsail out which as afterward I perceive be to flat she about for the shore again I present cause our fore-course to be make ready to flat our ship after she although we have little hope to assist she in any thing because the sea be so far grow as our man be a lose of their fore-course there come such a violent gust that they be fain to furl it again it not our sail will have be blow away they lose sight of the unicorn after the gust be over we set our foresail and to make she wear the round we braled up our main course part of it be blow out of the boult-rope before they can furl it after that the mainsail be up we put the helm hard a weather think that the ship will have come round but all in vain for she will not wear above two or three point and then come to again now the sea be so grow that we dare not let fall our spritsail and the wind so violent that we can not loose our fore-top-saile and this while the unicorn be out of sight when we see that our ship will not wear we steer away as near as we can lie south by east until noon have make our way south by east thirteen league from the southermost island in sight overnight which I call the Morocco saddle mortimer saddle or saddle-iland by reason of a deep swampe on the top thereof this saddle-iland aforesaid lie in twenty one degree forty five minute north latitude it have on the westerside four or five very small land close by it and on the eastern side three land in sight lie all three next hand east north-east from it from saddle-ile to the westward there be many land some northwest from it other west northwest west by north and the southermost of all those land in sight do bear from this west about fifteen league off this afternoon our ship wax very leak have on the sudden four foot and a half water in hold which employ both our pump go a long time before we can free she towards the evening it please GOD to discover three or four great leak between wind and water which when our carpenter have stop leak we find great ease and comfort for than we can let the pump stand still half a hour and free she again with one pump in little more than a quarter of a hour from this day noon until the two and twenty at noon five league south south-west with a pair of courser and nine league south-west by west a Hull here we have twenty seven fathom and a half ozie the two and twenty in the afternoon the violence of the wind begin to decrease and consequent the fury of the wave allay which cause our ship to grow the thight whereby we plain perceive that the most part of our leak be betwixt wind and water and therefore the first fair weather I cause our carpenter to search the ship side where they find and stop many bad place some of a yard in length where the be all rot in the seam the four and twenty day we have sight of a great island bear north from we about seven league off have a high hill on the eastern end of it which be the same island that do bear west from Morocco saddle fifteen league off or thereabouts from hence until the six and twenty in the evening our way be south by west twenty four league the depth increase from nineteen unto six and thirty fathom ozie ground here we have a little round island south-west by west two league off which lie in twenty degree and twenty minute near this island have four small land in the south-west side of it but none of they equal in height with this we see it at least ten league off rise like a chinese hat from hence until the seven and twenty at noon east by north two three part north twelve league here we have one and forty fathom ozie ground this morning at two of the clock the wind veer up at south southeast and about noon at south from twelve the twenty seven unto twelve the twenty eight east north-east eighteen league here we have almost one and forty fathom ozie ground this morning at two of the clock the wind veer back again at south southeast from the eight and twenty until noon the nine and twenty east north-east eighteen league here we be in one and twenty degree and ten minute depth one and forty fathom ozie the wind this twenty four hour from south to southeast by south and very fair weather ever since the storm from the nine and twenty until the thirty at noon east north-east eighteen league latitude one and twenty degree and thirty minute depth six and fifty fathom ozie the wind southeast by south somewhat gusty weather from the last of june until the first of july at noon east north-east half north two and twenty league latitude two and twenty degree and ten minute the depth five and twenty fathom black sandy ozie here from the top-mast-head we see land north northwest half north the wind in the night south southeast by day southeast this day from noon to seven at night north-east by north six league twenty four fathom black and white sand with shell from thence until two at noon south-west half south nine league and a half four and twenty fathom sandy ozie the first of july at six in the afternoon when we be in four and twenty fathom sand and shell we see three China fisher-boat the wind come up this evening at east southeast with which we stand off to the southwards and have crack our main topmast but a little before which be the cause that we can bear but course and bonnet of each and therefore make our way of no better than south-west as I say before from this second day at noon until eight at night our way be south four league depth seven and twenty fathom ozie ground from eight at night until noon the next day north northwest a quarter west seven league five and twenty fathom black ozie sand like the former the wind at east by north and east north-east here we see the land from the north to the north-east about twelve league off rise in certain hummock by which I conjecture that this land lie in two and twenty degree and five and forty minute near from twelve this day to four north northwest three league five and twenty fathom black sand from four to twelve the next day southeast by south ten league five and forty fathom black sandy ozie from the four untll the five at noon southeast by south six league no ground in eighty fathom this four and twenty hour very little wind for the most part at east north-east from the five to the six at noon north by east four league here we have no ground in eighty fathom this four and twenty hour it be for the most part calm that lirtle wind that blow be at east and east north-east when it be flat calm we make diverse trial with our lead and sometime we shall have sixty fathom otherwhiles fifty six fathom and then we perceive that the ship be carry to the south westward with a sag current and when the calm continue three or four hour than no ground in eighty fathom as aforesaid this afternoon it rain a downright shower and after that the wind come up at south and south south-west a easy gale with fair weather from the six unto the seven at noon north-east half north nine league here we have twenty six fathom black ozie ground the wind continue at south south-west with fair weather from the seven at noon until the eight at night north-east by north three league and a half twenty fathom gray ozie sand here by the scorpians heart I find the ship to be in two and twenty degree and five and thirty minute from eight to twelve the eight north-east by north fifteen league Logosse here the sun make we in three and twenty degree and six minute at this present we have sight of the high land of Logosse northwest by north eleven league off have nineteen fathom a gross white sand with small shell the wind still continue at south-west and west south-west this morning we see eight or nine fisher-boat whereof one come within hail of we but we can not persuade they to come aboard this morning we come over a bank where we have but fifteen fathom gross ground a bank this afternoon from twelve to four north north-east half north five league twenty fathom sandy gravel and shell the high land of Logosse bear northwest by west nine league off from four to eight north-east by north five league two and twenty fathom sandy gravel from eight to twelve five league thirty fathom sandy ozie from twelve to twelve the nine north-east twelve league thirty four fathom black sandy ozie the wind at south-west fair weather latitude twenty four degree twenty minute from the nine at noon until the ten north-east one quarter east twelve league thirty five fathom ozie this night the sky be all overcast and the wind overcast with rain this forenoon it be calm current and we make trial with the lead find that the current do set we north north-east small land here we have sight of certain small land one of they rise in form of a sugarloaf and do bear west northwest from we at noon about eight league off this afternoon we hoist out our little boat which the carpenter build upon our forecastle by she we make trial of the current again and find it to set east north-east this evening at eight we anchor in twenty eight fathom have make no way all this afternoon but as the current set we which be north-east about a mile a hour Tuesday the eleven in the morning we set sail again and so drive away to the north-east-ward by mean of the former current have no wind at all this day at noon we have sight of the top of above the cloud the high part of it bear southeast by east about eighteen league off and the near island unto we on the coast of China China be at the same time northwest from we seven league here we have sight of many great fisher-boat almost round about we who send certain little boat aboard we with fish for which we pay they double the value at the first to encourage they to come again this evening at six the wind come up at north north-east by mean whereof and a little help of the current set towards the north-east by east which make a east way nine league to the twelve at noon here we have the high land of southeast the near land about eight league off the neither point of it east by north ten league of our depth forty six fathom ozie the latitude twenty five degree twenty minute from the high land of stretch out a low land to the waterside be a white sandy shore and smooth sand hill far up the country much like to the coast of Barbary Wednesday the twelve from twelve to three east two league here we be in the same depth that we have at noon viz. forty six fathom be four league off the foresay sandy shore and see we can lie no slent this way we tack and stand off again stem northwest and northwest by north and north by west make northwest eight league where we have forty fathom from hence we stand in again until twelve the next day our way east by east six league here we have the norther point of east southeast ten league off be in the latitude of twenty five degree forty minute the depth fifty six fathom ozie by this we perceive that the current have carry we towards the east north-east the thirteen from noon until six we stand in east by south and east southeast until we have the foresay point east southeast half east six league off forty two fathom here we tack about the northward lie north northwest and northwest by north which make a northwest by west way till two at night about one half league than the wind come up at northwest by west until six in the morning with which half a league north-east by north here the foresay point be east southeast half south from six to twelve it be calm with a cockle sea set in upon the shore and yet by mean of the current set towards the east north-east we have by noon bring the say point southeast of we about five league off have forty four fathom ozie the latitude twenty five degree forty five minute Friday the fourteen in the afternoon we perceive that the former current be do and that our ship be drive to the southwestward with a contrary current wherefore we anchor have forty two fathom a brown glister sand here we ride until eight at night at which time find the current to set towards the east north-east contrary current again we weigh with a little breath of wind southerly and within a hour after the wind veer up at west south-west and begin to blow fresh at eight at night the fourteen unto the fifteen at noon north-east by north half east nineteen league twenty six degree thirty minute the wind west and west by north. from the fifteen at noon until the twelve the sixteenth north-east by north twenty four league latitude twenty four degree thirty minute depth fifty five fathom black sandy ozie the wind at west by north. from the twelve the sixteenth until the twelve the seventeen north-east by north seven league latitude twenty eight degree eight minute by this I perceive that the current have set we north-east four half league the wind west south-west depth fifty fathom black sandy ozie from the seventeen until the eighteen at noon our way through the water east north-east ten half league by the current north-east one quarter east five league latitude twenty eight degree thirty minute the wind north by west and north northwest fair weather from the eighteen until the nineteen at noon our way through the water north-east by north thirty four league latitude twenty nine degree forty five minute depth sixty fathom sandy ozie the wind at first north northwest and north northwest until midnight with fair weather from thence until noon the next day west south-west and south-west very foul weather with much rain from the nineteen until the twenty at noon north-east twenty eight league latitude thirty degree thirty five minute depth fifty five fathom sandy ozie the wind for the most part south-west and west south-west the weather showrie Thursday the twenty from three to six north-east two league and a half depth thirty seven fathom black sand from six to five next morning north-east by east nine league eighty six fathom gross gray sand with some shell from five to twelve the one and twenty north-east nine league and a half no ground in ninety fathom here we be in one and thirty degree twenty five minute south south-west south and south southeast here I find that the current have carry we ten mile to the north-ward of our computation in twenty four hour from twelve the one and twenty unto twelve current the two and twenty north-east two three part north twenty five league latitude thirty two degree forty minute here the great sound of be east about nine league off so^nd of (...) and the south (...) Goto west by north ten league off the three and (...) we arrive in a port of Firando call Cochee Cochee which be about four half english mile to the (...) of the haven of Firando their retain the eighteen of December Monday at noon isle of Mexuma the isle of Mexuma (@) bear northwest from we four leaugue off our course from Pomo be south south-west twenty five league the wind northwest from the eighteen at noon to the nineteen six league south-west little wind and variable yet fair weather as before here we have the isle of Mexuma north-east by north nine league off the latitude one and thirty degree thirty two minute here we have seventy eight fathom streamy ground betwixt with a peppery sand and small shell from the nineteen to the twenty at noon south-west fourteen league latitude one and thirty degree two minute the wind from the west northwest to the north north-east the weather very fair from the twenty to the one and twenty south-west by west thirty league latitude thirty degree twenty three minute by this we find that the current have set we thirteen mile to the north-ward of our account the wind at north north-east the weather fair Friday the two and twenty from the former midday we have make a south-west by west way twenty seven league latitude twenty nine degree forty minute here our latitude course and distance agree well together this day at noon we have thirty five fathom small sand and ozie the wind north north-east and north-east fair weather from Friday to Saturday at noon south south-west thirteen league this morning we come up with a juncke of nangasack belong to jan lowlson a Dutchman and find for Cambaya I cause the captain of she to bring his passport aboard which I perceive to be a Goshon from the emperor of japan I thereupon give he leave to depart this day about noon we have one and forty fathom ozie this twenty four hour the wind be very variable the weather close and somewhat hazie at four in the afternoon forty seven fathom ozie from Saturday to Sunday noon south-west half south forty league the wind at north and north northwest close weather from Sunday noon until Monday noon be Christmas day south-west half south fifty two league here we have sight of certain land which lie off the coast of China the near unto we be a small island bear west by south from we about three league off and do rise in the form of a cayman the wind north north-east and north-east the depth in this place about thirty three fathom ozie this forenone we come up with a juncke that keep the same course as we do she have the Holland colour on her poop whereby we conceive that she have a pass from they but have she be good purchase we can not have deal with she because there be much wind a lofty Sea from Monday noon to Tuesday noon south-west by south fifty three league here we have sight of certain land which lie off Logoseo bear northwest by west nine league off here we have one and thirty fathom black peppery sand from hence we steer in west south-west ten league until six at night at which time we have the rock of the point of loamb west forty league off our depth twenty two fathom and white sand mix from six to twelve south-west by south eleven league twenty five fathom ozie from twelve to twelve the seven and twenty south-west half west one and twenty league this seven and twenty it blow a fair gale at north-east as before and the weather clear up that we have sight of the sun which we have not of a long time see before from noon until midnight south-west half west nineteen league here by the north-star and Canopus Canopus we be in one and twenty degree thirty minute the depth fifty five sandy ozie from midnight the seven and twenty unto midnight the eight and twenty south-west nineteen league here by the sun we be north twenty degree forty five minute the wind still at north-east the weather fair from the eight and twenty until the nine and twenty at noon south-west thirty eight league latitude nineteen degree fifty three minute the depth seventy five fathom sandy ozie the wind north-east the weather faire^ by this we gather that we have make our way to the westward of the south-west by west by mean of some current set to the westward from the nine and twenty until the thirty south-west half south thirty eight league latitude eighteen degree thirty minute the wind at east north-east and east by north the weather very fair no ground in one hundred and twenty fathom from Saturday until Sunday at noon which be the last of December south-west by south twenty seven league and a half latitude seventeen degree twenty minute wind east north-east weather fair the first of january from the last of December until newyear day at noon south-west by south twenty eight league latitude sixteen degree ten minute here the wind come up at north-east by north the weather fair from the first of january until the second at noon south half west twenty eight league the weather overcast the wind at north-east by north. from this day noon until two of the clock in the afternoon south south-west half south three league here we have sight of a point of land bear west from we eight league off from two in the afternoon until twelve the next day south half east forty league here we have cape Varella northwest by north eight league off this twenty four hour we have much rain and dirty weather from the three at noon until the four at six in the morning our way one with another upon a straight line south south-west half west thirty league here we be in eleven degree north latitude of our depth twenty four fathom as near as I can guess here also we have sight of Poolo Cecir bear south by east seven league off cape Cecir or Cessir and the cape Cecir north by west six league from we from six until noon west south-west thirteen league from the four at noon until the five at noon first south-west by west twenty two league than south-west half west six league and then south south-west half south one and twenty league here we be in nine degree the body of Poolo Candor bear south south-west about seven league from we our depth from the four at noon Candor be from eighteen to fourteen fathom from sixteen to eleven we feel a current set our ship to the southward beyond our computation this same night at sunsetting we find the variation to be one degree north-westing this evening at six of the clock we have the southeast end of Poolo Candor northwest four league off the wind north-east current from six this evening until twelve the next south south-west thirty league latitude seven degree ten minute the wind at north-east the weather very fa^re from the six until the seven at noon south south-west thirty six league and a half latitude five degree thirty minute the wind at north-east the weather fair from Sunday the seven until Monday the eight at noon south south-west half south forty two league latitude three degree thirty minute the wind at north-east by east and east north-east the weather fair this day at four in the afternoon we have the north point of Poolo Timon Timon south-west by south about seven league off we have run from noon seven league south south-west from Monday to Tuesday at noon south south-west seven league southeast sixteen league and south seventeen league the latitude one degree twenty five minute by this we perceive the current have carry we sixteen minute to the southward of our computation from this twelve day until four in the afternoon south six league our depth twenty four fathom streamy ground here we see Poolo pengran south-west by south six league and the head-land of west south-west eight league off from hence until four league of south southeast fourteen league off eighteen fathom the same ground from hence till noon the ten south twelve degree here we have seventeen fathom the ten at noon we have sight of land the northermost high hummocke bear west from we about six league off this day at noon by our judgement we be ten minute to the southward of the line Thursday the eleven at noon we be in one degree sixteen minute south latitude our course from the ten at noon south half west twenty two league here the souther i will of Poolo Tayro be due east from we three league off our depth fourteen fathom ozie this Poolo Tayro consist of seven or eight land and rock mix together the long tract of they be north northwest and south southeast the northermost i will be far long and large than any of the rest from this norther-most i will unto Poolo pan pan. northwest half west nine league the depth from the ten at noon unto this present be from seventeen to fourteen fathom all alongst Poolo Tayro when the norther-most i will of Poolo Tayro east north-east half east three league from we than the three hummock on the north end of banco do bear southeast ten league off Mannapin and the high land of Mannapin south by east half east from this day noon until midnight south south-west half south ten league here we anchor seventeen fathom soft ground where we ride all night the next morning we have the hill of Mannapin south southeast half east the low land by the water side three league off the next head-land to the north-ward which rise in three hummocke when you be to the north-ward of it east north-east half north. about six league off the twelve at noon be at anchor in the same place by our observation we be in one degree one and fifty minute near the wind at west northwest weather fair this afternoon we weigh and stand in towards the coast of sumatra and at midnight anchor in twelve fathom of the river of Pallimbam find nine ten and twelve fathom ozie as we range along Saturday the thirteen in the morning we weigh again the wind northerly and steer along by the sumatra shore through the straits of banco until we come between the first and second point which be at eight at night where we anchor in sixteen fathom about two league of the sumatra shore from the river of Pallimbam unto this place sumatra straits of banco we have nine ten eleven twelve fathom within two half league of the sumatra side all alongst until we come up near the second point which make the narrow of the straits and there we find about twenty fathom water Sunday the fourteen we set sail again and borrow fair aboard the sumatra side in eight seven and six fathom until we have southeast by east and then we hale away south southeast southeast by south and southeast find all the way five fathom ozie until we have bring north by west about seven league off and then the water begin to deepen have five fathom and a half six fathom Monday the fifteen we be in four degree fifty eight minute we be distant from thirty six league south by east from it from hence until four in the afternoon south south-west four league here we see a shall above the water about four mile from we west south-west the two land on the coast of sumatra bear upon the same point seven league off also Poolo keero do bear east southeast half south from this shall five league off Marrough and the high land of Marrough be south-west from the shall aforesaid this evening the wind do hearten in at northwest by which mean we get in near unto Poolo Peniang after midnight and there come to anchor until the next day chap. 8 WILLIAM discourse of his voyage in the dragon and expedition from surat to Achen Teco and Bantam and of the surprise the dragon bear expedition etc. in a letter to the company to the honourable governor and right worshipful committee of the company of the english trade in the east INDIA etc. honourable and right worshipful sir the passage of your business in captain Bonner voyage to and at surat till then and long after very hopeful you have by ma^^ advise from themselves and several relation from other large and particular understand wherefore I shall therein be purposely silent intend according to my poor mean and ability the one be lose with your ship and the other have always be very small to acquaint you only with such accident as until the say ship take happen wherein I shall humble beseech that you will be please to pardon my presumption in offer to your view these imperfect and unworthy line not doubt but other better able will more accurate perform what be by i omit requisite your knowledge than my insufficiency especial at this time be able to express and poor employment in your service afford not to be make partaker of dragon part from the Anne 17. Febr. near surat before Dabull a junke of Dabull lade and find for the red Sea the dragon and other ship of that fleet part with the Anne the seventeen of February 1618. the one and twenty follow anchor before the road and town of Dabull it be former order by consultation to touch there and not long after come a boat from the governour-deputie to learn what and whence we be whereof be certify he again return ashore and towards night a grave man captain of a juncke then in the road lade and find for the red sea with his son come aboard bring ten ox ten goat three hundred hen with great store of rice fruit etc. for a present to confer with our captain about such thing as shall be propound and that night they lodge aboard the morrow after they remain for pledge master salbanke and master Fursland go ashore to the deputy the governor himself be then at court eight day journey distant the chief of the town kind entertainment at Dabull the dabull^rs desire ^rade with we store of refresh at Dabull and good cheap promise to buy quantity of cloth hereafter and l^ad but we can not pu^ of any of the lion remnant the captain of the jun^ke desire a english bible to cau^e to be translate into Arabeck as they affirm entertain they very kind profess likewise that they be much content with the english arrival and have long desire to have commerce with they and to that end entreat to have a factory leave or the ship to ride till notice thereof may be give to the governor because without his approbation they can not conclude of any thing we have at this place great store of very good refresh indifferent cheap large beef for six rial a piece and fruit etc. great plenty for small price but none of the old remnant in the lion can vend yet upon future hope they promise fair to deal hereafter for large quantity of broad cloth lead and other english commodity captain Bonner defer enforce advise thereof to surat that the next year fleet may do to they as occasion require the six and twenty the aforesaid Noghoda land to who be give a fair in-laid musket with the furniture thereof he also earnest desire a english bible which be give he say he will careful keep till some english be there resident and then with their help will have it translate into Arabeck for his own use it have be I presume long since relate unto your worship how that during your fleet abode at Swally two Mallabar frigate put themselves under command of your ship affirm themselves subject to a of Echaree near Goa and pretend to be send by the king their master to capitulate with the english about establish a trade with he for pepper his country by their report yield yearly sufficient to lade two great ship the trial whereof be by consultation assent unto they both attend the fleet to this place and here one of they desire leave to depart before to the king to advise of our come that his pepper may be in more readiness against our arrival and that a english merchant may accompany he to view the commodity and cut price with the king for who sufficient hostage shall be leave abo^rd the dragon which be likewise agree upon master wight merchant and i^o Tucker with he for linguist the history of the offer pepper at Bataquala be dispee with he and eight of the prime man in both (@) leave for pledge the lion be former dispose of for the red sea it be order that thou shall keep the other ship company to Dabull there to vent if possible part or all those remnant bring from the r^d sea for ready money or to force they trade and the proceed thereof to be towards lade the expedition with pepper at (@) but the unfitness of th^se commodity for the dabulleer their fair promise and kind usage procure their quiet this year the lion dispee to the red Sea six hundred pound detain for the lade of the expedition for which cause the lion company be judge needless any further the seven and twenty she be dispee upon her voyage but before her departure six hundred pound sterling intend to be transport to surat be detain for speedy lade the expedition have leave letter to to be send to surat towards night the Dragen etc. set sail intend next for Batachala at Dabull enquiry be make for tho. Sprage who be send from brampoore into Gulcandawe to recover a debt due by a persian in that place and at surat it be report that the say persian be forcible take from he at this town and sprage also very much abuse but they deny ever to have see or know any such man sprage not hear off at Dabull but take notice from we to apprehend both or either if they shall at any time happen on they the five of march we anchor at Batachala shoot three piece to give notice of our arrival and the next day about noon master wight with the other Mallabar frigate come aboard by who we understand that at the king town some three day journey thence be pepper to the quantity of one hundred and fifty ton or upward but the price be hold hard at fifty rial of eight the candee and will not be bring low than forty seven the p^ice of pepper at Battagala at fifty rial the candee the candee five hundred pound the pepper worse than that of tercoo and in all likelihood he have no intent for to sell it but to keep it for the portugal with who he have continual trade and this to be but a device of those rower to free themselves from command of the English the candee at this place contain near five hundred pound our hope of this place prove no better the three present we set sail thence run along this coast we see and meet with many junck of the malabar and not find ought in they save coco-nut and such trash present dismiss they one except a juncke of the Samorine detain belong to the Samorine which captain Bonner cause to return with he the soon to procure satisfaction for good and debt leave there by Peter needham etc. which juncke certify of another of the samorine lade with pepper ride at Panana some twelve league to the southward of Calicut and find for the red sea at which place also the Samorine then keep his court at Panana in the samorines country twelve league from surat be junk of the Samorine lade with pepper find for the red Sea satisfaction of our debt demand of the Samorine the samorine cunning pepper offer by the Samorine fraudulent the candee five hundred and two pound weight where arrive the ten a messenger be send to advertise the ship arrival to require satisfaction for his debt etc. and to renew a trade with we all which motion he seem willing to entertain promise the twelve follow to meet and confer with captain Bonner upon the shore near the seaside and after a end make of the old to begin a new business the king come at the time prefix have the day before draw ashore and unlade his juncke she ride within a river at the mouth whereof be a great bar hinder our seize she who captain Bonner attend with a guard of fifty small shot etc. meet deliver our king majesty letter with a present to he and after long debate it be conclude that in regard we know not the sum due by good leave with he and other not have any notice thereof the payment shall be defer till information from needham may be procure and with advice of his merchant consent to sell we pepper at present seven or eight hundred candee or more at thirty rial of eight free of all charge the candee we find by trial thereof with our english weight to contain five hundred and two pound neat whereupon resolve it be conclude that the next day master Wight and myself shall view the quantity and quality of the commodity which we be to certify captain Bonner than aboard the small pinnace near the shore who will thereupon have land money etc. and go to weigh but that night the king mind change and we land early next morning be refuse sight thereof unless the king give express order thereto to who also go he demand when our captain will land the samorines dissimulation large discourse which we certify he will not be till we have see the pepper and can judge of the quantity and that then we shall make sign for his come he then send we back with one of his kinsman to the merchant house will we there to stay till he either come himself or send order for dipatch but there we attend while past noon and then not hear aught return to the king who by his jurabassa fall to discourse of our country manner have tumbler play before he and with such trifle delay put off the time till near four after noon when we entreat he to give we a answer that we may return to the captain who all this while expect our come whereupon take we aside into a room from sight of his people he tell we that he have many matter of import whereof to confer with the captain which he will not have his own people to take notice off and to that end have appoint a private house to be prepare for his entertainment not far from his court and therefore will that master wight shall tarry and accompany he present thither and that I shall return to the captain and bring he to the place assign I desire to see it but he refuse appoint one of his attendant to go with i to the seaside there to tarry captain Bonner land and conduct he to the foresay house but by the way consider how indiscreet it will seem to motion his go to a place I have neither see nor know especial in such a treacherous place I tell my companion that unless I may first see where the king intend to meet I will not advise the captain land he perceive i resolute leave i and direct one of his slave to show it i who lead i near two english mile up into the country and at length bring i to a little house but handsome enough site in the midst of a small wood about which be a fair plain a quarter of a mile every way and without that round environ with thick and high wood which place minister just great cause of suspicion I return to the king who I meet upon the way with forty or fifty attendant come thither with he also master wight to who I show my opinion of the place and that it now grow late and therefore nothing to be do that night come to the house the king sit a good while muse without speak when we desire leave to depart it be now near night and past time for the captain land and that if he please we shall again return on the morrow as also to certify his desire of private conference with the captain but withal entreat that we may lose no more day but that according to his former conclusion we may dispatch our business after a little pause he command all his own people out of the room leave none but master wight Ino Tucker linguist the Samorine deny to perform with we according to his promise under forty rial the candee and myself the door be shut he beckon we and then ready find his Portugese tongue till then conceal tell we resolute that he can not perform at the price contract for the pepper be none of he but the merchant of the town and that under forty rial of eight the candee he can not accomplish and if they or any other will sell cheap he give licence thereto but if none then at that price himself will furnish and that he will satisfy his debt when we can certify how much and wherefore it be due also that he have other business to confer with the captain which he say shall not be mention unless himself be present Bonner threaten the Samorine to take his juncke and pay ourselves with which answer we return aboard to captain Bonner who send he word ashore by one of his servant who come with we that the english shall large pay themselves upon his junck both for the good he detain and for this abuse also the fourteen of march we depart thence the nineteen anchor at Brimion where fail of refresh or water the people by the portugal instigation refuse to let our cask be fill under eighty rial of eight the twenty altogether that night set sail and that night double cape Comorine the two and twenty of march a consultation be hold aboard the dragon wherein be propound and conclude a pinnace order to be send from Achen from rob. Bonner unto Teco and Bantam send the Portugal pinnace for Bantam and by the way to touch at Teco to learn the estate of that factory if any be to stay there four day and at Bantam ten and then unless by captain jordaine detain long to make all haste possible back to Teco there to attend the dragon arrival from argin to inform the company affair at Bantam in she be appoint William Rickes master with twenty other and my unhappy self also that factory be likely to want attendance and I willing to my best service though in so mean a condition as it have please your worship to dispose i the four and twenty about four after noon we part with the ship they stand away for Achen and we for Teco of who proceed there I be altogether ignorant and shall therefore presume to refer your worship to master Nichols his advice if as I much fear have happen the rest from the factor there have with your ship miscarry the six of April 1619. we arrive at Teco and hear nothing at this place save what your ^ have long since be acquaint with have water and send advice to captain Bonner of our arrival etc. the eleven follow we set sail for Bantam have have diverse day calm and sometime the wind contrary the three and twenty we anchor betwixt the salt h^ls in the straits of and the seven and twenty towards night a small gale blow we weigh and intend to have put into Bantam ride before day but the usual calm force our anchor some four mile short of poolo-paniang and in the morning the pinnace arrive among our ship near Bantam the 23. April ready to set sail we descry ten ship and four junck ride under the foresay island who with that breath weigh and stand towards u^ we know not what to conceive of they little expect to have find so many english especial those ship in that place the better to make they we hoist out our praw and in she three man to row until they can make their colour and if dutch to repair back to we if english to go aboard they the latter whereof they do ere long the admiral be thwart of we who master Rickes salute with three piece he answer with one and send his Skiffe aboard will our master to weigh and stand after he to Morrogh and i to come aboard his ship and bring such letter as I have with i which I present do where I have relate all those miserable and lamentable accident which I presume your worship long since understand by the james safe arrive home the nine and twenty the fleet anchor Morrogh and the next day sir Thomas dale captain bring etc. come aboard our pinnace and dispee she for Bantam if possible to get som^ provision for the ship as also to learn if any flemish ship be at jacatra or thereabouts but speed of neither we return to the fleet the second of may. the ten ship then at Morrogh cap. jordain in the Samson and hound go for jambe Pata Syam to visit those factory about the 9 of April be the moon Clove globe peppercorn the james royal gift unicorn advice rose and bee captain jourdaine be some fourteen day before our come go with the Samson and hound for jambee Patania Syam and other place beside the four junck three whereof be from China the other from Patania and our pinnace new also by sir Thomas dale order for to attend his fleet the first of May the China junck begin to be romidge and their good take into your ship for debt owe by the chinese to your worship after which four China junk take by our ship their good lade in to the james etc. the 1. may 1619. Owen bodman be execute the 24. may 1619. our ship set sail out of the straits of Sunda the 25. of may. a junke of Rice belong to the dutch. our fleet sir tho. dale be admiral with all the rest of our ship do set sail out of the straits of Sunda 25. may 1619. some go to Ingano to weigh the money and ordnance leave in the sun our fleet purpose to return again to Bantam by the last of sept. the pinnace send back again from Bantam to Teco Priaman and Achen the pinnace passage from Teco to Achin rich. crane miraculous save price Hawkins strike with lightning but partly recover the pinnace drive back again to Teco cut down their mast yard and sail to prevent their lade the pepper at Bantam leave they there ride the quantity and quality of those good exceed my knowledge to advise I be both a stranger and by your worship order not to meddle in business of that nature the four and twenty of May Owen bodman be execute at the yard arm in the moon this day the fleet fit to sail and the rose in stead of the pinnace be intend for Teco and Achen to advise captain Bonner of proceed there with a cargazon of Rice steele etc. confine to master Fursland at Achen in which ship also it please sir Thomas to appoint my return one of the foresay junck be of Patania and most of her lade Rice belong to the plemming so much thereof as be think fit each ship provision be take out and she this day dismiss the five and twenty the fleet set sail sir Thomas dale with the moon Clove globe peppercorn advice and pinnace stand for Ingano to recover if possible part of the money lose in the sun and to relieve those man leave there if any be alive and captain bring with the james royal gift unicorn and bee for the coast intend there all to meet and to come with their joint strength to Priaman there to meet with the ship from England and also captain bonner and altogether to go to Bantam the fifteen of june we arrive at Teco where we make little stay but have water etc. and left letter for captain Bonner of the past proceed at Bantam and future purpose for this place depart thence the nineteen from Achen go betwixt the main of sumatra and the shoalds which from Teco lie four degree or more of north latitude and stop every night the nine of july about six in the evening a storm begin at northwest we be then anchor some fifteen league to the northward of barrou which increase in great extremity till about midnight with very fearful thunder lightning and terrible rain we have but one anchor aground have the shoalds and the main on every side of we within two league in this extremity not know what course to take but only to attend God mercy in our deliverance our cable break and we bare room back over these shoalds in a exceed dark night with which former we dare scarce deal at noonday yet the never forsake mercy of the almighty preserve we from all those danger and with daylight also send we fair weather when necessity enforce determination to bear back again for Teco it be say we be the first ship that ever go this way and I think no man that dare depend upon his skill to adventure without sight of land will ever sail that way again the one and twenty we have another great storm which begin about two after noon with very much wind thunder and rain which last above four hour split our main sail and blue away our spritsail rich. crane one of our company be then upon the yard arm the brace lift and all the rig of the spritsail yard at once break and he with his head downward hang at every set of the ship cover with the sea above a glass space no man be able by any mean to succour he till at last faintness and weariness make he let go and as he drive by the ship side take hold of a rope by which mean next to the almighty mercy his life be beyond expectation miraculous preserve another name price hawk stand in the waste be by a flash of lightning strike dumb and lame over all his body lie in most lamentable plight for many day yet God be thank his speech be a little return but a kind of dead numbness in both his leg and arm make he still continue a very miserable man distress as aforesaid the three and twenty we return to Teco and by reason of our want both of cordage sailes and ground-tacke of which there be no more in the ship than be at that time in use no more than one hogshead of flesh no bread but rice and that not sweet no other drink for sick man etc. but water but nineteen man in the ship whereof five very sick and diverse other lame it be resolve through importunity of the company thereto to remain there and attend relief from the dragon or other english but in the interim a rumour of flemish ship come from Bantam force we change resolution and the six with our weak crew put to sea in hope either to meet the ship from Achen or to get our intend park and by that mean to ease ourselves of some of those misery the dragon and expedition go to Teco have have since our departure from Teco a very fair gale the ten to our great comfort we meet the dragon and expedition betwixt the island N^mtam and Batta so soon as we come near captain Bonner send his Skiffe aboard to who I go and deliver his letter from master spalding master ball etc. sir tho. dale by reason of his sickness have also refer he to they for advice the next morning at a consultation it be conclude two month trade obtain at Teco 1500. bahars remain at Achen unbought for lack of mean that the rose shall return back to Teco in regard of her unfitness for any voyage as also for that the good in she will vend so well here or better then at Achen the invoice whereof be enclose in a letter seal and direct to master rich. Fursland which I then likewise deliver by captain Bonner I understand of two month trade grant at Teco of above one thousand and three hundred bahar of pepper then in the dragon and of more than one thousand and five hundred remain at Achen unbought for lack of mean to the end that so little as may be of our short time shall be lose the fifteen in the night captain Bonner send off his barge with master Nichols and myself to go ashore and acquaint the king etc. with our licence for trade as also to take a house and so much as may be to set each thing in a forwardness the king seem very willing appoint as we desire a very convenient house close by the sea side next to the customhouse and promise so soon as he see the king letter muster of our good and have conclude of the price order shall be give for present weigh the nineteen master Nichols go aboard the dragon ride two league without the road and bring the king letter ashore with he which see and read proclamation thereof be present send into the country and many in the town have good quantity of pepper which they will not sell till the king have first begin the one and twenty the dragon etc. come into the road pepper buy at Teco and muster of good land the great part whereof be cainkeene blue selas and the price be conclude fifty selas thirty five cainkeene sixteen blue byronne the price of pepper and of surat good red selas thirty two and of baftaes according to the goodness eight ten and twelve piece for a Bahar which value according to the rate worth in ready money twenty rial the Bahar and it be agree that the next morning the king shall begin to weigh the custom of good not to be pay in kind but to land whatsoever we will and to pay fourteen the hundred custom fourteen custom at Teco little hope ever to have the great custom abate fire and treachery usual in Teco alteration of the price of pepper in rial of eight for all the pepper shall be pay either with good or money a very hard condition and wondrous unadvised consent to by those former there employ but now it be continue and little hope to get it ever reclaim some good be this day land be first open above and send ashore in bag to prevent wet and small quantity at once for fear of fire and treachery both which be very usual here but especial the latter more than in any part of India the two and twenty the king etc. return to the bailey refuse their former contract and will not himself sell under forty cainkeene and sixty blue selas the Bahar but give free leave to any other that will which be nothing for till he begin none will sell a Catee so that necessity enforce our assent the six and twenty our trade begin and this day weigh the first pepper the content whereof and of the succeed day I forbear to recite have collect it together in a note herewith unto your worship master Nichols etc. be aboard the dragon this day captain Bonner discourse of the business pass at Bantam and his own at present in the dragon fear lest at the fleet arrival the pepper in she shall be take out and send home upon some other ship that have be long in the country as also dread the fleming arrival of who he be always wondrous suspicious affirm Bonner be very suspicious of the hollander and dispose himself for a man of war he have no intent to lade more pepper in the dragon till he know certain how he shall be dispose of but will take it into the expedition whereto he say she shall be present fit and the dragon keep clear and pretty for a man of war in case the fleming shall come his reason be that he can not at any time after take it into his ship of which if he can dispose he can likewise by the same power command the expedition and good therein in which determination he seem to be firm and give order for the expedition fit room upon the arrival of the bear Bonner alter his resolution of fit his ship for a man of war and lade she into England the dragon pester the dragon uncivil but the next day after arrive Henry bate merchant from the ship bear who the day before anchor at Priaman and the eight and twenty of August aforesaid arrive at tecoo at instant of who come but upon what presumption or report I can certain determine captain Bonner change resolution and proceed to lade the dragon fill each place with lumber rummage her bread-roome and so cloy her deck as be not poss^ble to use her piece in great extremity by which unhappy accident we your poor servant have with loss of life or good or both endure excess of most base and past compare contemptible usage from a ingrateful and uncivil nation with many other never to be satisfy or forget injury the seven and twenty all night be very tempestuous fearful thunder and lightning and abundance of rain we have under our house in a room for that purpose some small store of steel Bettle box and such like where also lie two man appoint by capt. Bonner to watch the house discourse of theft in Teco the seven and twenty of August the boat be leave behind they ashore that night John Cocket alias Tucker a youth who have long live at surat and he also lodge there about midnight come thief to open the door which one within perceive with cry out scar they away two hour after they return and one of they put in his arm be strike at with a sword but miss flee away the second time and they within make the door so fast as they can which be but hurdle about four in the morning come again and open the door one go in take some brass Bettle box our man be all fast asleep and in return rub against tucker leg John Tucker slay the seven and twenty of Aug. who start up catch hold of he and cry a thief I have he which scarce pronounce with a pitiful accent cry out again oh he be go and have stab i with his creeze which be so sudden do as those who lie by he have not time to rescue he there be at that time aloft the surgeon of the dragon etc. who present run down with a light but too late the villain have with a knife give he two wound one whereof to the heart who without speak more word then lord have mercy upon i present die we in vain search each bush and place about our house and I go to call the cowal or waiter who every night till this keep watch in a bailey within twenty pace of our house miss who I go instant to the Pongolo Cowallas house and call he ask he where be the watch he say at the bailey which I deny he affirm to have charge one that night then I tell he we have a man slay and will he to search narrow if any suspicious person can be apprehend he forthwith go and acquaint the king therewith who present come down with the chief thereabouts see the dead body and affirm he will do what may be to find the murderer master Nichols charge the cowal to be actor or author hereof and require to have they all send for and one after another to touch the corpse whereto the king give order and when each one have take he by the hand and no cause to suspect any appear master Nichols demand if there be no more cowal it be answer no more save one who be sick and keep his bed he the king command to be send for who very look and demeanour condemn he in the opinion of all to be the villain seek for the king command to take the dead man by the hand which with extreme quake and many distract gesture and answer he do but will not hold it any time master Nichols urge this to be the man and require justice. a story of trial of a malefactor in a strange manner the king cause he to be find and profess in his conscience that be the man who kill he but that he must be try by their law also whereto the fellow assent and while preparation be make thereto we send word to captain Bonner who come ashore to see the event hereof present after who come a fire be make and a iron pan with a gallon of oil set thereon which leisurely boil till it come to such a degree of heat that a green leaf but dip therein be sodden and shiver the prisoner then call and persist in denial of the fact be in testimony of his innocence to take out of the say oil a small ball of brass little big than a musket shoot with his naked hand and that if any burn or scald appear thereon he be content to die which he address himself to perform strip up his sleeve above the elbow and take a kind of protestation desire that as he be clear thereof so he may prosper in this act dip his hand to the wrist in the burn oil take out the ball hold it fast and cry Basar or twenty two rial a Bahar of pepper at tecoo the dragon go out of tecoo ride into deep water diverse boat lade with pepper aboard the dragon our man weary about the pepper six hollander come into the road be adjudge english ship show no colour find by their Huls to be Holland ship set upon the dragon unprovided and her man weary before the admiral and vice-admiral lay she aboard and all the other four ship discharge at she as they pass by she be altogether pester no piece free but one and can come by no powder o^ shot great be the lord toss it up catch it again and then cast it on the ground show his hand unto all that will which have no more sign of hurt then if he have experiment the same in cold water the devil it seem be loath at that time to lose his credit the fellow be instant release and within a hour after return in his holiday apparel and none so lusty as he though but a little before he have be sick and so weak as he be fain to be bring upon man shoulder to his trial and this be all the justice we can have for our murder man though in all likelihood and their judgement also he be the actor this business end the king propound to captain Bonner that our time of trade begin now to be short and that there be great store of pepper yet to be have which may speedy be buy for ready money the people be unwilling to deal for any more cloth in regard the junke from argin be daily expect with great store from the king who will force their take thereof and that have sell before for ready money they will make the better shift which he say be alike to we our commodity be as vendible in other place and the new ship the bear have bring good store of money which may be well employ whereto consent be give the price be cut twenty two rial the Bahar and the assembly dismiss that night good store of pepper be bring down to be weigh the next day many of the chief affirm that there be in and about tecoo above a thousand Bahars pepper which so fast as can be weigh will be bring in the king give we leave that if in the night we see any about the house we shall detain they prisoner till the next day and in case they refuse to come unto we be call we shall shoot they and the peril to lie upon their own head the nine and twenty captain Bonner perceive the dragon to be already deep and hope ere long to have her full lade weigh out of the road by the island and anchor without attend a wind to go to the southward of those land there to ride and take the rest of her lade the first of October about four in the morning the dragon weigh and near eight with the breeze set sail and come into the foresay road not long after all the boat and skiff of the dragon expedition and rose come ashore to fetch pepper who lade so fast as they can but before all be lade six sail be descry stand with a fresh gale at south towards the road of our ship the boat forthwith put off and have very much labour to row to windward the man be much weary before with moore the ship and carry the bag of pepper captain Bonner judge they to be sir Thomas Dales fleet who have determine to arrive there by the fine of September and therefore till they come within less than a league that their hulls show who they be no colour be abroad not suspect they and then before any provision can be make for defence the admiral and vice-admiral lay the dragon aboard all the other as they go by shoot so many piece as can be bring to bear upon she who have that day take in above a hundred bahar of pepper have all her man even spend with labour the three other ship also take without shoot one piece hollander most stern insulter and incomparable cruel enemy if the infidel have not be more merciful than the hollander three hundred man have perish the hollander put our man in iron in their ship all night in open air in a most rainy and tempestuous night neither respect sick nor maim the next morning turn they ashore with rag among be forty six of the star man even till now keep prisoner rob. Bonner be send ashore offer to carry away the bed he lie upon which for triple the value be redeem his death with commendation 9 October God move the heathen to favour our people the king do visit captain Bonner and furnish he with needful and offer all courtesy the name of the holland ship depart from tecoo to Priaman and Bantam where they have thirty five sail ^esi^ging Bantam the pangram at Bantam and the Hollander vey for slaughter one of another people Diego Fernandes behead be take for a Hollander and be at that time so cloy as be never poor all empty and full of cask bread and other provision then upon she deck and all her low gun so stow up with lumber as that in so little time as be then to provide not more than one can be clear and that but once discharge powder and shoot in that extremity not to be come by with those ordnance which be clear the fight be maintain very hot about three glass or more till captain Bonner his worthy resolution approve his zeal to do your worship his uttermost service receive a mortal wound with a shot in the right side which remain in his body who be carry down the ship fire in four or five several place most pitiful tear and many man slay she become a prey rather than a prize unto they the other four dutch ship stand in to the bear expedition and rose who see as be say the dragon disaster yield also the two first without shoot a shot worthy sir I be not at present a actor at this surprise though I shall have always cause to bewail what I then suffer and therefore must beseech your favourable acceptance of this small recital till other therein employ of far better ability than myself shall large acquaint you with every circumstance neither dare I persist in this subject lest just passion cause by remembrance of so late feel and unless by your worship clemency relieve never to be recover misery shall transport i beyond those limit wherein I must now willing contain myself but thus much I may true profess if as be a common maxim contrary hold the same reason of proportion in change of quality they may be expect to be most kind friend for already we have find they most stern insulter and beyond compare cruel enemy and have not more true compassion pity and relief be extend to we from infidel moores then from these dutch christian three hundred of your servant unhappy man a great number of who will not a few hour before have change fortune even with the chief and unworthy of that crew have leave their dead carcase a prey to beast and fowl and subject their live body to miserable servitude if a great chastisement for our sin have not be inflict be possess of our ship they straight way send the english aboard they and for refresh after so great labour as they have that day sustain set they in iron upon the grate in such a night of wind rain thunder and lightning as either before or since I never see without respect to either sick or wound many of who life short after pay for that night barbarous entertainment the next morning early they turn all ashore with such poor rag as they will suffer they to wear on their back upon the main at tecoo be the foresay four ship company and forty six of the star man till than also keep prisoner there be then a shore in the factory William Nichols Henry bate and myself where so good order be take for the sick and wound as the time confusion and poor mean then there will permit the three day follow captain Bonner be send ashore with a guardian attend he to the house send by the dutch admiral to carry back even the poor bed he lie upon which for triple the value be redeem where grief and anguish add a violent fever and spasma to his former deadly wound have heretofore well deserve the repute of a worthy now show no less a christian man and with a resolution well six on the merit of our redeemer yield his soul into the hand of the almighty the nine of October leave we distress just to lament his loss who be before enough sorrowful afflict with remembrance of pass misery and expectation of more and great ensue calamity who body as he desire be bury upon the little island at tecoo so near his brother Thomas as can be guess somewhat to comfort we in this distress it please the lord to give we favour in those people sight who use we fair and well as can have be expect in any christian part of the World the king will diverse time visit captain Bonner and each day present he with such cate as be there esteem fit for so sick a man desire he also to be comfort and that both they and country shall be ready both to protect and relieve we which be well perform for so long as the fleming ride there one thousand man arm lay within a quarter of a mile of our house ready upon any occasion and a continual market for victual be keep at our door wherein all provision sell cheap than before our ship be take the five the hollander have take in their pepper at tecoo set sail with these ship follow viz. the Vapan Vande sealand admiral in she William johnson commander of the fleet the Huerlam new Zealand Neptune english star post-part the dragon bear and expedition for Priaman intend thence for Bantam to the rest of their fleet there consist of thirty five sail beside they and be then besiege Bantam the pangram and they vie for dead man head one for hollander and the other for javas give reward and in which deadly difference it be unhappy Diego destiny to be a sufferer who after his be take in the star and keep prisoner make a escape in a prow from jacatra intend to have secure himself in the english house at Bantam be by the james apprehend and behead instead of a Dutchman leave the rose in the road have first take out all her ordnance powder and munition and in she twelve hogshead salt flesh two butt of wine the rose leave unto the english in tecoo ride with the particular in she a man of Monanchabo report capt. jourdaine to be take at jambe the man take in ^he star do report that the hollander send out ship double man to take c. jordaine the palsgrave Elizabeth and Ho^e arrive at tecoo very happy who take in all our man Will Nichols and Henry Bates go to Achen to the king to complain of the hollander the rose order to b^ send for England the three ship and rose depart out of tecoo ride the 10. of Nouem. the rose arrive at Soldania the 28. of january they find capt. Adam letter and of 2. dutch ship the Saluage^^ at the (...) slay e^ight of our man think to be provoke thereunto by wrong do the dutch. come from Saldania the second of feb. and some few bag of bread and a very small proportion of water-caske for the foresay number of man except such as in the interim run away into their service to transport ourselves whither soever we can about this time there arrive at tecoo a man as himself say belong to Monanchabo who report confident but whether by the fleming instigation or his own knowledge I can determine that at the place whence he come two ship and a pinnace be say to be take at jambee by four other ship which be much to be doubt of captain jordan etc. the english on the star likewise affirm they have hear of four ship which be double man and marvellous well fit send purposely to take they which the lord I trust in his mercy have prevent the foresay black be thirty day from Monanchabo thither and though not common yet sometime advice from jambee come hither over-land during our abode at tecoo before the rose can be fit to sail it please the almighty to take compassion on our distress and to deliver we from the many inevitable danger yea even confusion which be likely present to light upon we by send in thither captain Charles Cliffingham with the palsgrave Elizabeth and hope who by consultation at the cape be intend for Priaman and arrive at tecoo the three and twenty of October aboard who the man ashore be forthwith disperse m. Nichols and Henry bate send in a small praw to Achin and the rose in that poor and weak state she then be and no otherwise conclude to be dispatch for England to advise of these accident and proceed concern the intendment of the three foresay ship as also the end of send those mention to Achin I be ignorant and therefore shall humble refer your worship to their own advice the foresaid ship with the rose set sail all together from tecoo the ten of November and at Nimtam part the fourteen and the lord of his mercy vouchsafe we so fair a passage that with the loss of but one man who also be sick before we leave tecoo notwithstanding our hard allowance most of our bread and much of our rice be consume and spoil with worm and vermin be arrive at the cape all in sound health the eight and twenty of january 1619. go ashore at Soldania we find letter leave by captain Adams the copy whereof be herewith enclose also of two dutch ship depart thence homeward leave by a Englishman passenger in one of they the copy whereof be herewith likewise enclose we have our Sayne ashore to fish and the country people demean themselves as former they accustom but the next day return again ashore to fish and water the most tragical and woeful accident befall we that ever happen to any english in these part eight of our man go to the river by land carry the Sayne with they to fish and be all by the saluage either miserable slay or keep away from we we have find the dead body of but four of they the cause which shall excite they to such a horrid and unheard of attempt I can conceive unless as be most probable some wrong offer by the dutch late go hence have move they to practice and exercise this treachery to we now and to be doub^ed will be endeavour to all that shall hereafter arrive have water our ship bury so many of the slay man as can be find and leave letter for any that shall arrive after we we set sail from Soldania the second of February about noon past the equinoctial the five of march and the of arrive at in England the almighty have of his inestimable clemency protect and deliver we from the exceed many and eminent danger of a most miserable voyage and vouchsafe we safe return into our native country for which and all other gracious favour from our beginning to this day extend his great and glorious majesty be extol and magnify both now and for evermore amen amen your worship poor servant in all duty and service ever at your command william hoare chap. 9 the journal of master NATHANIEL COURTHOP his voyage from Bantam to the land of Banda be chief commander of the two ship the swan admiral master Davis master and the defence vice-admiral master HINCHLEY master together with his residence in Banda and occurrent there contain the difference in those part betwixt the english and hollanders contract @. i. english kindness to the dutch the surrender of poolaroone to his majesty and the fortify there by the english Dutch hostility their take the swan Solomon and attendance and keep the defence betray by fugitive with other wrong let none accuse i for tediousness or be too punctual in this relation see the dutch pestilence grow principal from hence and hence may his majesty right to these land be know to future age for which I add this witness after Spurway we set sail from Bantam the last day of October 1616. and arrive at Maccassar the seventeen of November with the swan the defence come in the nineteen where I go on shore to get ready our provision of good and rice have no good as then in Bantam to serve those place but have commission to take they here where I find small store the chief being one hundred quians of Rice the five of December I spy a boat alongst the shore be a Skiffe of the hollander come from their ship which be in the off think they have have a factory here but I soon certify they it be dissolve the people their enemy whereupon they entreat i to stand their friend and I forthwith * * English kind-people^ the the king (@) visit captain b^nner and furnish he with needful and offer all courtesy the name of the holland ship depart from tecoo to Priaman and Bantam where they have thirty five sail ^esieging Bantam the pangram at Bantam a etc. the hollan^^^^veying ^^^veying ^i p. 516 slaught (@) reof ^ed to his pe^^iestie ^ fortify there three Holland ship to disturb the english go to the king and entreat he to dismiss they in that they come ignorant who at my request let they go give they warning not to attempt the shore a second time so be night I wish they to go aboard my ship to refresh themselves and to depart at their pleasure that night their pinnace go out to sea but miss their ship which come the next day into the road and not understand the news send their long boat towards the shore which the king of Maccasser perceive send a number of prowess which surprise she and slay every man of they be sixteen in number the nine of December we set sail for Banda with the Hollander in our company and be clear of Maccasser relieve they at their request with fresh water and sell they two quoine of Rice with some few hen and rack keep company as far as Amboyne hence we proceed and the three and twenty of December be near polaroone send my Skiffe ashore to understand the state of the islander who be glad of our come as be not able to hold out long against the hollander oppression keep they from relief of victual the same day we come to anchor at polaroone the orankaye come aboard and I inquire of they whether there have be any former contract between they and the hollander who certify i there have be none at all then according * * English kind-people^ the the king (@) visit captain b^nner and furnish he with needful and offer all courtesy the name of the holland ship depart from tecoo to Priaman and Bantam where they have thirty five sail ^esieging Bantam the pangram at Bantam a etc. the hollan^^^^veying ^^^veying ^i p. 516 slaught (@) reof ^ed to his pe^^iestie ^ fortify there three Holland ship to disturb the english to my commission I require they to surrender their land to the king majesty of England which they present do and draw article of trade and condition to be observe betwixt we which be agree on we spread saint George upon the island and shoot off most of our ordnance the five and twenty of December we see a holland ship come from the westward and forthwith upon council land three piece of ordnance out of the swan and mount they on a cliff fit for that purpose and make what haste we can to fit a platform for they we land three other piece of ordnance and mount they on a point of land which command the road thus fit I land most of the good and settle a factory upon the three of january there come three flemish ship into the road flourish with their trumpet and come to anchor by we we fit our ship for fight and I send master Muschamp aboard the admiral to certify they of the surrender as also to demand if they can lay any claim to the say land they answer no. I further offer they water or any thing the island afford but they plain tell i they come for no such thing whereupon I tell they the country people will not suffer they to ride there under their nose and that they have be do but I cause they to forbear master Sophonie Cozock the swan take by the dutch. see the manner of their unmannerliness in Spurway dutch peevishness John davis his letter this and other letter I have whole and have take that which I think most fit leave the r^st which be to be see perfect in master cort. journa^l I have above 60. letter belong to this and master hayes journal to peruse some of which I here have from the original trans-printed Neylackey^ ^ little island by Polaroon^ fortify the defence betray by perfidious k^^u^s to the hollander king Christmas hour har^is Bridges rockwell Car^er Taylor and woodlocke S^ what a dutch prison w^l^ do together with lie pretence of the hollander and fugitives the devil be al^o a liar and murderer from the beginning thus do the dutch with general rial w^y and all I dare not ^ay lie all in pretence of commission and t^e king letter and perceive their intent to surprise we and fear they will lay we aboard in the night I tell they I can not stay the country people any long if they be not go before two glass be run they thereupon weigh and depart the four there come a holland boat and sound all alongst the little island at who master Hinchley shoot from the land but hit she not and they depart the swan be deliver master davis will go water at wayre obstinate contrary my command I be then very sick come aboard the defence and send sophonie aboard the swan which depart jan. 18. I after have uncertain news that the hollander have take she and send the sew over to Lantore to hear the news which bring word that the swan be in Nero Road. on the seven and twenty of February I send Robert hayes to the Hollander with a flag of truce to demand the reason of take she their reason be we come yearly to make our voyage and lade our ship and be go they have the brunt of the war and we come sneak to do they injury and further they say that the state of Holland and the lord of the council shall confer of this business and be demand the manner of her take they say time shall bring it forth and further threaten to fetch the defence out of the Road. they ask what man we have at wayre and rosinging and say they will fetch they out of those place they also send a writing the effect whereof be that the wrong we offer they can no long be endure and that they will have one send over to come to composition with they hereupon by council it be agree for the safety of our ship life and good to land all our provision on the small island with most of the man to manage the ordnance which be subscribe by Corthop Spurway Hinchley hayes stacy Helmore and the second of march to be put in execution none else of the ship company will yield thereto but will keep the ship to death the seven of march a letter be bring from Nero by a Hollander with a flag of truce from master davis part whereof I have transcribe master Corthop commendation etc. the admiral and the rest have settle their resolution to have you off from polaroone according to their commission and I know that unless you do talk together there will be much slaughter about it for they be all double man from their castle and must fight it out as I have prove already for they do shoot at i twice before I begin although I be in the sea eight league off when they chase i we fight almost board and board for the space of one hour and a half until they have kill five man maim three and hurt eight and when we begin we have not thirty man able to do any thing nor no wind to work withal etc. I answer by a letter to they that we doubt of their message and letter except they will send a english man one of the ship company to notify thing unto we that we hear they have murder our man in cold blood and as they pretend commission to beat we off we have commission to maintain the king majesty right of England we thus seek to prolong time for our better fortification and the same night send ordnance and munition to the little island of neylackey which make the road and if they have plant there as they pretend they will have beat all our ship out of the road and have keep all relief from the great island so that we must have be go for want of food the ten of march come a Hollander with master Davies boy and a letter from he to signify that after the flag be furl not one man be meddle with Sophonie be the first man be tear in piece with a great shot etc. this letter come with other dutch letter but we now be almost ready for they write they a absolute answer that if we shall come into their subjection as they desire we shall show ourselves no true subject to his majesty and that our resolution be to stand to all hazard whatsoever march 11. on the fourteen it be conclude by council to bring ashore our provision and to bring the ship about her cable twice cut in two with the rock and now have but two anchor to sea-boord but find her leak and unlikely to be bring about we agree to bring she ashore under the defence fort. master Hi^chley on the eighteen come to a anchor near into the bay leave aboard John king Boatson with some twenty more and on the twenty in the morning the ship be drive almost as far as Lantore which when they which be a sleep in the ship perceive and ask the reason the king answer tell the master I have the watch and be asleep the ship drive thus some go into the long boat the rest which be compact stay behind and when the long boat be come away they set their fore-course and go into Nero roade and deliver the ship to the hollander the first of April 1617. the fleming send over letter with a flag of tr^ce one from master davis to urge a composition advise very passionate if I lose any more man by your arrogance as here I have lose by sickness already their life and blood shall rest upon your head and your faction and this I will write with die hand God give i leave for what they do or have do their commission will bear they out in and be content to let the law decide between our master and they or will come to any reasonable matter of friendship that no more blood may be spill on either side for I plain see how you carry it you have cause the master of the defence to land his piece ashore from his ship and make wrack of she * * take this as the fugitive and hollander report to drive up and down be it in our hand to defend a army that have order for what they do he proceed to a invective that they will defend treacherous Bandaneses who be at Banda daily to make a peace with the hollander that they may have time to cut your throat etc. I make answer to the hollander promise upon such two stay to come and confer withal redemand the defence with her man and good those pledge come not but two other and on the six go to nero. where the next day the general and council offer i restitution of ship good man and all loss whatsoever on condition that I shall take off my ordnance from Polaroon and Neylackey and leave the island to which I answer I can not unless I shall turn traitor unto my king and country in give up that right which I be able to hold and also betray the country people who have surrender up their land to our king majesty but promise to confer with my council and send he a absolute answer I return the eight and send he his pledge the next day I call a council show my commission where it be resolve to send word to Bantam and a resolute answer to the hollander that we can not give away the king right without treason and to betray the islander his subject be both unchristian falsehood and unreasonable folly to incur their fury but if the dutch will restore the defence with man and good new proffer rial threat and help to convey they to Bantam give under their hand that no attempt shall be make against the two land till it be decide in England or Bantam then etc. they return the messenger to advise i by writing to consider of it and send my full resolution in three day or else he will bring all his force and take we perforce he not come we fit a praw to send news to Bantam and demand aid wherein go master Spurway master Hinchley Christopher the flemish fugitive who doubt I give order to leave at Maccasser I write a letter of occurrent to Bantam signify also the dutch bravado which they have make master davis believe as that they have our king letter to take any of we to the east of celebe he offer * * the copy of the letter for the length I dare not transcribe a great part be the same that before you have read * * reasonable offer make if to reasonable man but when conscience be remove from the h^rt to the hilt and reason from the brain to the point of the sword reason and religion shall be no better deal with then the english and Bandaneses here be and note that the hollander can show no right to the land but fight of the hollander with the english and take two ship more the Solomon and the attendance deep lade with Rice clothes of diverse kind etc. as appear by the invoice which I have see of master ball hand if they can show such letter he will give up all or if they can show any surrender make to they by the native or if they will carry we to Bantam and not meddle till there or in England thing be decide that the hollander be hate of all nation in those part that they vaunt they have the copy of the company commission before any ship come forth that no english general have the king commission that they bring letter from petty king which be repute as their slave as of Amboyna and Hetto with the like that if the bandaneses will have their country in peace they must submit themselves to the hollander for that no nation can compare with they with request of supply the next wind that he can have have all Lantore land deliver he but do not think it fit have no good nor victual for they which if it come in two day will be do the small league they enter with the Hollander be but to sustain their hunger all of they be agree to have no other peace with they etc. the five of june the holland general Laurence Ryall in a small ship come within shoot of our fort upon neylackey have hear by the defence-fugitives that most of our man will run away if they have opportunity but he expect they in the Skiffe be welcome from i with fourteen shot that a man be not see to trim the sail but they bear up the helm and depart I send another praw with advice for Bantam lest the former may miscarry by master stacy which depart the eight of july the four and twenty of December we have news that the man of Lantore have detain seven hollander of their chief and their good kill one of they in the take the other ransom for eighty five bandanese and so the league be break the three and twenty of February I have news that the praw in which master stacy go be cast away and the king of Botton lend they another for Maccasser the twelve of march we feel a terrible earthquake the five and twenty of march 1618. we see two of our ship about some five league from Polaroon come from the westward with the very last of the westerly wind and as then be take with a easterly wind which bring the four Holland ship these we have see look out from the twenty day up with they the great Bantam the trow the star and the swan these fight with they from two of the clock till nine at night the fight be in sight of Polaroon some three league off and at midnight come the attendance Skiffe ashore at Polaroon with four and twenty bandanese who tell we of three ship the Solomon the Thomas and the attendance and how the Thomas have leave they in the straits of desol^m and never be see after and that the ship can no long endure the fight because the Solomon can not use she low Teere and their powder be naught the six and twenty we lose sight of all the ship and in the nine and twenty all six come into Nero road where the hollander wear our colour under their ship sterne in all disgraceful manner @ 2 the manner of take the Solomon and attendance in diverse letter describe dutch abusive device by lie to delude and dishearten our man diverse extracts of letter of master CORTHOP * * in master co^thops journal be copy of letter send by he or to he with other occurrent the first of April Robert Fuller bring news from Lantore that the bandaneses be most of they slay by the hollander in take the ship and that they feze the hollander twice over board and slay many of they but be oppress with number on the fourteen a Hollander with a flag of truce bring i a letter from master cassarian David commander of the three ship aforesaid in these word Pooloway the fourteen of April 1618. master Corthop my love premise unto yourself and the rest of your good company I wish you all health and prosperity have at this time through the general permission get opportunity to write unto you I think good to let you understand of that which I think you do already know too well that be of our be surprise by the hollander the general and his council do allege that these island Pooloway and pooloroan with the rest be their right false pretence of commission as you have former hear they say and that if any of the english come there for trade they have a commission to make lawful prize of they and so late experience have teach we here for my part I can resolve the general of any determinate course for want of your advi^e but I wish you be all safe from thence it rest that you do advice with the merchant and the rest reside with you and if you think good write down your determination and send it i by this bearer that I may the better answer to the general proposition which I can do till we understand each other mind as for my consent it shall be ground upon your knowledge and experience of the island whether you be able to keep it or be willing to leave it our ship the Solomon and the attendance ride at Nero and our man share among the dutch ship be strip out of all money and clothes myself with one english boy to attend i remain upon Pooloway where the general and his council do abide at who hand I do daily find much favour and kind usage though watch and look unto as a prisoner the Thomas which be my vice-admiral we lose in the straits of Desalon and by all judgement she be there cast away yet we have no absolute certainty thereof I will be glad to have your presence here for our better proceed in the business and the general be willing to send to pooloroan a man of fashion to stay there as a pledge in your absence but always provide that you enter into a condition with the country people that the say pledge have no wrong offer he in your absence but as you shall return in safety to pooloroan so he may return in safety to Pooloway again of this I pray you consider etc. and confer with the Orankayas and send it i in write by this bearer whether you may do so or not if you think good that it shall be so fail not to advise i thereof and the boat shall come for you again and bring the general pledge and so I commit you to the safe tuition of the almighty and rest your ever love friend cassarian DAVID aboard the trow in Nero ride the twenty six of April 1618. most love and kind friend master Nathaniel Corthop I hearty salute you and beseech God to send continuance of health unto you all there your letter yesterday be of we safe receive here minister much joy unto we all in midst of our lamentation for you understand thereby the fleming notorious lie who can do little else lie of english distress report you all to be in all manner of want and misery by the bandanese against who they be speedy bend to make a assault upon either Lantore or otherwise Polaroon but I hope you mistrust the worst with five hundred soldier at least now they have here e^ght sail of ship of their own and within two or three day expect they it please master geo. Barkley the twenty of February 1616. to send i with ric. hunt who die at Bantam upon the attendant to yourself but the monson be spend we can but fetch Maccassar where I stay but eleven month in expectation of our fleet for Banda which be a hot one when it come to encounter with such a enemy be but three ship and the best of they run away aforehand I mean the Thomas master William Hakeridge leave myself and his mate tatten and pu^ser with five more of his company aboard the Solomon and God know what be become of they which have we be together doubtless we have geld they of their great Bantam but be as we be so deep ship have upward of two hundred quoyne of rice beside Arack six hundred larre thirty four bale of cloth with other provision as never be Poolaroon so fit if it have please God we have all safe here arrive for that we be too too much over-matched by their great force sickness at Bantam there have be this year a great mortality in Bantam the chief factor there with general Pepwell and the rest keep the ship there so long that there die above two hundred of our man there before their departure from thence the frenchman that arrive at Bantam these fleming take their dutchman out of they perforce french arrive at Bantam and how welcome by the dutch. to the overthrow of their voyage and for any far matter not worthy the write thereof now to come to ourselves and our take the Bantam be near we of the fleming four ship yet some distance off and the five and twenty of March last pass about noon shoot at we who we soon answer again with shot for shot all that afternoon but our powder be naught and can not carry the shot home when they come ever we but never touch we to the set of the sun soon after the wind come easterly we be in the midst of our foe and be so much overmatch be by they surprise and take but the bandanezes eight of they fight very valiant and kill the fleming three man outright and hurt they three more but the tall man of Pooloway and another little man with he play their part excellent for they drive the fleming overboard by forty at once some up into the four shroud some one way and some another that they have scour the deck of they all I think if the Bandanezes have have they upon plain ground they will have put the fleming to the sword every man of they brave spirit of the Bandanezes for that they be exceed fearful to deal (@) they but by their boat and subtlety they kill the Bandanezes and take seven or eight boy prisoner whereof one or two of they be run away and escape from hence out of their hand and I hope get safe to you there by this time now after that we come to a parley with the fleming base deal of brutish dutch. they kill we three man base both against the law of arm and all good manner beside bring we afterward to Nero where they make pillage by the dutch general his order of all that we have keep our man in iron these fleming be so close in all their do that their own skipper can know their determination and yet then general be find with they in company or else I think little will be by they perform what I can I will advise you though I can persuade you but I beseech God bless you and all with you master cassarian David be keep by the dutch general at Pooloway be send by the chief factor and counsel at Bantam cape merchant of the fleet upon the Solomon and myself he second upon the Thomas consign all by commission unto yourself and be refer to your appointment the first present I write master cassarian at Pooloway advise he to acquaint you with all occurrence what have pass that you may not be ignorant of any thing nor frustrate your hope in expectation of what now can be I say the more to blame they at Bantam so cares^y to keep these ship there so long unto the eight of januarie last before they send they away from thence which have bring upon we all this misery the ship arrive at Maccassar the second of February last and through extremity of foul weather it be the seven of march before we can set sail from thence I pray you return my hearty commendation unto master Muschampe master hayes and Thomas Ford with all the rest of our love friend there likewise master lane master churchman master kelum and Thomas fowl commend themselves hearty unto you all I can yet hear from master cassarian I think hereafter we shall go for Amboyna where master davis be and twenty man more the rest be at ternate I pray you excuse my not former write to you because I doubt the delivery and thus much at present shall for this time suffice and with my kind commendation unto yourself I beseech God to keep you out of the hand of all your enemy and make our meeting joyful to each other and so in haste I rest want of conveyance make a long passage your ever love friend here now prisoner geo. jackson in the behalf of jacob lane Bartholomew churchman and the rest these fleming report that the day after we be take their other three ship take up the attendant Skiffe half full of bloody water and think those Bandanezes that go away in the Skiffe this be a lie for it arrive safe at poolaroone kill one another and get not to poolaroone wherefore in your next I pray you write the certainty of it likewise they report that our man do not run away with the defence but will have carry she for ceyran but that the fleming man out two of their long boat and take the defence and bring she into nero. geo. Jackson a letter from master lane master of the Solomon from aboard the trow of Amsterdam in Nero ride the twelve of April love friend master Nathaniel Corthop I hearty salute these be to certify you the seven of march we depart out of Macasser road with the Solomon the Thomas and the attendance master cassarian davis being our chief commander of all the ship the thirteen of the same month be near the straits of Saler we lose company of the Thomas which we never hear of since all of we be find direct for poolaroone the five and twenty of the same month be break of the day the Solomon and the tendance be within four or five league of poolaroone we see four sail of dutch ship three of they be to the eastern of we the other be their admiral be near unto the island of poolaroone that day be calm with little wind easterly we tow with our boat and make the best mean we can to get the island the dutch ship have the wind of we bear with we at two a clock in the afternoon the great Bantam vice-admiral get within shoot of we and ply her best to we and we requite she to our power at four a clock the star which take the swan and the swan likewise get within shoot of we at eight a clock at night the admiral get within a ship length of we and ply their great ordnance upon we kill three man and hurt thirteen or fourteen man but will not board we command the chief of we to come aboard their admiral and to strike down our sail and to take in our flag which master cassarian cause to be do and command the Skiffe to be man to go aboard of they and likewise master jackson in another boat to go aboard another of they they be there I can hear no answer from any of they the dutch have our two boat aboard with our chief commander send their four large boat full of man to the number of one hundred and forty or one hundred and fifty man to keep our ship and to take the bandaneses which they kill the arankaye to the number of twelve of they the rest they save alive and carry they ashore to Nero for master cassarian he be and have be at Pooloway since we come in here but for my part with my mate churchman and master jackson with thirteen man more be aboard of the trow in iron but we three for master which be master of the attendance he be aboard the star with many of his man for the rest of our man they be aboard the Bantam and the swan not suffer to go to one another dutch cruelty but lie and fare more like slave than man which I think will kill many of we for our thing they have take away all that every man have to their clothes of their back sir I understand that your want be great at the island and that the country people have get the castle from you lye-device and that within short time they mean to send you all over here unto the hand of the dutch which I wish you can rather get for Macasser then to come in their hand the Dutch have no ship at Buttone three ship they have now in the off or at Amboyna five ship they have hear if the three ship get in here they purpose to come all for poolaroone otherwise I think not this year yet I hear within this seven or eight day the old horn a ship of seven or eight hundred ton with the small galley and other boat be to come for poolaroone where they understand that the small castle shall be deliver up unto the dutch for the rest of their ship that be here I hear within this three week they be to go for Amboyna sir I have save these two letter which captain ball deliver i for you which I use the best mean I can to save they for you and to send they to you with the best mean I can to save they for you and to send they to you with the best mean I can use which I desire you may receive and to send i answer how all business stand with you in this case and I will be glad to pay the coat off my back to the bearer for a answer other letter we have for you and the rest of your company on the island which if I can shall be send you sir the Solomon be deep lay with Rice the Thomas lade with Rice and rack and other provision the attendance lade with Rice fish and rack and other provision thus with my love unto you with the rest of your company I cease beseech God to bless you in your proceed and deliver we out of the hand of these tyrant and send we all a joyful meeting your friend to his poor power to command Jacob lane sir the general of the dutch have give express authority unto the commander of those ship that if they meet we either to sink or burn we before we shall recover the island or else he will hang they that shall be the occasion adie in the prison of the castle Pooloway july the fifteen 1618. the cop^e of a piece o^ m. jacksons letter to m ball from the prison in Pooloway cast^e july 15. 1618. howsoever William Hakeridge have deal with i yet I rest much find to yourself for your love to i that think so well on i who thankfulness shall undoubted have turn to your credit have it not be by these arrogant thievish fleming and master Hakeridge otherwise prevent which mischief grow from a Molajo letter write by a Fleming whore in Maccasser and send in a trunk to Amboyna advise of our come otherwise we have be at our port before that the fleming have hear of we hereupon the fleming lay weight for we with four of their best ship of war and three more ready to second they if need require now the Thomas be lose out of our company we ply our voyage with the Solomon and the attendant sail to the southward of the shoald that be off a Buttone and the five and twenty of March last by day break we have sight of polaroone about five league off present upon this we descry three sail of fleming to the northward and one to the eastward to say the Bantam the trow the swan and the star that take the swan which of these ship the Bantam come somewhat near we about noon and have we here have the Thomas in our company we have sure geld they of their great Bantam for that ship be some distance from her consort and see our weakness begin fight and shot at we who we soon answer again with shot for shot but our powder be naught and can not carry the shot home when the fleming shoot over we thus we continue but no hurt do of either side to the set of the sun for that we be some distance off and be send to too late the monson fail we the wind come now easterly and in the night bring our enemy round about we at which time of be send by master cassarian aboard their vice-admiral the Bantam to know their intent which be according to their protest make at Bantam against we than the trow their admiral very base shoot the Solomon twice thorough and through kill there four man and hurt we ten man more thus be we by the fleming surprise take prisoner and pillage who keep we first in their ship at Nero and now close prisoner in Pooloway castle ten of we perfidious dutch. the rest be carry for Amboyna and the Moluccas now if our three ship have be send soon we have not only arrive safe at polaroone with two hundred and fifty quien of Rice for that I know there be no less provide in Maccasser but also we have gain the whole commodity of nut and mace with both country of Banda and people likewise and the fleming can not have buy two hundred suckle of mace whereas now they have buy at least two hundred ton the neglect of which thus much import though it prove not the loss of both commodity and country hereafter the five and twenty of may last the fleming march with seven hundred and fifty soldier against Lantore but the Bandanezes give they such a repulse kill they four man and hurt they sixteen more that the fleming come off again and never beat their drum the dutch general will not be entreat of we to show we any kindness neither will he ransom we for any money it may be that he think the english will take so many of his man and so ransom one man for another thus not willing to be over tedious I beseech you good sir to consider our misery and do what may be for our releasement your ever love friend to command George jackson Pooloway the 18. of September I send a answer offer upon pledge to come over to Pooloway in the vessel which they shall come in the seventeen of April the orrenkaye of Lantore come over to i to confer about keep the island another year which they promise to keep out the Hollander from trade with they only rely upon our force the next year we agree to hold it out till the next year the eighteen by a praw that go to bottoone I send a letter for Bantam to be convey by that king to our factory at Maccasser m. courthops letter to m. ball. signify the take of these ship the unadvisedness in send they so unreasonable for one day soon have bring they in neither be there above half a day of westerly wind to bring they to Nero that many poor man be slay maim or hold in slavery worse than turkish slave and have not four or five java juncke come in for want of victual we must also have give up and still line on Rice only with a little fish which in foul weather be not to be have daily expect a assault from the hollander and wish it not so much able to stand out as willing to make they pay dear etc. he send another also for refreshment to the factor at Maccasser the twenty of April we be advertise that within two day the hollander will assail we but they come not the thirty they train their man about seven hundred I send another letter to master ball where in relate the fight these word be use the attendance before they yield give the Bandanezes their small boat so they escape to poolaroone but the Solomon be so belay that the Bandanezes can not go out of she master cassarian yield in that manner that if I have be in his place before I will have do it I will have sink down * * thus he do foretell his own death in the cause and manner right in the Sea that be in this manner after they have fight from two till nine at night be almost board and board the dutch call unto he to take in his colour strike his sail and come himself aboard which all he do they detain he and his Boat so our man in the ship play a good and wise part likewise for they perceive their commander keep aboard the dutch ship go and get the bandanezes sword and hide they from they only two of they keep their sword private nineteen have no weapon and stow themselves in the ship and some eight or ten of they with their creeze and two sword at the hollander enter of our ship kill the hollander at least forty of they and hurt diverse more of they most of this slaughter be do by two of the Bandanezes only for at their enter our man keep themselves in the forecastle apart while the Bandanezes fight but at last be take the hollander kill some twelve and save seven of the young so far as can I perceive they neither respect right or justice but stand altogether upon force of arm I have but thirty eight man to withstand their force and tyranny our want extreme neither have we victual or drink but only rice and water they have at present eight ship here and two galley and to my knowledge all fit to come against we I look daily and hourly for they etc. he signify also both to he and in a letter to the factor at Maccasser that he have not since first he come into these land receive one letter or advice from any English in a letter from master lane to m. Courthop be write that he have send away the Bandanezes but one Richard Tawton master mate of the Thomas will not suffer it for fear of the dutch severity and that they see no remedy shot William shoply after master and cut the ear off of the gunner mate near off another they run through the back this be like to be the cause of take away their sword the seven of May the Solomon go from Nero lade the five and twenty the hollander give a assault on Lantore land eight company of soldier contain about five hundred man but be repulse with loss of four of they and one Bandaneze the two and twenty for further certainty I send another letter to master ball. the eight and twenty of june I have a letter send i from master cassarian David wherein he signify the dutch threat of perpetual imprisonment if I come not to better consideration which I answer dutch lie to sca^re the engglish and sauce their imprisonment refel the hollander lie touch the attendant boat take up by they with blood and another that I shove send the general a letter to surrender the small island and that I have but ten english here also that the black have possession of my ordnance etc. the last of june master ball letter be send i by master lane which be as follow master Courthop my hearty commendation to you and all the rest of your company with my prayer for your health and happiness etc. you of the eleven of April by master Thomas Spurway and the thirty of june by master stacy I receive understand thereby of the occurrence happen in Banda which albeit in many thing contrary to our expectation yet as now not to be avoid nor by any fair course hope to have it amend be it to be doubt that surrender be make to his majesty of England of those place and his subject in possession that in so apparent and just cause the fleming dare have fall out into open hostility with we in take the swan and make themselves owner of the defence with the imprisonment of our man but now we have too manifest a proof of their insolency and that they dare do any thing that be not above their force and make the best show of a bad meaning they pretend contract with the king of ternate for defence of his country and with his subject for their epice and all trade whatsoever even to the exclusion of all other nation justice be too weak to deal with force and consequent no plead with they without force which I hope we shall have be able this year to have effect albeit that it fall out to the contrary but the next I doubt not but we shall have force to make they know that free gift and possession be better than contract and that they be not to conquer country to themselves under pretence of defend the king of ternate be to they in nature of a prisoner that be in no command of he in the mean time our endeavour must be for the right of our king and honour of our country to make good what we have master Spurway in his return be charge into botone by the fleming and so belay for that have not the king of that place stand his very good friend he and his company have fall into their hand but by this mean while the fleming wait before the mouth of the river for their come out they be convey over a neck of land and so escape for Maccasser where meet the attendance they take passage and come hither Stacie that owl blind in his self will cast away his praw upon Botone the good all lose the man only save where he leave the Ban^anezes who choose to stay there in hope to save something for themselves and by the king favour get a praw and come thither by the way of Maccasser all the bill of exchange only the hundred rial of Peter Vande I pay also the honourable our employer lose one quarter thereby the Cattee of Mac^ take^ there at a rial worth here not three quarter of a rial and for he the say Vande loare as he come to you a espy in that place so at his best opportunity he leave we here leave though very loath his money behind he captain jordane depart hence in the Clove for England Christmas last a year and captain Barkley our chief depart this life the first of march past here arrive the fleet of captain joseph but not himself be slay about the land of Comora in fight with a carrack who have no mean to escape run ashore and fire there be in she beside good of diverse fabriques three and twenty hundred thousand piece of eight a pretty Cargazon and will have do well in our factory but it be fall out a lass to the portugal and no gain unto we neither in purse nor credit as you may understand by other it be give we to understand by letter from our honourable employer of a second joint stock subscribe for twenty hundred thousand pound it begin the first of this year the first joint stock end in the fleet of captain bring consist of seven ship whereof two to say the hope and hound come direct hither the other five go by by off surat I pray God to bless they and that perform effectual there they may arrive hither in safety the governor of the fleming have be here but we confer not together the cause proceed of pride in they and no submission in i but to be short as they begin which you see they have continue unto we in hostile manner the six and twenty of November the speedwell Robert jackson master find for jacatra be take and the man all but one that be slay in the enter she and one that be since dead be in chain the governor after the take of this pinnace come with sixteen ship into Bantam road to brave we which we be content to suffer in respect of their too much advantage and now you may understand I have dispee these two ship the Solomon and Thomas for Maccasser to lade rice already provide for they with a good cargazon of good beside of cloth of diverse sort for Banda according to the inuoyce here enclose send you whereof not doubt your care and diligence for sales and return I omit in that respect to insert to your memory for other news and occurrent here pass since your departure I commend you unto the bearer hereof and so for this time I commit you to the might and merciful protection of the almighty Bantam the seven of january 1617. your ever love friend geo. BALL the seven of july I send Robert hayes to Lantore to view the road what convenient place our ship may ride in free from shot of Nero castle and what place we may plant ordnance to defend our ship and endamage the hollander which return with a draught of the road there on the eighteen the two and twenty I write again by a java^uncke ^uncke to master ball touch the take of the ship the hollander proud wear our colour at their stern and a long time never cease shoot day nor night as though they have take half the good in the World the three of this present the general with five ship set sail to the westward send i word some four day before that he will come by i and send i some fly messenger to know how I do but like a brag lie etc. the second of August I send master Muschamp in a Banda praw with the sabandar of Pooloway and Inche tungull to give intelligence at Bantam by who I write touch the intolerable pride and tyranny that the Hollander use in these part upon we both in body and name and that with a good conscience we may proceed in regard of the great outrage and infamy they have offer we in these part both in disgraceful speech to our king and nation and in their barbarous tyranny they have use to our weak force be captivate by they have write how we may offend they by plant ordnance at Oretaton etc. the thirteen of August there come fifteen portugal bear at Goa which have be surprise by the hollander from Nero in a praw and I give they entertainment the fifteen I receive a letter from master cassarian David in the name of the english at Pooloway urge to right what be amiss * * m. courthop magnanimous mind be not more see in withstand the hollander wrong then in bear the impatience of his countryman impotent urge right and to call conscience to the bar word show what a hard imprisonment and fair gloss may do with impotent and impatient spirit which I answer the next day both with best reason and send they relief I receive also a letter from master wiles as follow from Pooloway the fifteen of August 1618. love friend master Courthop my love remember to you and to all the rest of our good friend etc. master Courthop the urgent occasion at this present be to let you understand about send the black ashore be this first about ten of the clock the same day we be chase by three sail for my part I go aboard of the Solomon to see what they be mind to do master cassarian will i present to go aboard again and to be ready to defend ourselves and to keep fair by he which indeed I do and also I can have go from they at first sight if I will but I can not have get the island if I have go at ten of the clock at night we be fair by the fleming the Solomon be within call of we the black that be in the Solomon be get into the ship boat for to go ashore then be I call to to have our black for to make themselves ready to go with they which I do and look when the Salomon boat will come think they have be go I give they our small boat to carry they and for my part fain will I have send you a letter or some other thing but be at that time so employ that I have not time to do as I will fain will I have write more at large but that time will not permit so I rest pray to the almighty to bless you to in all your affair you to command I pray commend i to master jones use to his power the chirurgeon Matthew wiles love and kind friend master Courthop hearty commendation unto you and the rest of your good company with all health and prosperity to you in all affair for to relate of our cross voyage and misfortune it be no news but I hope to see the proud of they pull down one day although we endure the misery of it in the mean time I be glad to hear of your good prosperity and welfare the which I much doubt long since of your want but God will provide for his servant although he give these horse-turds leave to domineer awhile whosoever life will see their pride abate I must needs say they do use we well for I do not know to compare it near than to Ludgate or Newgate not a inch liberty nor allowance more than the worst prisoner they have in keep which be command at the receit of your last letter to the general in the which case I wish you be able to do we any good but in the mean time I hope God will provide for we there be this year to come to Bantam the best fleet of ship that ever come out of England one Martin friend be general the horse-turd that take we be at the cape with they in all five ship the royal james a new ship admiral the ball vide-admiral the gift rear-admiral with two ship more which go to surat we have the last year eleven ship at Bantam but the reason of no more come this way as I hear be by master Lucas his come from the coast and set captain Ball and captain Pepwell together by the ear because Lucas must have a ship to go home for afore Lucas come captain Pepwell be mind to come this way but time will not permit to write any more so in haste I take my leave I have a box of stone of you which I do employ for your use in Rice some of they and the remainder I bring back but all be lose for I have some necessary for you as linen and some clothes but all be go and not able to help myself you shall receive a letter from captain ball which I get out of the Solomon after she be take but it be open I pray commend i to master Muschampe Mastrr hayes and master Ford Thomas Miller you to my power kelum throgmorton the nineteen master David send i a letter from master ball bear date the six and twenty of january express his care and endeavour for further the Banda business that it fall out so late in the year before I send unto you have be cause through discord betwixt captain p. and myself who of himself weak and extreme covetous disagreement of the english advantageous to the dutch I have the whole letter which be long I have express this only and instigate by his proud and insolent master do obstinate insist to cross our design think to bring we under his command if this captain and his master have be they have this year come for Banda to have make further trial of these fleming that threaten fire and sword but have send only two or three ship that be worst able to hold out which if not catch up by the Fleming will be sufficient but if take the loss will be the less unto we I shall not be able to send you beef pork or powder for your relief because I can get none from these newcome ship how much it do grieve we that we be able to do no better etc. the commander captain derickson use the english prisoner with some kindness some of the dutch kind to the English and more will but for rial strict command he therefore I do write unto with thanks etc. who also pass on the three and twenty of August by the island of neylackey and strike his main topsail D^ricksons kindness and there be shoot in kindness betwixt we on either part some five or six piece he go for the Moluccas the six and twenty the hollander frigate fetch water at Solomon be beset by Lantore man one kill and diverse hurt and have be all take but for discovery by Solomon man the ten of September I send Will^am newbegin with supply of two goat twelve hen mackerel the captain his kindness to the English orange and other trifle to the english at Pooloway the messenger return with a letter from master cassarian David commend the usage of the captain since the departure of the commander in what he may be bold without offend order prescribe unto he that the Solomon and Thomas be send away with good and victual and one and twenty day after the attendance english dissension and vanity wherein I be to shape my course direct for poolaroone but by reason the Solomon and Thomas as both ware their flag in the mayne-top and that in sight in go out of the road of Bantam the precedent think it do in pride by the two ship-master as also shape asleep forbid course for water at Pontang therefore it be decree that I shall first go to maccas^er there to take the government of the three ship and dispose they after the order of a Fleet. if it have not be for strive for authority between captain p. and captain b. you shall have be visit last year with the Charles and the unicorn and other good ship but multitude of commander make a confuse government which be the only cause of we and your fare the worse this year etc. here follow also a letter from the english at Amboyna to master David captain I hearty commend i unto you and to our master and his mate and all the rest of the company this be to let you understand that I be in good health and all the rest of our company only Andrew keel and Thomas sweet be dead but all the rest be in good health but use very base for we be keep in iron night and day and if we have not a releasement the soon I think it will make a end of we all I marvel much we can not hear from you by the frigate which make i the more forgetful to write unto you no more at this time but the lord have you in his keep from Amboyna this three of October 1618. your friend to command to his power richard nash. I receive copy of certain note the first a petition of the english for shift of clothes and to be free of iron in the day time petition of the english prisoner to the dutch general cruel reject which be in some sort grant the second that each man may come before the general to speak for his liberty which will not be grant the three that the dutch general may give we a old ship pinnace or praw to carry we to Bantam or that he will set a ransom on the english prisoner which he will neither grant nor hear of but answer that he will keep we prisoner so long as any english be upon poolaroone the seven of june we be send for Pooloway the four humble petition of the prisoner in Nero Road. the four of june 1618. humble show unto your good lordship that whereas your lordship poor petitioner and prisoner be altogether doubtful of any speedy releasement and desirous to avoid the danger of sickness and mortality incident to all man in these unwholesome country do therefore beseech your lordship that it may stand with your lordship pleasure to grant unto your lordship say petitioner licence and favour to go for Holland this year in your lordship ship and so your lordship poor prisoner shall do our best endeavour to do your lordship service in our passage wish there may be a good end of all these difference and thus hope of your lordship favourable charity herein towards we poor prisoner we will pray for the prosperous success of your lordship affair the petition will be grant the five on the second of july humble show unto your lordship that we poor prisoner now in this castle of Pooloway do petition unto your lordship that we may be allow such victual as may sustain our body without famishment and that your lordship will be please to spare we money to buy such thing as be needful for we for our clothing at this time be but very bare wherefore we beseech your lordship to take some course for we before your lordship departure from hence likewise we beseech your lordship that we may be suffer to walk abroad at several time as your lordship shall be please to give order and so your lordship poor prisoner shall pray for the good success of your lordship affair which will not be grant @ 3 other act of the hollander in diverse place of the indies encouragement from sir THOMAS dale master JORDAN and other and various event in those part till his death the seven and twenty of September I send Robert hayes with a white flag to visit the english prisoner and to carry such refreshment as poolaroone afford who be kind use by the hollander return that night the eight and twenty of October I likewise send Arthur Atkinson to Pooloway with refresh the ten of November the hollander make a ambushment ashore at Oretaton but catch one slave only who they cut to piece the thirteen of December news of the Thomas here arrive a Keydupa prow lade with Coco nut she bring news that the Thomas be go for the Moluccas the fourteen of january I have provision from Lantore with Abraham that go with master Mustian for Maccasser who by the unskilfulness of the pilot ^ell w^th Rosingang a island six league to lee-ward to our great trouble to fetch provision in small boat hither he bring diverse letter one from master staverton in which be mention of the hollander m. Stavertons Lette^ that through their brutish usage and rapine take of juncke of all place they have exclude themselves all java and the rice country except where they hold by force for Bantam jacatra and I refer you to the precedent letter the two and twenty of November last here come three of their great ship brave to this place and first come to a anchor of tennacooke castle without show any colour and at night it be fair moon light they come near into the road and one of they go and ride under the island under point and in the morning they command two java juncke of jacatra have in they some fifty quoin of rice and by the java No^hoda send a letter ashore to the king and great man of Maccasser pretend debt and require satisfaction for their man life murder two year since which they will balance with so many life of man of quality at Maccasser the king send a answer what I know not and they write again but he answer not they burn one of the juncke and on the six and twenty set sail as we conjecture for Amboyna the good in the ship which the d^tch take the last year I write what provision I lade on the ship Solomon one hundred and one quoin three hundred seventy seven g. of Rice on the Thomas seventy five q. eighty four g. on the attendance sixteen q. five hundred seventy six g. one hundred ninety three q. two hundred thirty seven g. eight hundred sixty five jar of Aracke most upon the Thomas also sundry other provision divide upon the ship which with rack and rice amount to three thousand nine hundred and sixteen mas. what provision be lade from Bantam and jacatra * * but for prolixity I have add the invoice of good from thence which I have write by m. ball. d^^th of many of captain Newport spaniard and portugal at jo^tan kill m. jackson spoil abuse fright I know not etc. the last year happen great mortality there die out of the hope captain Newport that worthy seaman and commander also Henry raven master and forty more of that ship company out of the james captain child etc. he send to i master balls letter to he wherein be relation of master jacksons loss with juncke good and slave except three which save themselves by swim as by write from his father appear for want Rice and necessary he put into jortan to the number of three and twe^tie under colour of bring provision aboard enter the juncke and kill he and all his company but three which leap overboard and carry the juncke away the rest of the port remain ashore be prisoner to the king to answer for their fellow the fleming land at japara by night fire the town and seven or eight juncke in the road the people flee to the mountain they have forcible build a fort upon the main at jacatra and another upon the land over against the water place which make the pangram of Bantam look about he the seven and twenty of january here arrive a small pinnace call the Francis with advice from the fleet and relief master Robert jackson master sir Thomas Dales letter as follow master Courthop as unknown I remember my love which I will always be ready to express in respect of your worthy service for the honour of our country and benefit of our honourable employer and do desire you ^o proceed in your good resolution with the rest of your honest company nothing doubt but that the company will recompense your desert to the full I have send you by this Beare^ only to supply your present want the particular be enclose in the precedent letter and will if God spare i life (...) follow my stay be only to revenge in part the abuse receive from they have now a (@) tunitie by a difference betwixt they and the king of jacatra to put they from thence if God give the blessing which I intend forthwith to put in execution if it shall please God to give good success I shall leave all safe behind i and may proceed with the better resolution if otherwise yet I must adventure forward to affront they there although I leave a ill neighbour behind i I have already give they a taste of twelve hundred great shot from six of our ship within the space of four hour between Bantam and jacatra which they do so much mislike that they leave we in the plain field and flee before we to the east-ward through the bay of jacatra in sight of their castle real for other news I refer you to the precedent letter not doubt but that he have satisfy you at large and thus with my best wish for your health and safety I take my leave until I come remain your assure friend tho. dale the precedent letter master Nathaniel Courthop we hearty salute you with the rest we have think it good at present to send you this small pinnace the little Francis as a adviser with such provision as she be able to carry thereby to comfort you and your company in the interim not doubt but as you have begin so you will continue with a constant resolution to defend the place when you be also to encourage the country people of Pooloway poolaroone and Lantore and for the better satisfaction of the country people we have send in the pinnace one or two of the Bandanezes to relate unto they the just war that we have with the dutch. for short after our arrival at Bantam the two and twenty of November with five ship wherein be admiral for the sea sir Thomas dale knight we understand so many injury and insolence do to our nation aswell in those part as in all other place of the India we take one of their ship call the red lion lade with Rice pepper and other commodity whereupon out of their great pride they imprison two of our merchant at jacatra and chain they in their gatehouse to the view of all the country people and not content herewith their house be strong fortify with much ordnance in it shoot at our goodoung and set fire to it and burn it to the ground as also they shoot into the java quarter into the king house and kill many javas and raze the China quarter to the ground with their ordnance and with fire and the king have shoot some ordnance against their house or fort and have have many skirmish with they so that of both side there have be slaughter but most of the javas now the king of jacatra see himself in a strait send a messenger to Bantam desire aid of we and call here a council conclude to send a fleet of eleven sail of ship wherein go sir Thomas dale and captain bring commander not only to surprise their ship but also to destroy their fort if it please God to give a blessing thereunto which be once effect by God grace we determine to proceed for Banda and the Moluccas hope in God that we shall be able to lay some part of their insolent pride if not altogether this year yet the next we expect a far great fleet thereby at once to finish all and whereas the proud Laurence real the dutch general that be have false report that he have letter patent from his majesty of England to surprise we in those part of Banda and the Moluccas we take notice thereof and will put it in print among the rest of their lie out of who mouth there come not a true word we like very well of your former proceed and of your large advice concern those part pray you to continue therein and with a steadfast resolution notwithstanding the hollander threaten to defend the place until we send further aid and no doubt but the honourable company will high reward you and all those that faithful and true do their endeavour in their affair thus leave further to insert at present refer all thing to our next in which God willing we will write you more at large pray God to prosper your proceed to his glory and your heart desire Bantam the three and twenty of December 1618. your love friend John jordan Augustine Spaldwin George ball. postscript of master jordan the james and the Bantam arrive at Bantam from jambe the one and twenty by who we understand of the death of master Richard Westly murder there by the dutch they invite he to their house to give he his he be find for Bantam in these ship and there end his life the three and twenty I set sail in the james hound and petty France from Bantam towards the fleet which lie about the land of jacatra near the holland fleet hope to have be with they before they have begin any fight but the very same day in the morning the fleet have a very hot encounter for the space of four hour our man valiant fight and they no less defend our Fic^ec have shoot about twelve hundred shot to the hollander so that they have have such a breakfast that they will not abide a second but fly before we as we suppose only to draw we to the east-ward from their fort suppose that we shall not be able to come up this monson but we have not follow they further than the easter point of jacatra whereas we have lose sight of they and know not as yet which way they be go either to the eastward or to the westward your love friend John jordane the second of February we by council order that the Francis shall ride under the fort to relieve such juncke as shall come thither for relief diverse of which with some praw or Curracorra they have intercept so to starve the inhabitant the five come a praw from Pooloway with letter from the english prisoner letter from the prisoner complain of many of they dead by misery of imprisonment deplore that lie in misery and iron many of they have lose their life who if they have be at liberty may have be alive and have do their king and country good service and pray to supply their want by that praw with money and what else can be send not know whether they may be suffer hereafter to send or no which I answer with certificate of the news and provision the thirteen of February there be three ship in Nero ride one whereof have her beak head shoot off and shoot through in forty place I guess it one of the ship which be in the skirmish at jacatra the eighteen I receive a letter by a praw from wayre from Bartholomew churchman wherein with thanks for thing send he certify that the angel come from Amboyna that night where they leave their general to get all their force together dutch preparation which will be fourteen or fifteen ship with the old general too that come from ternate and short they look for their fleet from the Maneelos which be ten ship and they say they will go all to java together and where they have the overthrow there again they will set upon our ship to recover their former loss and disgrace in sight of all the javas but I think they will be hang before they meet upon equal term three day after we have receive your letter they bring we all to Nero where they do allow we now more victual and liberty than they do before God be thank therefore and within two or three day we be to go for Amboyna in the angel etc. the two and twenty of April 1619. I do write to master staverton at Maccasser and also to master precedent certify that at that time there be neither holland ship nor galley in Banda and have the english ship come as they promise I very think there will not at the end of this monson be leave one Hollander enemy to we in Banda by reason I know the world be never so hard with they their want be extreme both for man and victual likely that few of their soldier but will have flee to we we have neither stock nor victual but bare encouragement of word etc. the eight of june the pinnace set sail for Setran and return the fourteen of july with fifty thousand cake of Sago the three and twenty of August I send she thither again shee return the five and twenty of November so full of leak that the three of December we hale she on shore and find she so rot that we save what we can and set fire on the rest the five of December there come a Lantore Coracora which bring news that four day before they have take a holland praw row from Nero to Pooloway there be four Holland prawe in company find for Pooloway who come by Lantore dare the Banda man to come forth who man two prawe and follow they almost to Pooloway and take one of they and kill all the man be twenty black and nine hollander the Lantore man be now in heart and now I have get the Banda man to repair the fort at the island be much out of reparation the four and twenty of December here arrive a juncke from Maccasser which bring we some provision but no news from the west that day master jackson misse-behaving himself to the captain be censure the twelve of january a holland Coracora which come from Amboyna with letter to the captain of Nero put off by a gust be take by the islander the letter contain their lose of Bachan to the spaniard and their trouble at Amboyna and but no news from the west the thirty I send over Robert hayes with the priest of Pooloway to Lantore surrender of Lantore talk of to confer with the Orancaias there about the surrender of their land to the king majesty of England to which they all agree that the sabandar of Lantore shall be the man to come over and agree with i about that business and that whatsoever he shall agree upon the whole country will affirm unto also I send to they concern their make islam of all such hollander as come run from Nero which cause so few to come they promise it shall be no more so but hereafter as they shall see cause they will either kill they or send they to i make mo^^es of christian the eight and twenty go by a holland ship and never touch at Pooloway nor Nero only a boat come aboard she and whither she go I know not I guess they bring no relief and therefore will not stay for fear of mutiny among the soldier they be in great want and distress for victual while master hayes be over at Lantore the hollander break league with the Solamon man take three prawe of they the thirteen of February come in a juncke and a praw of this island with Sago from Buro Holland fleet report thirty four sail the javas can tell we no certain news of our ship but they report that thirty four holland ship w^re at Bantam and that fifteen english ship be go through the straits of and think that no english ship will be here this year which be cold comfort to i which have neither direction nor stock many juncke arrive which can tell no other news one a Portugal frigate and in she a black who I have send the last easterly wind to Maccasser which bring letter from thence but juncke and letter be cast away he come in this frigate which be find for the Moluccas but have strike on a rock and leak be persuade to come to poolaroone I take up all his lade God make i able to pay he the twenty of march I receive a letter send from master staverton at Maccasser date the seven of February wherein be mention the report of the hound and Samson take at Patania by the dutch the b^are Rose hope and dragon at tecoo and at Bantam a ship call the star seven english ship take in diverse place by the hollander new come out of England complain also of want there by neglect at Bantam the two and twenty here arrive a praw from Maccasser with one Guilliam Gaultier a Frenchman good send i to sell for he the loss of the ship aforesaid I think good to add out of a letter of master Muschamp to master Courthop jacatra this nine of march 1619. worthy and respect friend hearty salutation my hope be to have be my own messenger but there be a unfortunate change and time spend to little purpose the manner I refer to future relation not be desirous to censure my superior only to clear myself of the trust you impose upon i which I prosecute with all ^endevours and to perform my promise in return free myself from the chief merchant place in Bantam after all hope be pass of come to you I be appoint chief for siam and go with the precedent for Patania where we fall in the hand of our enemy and in the defence of our ship and good perform what we be able but the element fight against we for contrary to the common course we have neither wind nor tide to thwart the ship to bring our ordnance to bear and they breathe themselves to our great disadvantage which we may have help overnight if the precedent have not stand too much upon point of honour in the sight of the country people which in his own person he endeavour to maintain with as much resolution as ever do any commander and most part of we second with our best endeavour as long as we be able until many of u^ be kill and hurt then the precedent sound a parley and in talk with henrike johnson receive his death wound with a musket and they present surprise our ship make pillage of all we have but give most part of we our liberty by reason of our wound where I continue four month in miserable torture with the loss of my right leg shoot off with a canon for want of medicine to apply to it afterward we come to seek our fleet in three prawe and leave two of they with master weldin and forty man for the defence of our factory at jambe the residue be six and twenty with myself come for Bantam this king to have find our fleet where we be surprise with their ship and boat and now remain prisoner with they which be more grievous to i then the re^t by reason of the want of my leg and urge i to solicit to go home in their ship which will be a unseasonable and discontent passage at this time but in the case I be in I do not much value my life and have every day less comfort and courage to remain in these part for either you or myself howsoever I make no question our honourable master will true vain your desert God send you well home to receive the guerdon thereof and the comfort of your friend who as I hear be very desirous to see you his name Robert holding now at japarra and your elder brother wish the pursers mate of the star to tell you that you shall come home with the first and that while he have a penny you shall not want to receive it the news since our take as follow the star come out of England take in the straits of Sunda the dragon expedition Rose and bear take at tecoo with six of their ship they come upon they unprovided and the deck of the dragon be so pester with pepper and other thing that they can not use one quarter of their ordnance so that they be take without any great resistance the residue of our fleet be at the coast viz. ten ship where it be suppose they stay to join with seven ship that be at surat and three of the king of Denmark ship which will be of force sufficient to revenge our injury if God be of our side and that they have no new force out of Holland they have now not above fourteen ship before Bantam and the Pangram continue their mortal enemy all the force they have which be thirty sail at one time can bring he to any composition but whole rely upon our fleet and his own strength which will much advantage the company trade if they be of force to make their own way and assist he according to expectation excuse my unperfect advice for I have neither time nor place to write as I will when occasion shall serve you shall find i always ready to deserve your love and friendship remember my love to master hayes master jones John Elmor Thomas Dobins and all the rest with my dear affection to yourself I rest now and ever your faithful friend to his power George Muschampe the eight and twenty of march 1620. here arrive a juncke from jortan lade with Rice the three of April three Holland ship sail into Nero Road. this year I have no letter nor any advice from our commander at Bantam nor any supply and be enforce to take up all my man good to buy victual to pay fifty interest the thirty I send a letter to the precedent and commander signify my want and if the Portugal frigate have not come in I must have give over the place who yet I be enforce to send to Bantam for his payment on my bill God grant i good get out of these country people hand for they have spend their gold and estate beggar themselves and diverse of they lose some their life other their liberty in hold out in expectation of the english force can the heathen sail to and again as also all other nation french and portugal and only the english fear to adventure the company good pass over the matter with rub out another year we have rub off the skin already and if we rub any long shall rub to the bone I pray look to it etc. the three of May the long expect jurotinge arrive with his juncke master west die of the flux the twenty of june I send letter to Maccasser with a letter enclose to the precedent and commander advise to send a ship with provision and of the Lantore man hold out still in expectation and that except some such course be take they shall see i before they shall hear any further from i the three and twenty of September jurotinge set sail for Maccasser who I send to fetch rice and with he three China man which run from Nero to the black at Lantore which but for i will have force they to turn slamme chap. x. the continuation of the former journal by master ROBERT HAYES contain the death of captain COURTHOP succession of ROBERT HAYES surrender of Lantore to his majesty news of the peace and after the peace Lantore and poolaroone seize by the dutch with abominable wrong to the English the eighteen of October 1620. our captain Nathaniel Courthop come to i Robert hayes and say that he hear say there be two prawe go into Lantore yesterday which be key prawe as he think yet be not and in regard of former abuse to jurotingee he will go and revenge the same I pray he to stay till he hear from thence whether it be so or no this jurotinge m. staverton in a letter of he which I have call a unlucky fellow as here he prove seem a black Sain^ be a black devil but he refuse say if they be not of key it be but so much labour lose and now he may go with the Priest thus go he over that night with his boy William well fit with musket and weapon promise to return in five day and bid i send for water on the three and twenty which I do but he come not and send i word he will come the six and twenty at n^ght he come according part of the way the priest stay at Lantore because it be a great feast with the black the next day there be one and twenty person in the boat with six musket and fowl piece of the company and good of the captain to the value of one hundred and fifty rial of eight or upward come thwart of Pooloway about two or three a clock in the morning they meet with the hollander Cor^cora and one praw more with some forty small shot and come up with they fight with they where the captain behave himself courageous until diverse of the Banda man be slay and the captain also receive a shot on the breast sit down and with all his piece be cloy throw it overboard and then leap overboard himself in his clothes captain Corthop wound leap overboard the praw be too hot to stay in and what become of he I know not but the black say sure he there sink by reason of his wound and his clothes all about he there come of those one and twenty person seven ashore who have not be wound and be strong to swim the space be some five mile the same night rial a Dutchman former turn Moor run away to the hollander with a small praw master hayes succeed the seven and twenty of October I go to the fort at Neylackey and call the company together demand of they their purpose and they all promise that as former they have be rule by the captain so now they will be rule by i Robert hayes as know before that I be to succeed in case of mortality I take order concern better watch have but twenty three man on Neylackey and two barrel of powder with that which be in the gun the one and thirty I send a small praw to Lantore with four man to certify Robert Randall of business new agreement betwixt the new captain and the people the same night the Sabander come with a Coracora and a Orankay well provide to bring over the priest and Robert Randall with they so all the chief of the country come to the fort on Saturday in the evening the four of November and call all our company demand who they shall now our captain be dead trust to take charge they all answer master hayes they further demand if they will stand to that which I shall promise because they be not to make agreement with a multitude without a head they all answer they will perform all my agreement and promise to the utmost of their power I then be settle in my business demand thirty man each night to come to watch with we viz. fifteen at the island and fifteen betwixt the two fort for that I fear assault in the night and it be agree the five of November the Sabander come with the priest to i to know my determination about four piece of ordnance which the captain have promise to Lantore as master Randall know and myself and peruse the precedent letter to go through with they of Lantore as we have do with they of poolaroone and Pooloway I answer that if the chief will come over and agree with i I will perform their request the seven Robert Randall go back with the say sab. in the which he will certify the s^b of Lantore and the orankaye of my answer and that within three day I shall expect they again at present here be seven key prawe in the road and the seventeen I man our Oranbay with a murderer and seven musket and go with other five musket on the flanker at F^riat and send to the key-man that two of their chief shall come and confer with i about the cloth steal from jurotinge key-man chastise but they all swim on shore till the country people take up the matter and give i two key-man pledge who I keep at Neylarkey the four and twenty come three Corocoras with other prawe from Lantore for the gun promise and upon their demand of aid of we and agreement to surrender their land to the king majesty of England I give they two saker and one demiculuerin the same day the key-case be end and the same day they of Lantore surrender the land to the king most excellent majesty Lantore surrender to the King the six and twenty of November we see a sail to the west and all the chief of Banda be here put off with thirteen Corocoras and come up with she be a holland aduisor from japan and Amboyna dutch aduisor take with letter for Banda they kill four and keep three alive be in all seven hollander the letter they bring i but I can not attain to the full content by want of the dutch language only thus I find that the english and Hollander be agree at home and I read the thirty article of agreement betwixt we and they so that I think it not unfit to send the letter to Pooloway I will have keep the business from the Banda man but than it will have be worse for we I therefore disclose it to the priest of Pooloway so to frame our answer to the whole country namely that ship both english and dutch be to come thither to end the business and that it be good those write shall be send to the hollander to redeem their three man with six black we be glad of the agreement but know not how to clear ourselves of the country people in case of peace the eight and twenty I send Robert Monday with six Banda slave to Pooloway with a flag of truce and that packet of letter and to redeem their man and to send word whether they will persist in their rigorous course or be still till ship come which if they refuse that they take notice that the Banda man be in hand with a stratagem against they f^r they purpose to make use of their ordnance and beside to set on their frigate but I will not disclose the particular the nine and twenty my messenger come back with a letter write to his love friend master Robert hayes factor for the english upon poolaroone worthy sir your letter of the eight and twenty of November we have receive also the packet of letter which be by it and have with great joy and gladness understand the friendship and agreement between both our master wherewithal be end war which be begin with great blood shed the letter of the dutch to the english about the peace not fit for two nation which have be so good friend as you and we have be we have further understand with sadness the loss of the Campas and the kill of four man at the take of she likewise of three which be the Banda prisoner for the redeem of which they will have six man howsoever I will not leave they un-redeemed the captain Nathaniel be kill in the prow for which God know I be hearty sorry m. Courthop bury by the dutch. we have bury he so stately and honest as ever we can fit for such a man he proceed with desire that master hayes and a Orankaia shall come that they may confer upon some truce with the Bandanezes till the ship come wherein they shall well agree if they will let they have mace and nut for their money with promise of security a present thanks and commendation date Pooloway in the castle of revenge this nine of decemb. 1620. your love friend William Vande anthon. the second of December the priest be content to take man for man but freeman and if they have not so many hundred rial of 8. for the three and I write so by ed. twelve and advise they of go between Lantore and Guning Apee and of a action in hand etc. the three my messenger return with a holland prow row by spaniard and two hollander the minister and a ancient-bearer which bring Nocoda Ishmael Mirnie and one hundred rial of eight and I suffer no Banda man to come to the island but only the priest and exchange the prisoner I entertain the hollander in the best manner I can but will not suffer they as they desire to speak with a Banda Orancaia suspect it be for trade in the letter of van Anthon he write touch the truce of which you write be not only between you and our master make a truce but also a good and sure peace therefore there be nothing to say between you and we when it please you you may go wheresoever you listen etc. the five day the western monson blow with rain God be thank monsons want of water for we have no water fall to any purpose since the begin of june last be six month so that we go to Lantore seven time for water beside that I hire the key-man once the same day come a praw from beynawre beynawre and tell of twenty Corocoras go from Seyram to Amboyna against the Hollander beside many small prowess there come over the Sabander and sab. Lantore with a Coracora and two oranbayg for their other gun and tell that the hollander sue for peace and trade with the Lantore man and those of Solomon but be defer till ten day for answer I bid they remember their surrender and how they have promise in writing to sell no spice but to the English thus the Hollander seek by policy what he can notwithstanding the news be public the eighteen I have word that the hollander come to seek for trade with the Lantore man which will not agree except they will restore they one of the land of Nero or Pooloway whereupon the hollander messenger return to Nero and pull down their white flag which have stand some ten day and set red in place and send the frigate to shoot into Lantore and at night the Lantore man send three black in a small praw to Nero which kill a Hollander in a house without the castle and the sab. send i word that they will keep their spice for the english only the one and twenty of December here arrive at the Lucon a China juncke from Maccasser with a little rice and rack from the factor and letter but no news from the west so that we know more news here then they there he also protest in his letter that he have that on trust have no mean leave but borrow the people censure and the portugal laugh hereat date the nine and twenty of November to captain Courthop the nineteen of january I send over the sew to fetch letter from master staverton in a Portugal juncke I hear then by master Randall letter that the hollander have burn the great China juncke with our flag in she and take our letter and all the China man prisoner but the Lantore man will redeem they with two hollander they take in a small prow Dutch cunning have kill the three but the hollander care not so much to redeem their man as to have trade with the black they do what lie in their power to set the Banda man and we at difference for any sail they see they pursue under the reach of ordnance and be pursue by Banda Coracoras put out a white flag to we which I think base do they be entreat by i to be still till the fleet come but they will not though themselves go by the worst they profess friendship to the english and skirmish with the Bandanezes with who we live the letter which I receive from Hoia murad be the copy of a letter from master Hayward the factor at Succadania to master staverton of the place date the seven and twenty of October it be under-written by master staverton with promise of relief his best endeavour the copy of the article send from our commander at jacatra under-written by captain Furresland precedent master Brokden master Spaldin etc. the five and twenty of january Matthew Richards be censure for misdemeanour in pull down the order set up in our place of common prayer and uncivil speech by consent of council the nine of February the dragon claw arrive and bring we letter and a cargazon the eleven hollander preten^e to Lantore come by eleven holland^hips ^hips and I send my prow aboard to hear of our ship I receive a letter from master Bates from Amboyna wherein I be certify of the hollander pretence to take Lantore with two thousand soldier beside a thousand more of all nation which be strange news to we expect nothing less in respect that land be surrender unto we and we have a factory there with man ordnance and good I expect direction from jacatra concern this affair but I have no knowledge concern it three day after in come some three ship more the sixteenth at night I write a letter to the dutch general to give he notice of the surrender of Lantore notice give to the dutch general which will give no answer and of our man good and munition there the eighteen my messenger return certify i that the dutch general read my letter but will not answer it but bid my messenger ^e go now the dutch send to the Lantore man to yield up their country to they and to put the english from they but they will not neither will I send for they to come off for I can not answer it namely to forsake the company good there or to leave the land so surrender to the king majesty the Lantore man send over to i to know what we mean to deceive they and not to succour they as we have promise I send over my prow with man in she for the defend of the company spice there but for that the country see I can not relieve they deny that we shall put out our flag in regard they must defend themselves for all we so all the man return except Robert Randall and two more English hollander invade Lantore and burn the town the english villanous abuse by hollander the first of march the hollander force go on shore at a place betwixt Loquee and maude Anginy and so march to Lantore and take the town and fire it there be small bloodshed on either party the inhabitant flee and master Randall and the other two english stand by the company good be take and strip to their skin find beat throw over the town-wall and carry aboard the general and put in chain they take all the company spice good and money by account of Robert Randall three and twenty thousand four hundred pound english of mace and one hundred and twenty thousand pound English of n^ts monies five hundred rial cloth and other to a small quantity dutch slight the three day t^e star arrive here at poolaroone so I go aboard and make master welden and master Bates acquaint with these occurrent the five they go over to the general a^ Nero to know his pleasure about settle of factory in Banda but he pretend business for three or four day and then we shall hear further at master welden be there he speak with master Randall with much ado who tell of his usage but release can not be get for our man further the general demand if we have poolaroone man in subjection as he h^d the Lantore man otherwise he will come and do it his pretence as I suppose be to pick a quarrel with the poolaroone man to get we out and after to settle we under they the six of march the hart come and anchor at the Lucon and twenty five prowess contain some fifteen hundred man hollander art at poolaroone come and lie off and the fiscal come aboard the star now the country people come flock to know what these prowess mean and whether they come in peace or war the fiscal threat the fiscal entreat master welden to go ashore with he but master welden say he have business aboard desire i to go on shore the fiscal then tell the country people they have nothing to say to we but as for they if they do not come and submit themselves present to the general that they shall fare as those of Lantore and will know how they dare surrender poolaroone to the English the people plead subjection to his majesty high-way-law the country say that they know it to be peace betwixt they and the english and they themselves and to the king majesty of England doubt not that the Hollander have any further to say in this matter the advocate reply that if on the morrow they will not come over and surrender their land to the general that then they will come with their force etc. and so he depart and the seven day the country be afraid that we can not withstand the hollander as indeed then we can not they go to the general and tell he they have bring the land unto he note well but it be not they to give be former give the english therefore let they and the english try for that as we will the nine come the advocate with certain soldier and Amboynezes to command the black to pull down their wall and deliver up their weapon which they do and afterward bid the black take off our gun from the land but the Orankay answer they can not do it by reason of former agreement then the fiscal will have i to take they off but I will not the fiscal say that if the black will not give they the land clear without bush on it meaning by we that then he will come with his force so by their policy they set the black against we to cut our throat as much as lay in their power the thirteen the fiscal come to see if the black have pull down their wall and be at they to pull off our gun and leave their flag stand upon one of the carriage of our gun which be at the town the same time master welden go to Nero to the publication the fourteen come in the exchange captain Fitzherbert and I relate to captain Fitzherbert of the occurrent here who wish he have be here soon and that night send one of his man on shore and carry away the flag into Nero ride the next day and send word back to send the star present away for Nero which I do as soon as I can on the eighteen the twenty the fiscal and the captain solar come with twenty soldier and throw down all our ordnance of the main island be nine piece and break they dutch hostility to the English and carry away the piece thereof also they take away a flag from one of the fort and carry away a Coracora of the english for Pooloway as for the little island they meddle not with it at all but as we have it so we may keep it the flag which they take the fiscal say be in revenge that captain Fitzherbert have take away their flag the one and twenty the claw arrive from Amboyna the six and twenty 1621. the general of the hollander send to the orankay of poolaroone imperious dutch. command they to sell we no more spice the second of April master bate go to settle at Poolaway the pinnace be send on a voyage to seyran to buy slave and Sago the eight and twenty dutch empire we hear of a strange massacre that the general cut in piece forty four orankay of Lantore for treason the second of May the general sign article of agreement with the poolaroone man which be all one in effect with our article former sign with they only that they must pay ten to the prince of the country the four Seran treachery english suffer for hollander fault he send to take the oranck of poolaroone their oath to be true to the prince of Orange the two and twenty I hear of the claw misfortune betray by Seran man lose twenty two slave and half their Sago be glad to get aboard themselves lose two man and all whatsoever on shore the cause spring from Lantore man that run thither say that the english and hollanders be all one and have massacre their Orencaias the five of june I go in the claw from poolaroone to Amboyna where I go ashore on the nine I have add to this journal of master hayes by he kind communicate to i a letter of master Fitzherbert to he sort with these dutch affair I have add master fitzherberts letter here print out of the original because the dutch in their answer make he a approver of their dessigne master hayes these be to require you to discharge these three dutchman out of the company service and to dispatch they off the island for so much I have promise unto the dutch general who be much offend with they that he say he will have they howsoever it do grieve i to turn away the company servant in this manner prefer in my mind the time of our infortunate war before a trouble peace other news I can write but I refer it to better occasion from aboard the royal exchange in Nero roade the eighteen of march 1620. your love friend Humphrey Fitzherbert for the reader more full satisfaction in these affair of Banda the original of the war betwixt the english and hollander in the indies I have reprint three letter before publish as also the declaration of the hollander in answer thereto and the same refute by certain mariner together with deposition touch the premise and last the state of the quarrel betwixt the dutch and the Bandanezes and betwixt we and they be more full clear by the author chap. 11 a letter write to the east India company in England from their factour about the month of December 1620. the dutch general have prepare a force of sixteen ship declare to our precedent that he intend a exploit for the good of both company without mention any particular of his design and see we to have no such force ready to join with he he say he will attempt it alone and the three of january 1620. he do set sail from jaquatra with his say force and arrive at Banda about the three of February follow present upon his arrival he make great preparation against the island of Lantore which island be former by the inhabitant thereof deliver over unto our people for the use and under the subjection of the king majesty of England whereof our captain of the i will of polaroone have take possession and have also settle a factory there when our chief factor * * this be m. hayes captain of the English in our say isle of polaroone hear of the purpose of the dutch general against the say i will of Lantore he write a letter unto the say general advise he that the say i will of Lantore do belong unto the king of England and that therefore he shall not attempt any violence against it see there be a accord make in England between we which letter the say general throw from he in a great rage scarce vouchsafe to read it over and cause the messenger to be thrust out of door require he to advise our factor of polaroone present to send to Lantore and fetch away all such of our people and good as be upon that island for whosoever he shall find there he will take they as his utter enemy and they shall fare no better than the inhabitant and within ten or twelve day after he land all his force there and subdue the say island so long as the fight endure our factor and servant there be three English and eight chinees keep themselves within door and afterward our people come out of their house and tell they the house wherein they be be the english house and that therefore they shall not meddle therewith nevertheless they sack our house take away all our good murder three of our chine servant find the rest as well English as Chinezes hand and foot and threaten they to cut their throat bind they three several time to several stake with their weapon ready draw out Robert Randall and do put a halter upon our principal factor neck draw up his head and stretch out his neck ready to put they to death yet do not execute they but as they be find hand and foot as aforesaid tumble they down over the rock like dog and like to have break their neck and thus find carry they aboard their ship and there keep they prisoner in iron fourteen or sixteen day after the conquest of the island of Lantore the dutch general threaten to do the like unto polaroone wherefore our principal * * this be m. welden factor of polaroone be there but new arrive go unto the dutch general unto the castle of Nero and tell he that he hear that he purpose to take polaroone by force which he can not believe although his own messenger send to polaroone to speak with our factor have give it out also that the general himself shall say that if the english do not come present unto he and yield the say fort of polaroone unto he he will send his force and overrun all the country but hope he will enterprise no such thing against that place consider the article of agreement and know how many year to the great loss and charge of the company we hold possession and maintain the place to the use of his majesty of England the say general make little answer to it as though there be no such matter intend whereupon our say factor take his leave and come away but the next day he be follow to polaroone with a armado of twenty six prowess and one ship which do put the inhabitant of polaroone in such a fear as they know not what to do whereupon our chief factor there ask the commander of those force what his purpose be with such a fleet there and that if he attempt any thing against poolaroone it be a breach of the article it be in our possession this can not prevail with he but say the land be they and they will have it by fair mean or force and as for our profession they will not acknowledge it the inhabitant and not we be master of the place and so the dutch commander go ashore unto the inhabitant whereupon the say inhabitant ask we if we can and will defend they but perceive we be not able to defend ourselves much less to secure they they be force to yield themselves and the island into his hand the dutch take down the english colour and set up their own and cause the inhabitant present to bring in all their weapon and to throw down all their wall and will have force they to have take all our ordnance out of our fort which they at the first refuse to do allege that they have former give and surrender the land to the king of England and in respect they have live so long with the english they will not now offer we any injury or violence and when our chief factor go ashore to expostulate the matter with the dutch commander he can obtain nothing at his hand but that the land be they and thing must be so and shall be so whereupon our say factor go again unto the dutch general to the castle of Nero to confer with he thereabouts but he will give no other answer but that he have refer those business to his say lieutenant send thither with who he may confer who in the absence of our chief factor have bring some of his soldier ashore upon poolaroone and force the islander to throw all our ordnance over the rock from the place where they be plant be nine piece whereof four break with the fall and be all carry away by the dutch. moreover our captain of who have defend the island four year together Nathaniel Courthop go to Lantore at the request of the inhabitant to receive the surrendry thereof for our king majesty use as aforesaid and return back again about the begin of November 1620. be slay by the dutch. and it be very probable they do it after the time they have intelligence of the publication of the accord at Bantam in march 1619. for present upon the say publication they send secret to the land in those part where they have trade to prevent we of our part of the spice due unto we by the accord after the say dutch general have subdue the fore mention island of Lantore he constrain they to deliver unto he the principal of all their child for hostage then he take away from they all their small vessel and boat and then he also require all the man of Lantore to be bring unto he and they bring he all the principal man but this do not satisfy he but he will have all the Bandanezes which have aid they as also all their wife and child small and great to be bring as prisoner aboard his ship which when the Bandanezes perceive doubt that he mean to make they all slave and to carry they to some other place they agree together to retire themselves into the high and strong place of the land and there do fortify themselves whereupon the dutch slay of they and take twelve hundred person prisoner most of they be woman and child which they have since carry to jacatra and other place print according to the original copy the eight of February 1621. d. Adrian jacobson jacatranenses Batavos love brother I have receive your letter and according to your desire have return these few line in answer thereunto if I have not so full satisfy the particular of your letter as I wish and purpose I pray you impute it not to any want of will but unto my disacquaintance with your dutch tongue and hand I shall peradventure have give you better satisfaction than now I do if you have write to i in the latin tongue but to leave excuse and come to the matter the thing you touch in your letter be but too too true to wit that the hatred and dissension among christian if it continue as God defend it shall be and will be the cause of much innocent bloodshedding among friend and of estrange the heart of heathen from the worship of the true God and therefore that enmity among friend may cease and that such as be yet without may be allure to submit themselves to the sceptre of jesus Christ it stand we upon who be preacher of the gospel of peace to be instrument of peace which for my own part how willing I be to do be not unknown to such as know myself and among who I do daily converse I have always both in public and private by letter to our worshipful company in England and by lively voice to our commander here in the indies declare how good a thing ^t be for we that be christian profess one faith one Christ one baptism to live in peace and to dwell together in unity and of this my earnest desire to be a peacemaker master Brancraft your master of the black lion who remain after his take some week aboard of the royal james can give evident testimony and witness and now that you have write to this end I will stir up myself and set afresh upon the work of reconciliation it be pelf indeed and pride that be the makebate breed strife and discord for have not the riches of the molu^^as and the rob of the chinees and other by you under the english colour father thereby your theft upon we cast you into a deep and deadly lethargy you will not as you have do have abuse your best friend abroad that have shed so much of their dear blood in defence of you and your country at home but now you be free from the Spaniard at home you fall out with your friend abroad be this the recompense of our love and blood show unto you and shed for you to keep you from the suppose thraldom of Spain do David thus reward his three worthy who adventure their life to satisfy his long and to quench his thirst do he not say lord be it far from i that I shall do this be not this the blood of the man that go in jeopardy of their life 2. sam. 23.17 do you thus requite we as lot do Abraham who when as he with the three hundred and eighteen that be bear and bring up in his house do recover lot and his good and woman out of the hand of the conqueror care not for he but to serve his own turn and be deliver do in a manner scorn Abraham company well though Abraham be the elder and worthy may have stand upon his right yet yield of his interest that he and lot may live as brother and the rather because both of they at this time sojourn among the canaanite and Pheresites who be ready to take notice of their discord and so to curse their god and holy religion yet what gain lot by separate company but a shower of fire and brimstone which rain upon Sodom wherein he live and will have consume both he and he if God have not be merciful unto he at Abraham request it be not long of the english that we expose ourselves to the mockery of infidel our company love peace and trade peaceable they have put up for peace sake more wrong at your hand than they mean to do again you write and publish to the world that the sea be free and ytt by your encroach upon it be not you both the mother and nurse of discord one of our commander write as I think or at least send word by one of special note among yourselves to Coen your commander concern a parley before the shoot down of our turret at jacatra but the first and last news we hear of he be it not the beat down of our house there and the defame of our nation with Penoran at Bantam and other here and think you that this be the way to make peace the present captain of your fort at jacatra promise to the right worshipful sir Thomas dale our chief commander upon the faith of a christian that m. Peter wadden now your prisoner shall have free ingress and egress in and out of your house to parley between we to return to our ship and yet be either promise or oath keep have he not and do he not continue your prisoner to this hour you remember jehu his answer to jehoram what peace while the whoredom of thy mother jezabel and her witchcraft be yet in great number 2. king 9.23 no sound league of friendship or reconciliation can be make or be make can continue till the wrong which man have do one to another be reprove and remove and satisfaction give by word and deed where it may possible be perform else it will be like a wound or sore that be cure outward to the eye do bleed and fester inward many hollow reconciliation be daily make among man which afterward break out to the hurt of both party and scandal of other as a wound that be ill cure by a unskilful or a unconscionable chirurgeon as for my own part I will to God that if it be possible I may with all my best skill and cunning be the chirurgeon to cure this wound that our reconciliation when ever it shall be make may not be h^llow but holy and firm yea I wish from my heart that my very blood may be the milk to put out this wild fire which now be kindle and if it be not quench in time be like to devour not only the ship and good as it have do some already and be like to do more but the precious life of many of both nation and of those also that be as yet unborn who it be like will curse the time that ever the english and dutch know the indies all stand not in one side there must be a yield of both side if ever there be a sound peace but you say both side be stout who shall begin I answer what avail anger without strength to bear it out what be fierceness of spirit without wisdom of heart but even a fool bolt against himself and to such a one may not the say of Archidamus to his son be too foolhardy be as fit apply as a glove to a man hand son son either put too more strength or take away some of this courage you can be ignorant that when Herod intend to make war against the tyrian and sydonians how they come all with one accord and persuade Blastus the king chamberlain that they may live in peace or else they shall all of they be starve act. 12.20 take heed you come not to this when it be too late be you so well able to live of yourselves in Holland that you have no need of your neighbour country England be you so high above the water that the sluice of heaven can drown you or be the sea so low beneath your Netherlands that you fear no deluge the treasurer be he not as sure seat as your grave be in Holland or the great among you here in the indies even Coen himself and yet be he not toss up and down as a football in a strange country and be not the chariot of his glory the shame of his lord house esay 22.18 but I have run myself a little beyond that I intend and now to recover my breath by these line I promise and by word and deed will God willing with sail and care labour to bring to pass that we may live as friend and neighbour both here and at home thus I have return you a answer to that you desire and look that both of we shall do our best endeavour for the good of our present fleet and of such as hereafter may live to bless we from our royal james ride near to Bant^^ ride this 20. of April 1619. your love brother Patrick Copland from aboard the bee in the road of jacquatra on the coast of java the five and twenty of February 1620. AVgust the second 1619. our ship and good be take by the fleming in the strait of near Bantam and set ashore at jacquatra ship take by the hollander at Banda before this they have take the swan the Solomon the attendance and keep the defence which fugitive knave betray to they likewise the Speedwell^ pinnace they be report to have enter and take out the english leave only three ignorant black which for want of wit or skill suffer she to be lose the cause for that she will not strike to the dutch plead freedom in sea as subject to a free King the star be take in the strait of Sunda in all these infortunate ship be twelve September the eight 1619. the fleming disperse we into their ship and on the coast of sumatra the first of October 1619. they take four other english ship viz. the dragon the bear the expedition and the rose and on the second of October they turn we all ashore at tecoo among the indian where our merchant have no trade but for eight day we be then three hundred seventy and odd man all or the most part undo about fifteen man be kill in fight they leave we the little rose to shift for ourselves the three and twenty of October 1619. there come into the road out of England three other ship the palsgrave the Elizabeth and the merchant hope from tecoo we sail too and fro and at length come to anchor at a island call Amyncan where we have fresh water and some fish but be no place of trade nor be there any man that know of any thing that grow upon it the people be think to be men^aters after this we return back for tecoo and near the same twenty nine of january 1619. we meet with general bring in the royal james and his whole fleet of ship in number nine all the fleet be then twelve goodly ship be resolve to sail for Bantam and in sight of two flemish ship which we purpose to take captain Adams in the ship call the bull together with one of the flemish ship come up with news of peace we than sail for jacatra where by the way meet we sail of goodly flemish ship with who have not the peace then come we must have fight it out but peace be then conclude between the fleming and we our english factory be again settle at jacatra and the ship divide some for one place some for another the six and twenty of April 1620. the royal james and a ship of some eight hundred ton call the unicorn set sail for japan the distance near about a eleven hundred league the second of june 1620. the unicorn be cast away on the coast of China near a certain island call the Macoio island in the ship be two english woman both which and all the man be save for they run the ship near the shore most part of all their good they lose as we sail for japan at a place call Patanie we hear of captain jordan who be there with two ship call the hound and the Samson there come into the road and fight with they three flemish ship captain jordan be slay in that fight and the fleming take both their ship the seventeen of December 1620. the great james be well trim at a place call Firando in japan come away from thence and the fourteen of januarie 1620. we arrive safe at jacatra where she be now load for England the ship that since my come from England have be take and lose be the sun cast away near Bantam the star take near Bantam the dragon the bear the expedition and the rose take at tecoo the hound and the Samson take at Patany the unicorn cast away on the coast of China two or three other ship take and lose at the Moluccas man of good command dead be captain Parker of Plymmouth sir Thomas dale captain jordayne kill at Patany captain Bonner kill at tecoo while we be at japan the fleming yield up again the star to the english and she be go to the Moluccas Thomas Knowles chap. 12 the hollander declaration of the affair of the east indies faithful translate according to the dutch copy print at Amsterdam 1622. write in answer to the former report touch wrong do to the English and a answer write by certain mariner late publish with deposition further open the iniquity and cruelty of the dutch. @. i. a true relation of that which pass in the land of Banda in the east indies in the year of our lord God 1621. and before print at Amsterdam 1622. all the land of Banda from the ten of August 1609. by a special treaty and agreement make with the ^ranka^es or magistrate of the foresay land be put under the protection of the high and mighty the state general of the unite province on condition to defend they from the Portugal and other their enemy provide that they of the say land be find to deliver unto the fort call nassau or unto the committee of the say company all their fruit or spice at a certain price and so forth as by the say treaty of agreement more at large appear these article of agreement be for a time by they perform be afterward break and violate as well in keep back and withhold the say fruit and spice which they be tie to deliver to the Netherlands company as also enforce and rob their warehouse and contrary to solemn treaty and promise murder at sundry time and place diverse of the principal officer committee and servant of the say Netherlands company in take away diverse small ship provision their open invade of the place and country withstand also late under the subjection of the high and mighty the state general and in conquer the inhabitant thereof who with a strong hand they force from be christian to become Moor again or those which withstand or gainsaid they they sell as slave and in commit all kind of perverse wickedness and treachery during which passage and do there be again certain contract on the aforesaid condition agree upon with the say Bandaneses as in May in the year 1616. by one of the Netherlands commander call Lam and by their governor general Laurence real in the year 1617. which indeed be short after break and violate by the bandanese and that through the animate by the english who do open aid and assist the foresay land and maintain they in warrage the Netherlands company with victual and munition great ordnance man and ship thereby to withhold from we the fruit and spice which the bandaneses be tie to deliver in this wilfulness the bandaneses continue till in june 1620. till that at jacatra be publish both among the english and the Netherlands fleet then ride there in the road the treaty conclude and agree upon between his most excellent majesty the king of great Britain and the high and mighty lord the state general for to reconcile upon certain condition the english and Netherlands east India company the which treaty and by conference of handle concern the moluccaes Amboyna and Banda all dispute and difference between the english and the Netherlands company concern the same be to that time abolish and a general force of ship of war be ordain between they for the defence of both company in their right and the commerce which they have obtain in the indies the reduction of the wilful bandaneses unto the Netherlands camp be hinder a year or two through the actual proceed which the english in Banda itself since the year 1616. and afterward in the year 1618. about the coast of java and whole India through by open hostility do attempt whereby the aforesaid bandaneses be encourage and make bold do withdraw themselves whole from under the subjection of the castle of Nassaw do unto we and we all wrong and hostility and withhold from we their fruit to say nutmeg and mace which they do not only sell unto the english and to the indian but also to the portugal who be both their and our enemy with who they seek to make near alliance of friendship as already in the great island name Banda be come fifty or threescore Portug^ls who by some more assistance consider the natural force of the say island will have be sufficient to have deprive both the english and the Netherlands company of the right therein and the fruit thereof without hope hereafter to have any redress in regard of those inconvenience after the publication of the contract that be make the general of the Netherlands company in the common council for defence consist of Englishmen and netherlander propound the necessity of the take of Banda as also the redress and assure of those quarter and of the trade in Amboyna and moluccaes to the which end both the company according to the contract be find together to use all the force and power that he can for the preservation of the place as much as concern the trade for both the company and it appear by the act make by those of the say counsel for defence bear date the first of january 1621. that the english committee there declare that the necessity of the business be well know unto they as also that they be very willing together with we to do some common exploit but for that as then they want both power and mean of man and ship that they can not for that time furnish any thing towards the same whereupon the Netherlands governor general declare that with the particular power of the Netherlands company he will take the same in hand and effect it in such manner as God shall be please to prosper his proceed and to that end upon the t^^rtenth of january the governor general go from jacatra to Amboyna where he arrive upon the fourteen of February and from thence go to Banda to the castle of Nassaw lie in the island Nero upon the seven and twenty of February 1621. in the mean time one of the english counsel for defence that have be at jacatra upon the first of january 1621. and be privy to the contract make lie then in Amboyna when the governor general go from thence to Banda sent-letter in our own ship to the englishman lie in the small island Polaroon and make know and discover unto those of Banda in what manner the general of the Netherlands company intend to assail the great island of Banda and when the say governor general be come to the fort of Nassaw in Banda he understand that the englishman in Polaroon have add they of the town of Lantore in the great island of Banda with four piece of great ordnance and that if they have have long time that the entrance of the general of the Netherlands army into Lantore haven shall have be let and withstand by a great battery as also that some englishman in Lantore assist these of Banda we and according to the contract their enemy both with counsel and force encourage they with their presence and notwithstanding that the say general require the say englishman of Lantore to leave the town for the cause and reason aforesaid as also for that they themselves according to the contract and order make by the counsel of defence before that time may not buy any fruit in Moluccas and Banda as after the publication of the contract they may do and that only together and in common place with the netherlander yet some few of they stay still with they of Banda our common enemy notwithstanding also that the governor general protest that he be not therein to be blame if by that mean any hurt be do unto they be among and with our common enemy from who they shall and ought to have separate themselves first the governors general determine to assail the great island of Banda on the south side by some call Lantore because the principal town be so call by land in a place call Luchny and to that end cause the ship call the hart to anchor thereabouts which lie not long there but it be shoot at by a english piece of ordnance whereby our man be force to tow the say ship with a galley from the shore and to leave two anchor and two cable behind they or else it have be in great danger of sink or burn our man assure we that a english gunner have shoot at they and that they perfect descry and see he although the englishman seem to deny it whereby alter of their first purpose the general of the netherlander resolve to land upon the inward part of the island of Banda there to encamp themselves and then to go up upon the hill and there to plant their ordnance and to that end upon the eight of march 1621. land with seventeen company between Comber and Ortatten they march along the shoareside within the reach of three piece of great ordnance lend then by the englishman and not long before plant there whereby if they have march forward many of our man have be slay and so we shall have find no place there to encamp ourselves but the enemy from the hill will have domineer over we no man know what counsel to give whereby we may get up upon the hill the way whereon above three year before we have be be all entrench whereupon the general determine to enter again into his ship with the whole army to take another course they of Banda not once pursue after we but with flout and mock let we go and so think thereby that they have get the upper hand of we most part of they bring their wife and child again into Lantore after these two erterprise partly hinder by the english ordnance be in that manner cross the general for a three resolution determine to assail the great island of Banda on both side that be on the inner side of the land with six company and on the south side with ten company that they on the inner side shall land a hour before the other shall land by that mean to draw the enemy forth and so to make place on the other side while a company of choose man shall land on the north side to climb up upon the hill and other in other place of the land shall also be in a readiness be three hundred and thirty person whereof one hundred and fifty be musketeer appoint for the man and assure of thirty boat which the say company will bring on the south side of the island this be effect upon the eleven of march and according six company by break of day go on land between Comber and Ortatten captain Voghel with certain choose soldier march forward who climb up upon the hill find such resistance that all their powder be spend they be in great danger to be spoil but be well follow and second by the rest the enemy be force to retire and while this skirmish continue the other ten company land out of the say thirty boat go on shore upon the south side of Banda in a small bay some with ladder and other without climb up upon the cliff and be get up th^y march to the backside of Lantore without any resistance but only those that set upon the first troop be some ten or twenty musketeer by who one of our man be slay and four or five hurt whereby Lantore be take on the south side by the say ten company while the other five company skirmish with those of Banda upon the hill and as soon as Lantore be take those of Madiangi Luchny Ortatten and Sammer present forsake their town in the say island when they of Banda see the aforesaid thirty boat they think we will have sail round about the land as we have do three time before whereupon make no reckon of our land they be sudden surprise by break of day as soon as Lantore with the rest of the place aforesaid be win the rest of they of Banda namely Slamma Comber Owendender wayer and those of the land of rosinging and poolaroone make composition with we which we grant upon condition that they shall break down their fort and wall and give we their shot piece and musket etc. which by they be do all of they together according to their contract and promise yield to hold their country and land of the lord the general state of the unite Netherlands province promise to do whatsoever they shall be command and acknowledge the say lord the general state for their sovereign notwithstanding their former oath take unto any other those of Lantore and other be first overcome and vanquish and that save themselves among other of Banda also ask pardon and seek for peace which be grant unto they upon the condition aforesaid though they hardly hold the same and secret seek to begin a new rebellion and be command by the ge^^^all to show themselves all together upon the strand that they may be appoint in some other convenient place to live as fellow citizen free together without the loss of their good which they then have whereunto some of they obey but the great part flee upon the high mountain in the great island of Banda to who also many other town resort and slay a Netherlands merchant one other and a boy where they be enclose and hinder from victual by our man by this mean all the town and place in Banda be win and make sure only poolaroone which be not meddle withal because they of Banda therein behave themselves peaceable for the aid or rather the service of those of poolaroone the englishman plant nine piece of ordnance upon a small island in poolaroone have entrench the same and when those of poolaroone according to the composition be to yield up their arm and disarm themselves as they willing do yet our general do not once speak of those nine piece of ordnance stand in the say small island because the englishman shall have no cause to make any question that our man have do any thing against their fort or man the english commander Humphrey Fitz-herbert with his ship call the exchange lie before the castle of and have intelligence of the general of the Netherlands victory in Banda shoot off fourteen piece of ordnance for joy thereof this that be former declare be the true state and proceed of that which have be do now late and before in the island of Banda wherein nothing have be do but that which according to the law of nation and the aforesaid contract make and promise to be hold and without any wrong do to the liberty of the english company agree upon with the company of the Netherlands might and ought to have be do @ 2 a answer to the hollander declaration concern the occurrent of the east India contract somewhat brief than in the former impression there be of late two current publish bear date the one the eight of February the other the eight and twenty in these two current sundry both incredible and intolerable wrong and grievance be make know which the hollander of the east indies have inflict and enforce upon the english company of the east indies since the print of these two current the hollander have publish a pamphlet entitle a declaration of the affair of the east indies this declaration be publish as by the discourse may appear in answer of the two current above mention for the whole scope of the declaration tend to no other end but to justify their own right in the east indies and thereupon to charge the english with wrong do to they that thereby the world may be make believe that whatsoever extremity or hard measure they offer to the english they be urge and provoke thereunto by the unjust deal of the english and the wrong first offer by they howsoever the english provoke the hollander in India the hollander by this declaration do urge and provoke the english to defend themselves against so false and fabulous slander impose upon they be it not too much that the hollander most unjust oppress we in India but that they must proceed further to slander we in the loss of a good name the loss of trust and credit be loss irrecoverable but thanks be to almighty God who do always protect the innocent this declaration of the hollander intend and publish for our utter undo and disgrace offer unto we in two respect both hope and help thanks be to almighty God who have convert Hamon his Jailhouse intend against Mordocheus to his own confusion like as he have suffer you to publish a declaration to cut your own throat what can you devise to write and publish more opposite to what you intend more to disgrace yourselves in convince you of falsehood more to honour acquit and clear the english than this declaration all which shall manifest appear in the examination of your declaration which follow to begin with the very first line and page you affirm that all the land of Banda from the ten of August 1609. be by a special treaty and agreement make with the orankayas the magistrate of the land put under the protection of the state of the Netherlands how untrue this be let all man judge when as you confess in the latter end of the first page * * understand the page as they lie in the former impression and in the begin of the second be afterward break and violate and that the islander withhold their fruit and spice that they enforce and rob their warehouse murder at sundry time and place diverse of the principal officer committee and servant of the Netherlands company take away their ship and provision what can the hollander say less then to pretend a agreement and what or how can allege and prove more direct to convince themselves of untruth then so plain and large confess the recite hostility practise by the bandanese against they what a agreement can this be where there be so great a aversion of the islander mind declare by the hostile deed which they practise against the hollander they may perhaps say there be a treaty but such hostile practice manifest prove there can be no agreement the hollander proceed further from the year 1609. to the year 1616. where they speak of another agreement conclude in May by one of the netherlander commander call lam. and another agreement make by their governor general call real in the year 1617. which they confess be both short after break by the bandanese but how here come in the main matter the bandaneses rebel through the animate of the english who do open aid and assist they with victual munition great ordnance man and ship it be necessary that the hollander shall set down the cause which move the english to join so far with the bandanese for the cause do either lessen or aggravate the charge impose upon the english they must either say the english aid the bandaneses direct against the hollander without further respect which they can prove or they must allege which themselves in their declaration do prove that the english do endeavour to defend they with who they have free trade and traffic who love and with free consent sell to the english their spice etc. who put themselves under the protection of the english who yield the land of Poolaway poolaroone and Lantore under the obeisance of the king of England which if they will they can deny for they confess that the english have mount ordnance upon all these land why shall the english plant their ordnance upon these land but to defend their right how can the english plant their ordnance upon the land but with free consent of the bandanese at what time do the english plant their ordnance in these land of Banda the hollander confess before they come to the land for they find they in the land now where be the wrong that the english have do the hollander and in what because the english do hinder the agreement so often make betwixt the hollander and the bandanese why for eleven year the hollander confess there be never any as in the three page they say in this wilfulness do the bandaneses continue till in june 1620. thus hitherto it be plain acknowledge the hollander never have any land any castle or fort any trade in the land of Banda but what be get by force and absolute constraint if the hollander can prove so much for themselves as they do for the english the english then may have blush for shame in all this time that the hollander maintain hostility with the bandanese there be no mention make that the bandaneses ever offer any opposition against the english or once deny they their spice but that they have trade and traffic with they free and friendly now if consent and prescription of time be the best claim the hollander will have for the land of Banda why the englishman go far beyond they the bandaneses do never violate any agreement make with the english they never keep any pretend agreement make with the hollander the englishman in eleven year be never expel the hollander in all that time be never entertain but in all hostile manner the englishman have offer at all time of nutmeg and mace so have the hollander never at any time but what they get by violence and compulsion all which be acknowledge in the three page and the beginning of the four we pass over many acknowledgement and confession of the hollander because they all tend but to two end to justify themselves and condemn the english and because there be sufficient observation give that in justify themselves they disgrace themselves and in practise to disgrace the english they do they great honour but to deal plain and true not to abuse the world with untruth nor to wrong the hollander without cause we do confess the bandaneses make one famous agreement with the hollander which we well remember even in that year in which they report they have make agreement with the bandanese in june 1609. after they have by force take from they a town call Neara and make they flee to the backside or the coast to a place which they call Nassaw van hoof the general make show of love and friendship with the bandaneses which they perceive and desirous to revenge the wrong and cruelty offer unto they by the hollander do dissemble their intent entertain van hoof with vain hope promise he to come to some agreement by which mean they draw van hoof with threescore or more of his commander and soldier unto a place in which the bandaneses have advantage now instead of agreement in warlike manner they set upon Van hoof and slay he and almost his company this be the best agreement that we ever know or hear the bandaneses ever make with the hollander during eleven or twelve year present after this in july after captain bitter who among all the commander escape when van hoof be slay attempt to surprise another town call Slamma he be fight withal by the bandanese and wound in the thigh of which wound he short die where be now any wrong which the english have do the hollander except it be a wrong to maintain they who with free and general consent put themselves under the protection of the king of England or a wrong to defend they who willing traffic and trade with the english or a wrong to maintain that right which the hollander acknowledge the english have in the island of Banda these be all the wrong which the hollander do or can charge the english withal but now on the other side what extreme wrong do the english charge upon the hollander in two current print the eight of February and the twenty eight 1622. the hollander be charge with most barbarous and inhuman wrong do to the english all which they pass over in their declaration without any answer at all whereby in silence they can but plead guilty to confess they they be ashamed and to deny they they can but in their accustom policy they seek to avoid they by way of insinuation that the english deserve they in aid and assist the bandaneses against they there be two orator of Athens very great and inward friend before the judge the one do accuse the other defend a magistrate of Athens whereupon the one orator do challenge the other that he have deal very unkind with he to defend his mortal enemy and thou as unkind with i quoth the other to accuse my dear friend this be just the like challenge betwixt the hollander and the english why do you say the hollander defend our great enemy and why do you say the english oppose against our dear friend yet in this challenge there be a difference for the english have more cause to defend their friend than the hollander have cause to oppose against their enemy Englishmen have a right by consent hollander have nothing but by constraint just defence be more honest and honourable then unjust opposition be either by law of GOD or man warrantable to proceed on with the cruel and inhuman wrong do by the hollander to the english by so much more barbarous and inhuman by how much the english of all nation in the world do least deserve it what deserve any hard measure from the hollander to what nation under the cope of heaven be they so much find as to the english who have foster and nurse they up to this greatness but the english what nation have shed so much blood lose the life of so many gallant captain commander and soldier to aid and defend they as the english what nation have lend they and spend upon they so much money and treasure as the english have do when they be in their extreme weakness and poverty when and where do the english ever fail they if for these cause the english have deserve at the hollander hand to have their ship take and make prize their good confiscate and convert to their own use their captain soldier factor and mariner take prisoner hold in miserable servitude clog with iron keep in stock find hand and foot tie to stake hale and pull they with rope about their neck spurn they like dog throw they headlong down rock and cliff kill murder starve and pine they to death enforce they to carry lime and stone for their building land they among the pagan people without all provision whatsoever expose they to the mercy of miscreant of who notwithstanding they find better usage then of the hollander when as the hollander rob and spoil other nation under the english colour pretend to disgrace the english that they be Englishmen counterfeit the coin of other nation charge the english with the same lay the English who they hold as prisoner above hatch where the sun scorch they in the day and where their ordure and piss fell upon they in the night till they grow more loathsome and filthy than leper bar the english as much as in they lay from all commerce and trade in the indies as all these particular be direct to be prove by man yet live who either endure or their eye see what be here report and will be ready upon all occasion either with their life or oath to justify for truth what they have endure and what they have see with their eye let all the world judge whether Englishmen have deserve these usage at the hollander hand whereas some people either affect to the hollander or think it too strange and monstrous that christian shall domineer over christian with such inhuman and barbarous cruelty rather tyranny except the english^ad ^ad provoke they heavy thereunto let all such who harbour any such conceit read and consider what be before answer to such objection the hollander in their declaration be charge in the two first current with many of these extreme wrong inflict upon the english they make no denial of they make a challenge that the english do aid and assist the bandaneses against they it have former be allege and sufficient prove by their own confession that the english do not maintain the islander by way of oppose the hollander but they do as much as in they lay to defend the right of the king of England they do defend that right which they have by consent they do defend that people who do so free and friendly trade and traffic with they other cause then their so honest so just agree with the law of GOD of nature and nation they neither do nor can allege any some other inconsiderate people who envy the prosperity of the east indian merchant will further say to close with the hollander that these extremity be offer in India only and no where else to the english for proof of the contrary we of the east indian company do challenge all the merchant which travail or traffic east west north or south to deliver their knowledge what indignity they have endure from the hollander in Turkey in the straits in muscovie in Gr^ynland at newfoundland and where not so that not only the east indian company have only cause to complain yea they wrong englishman in their own sea at home as be general know now because hollander may say that they be charge with generality without particular instance general speech be a common cause to aggravate cause and be avoid except the general be prove by particular because they shall find that we can want of particular out of infinite there shall be here follow deliver some by man yet live who have both see they and endure they @. 3 relation and deposition touch the hollander brutish and cruel usage of the English in the road of Patany in the east indies the seventeen of july 1619. the two ship call the Samson and the hound ride there at anchor three ship of the Netherlands set upon they with might and main after five hour fight eleven of the man in the Samson be slay outright and five and thirty man of the same ship be wound maim and dismember at this time captain jordan be captain of the Samson and do hang up a flag of truce and withal send Thomas Hackwell master of the Samson to the netherlander to parley about a peace the examination of Thomas Hackwell the five and twenty of january 1621. Thomas Hackwell be swear and examine upon certain article minister on the behalf of the right worshipful the english company of merchant trade to the east India aforesaid say and depose thereto as follow to the first of the say article he say and depose by charge of his oath that in the road of Patany in the east India upon the seventeen day of july 1619. last past the Samson whereof this examinant be master and the hound belong to the english company be forcible assault by three ship of the hollander viz. the angel the morning star and the burgarboate whereof Hendricke johnson be commander and after five glass fight two hour and a half eleven of the say ship the Samson her man be slay outright five dismember and about thirty otherwise wound captain jordane be then in the say ship the Samson and commander of she cause a flag of truce to be hang out and send this examinant in the samson boat aboard the fleming to treat with they for a peace and at the hang out of the say flag of truce and when this examinant leave the say captain jordane to go aboard the fleming he be well but above half a hour after the say flag of truce be so hang out and this examinant be in parley with the fleming about the say peace captain jordane not expect any violence from the fleming during the say parley show himself aboard the Samson before the main mast upon the grate where the fleming espy he most treacherous and cruel shoot at he with a musket and shoot he into the body near the heart of which wound he die within half a hour after and this he say by charge of his oath to the second he say that after the say ship the Samson and the hound be surprise by the hollander in the say fight at Patany as aforesaid the great part of their man by the command of the dutch be bring aboard the angel their admiral and there notwithstanding diverse of they in the say fight be much burn with gunpowder and wound with splinter and thereby suffer miserable torment yet they the say Dutch most unchristianly and inhumane cause and force they to put their leg down through the grate and so seize they and tie they to the Capsten bar insomuch that still as any man have occasion to go and ease himself his leg be so swell by reason of the extraordinary hard tie of they that the carpenter be always fetch to make big the hole at which they be put down to get out their leg again and this he say by charge of his oath be most true to the three he say that he know that the dutch at jacatra do cause all china man reside and barter there to pay monthly six shilling upon a head or else you shall not sell any commodity there to the english and this he have see diverse of China man pay at jacatra to the four he say that upon the three day of March last be twelve month aboard th^ new Zealand then ride in Bantam roade this examinant with three or four other do hear one cl^se derickson then upper steersman of the dutch ship call the southern-indraught say that the state in Holland have be plot that war between the english and the dutch in the Indie seven year before to this last article be witness Thomas Hackwell William Shaples Henry Backtasell Bartholomew churchman Anthony Piccot the deposition of Bartholomew churchman I do affirm that they have many time term we slave to the king of Holland and that we shall all be send to the Moluccas to row in their galley and so be keep bondslave under they during our life more I affirm that they have keep twelve of we in a dungeon at Pooloway and four and twenty at Amboyna by the command of Laurence rial then general but now return into Holland where they piss and upon our head and in this manner we lay until such time as we be break out from top to toe like leper have nothing to eat but dirty rice and stink rainwater insomuch as if it have not be for a dutch woman name mistress cane and some poor black that bring we a little fruit we have all starve in that place as many of our company do beside the extremity which they use to many other which they have in prison at other land where they perish leave their wife and child here in England ready to starve for want of maintenance the name of the ten man which lay in Pooloway be these Bartholomew churchman jacob Lane kellam throgmorton Matthew willis William Burris cassarian David George jackson George pettice Walter stacy Richard Phillips at Amboyna Richard swanley William brookes and twelve more who name I well know not nor can remember put into a dungeon with forty indian all in a hole have no place to ease themselves Bartholomew churchman the last of October 1617. John Tucker affirm that the dutchman take the dragon the expedition the bear and the rose and deliver only the rose and that there be in the dragon a present from the king of Achen for the king of England call by they a creeze that be to say a dagger which they do detain to this hour this be true I under-written do affirm and testify that it be not do by base rogue as they term it but some of the principal commander John Tucker after the take of these ship there be above three hundred and fifty man set out of the four ship which be on shore expose unto the mercy of the indian where they find more courtesy then of the hollander otherwise they have all perish that all these abuse and many more which we have former receive by they be true we will maintain upon our oath and with our life against any of their nation or other that shall gainsay this truth yet notwithstanding all this be by the goodness of almighty God return into our own country we have no satisfaction for these intolerable injury nor any consideration for two three of our wage most barbarous keep from we article of abuse do by the hollander at the island of Moluccas and other place of the east indies aswell against our sovereign lord the king majesty as also against we and other englishman since the year of our lord 1616. not only before the peace but also since until the month of march 1620. that we come out of the indies in the good ship call the james. the second day of the month of February in the year of the lord 1616. the swan be surprise and take by the hollander at the land of Banda and her man keep prisoner till the eight and twenty of April follow at which time the hollander carry five and twenty of the english to the Moluccas where they be very hardly and inhumane use be fetter and shackled in the day time and close lock up a night and from the month of May until the end of September they be compel to carry stone and lime for the build of fort there which if any refuse to do they be keep in stock and iron till they will work and be notwithstanding also very hardly use for their victual insomuch that the one half of they die through their hard usage when we be first take we be possess of diverse good provision and mean wherewith to relieve ourselves which they present take from we and leave we not so much as wherewith to cover our body whereof when we complain to John Ellias who be lieutenant to one garret derickson in the trow hope that he will have have some commiseration of our misery and long lie in iron bad usage for want of meat drink lodging and other thing the say Ellias and the rest of his company do thereupon and many other time say unto we here diverse word a^e omit as ^oo odious against filthy ^um^s of dutch drink that he care not for we nor for any of our countryman and that if they shall take we and hang we up we have our desert yea they use other gross and base speech not fit to be speak off we affirm that the say John Ellias and his company say that they have little need of englishman for they in Holland be able of a sudden to make and furnish twenty four thousand of flat-bottomd boat such as Parma will have land upon the english shore in eighty eight and also say that they have of their own nation and countryman at the least forty thousand strong in England that present upon the least occasion will rise in arm and bend their force speedy against we in our own country we affirm that Laurence rial who be their general cause grate and cage to be make in their ship and do put we therein and carry we in they find in iron from port to port among the indian and thus in scornful and deride manner and sort speak unto the indian as follow behold and see here be the people of that nation who king you care so much for but now you may hereby plain behold how kind we use his subject make they believe that englishman be their vassal and slave beside all this they keep many of we fast find and fetter in iron in most loathsome and dark stink dungeon and give we no sustenance but a little dirty rice to eat and a little stink rainwater to drink so that many of our english faint in their sight for want of competent sustenance or other lodging at their hand for want whereof many die who be fetch out of the dungeon and so base bury more like dog than christians about the five of May in the year of our lord 1619. we have over-passed many hungry day and cold night lodging in cold iron and dark dungeon and think it not possible able for we to endure those misery any long make mean that some of we come to John Peter Socoma their general that now be and desire his lordship which title he due look for in the east indies that he will consider of our extreme want and misery and help we to some better sustenance and further we desire he that he will be so much our friend as to ease we of our iron but for the day time whereupon the say general most wicked reply with base speech and bid we be go and trouble he no more for if we do he will cause we all to be hang speedy so that we be force to return from whence we come with heavy heart have no hope but in the almighty to who we pray to turn their heart and to release we of our misery upon the thirteen of May in the year of our lord 1619. the dutch go ashore at japara and there they wicked and malicious burn down the town and the english house there and from thence forcible take away the english flag japara the cruelty there and in great disdain of our country trail our flag after they in the dirt through the town and tow it aboard their ship at their boat stern but what they do with it afterward we know not upon the eighteen day of the month of November and in the year of our lord God 1619. they take one Bartholomew churchman and clap he up in iron and set he where he sit in the rain and cold storm of the night and in the day time where the hot sun shine upon he and scorch he without any shelter at all and this they do to he only because he strike a base fellow that speak such word against our late queen Anne majesty as be not fit to be repeat which word as also diverse other which they speak against our dread sovereign we dare not relate as be too odious to be use in a subject mouth touch his prince howbeit may license and freedom of speech be grant we to make know the base slanderous and detract speech of that nation against our king and country that we may not incur any danger of his majesty displeasure by the repeat they it will sufficient make know the pride and cruelty of that people who do not then let to say that they make no account of our king nor any of his subject the seventeen day of the month of march and in the year of our lord God everlasting 1619. their governor of the Moluccas give order for the release of the english there and appoint thirty of they to be carry to Amboynas amboynas cruelty from thence to be send into England or Holland but the governor of Amboynas perceive they to be arrive he utter refuse to discharge they and force they to serve in their three ship that go to the Manelees as man of war which if any refuse to do they be to row in their galley chain like unto slave in which voyage to the Manelees fourteen of our man go in the saint Michael which be lose and never since hear on who name do follow Geroge trigge John edwards james Welch John crocket William Nichols Robert Gilbert Matthew Gilbert Giles lipscombe Arthur tap Edward Parker William vese John king John over and William smith chirurgeon we affirm that they have arrian Ellis Edward read and William powel three englishman prisoner in their ship call the Bantam they chain they in iron and lay they in the beakhead strait prohibit all other to come near they to give they any other food than their allowance which be so small that mere hunger compel those three prisoner to throw the dice who shall cut each other throat and so they do throw the dice to that end but be disclose before any of they be slay so that they be thereupon sunder and send into other ship they have take our man and without any cause have strip and whip they open in the market place they have also beat up their drum and call the black together to see it do they will not suffer we to wear or spread in our english house in those part where they have any command any colour that be our king colour the copy of a letter send unto the dutch in the east indies from their english captive at the island of Monoboca the nineteen day of march 1618. and deliver unto captain William johnson commander of the angel consideration in thing of difficulty be requisite and therefore much requisite in these our unchristianlike misery but because this have be but slight respe we be now resolve to tell you of all your perfidiousness first Grippe get advantage to surprise our ship and make a vow not to touch life nor good in any sort but since the contrary have be so much prove that Grippe and his confederate be now see to be for swear as short after their action do show in take away even th^se thing which with their consent we do save and bring aboard your ship call the trow at that time we be endungeon at Pooloway beside all the pagan-like usage of that cruel man Laurence rial we be by van hoof keep in such extreme misery with stink water and Rice half full of stone and dirt scarce able to keep life and soul together that have not De^rickson Vande Lam grant the english at poolaroone free access to Pooloway to bring we relief ^ee have be all ere this time starve for want but we pass away that time in expectation of better fortune which you have all from time to time promise yet now again our misery be thrice redouble for since we come to this place you have not only use we most base in other thing but also have take away from we even that poor sustenance which we buy with our money and this have be ^o^e by that envious man the master who your commander do suffer to be their commander rather than their inferior if you consider all his action the refresh which we have buy have be but small that be to say four small hen and cock and even they have the master take away and eat they in the great cabin which deal of his if it be christian-like we refer it to your own discretion and now at last for a small cause or nothing at all to be thus handle be a ten t^mes worse affliction than ever be inflict upon we for to chain we up like so many Dog^ and to let we lie in the rain and storm of the night without any shelter which be also bring to pass by the master for commander a sop for Cerberus we consider your gentleness so that you can dispense with rigour therefore that misery that we endure be not by your mean but by the master and they that be of his mind and this be of a truth that even your hog after their kind lie a-nights d^yer then we after our kind be christian and our grief be the more because your man of the black lion be take by our english be use like man and we like abject of the world to be thus use like dog be subject to the king majesty of England and in good respect with our employer but GOD that be above all know all and in his good time will remedy all thus much we have think good to certify unto you not in the way of entreaty for that we see be vain but only that you may know we now never look to come al^ue out of your hand for by all manifest appearance you seek to take even our life from we and this shall be a true argument of our grieve heart witness to all man how unchristianlike we have be and be use by you^ for in all this we have not express the ten part of your cruelty yet we hope that for this t^me it shall be a sufficient light unto you for that which have be from time to time practise by you against the English give at the island of Monaboca the nineteen of march 1618. subscribe by cassarian David Bartholomew churchman and George Pettys upon the receipt of this letter we three afore-named be lay in iron for eighteen month follow with such barbarous usage as be not to be imagine to be use among christian upon the news of the take of our two ship call the Samson and the hound in Patania ride Hendricke janson the commander of three ship viz. the angel the morning star and the burger-boat send a letter by the upper steersman of the star who have but one arm to their general John Peter Sacone then at jacatra of the take of our two ship he the say Sacone then say you have now Hendricke janson give i good satisfaction in that captain jordan be dead and at his return thither gratify he with fourteen hundred gilder in a chain of gold put it himself about his neck not leave any one unrewarded that have be at the take of our two ship and one hundred piece of eight to he that shoot he notwithstanding our flag of truce be hang out we affirm also that the say general John Peter Sacone upon the news bring he by a ship call the hart from the coast of carmandele of the death of sir Thomas dale then say dale be dead and jordayne blood I have if I have George cockin life to I be then satisfy a answer to objection make by the hollander that the english be the cause of the first breach in the east indies whereas the hollander affirm that sir Thomas dale 1616. (@) and captain jordan be the prime cause of all the difference betwixt the two company this we affirm and can prove that both sir Thomas dale and captain jordan be both in England when the defence and the swan be take and also that very inhuman they take the defence * * see the st^ry before suspect fo^ what (...) by (...) when for relief be put from their anchor at poolaroone in a storm they come into one of their harbour for succour they take the ship and detain her man prisoner likewise in rescue we follow they take a pinnace of we call the speedwell go to jacatra one of our man they slay and the rest they lay in iron as prisoner among which one Richard Taylor carpenter of the say pinnace who at that time have the bloody flux who die in their hand in iron they take the dead carcase of the say decease and put he into a bush 1617. with his head downward and his heel upward and say in most barbarous manner that there be a stert-man that be a man with a tail with his heel upward and there his carcase rot in the bush I will demand of they where sir Thomas dale and captain jordan be 1^^^ 25. (@) when they take the Solomon and the attendance it be to be prove they be then come out of England hardly clear of the coast when they take both these ship upon fair term of composition namely with promise to give we our life good and liberty they rob we of all our good and keep we in lamentable manner in iron some of we three year some more some less in which woeful misery many of our company end their day lamentable for in truth they never keep any faith oath or promise with we at all but most proud disdainful and cruel demean themselves towards we Bartholomew churchman chap. 13 a pithy description of the chief land of Banda and Moluccas by captain HUMPHREY fitz-herbert in a letter to the company right worshipful it remain that before I leave these eastern part I note unto you some particular observe this voyage in Banda Amboyna and the Moluccas which although I easy believe be well know unto you already yet as of the letter of the alphabet well know to all man many unknown word be compose so these note thing either in respect of the time the matter or the manner of the delivery may bring some thing again to your necessary remembrance to your wise foreknowledge or to your further consideration leave japparra and Maccassar I will betake myself to the barrene place of the isle of Banda that be Gonahpee one of the Banda land with a burn top to Gonahpee at the top yield nothing but cinder fire and smoke on the surface below wood without water or fruit for the sustenance of the life of man nevertheless be sever from the island Nero but by a very small channel they together with Lantore on the other side do make a very fair and spacious harbour this island be very subject to earthquake earthquake which do trouble all other the land also and make the ship in the road to totter and tremble again since the surprisal of Nero by the dutch there be a fearful earthquake one most h^deous and horrible the say hill cast forth such hideous flame such store of cinder and huge steam that it destroy burn and break down all the thick wood and mighty tree overwhelm they as it be she own vomit so that a green leaf can not be see in all that part of the island nor do Nero escape these hellish blast which blow these steam and cinder into the castle and country near adjoin in such abundance that it invite all man that see it to her funeral burn up all the fruit tree and cover all the country about it and have like to have sink the ship in the road it be credible report by those that see it the violence be so great that it carry stone of three or four ton weight from the one island into the other and into the Road. the castle stand close on the waterside in the plain it be fair large and strong build but weak situate by reason of the rise of the hill to the landward within less than musket shoot it have a hillock high than it by at the least twenty fathom which do command it at pleasure to prevent which mischief the dutch have build thereon a small fort but in vain the same be under command of another aswell as the former the castle be a matter of great charge castle weak situate both in respect of itself as also in respect of the soldier and altogether unnecessary but for dwell house and magazine the other fort be great enough and strong enough for the defence of this place here be in this castle about forty piece of ordnance in the other some eight or ten the most of brass the dutch have not receive the fruit of this island since their come thither be always overmaster by the black both by sea and land but the gain of Lantore have make all thing quiet now I pray GOD make it profitable hereafter Lantore Lantore be the great and rich island of all the isle of Banda strong and almost inaccessible as it be a castle there be scarce a tree on the island but bear fruit the bandaneses leave it for want of military policy but he must have a politic pate I believe that gain it again the town be situate on the brow of a sharp hill the ascent as difficult as by a ladder while they stand peevish to the defence thereof to the roadwards the dutch land with much ado on the other side of the island and surprise they at unaware right over the town the dutch have build a fort on the top of the hill to prevent the like inconvenience as also to keep the same in better subjection it be but small and while I be there the foundation scarce finish if the english have come thither a month or six week before the dutch make this spiteful expedition I dare avouch it they may have near lade the best ship your worship have in India with nutmeg and mace from these land Pooloway Pooloway be the paradise of all the rest entermit pleasure with profit there be not a tree on that island but the nutmeg and other delicate fruit of superfluity and withal full of pleasant walk so that the whole country seem a contrive orchard with variety they have none but rainwater none but rain water which they keep in jarres and cistern or fetch it from the abovenamed land which be their only defect the sea shore be so steep that it seem nature mean to reserve this island particular to herself there be but one place about the whole island for a ship to anchor in and that so dangerous that he that let fall his anchor seldom see the weigh of it again beside he incur the imminent danger of his ship how this island be win by Derrick Lam the castle poolaroone or lose by captain castleton I can well relate it have on the eastern side a fair and strong castle a regular Pentagonon well fortify and furnish with all manner of provision and soldier and be hold to be the strong castle the dutch have in the indies and the most pleasant residence poolaroone in imitation of her sister the other land be turn dutch. there be in she neither pleasure nor profit yet the ambitious king Coen * * Coen the chief commander of the dutch in the indies who fastigious title may seem fastidious to a eye not altogether evil and follow as I have see a copy of they I know not whether need a Democritus or Heraclitus whether to be rank with t. C^riat sup. l. 4. c. 17. or with some of the long-stiled emperor beside these land of Banda here name be reckon rosinging p. maon p. Capal p. Sangy Neilackey etc. Amboyna a little isthmus th^ee vintage rarity in nature strange spring have make a conquest of her chastity the civil law deny a violent rape to be incontinency because although the body be force the mind may yet be free recall she again and right this uncivil outrage by your wise and civil censure although the benefit which be not to be contemn be divide into share yet we hope your worship will keep and enjoy to yourselves the dispose and distribute always of your own Amboyna sit as queen between the isle of Banda and the Moluccas she be beautify with the fruit of several factory and dear belove of the dutch which the better to declare they say they will give thirty million there be no clove but on that island only Neptune be her darling and entertain in her very bosom it seem that the water and the earth be agree together in unity for at the bottom of the bay with one hundred pioner in seven day of one island it may be make two it be not above a flight shoot from full sea mark on the one side to full sea mark on the other side nor be the sandy plain raise a fathom above the of the horizon insomuch they glide their prawe and coracorry by main force from one sea to the other it be plentiful store with fruit fish and fresh water nor be there any great want of flesh. their vine both of Banda Amboyna and the Molluccas be prune thrice a year and every prunage have his vintage a rarity it seem to i in nature I see in the wood of this island a plant or tree or neither or whether I shall call it I know not in substance much like to the body of our ivy in form like a hal^er of five or six inch in length five or six fathom bare without sprig or sprout the one end fast in the ground the other fix to the limb of a great tree a fathom and better distant from the body thereof and so perpendicular that it be very disputable whether it grow up from the ground or from the limb of the tree to the ground this rope be of firm solid wood without any concavity and yet it yield excellent good fair and sweet water and as fresh as from the fountain nor do it herein admit any distinction or difference unless it be the more delicate according to your company cut more or less thereof distribute every one the quantity of two foot or thereabouts and they shall have sufficient for every piece will run to the value of a pint or thereabouts and that in a instant a strange refresh to those that travail those high and dry mountain as myself do find by good experience the castle of Amboyna be quadrangular the castle w^ll moat and fortify with man and munition and have in it about piece of ordnance the dutch have reduce into order the two rebellious factory and the people begin to plant anew insomuch that they expect within these few year the fruit will be to that it be at present your worship shall herewith receive the draught of this island and the adjoin factory set out at large after the dutch fashion which make not molehill of mountain Bachan be account among the land which be more proper call the Moluccas and be the great of they all it be call great Bachan great Bachan there be another near adjoin call old Bachan in great Bachan the dutch have a factory and castle old Bachan which vent some commodity do yield they board plank and mast for any ship whatsoever it be the fruitful of all the land of all the Moluccas and the cheap the king keep near the castle without about three hundred person the rest be flee to the mountain and other land the dutch merchant and other tell i for certain that for want of people the clove lie on the ground three or four inch thick in some place so as it may be true say of this place the harvest be great and the gatherer few nor do I think that the dutch do desire many the castle the castle be but small yet strong enough for this place and contain fourteen piece of iron ordnance small and great etc. this be a very good harbour machan the next in order mount her top above the cloud in manner of a cone machan and admit no plain within the circut of her confine it be a very fertile island and yield to the dutch the great revenue of all the rest of the Moluccas land it have three factory wi^h their fort in triangle position the chief be which yield most spice Taffasoho Tabbalolo but vent less merchandise the second be taffasoho which vent more merchandise and receive less spice the three be Tabbalolo which yield less spice and vent less merchandise the road where the ship take in their good be at at the other place there be no ride this castle also be the strong they be all seat high above the water and the way unto they be steep and difficult and therefore to the sea-ward very strong but to the land-ward be command every way there be in this island a Clove tree differ from all other in its fruit strange Clove tree which be call the king Clove much esteem by the country people both for the variety as also for the goodness nor be there any other but this in all the Moluccas they be not to be buy for any money but be give abroad to friend by handful and half handful what fall to my lot your worship shall receive together with a exact draught of all the dutch castle in the Moluccas motyr make haste to follow Machand in form height and fruitfulness motyr but not in her revenue nor be she equal to she in greatness the dutch have one only factory upon this island which be call by the same name it yield but little fruit and vent less merchandise here Venus and voluptuousness have their habitation through idleness thus much by the report of other for I be not there to see it myself Tydore do tax the dutch for leave she whole to the spaniard and destroy the fort call the Marieca this island be great and rich in spice as any but because I have not land here I refer you to the draught thereof and of ternate herewith send to your worship for further notice ternate ternate the great of these land be the seat of dissension between the Spaniard and the dutch. the chief place for the dutch be Malaijo near unto which be Tallooko and on the northside of the island be tycoome which shall have be destroy with the rest Gamolamo Dangile and saint Lucy be the spanish fort between which be Calamasca seat as a frontier fort of the dutch which shall also have be destroy the whole both concern the island and those fort will better appear by the draught thereof herewith send your worship enclose in a bamboo etc. aboard the royal exchange in the road of jacatra the 18. of October 1621. your worship to command Humphrey fitz-herbert because the author call Coen a ambitious king you may see the occasion of it in the title which he assume and be impose on he as I have see they write entitle by himself in his proclamation for cessing or impose of custom at jacatra in this manner viz. IOhn Peeterson Coen governor general over all the land land town fort place factory ship Pinnasses shallop and man as also of the whole trade and commerce in India on the behalf of the high and mighty lord the state general his princely excellency and other the privilege committee of the unite Netherlands east India company to all those to who this present write shall come greeting we take into our consideration after the conquest of the kingdom of jacatra etc. by the queen of Patanie send her ambassador unto he he be style the great strong and mighty king of jacatra and of twelve castle commander of all the sea under the wind John Peeterson Coen if I have be able to have give thou also those draught reader thou shall have have ^^em but such as I have give I unto thou namely this of Hondius mean and obscure enough but somewhat more than nothing I have another far better send out of the indies but partly the cost and partly doubt to displease have detain the publish chap. 14 three several surrender of certain of the Banda land make to the king majesty of England faithful translate out of Malahan into English with a voyage also annex of sir HENRY MIDDLETON the content of the surrender of the land of Pooloway and poolaroone in Banda to his majesty this write be for the agreement between all the Orankayas of Pooloway this be translate by Robert hayes ^hose cond^ent out the Indies^^ ^^ translate (@) three by Robert hayes and poolaroone also and the english in manner as follow that whereas in the time that Pooloway be not yet suprize by the hollander the people of Pooloway and poolaroone have surrender the two foresay land unto the king of England and have give ground to Richard hunt merchant there withal set up the king of England his flag upon the castle of Pooloway and shoot ^f three piece of ordnance in token of the covenant of the man of Pooloway and poolaroone between the english and they when they do surrender the two foresay land to the king of England and have give ground to the english be do before the surprise of Pooloway eight day and after that it be take by the hollander and whereas at that time there be but two englishman upon Pooloway of weak defence who be not able to do the country any good go away to poolaroone together with the man of Pooloway in one small praw who have bring away with they earth and write for the establish of covenant betwixt they and the man of poolaroone therefore now the two foresay land be in the hand of the king of England only according to our surrender but whereas at this time through the assault of the hollander Pooloway be fall into their hand and possession if it shall please his majesty to recover it unto himself again he shall do therein nought but justice because the inhibtant thereof have absolute surrender it unto he and if his majesty pleasure be to the contrary let it be as shall seem best in his highness judgement but this be sure that we the man of Pooloway and poolaroone have surrender the two foresay land unto his majesty power and can go from or revolt our word again even to the last day and have link ourselves with the english in one bond to live and die together furthermore all the man of Pooloway and poolaroone do covenant to send every year to the king of England a branch of nutmeg in token of their design desire that this offer of all the Orankayas of Pooloway and poolaroone be once offer out of their true love unto the king of England be not have in oblivion or reject and whereas king james by the grace of God be king of England Scotland France and Ireland be also now by the mercy of God king of Pooloway and poolaroone moreover we do all of we make a agreement that the commodity in the two foresay land namely mace and nutmeg we can nor will sell to any other nation but only to the king of England his subject according to the true meaning of our covenant and surrender of the two foresay land to his majesty with all that be in they to be sole at his dispose which be and shall be the reason that we can trade with any other and whereas all the Orankayas of the two foresay land have make this agreement let it be credit that it be not make in madness or loose as the breathe of the wind but because it be conclude upon in their heart they can revolt or swerve from the same again moreover all we together do desire of his majesty that such thing as be not fit in our religion as unreverent usage of woman maintain of swine in our country forceable take away of man good misse-using of our man or any such like that be except against in our law that they be not put in practice be out of our use and custom that they may not prove a blemish unto our religion and that we may receive no occasion to deal unkind with the English furthermore if any Englishman will beeome of our religion we will accept of he upon counsel or if any of our people will become a Christian he shall be so likewise upon like counsel desire this promise that such thing be not do in such manner as may breed discontent betwixt we and the english which we do very earnest desire of his majesty final at this time all the Orankayas of Pooloway and poolaroone do again make a covenant with Nathaniel Courthop captain of the two ship ride here Sophon Cozocke and Thomas Spurway give ground and surrender the two foresay land unto the king of England be already partly in the hand of Nathaniel Courthop Sophon Cozocke and Thomas Spurway and that not only now but as be do long since when captain castleton go from Pooloway with four ship all the Orankayas of the two foresay land have agree with Richard hunt merchant of Pooloway with all have set the king of England his flag upon the castle of Pooloway and shoot off two piece of ordnance in token of the covenant the orankaye of Pooloway and poolaroone and the english and as it have be do heretofore so at this time we do renew it with Nathaniel Courthop Sophon Cozocke and Thomas Spurway Emmon Poolowaye sabandar Poolowaye sabandar Wratt Sabandar poolaroone sabandar Lamecoe Nahoda Coa Hattib Ittam Hattib Pootee sabandar treat Emmon Lancecoe sabandar Locon the surrender of rosinging and wayre to his majesty this writing be for the agreement between all the orankaye of the country of wayre and of the island of rosinging and the english nation in manner as follow viz. that whereas in the time that the country of Banda be in trouble by reason of their enemy so that they be no long al^^ to withstand they they therefore agree with Nathaniel Courthop Sophonie Cozock and Thomas Spurway thus much in effect that be that they do surrender the country of wayre and the island of rosinging unto the king of England in respect that they be not able any more to stand for themselves against their enemy that now the say country of wayre and the island of ros^nging be only in the power of the king of England and whereas the agreement be once make we the aforesaid orankaye can in our conscience dissolve it again but that it shall last for ever until the last day of doom and that the english shall be as the man of the country of wayre in all privilege furthermore the man of the aforesaid country of wayre and the island of rosinging do promise and agree to send unto the king of England one branch of nutmeg as a token of there foresay agreement of all we the aforesaid orankaye on condition that the say token of our agreement be not out of memory nor dissolve nor we dis-esteemed and we do wish that almighty God will vouchsafe to give prosperity to the king of England Scotland France and Ireland and now by the grace and mercy of God the king of the country of wayre and the island of rosinging and that more we will stoop to no other king or potentate but only unto his majesty and after he to all his posterity furthermore as concern our trade we do all true agree not to sell any of the nut or mace which the aforesaid country do ^fford to any other but only to the king of England his subject because we have whole unto he surrender the foresay two country of wayre and rosinging with all that therein be or whatsoever it do or shall yield it be the king of England his own and this shall stand for a reason that we cann^t trade with any other nation moreover we entreat the king majesty of England in earnest manner that such thing as be not befit to our religion as unmannerly usage of our woman maintain of swine in our country beat and abuse of our man or take away of they perforce against their will as if they be their own slave or any other such like attempt that be hold unbeseeming in our law we say that we do entreat his highness that none of these or such like be put in practice by his subject because they be thing disallowable in our law and so be commit will redound to the overthrow thereof and we thereby may be force to deal unkind with the english therefore moreover if any of the english hereafter shall have a affection to be circumcise and become as one of we it shall be do upon sufficient counsel between the rest of the english and we or if any of we will become a christian in that cause the like counsel shall be hold and this shall not be do for any misdemeanour of the party will so to turn because that may breed a dissension between the english and we and whereas this agreement be make in the presence and by the consent of the king and Sabander of wayre the Sabander of rosinging Emmon Hattib and all the rest of the orankaye of the country of wayre and the land of rosinging this shall be for a testimony that it be not do in madness or in the manner of the breathe of wind but that it be also aswell think in our heart as speak with our mouth and therefore we can nor will go from it again but that it shall so stand until the dissolution of the world neither shall there any doubt rise in our heart of any other but that we the man of wayre and rosinging be only the king majesty of England his subject and if any trouble hereafter do happen in the foresay country we will be content aswell to die as to live together with the english because we will be subject to one king and this shall stand for a reason that any be in league with we shall also be in league with the english and he that be near the english shall be near we because we will by no mean again divorce ourselves one from the other final at the time this agreement be make all the orankaye of Pooloway and poolaroone be witness thereunto all the orankaye of Pooloway and rosinging have unto the aforesaid premise set their hand the king of wayre the sabandar of wayre emmom of wayre the sabandar of rosinging Emmon of rosinging Hattib of rosinging translation of the surrender of Lantore cont. in the paper n. d. in the year of the prophet mahomed 1028. in the ten day of the moon Maharran be Saturday the year be call aleph and in the year of of jesus 1620. in the month of November the 24. day this be the write of the agreement of the sabandar of Lantore and the cap. of Lantore and all the orankaye within the country of Lantore with Robert hayes after the loss of captain Courthop that we of Lantore do surrender the land of Lantore unto the king majesty of England with all that be therein so that all the nut and mace within the country of Lantore we promise to sell to no other people other then to the subject of the king majesty of England only furthermore we the orankaye of Lantore do promise every year to send to the king majesty of England a bough of a nutmeg tree for the acknowledge of the homage of we the man of Lantore to the king majesty of England to the intent that this agreement of surrender betwixt we be not forget to the end of the world and to the intent their be no difference or fall out betwixt we furthermore we do crave of his majesty of England concern such thing as do not agree with our religion that they may not be do in the country of Bandan to the end that such thing be restrain there be no offence give between the Bandanezes and the englishman as to enforce our woman our wife or daughter or to strike any of we or violent to take any thing from we or to let swine loose in our country or any such like thing as do not agree with our religion these thing we only except because those thing tend to the destroy of our religion to the intent there be no fall out betwixt the Bandanezes and the english unto the end of the world and whereas it please God that james be king of England Scotland France and Ireland so now also he be king of the country of Banda so than the country of Banda be in subjection to no other king then to the king majesty of England only in this world except our religion for our religion of Islam do not agree with the christian religion neither do the christian religion agree with our religion of Islam and this be the purport of our agreement further if it shall happen any english to run to we or any Banda man to run to the english it may not be tolerate without the consent of the chief of the english and we of Banda because such thing be contrary to our religion and tend only to fall out and brabble betwixt the bandamen and the englishman at this time we be together in consultation all the orankaye of Lantore and the orankaye of labetacke and the orankaye of Nero Pooloway and poolaroone and have put too our hand and this be the intent of this writing sabandar Lantore sabandar Ratoo the voyage of master Henry Middleton to the Moluccas this shall have come in more due place before be the second voyage of the company if we than have have it but better late than never and for the subject it well agree with this place also his majesty letter king of Bantam have send captain colthurst in the ascension to Banda with letter of the king of those part to his majesty have take leave ^f the company be furnish with all thing necessary we depart from grausend the five and twenty of march 1604. and about the twenty of December follow after many various accident we arrive our man be very weak in Bantam roade where after many complemental salutation between we and the hollander with interchange of great ordnance on both part the general of the hollander dine the last of December aboard our general the day follow our general go on shore with a letter from the king majesty of England to the king of Bantam which with a present send be by he receive with great ceremony he be but of thirteen year of age and govern by a protector the sixteenth of the say month our general come aboard from Bantam to proceed on his voyage for the moluccaes appoint master Surflet to go home in the Hector the seven of january follow 1605. we anchor under the shore of Veranula Varanula a people that deadly hate the portugal and therefore have send to the hollander for aid against they promise to become subject unto they if they expel the portugal in sum the hollander prepare to assault the castle of Amboyna and the portugal to defend it the one purpose to recover the other to hold it the hollander summon they in the prince of Orange his name to deliver it that day by two of the clock castle of Amboyna take English bar of trade by the hollander and the portugal deny it yet in the end after many attempt and defence it be yield to the hollander by composition whereupon the governor of the town after the surrender of the castle bar we of all trade by the command of the hollander the war continue between the tarnatans and tydorians the first assist by the hollander the other by the portugal short after we get under the land of Tydore where we may espy between Pulocanally and Tydore two galley of Tarnata make great speed towards we weave unto we with a white flag to strike sail and to tarry for they at the same time come seven galley of Tydore row betwixt we and the shore to assault the tarnatans our general see the danger they be in lay by the lee to know what the matter be the foremost of these galley or coracoras wherein the king of Tarnata with diverse of his noble and three dutch merchant be king of Ternata be full of fear desire our general for God sake to save they from their enemy the tydorian from who they look for no mercy if he do not help they and withal that he will be please to rescue their other Coracora that come after wherein there be diverse dutchmen who be to expect nothing but death if he do not relieve they whereupon our general command his gunner to shoot at the tydore galley yet they desist not but board they within shoot of our ordnance tydore galley and put they all to the sword but three that save themselves by swim and be take up by our man into their boat english benefit to the dutch. our genenrall be determine to go for tydore the dutch desire he that he will no^ let the king of Tarnata and they fall into their enemy hand from who he have so late deliver they promise mountain of clove and other commodity at Tarnata and Makeu but perform molehill verify the proverb the danger escape the saint be deceive one thing I may not forget the king of Tarnata come aboard the general tremble for fear which the general suppose to be for cold put a black damask gown lay with gold lace and line with unshorn velvet on his back which at his departure he have not the manner to restore but keep it as his own but see how this kindness be short after recompense by these unthankful man our general arrive at the portugal town in Tydore the governor of the fort send one Thomas de torres Ternatas fraud and other with a letter the effect whereof be that the king of Tarnata and the hollander report that there be nothing but treason and villainy to be expect at our hand but that he conceive better of we believe their report to be nothing but malice to second this not long after our general arrive at the king town send master grave aboard the dutch admiral who find but can entertainment at their hand affirm that we have assist the portugal in the last war against the king of Tarnata and they with ordnance and other munition which our general prove to the contrary by some portugal that be take prisoner by they in that conflict dutch unkindness and then be ashamed of the slander the general affirm he have it from a renegado but do not think it to be true to fill up full measure not long after the king of Tarnata seem to affect our nation they threan he that they will forsake he and join with the deadly enemy the king of Tydore this Saunder pass in print in their author notwithstanding peevishness of the dutch. their brag and lie if he suffer the english either to have a factory or any trade with they affirm that the english be thief and robber and no other he shall find they and that the king of Holland be strong by sea than all Christendom beside with many other disgraceful speech of our nation and all other christian prince a just consideration for all nation to think what this insolent frothy * * understand this of the merchant which trade or war rather not of the whole land or best man of Holland loser will have leave to speak and merchant envy each other nation will do if they attain to the possession of the east indies to which insolent speech our general reply that what Hollander soever he be that so report he lie like a traitor and that he will make it good against any one that shall so report affirm that if the queen majesty of England have not take pity of they they have be utter ruin by the king of Spain and brand for slave and traitor the particular wrong do by they to our nation if they be lay open will fill volume and amaze the world to hear I will conclude to show the esteem have of our nation in the east India with the true copy of sundry letter by their king to his majesty of great Britain and first of the king of Tarnata the king of letter to the King hear of the good report of your majesty by the come of the great captain sir Francis Drake in the time of my father which be about some thirty year past by the which captain my predecessor do send a ring unto the queen of England as a token of remembrance between we fame of sir Francis Drake which if the aforesaid drake have be live he can have inform your majesty of the great love and friendship of either side he in the behalf of the queen my father for he and his successor since which time of the departure of the foresay captain we have daily expect his return my father live many year after and daily expect his return and I after the death of my father have live in the same hope till I be father of eleven child in which time graccho I have be inform that the englishman be man of a bad disposition and that they come not as peaceable merchant but to dispossess we of our kingdom which by the come of the bearer hereof we have find to the contrary which we great rejoice at and after many year of our expectation of some english force by the promise of captain Drake here arrive certain ship which we well hope have be Englishmen but find they contrary and be out of all hope of succour of the english nation we be enforce to write to the prince of Holland to crave aid and succour against our ancient enemy the portugal and according to our request he have send hither his force which have expel the portugal out of all the fort which they hold at Amboyna and Tydore and whereas your majesty have send to i a most kind and friendly letter by your servant captain Henry Middleton that do not a little rejoice we and whereas captain Henry Middleton be desirous to leave a factory here we be very willing thereunto which the captain of the hollander understanding he come to challenge i of a former promise which I have write to the prince of Holland that if he will send i such succour a friend at a pinch as shall expel the portugals^ut ^ut of these part that no other nation shall have trade there but only they so that we be enforce against our like to yield unto the holland captain request for this time whereof we crave pardon of your highness and if any of your nation come hereafter they shall be welcome and whereas the chief captain of the hollander do solicit we not to hold any friendship with your nation nor to give ear to your highness letter yet for all their suit if you please to send hither again you shall be welcome and in token of our friendship which we desire of your majesty we have send you a small remembrance a Bahar of clove our country be poor and yield no better commodity which we pray your highness to accept in good part the king of Tydores letter to the king majesty of England this writing of the king of Tydore to the king of England be to let your highness understand that the king of Holland have send hither into these part a fleet of ship to join with our ancient enemy the king of Tarnata and they joint together have overrun and spoil part of our country and determine to destroy both we and our subject now understand by the bearer hereof captain Henry Middleton that your highness be in friendship with the king of Spain we desire your majesty that you will take pity of we that we may not be destroy by the king of Holland and Tarnata to who we have offer no wrong but they by forcible mean seek to bereave we of our kingdom and as great king upon the earth be ordain by God to succour all they that be wrongful oppress so I appeal unto your majesty for succour against my enemy not doubt but to find relief at your majesty hand and if your majesty send hither I humble entreat that it may be captain Henry Middleton or his brother with who I be well acquaint God enlarge your kingdom bless you and all your counsel Tydore the king of Bantam to the king of England a letter give by your friend the king of Bantam to the king of England Scotland France and Ireland desire God to preserve your health and to exalt you more and more and all your counsel and whereas your majesty have send a general Henry Middleton he come to i in health I do hear that your majesty be come to the crown of England which do great rejoice my heart now England and Bantam be both as one I have also receive a present from your majesty the which I give you many thanks for I do send your majesty two bezoar stone the one weigh fourteen mass the other three and so God have you in his keep Bantam chap. 15 the dutch navigation to the east indies out of their own journal and other history forasmuch as Banda have be almost the bane and as it be the trojan horse to our indian Ilium whence a Iliad of misery and mischief have issue to that society whereby their wont gain have be suspend with a their reputation stayn^d their ship and good take and stay the person of many christian brethren in arm art and religion expose to the base of contumely and cruel of death as the premise declare and that among the infidel who by word and example of life they shall have seek to convert who state also be hereby subvert and their faith far pervert through you the wrong-doer in this case be my name blaspheme among the gentile I have think good to set down the true case brief as out of diverse witness christian and heathen english and dutch I have gather it no whit seek the dishonour of either nation for what nation have not some sick some rot member but as a historian ought to deliver the truth which haply the industrious out of the formal material can see to do without help but the vulgar will need spectacle and herein for the more honour of the dutch nation we will begin with the beginning of their indian navigation and by brief step descend into these broil wherein if the merchant have prove martial if some of their commander have be insolent if other of the base rascality with pot-froth or sea-froth transport to blaspheme king and high power and that dutch-indian disease have late grow epidemical in those part and turn into a general contagion wherewith their great number there have be infect yet the head and heart here at home I doubt not be sound and will soon my hope tell i purge these malign humour from those remote member will soon nay my faith run fast they be even now a do it herein also my charity check it as too shortbreathed and say it be other fault if I lie they have already * do it for who can suppose that they will make other wrong deed they by convinence or countenance that their justice will not do that which be just that their wisdom do not reason in season that their mature forwardness have not do already that to and for the english there which come thither and about the world by english help by their example in drake and Candish instigate by their pilot note and instruction as before appear in Melis Adams davis and other not a little further and by their support at home enable to look abroad so many gallant english spirit exhale so much english treasure exhaust in defence of that belgian liberty wherein the Hollander of all man will not take it to see their virtue imitate by the Bandanezes who likewise there affect it by seek english protection and effect by surrender themselves in subjection to the english crown and as for their freedom then when they offer it I be not willing to make a comparative betwixt the dutch and they * * may both english and Bandanese allege whether be free state whether more oblige these to the Dutch themselves by any act of former subjection or to the pretend title of ternate in both which the dutch own historiographer as here will appear free they or the other to but I will to my history or rather to they both in respect of the subject and author and occasion by the evil of some will honour the worthy spirit of that nation out of their own journal and relation deliver a brief of their marine exploit when * * hist amstelod joh. Fontani l. 2. c. 18. and 24. prefat in 8. part ind. orient Diarium in ind. Orient. ap. io. janson Arnhemiens also you have this whole voyage write by the commissary of the fleet in the three part ind. or. of these thing see their several journal publish in diverse language also the tome of the e. i. Gaspar get artus pag. 594. etc. the king of Spain have make many year war upon the hollander with exceed expense and force permit mean while the hollander ship nevertheless to trade on his coast he be at last counsel to bring they to subjection by hinder their navigation and intercept their ship by arrest thus be they prohibit the shore of Spain and Portugal some put into their galley their good confiscate and the hollander begin to think of other trade and to make trial of the indies and first begin those of Amsterdam to set forth eight ship by consent of the state and prince Maurice four of which be to go the wont way by the cape of good hope to seek and settle trade in those part especial of the indies where the spanish power be not admit the other four of which two be of Amsterdam the other two of Zealand and Enckhusen attempt by the north to discover a passage to China cathay and the Moluccas as by a far short cut this way from Holland to japan be not above one thousand two hundred thirty five dutch mile whereas by the Portugal way it be two thousand nine hundred thirty two of their northern expedition * * in the eight book of his work elsewhere the other four ship by a safe and more frequent way set forth in the same year 1595. and lay foundation of that which since be repute by they a miraculous structure and take occasion from be forbid Spain to make themselves way first to the east and since enterprize also the west indies the ship be the Maurice the holland the Amsterdam and a pinnace the person two hundred forty nine the society call Compenie verre the whole charge be two hundred and ninety thousand florin of which one hundred thousand be in ready money and merchandise the Maurice and the holland be of two hundred and eighty last the Amsterdam one hundred and eighty the pinnace twenty the captain of the first Bernard cape merchant Cornelius Houtman John Miller master etc. the second of April they set sail from the tessel the second of August they have sight of the cape of good hope the two and twenty of September they set two man on shore for mutiny on the five and twenty they come to saint Augustine bay in the i will of saint Laurence the ten of February to Anton gill. in may they come to Dampin in sumatra in june to the straits of Sunda where certain portugal from Bantam visit they on the three and twenty and four and twenty diverse Chinois Malabars and man of other nation come to they some of which have be in Constantinople Venice and Rome and one of they say he have four month pass see their lad and God mean the pope who they answer that they be christian and care not for the pope on the six and twenty of june captain Heync die of the flix on the nine and twenty the pangram or Vice king come aboard the mauritius the first of july the pirnces letter write in Arabecke and Portugal be read and covenant confirm by oath on both side on the six of july they be warn by their interpreter from the viceroy or protector to take heed of the portugal which notwithstanding colour friendship seek their ruin and have agree with Caesar who father have rule all java but he himself be bring into straits and enjoy little but a name Portugal treachery to the hollander Raya Davina^ ^ caesar. have also a Portugal wife that he shall invite all the principal hollander to a feast and the portugal meanwhile with fifty soldier and other of Caesar household shall invade their ship Caesar to have the spoil and the portugal to give he three thousand ducat for the ship this Caesar be so call by the portugal of the people Raya but the man of Bantam reject his dominion because he have live at malacca and favour the portugal to who they fear lest he shall bring they in subjection yet be he acknowledge of many even king themselves speak to he with their hand enfold one in the other the gesture of slave he have also be aboard with his child on the second of july he tell they also that the portugal seek to persuade the viceroy to the like and beseech and bribe his follower thereunto affirm that they be not merchant but pirate and if they have access now in ten or twelve year they will return and subdue their country and this spark if now unquenched will set the whole east on fire morever they be enemy to the king of Spain who enmity will by their entertainment be procure and that they be but spy hereby appear the discord betwixt Caesar and the bantamians as far as they dare the hollander send one of their captain into the town to search the truth by conference with the protector or viceroy who further counsel they to shoot into the town when Caesar go aboard the ship promise to reveal all thing to they he find also in the sabander house gunpowder and other hostile provision they send Caesar a costlet and other present and he according send to invite all their chief man and musician but now by their present seem to be win to better thought blame the portugal after this Caesar go to jacatra and the protector and hollander agree about take a house for their better traffic which be do and rainer Vande hell be appoint chief who yet find nothing but fraud and shift in the protector and bantamese as for the portugal they murder Peter Tayda a mestizo of Portugal original and dwell at Bantam for h^lding familiarity with the dutch by the solicitation of their Priest the inhabitant be by proclamation inhibit to sell rice to the Hollander and present after they be tell of a assault shall be make on their ship and when some of their company have get aboard the rest be detain which when by no intercession they can recover they assail the town with their ship and take three juncke a four be set on fire by the portugal to prevent take at night Houtman the chief on shore write to they that they have halter about their neck and be present all of they adjudge to die if they continue further battery and spoil a day truce follow and after that the war renew which continue above a month and peace be conclude as for Houtman and his fellow they be sentence to die but the various opinion of the mean protract their life persuade by the portugal who have send purposely thither from malacca * * this messenger be say to have give 10000 rial to deliver he the hollander or to prohibit they trade the bantamians after a little space break off trade again which the hollander supply by take their juncke after this they be assault by a ship of indian with poison arrow the venom whereof can not be cure but by cut out the affect part this ship also the hollander take the portugal expostulate with the protector that so little have be do and they both grow to hot word the fuel of a great fire the portugal seize on some China juncke for their satisfaction which the protector a while dissemble but afterward revenge with the destruction of the portugal under colour of a great marriage at jacatra set forth a fleet wherewith he invade the Portugal galley slay the man and divide the spoil the portugal reward Tuban Cydaio Brandaon and Surubaya be near each other on jova the bird eme. another treachery the other portugal drip their anchor and flee to malacca the hollander come to jacatra the thirteen of November and be receive with much kindness whence have furnish themselves with necessary they set sail the Amsterdam run with full sail on a rock before they have sail a dutch mile on the three of December they come to Tuban and Cydaia where they buy nutmeg and clove and the sabandar give they a great fowl call eme above four foot in height somewhat like a ostrich save that the foot be not cleave here under colour of friendship the cydayans set on as they learn after by the portugal and bantamians with six great prawe assail the Amsterdam and the pinnace where they slay in the Amsterdam twelve and wound two but the other ship come in Madura they flee lose a hundred and fifty of the javan the hollander depart thence to Madura here the king will needs have leave to come aboard which he be permit if he come with six follower and to one of the great ship but he come with one hundred and to the Amsterdam be slay with the priest and most of his company his young son and other take by who they learn the ill intent that the madurians have to take their ship Amsterdam which themselves soon after fire take out of she what they find useful and now have lose many of their chief they consult about return and by force of wind be put into Ballabua and the ship Holland enter the river of baly a isle nine league off be put back with the violence of the stream the king of Passaruan a mahometan have marry and slay the daughter of the king of Balabua a gentile and now hold he besiege to enforce he to exchange his faithless faith Ballabua or balamboan here cand^sh have be baly call Hollandiola in eight degree of south latitude the king of baly assist the gentile but his captain be slay the rest return these tell of a ship there ten year before which be think to be master candish the old king then suppose one hundred and fifty to be still live baly they call Hollandiola for the fertility there they water they send to the king who accompany the messenger to the shore in a chariot draw with buffal hold the whip in his own hand have three hundred follower some with flame-formed crise and long spear bow of cane with poison arrow he be feast in dish of solid Gold the land be a equal and fertile plain to the west water with many little river some make by hand and so people that the king be able to bring into the field * * another say which be more credible that it nourish 600000. people three hundred thousand foot and one hundred thousand horseman their horse be little like islander their man black and use little merchandise but with Cotton cloth in prawe the island be in compass about twelve german mile their religion be ethnic order by the brachmanes or Bramenes in who discipline the king be train up they have also Banianes which wear about their neck a stone as big as a egg with a hole in it whence hang forth three thread they call it Tambarene and think the deity thereby represent they abstain from flesh and fish but not as the javan pythagorean from marriage once they may marry and when they die their wife be bury quick with they every seven day they keep holy the seven day holy drake straight and many other holiday in the year beside with solemn ceremony their wife burn with their dead husband here they hear of captain drake be there eighteen year before and call one straight by his name the king observe state be speak too with hand fold by the best the Quillon have power there as the chancellor in Poland two of their company forsake they and stay on the island and of two hundred forty nine there be now leave but ninety in February they begin their return the four and twenty of April 1597. they come in sight of Natal and the five and twenty of May of saint Helena where four carrack make they afraid to adventure the eleven of August they enter the tessel the ship Holland have not man leave to weigh their anchor and force therefore in a storm to cut their mast overboard the second voyage although the gain of this expedition be loss of man and perhaps also of money and wealth yet do it encourage with the strange novelty and hopeful probability many adventurer both of the hollander and of english also that way affect adventure with they this we have observe in the voyage of master davis * * pag. 117. pilot with Houtman with two ship and of master Adams with jaques Mayhay in a fleet of five ship and of Melis * * pag. 125. and pag. 71. with Oliver Noort in a fleet of four ship these two last sail by the Magellan streights to the indies follow the sun to see his rise and seek the east indies by the west all be set forth in the year after the other return 1598. the same year be by the indian society of Holland set forth a fleet of eight ship the holland the Zealand the Friesland the Gelderland the vtrick the ouer-issell or the dove the Maurice and the Amsterdam furnish with five hundred and sixty man james Neccius admiral in the Maurice wibrand Warwick who we before have honour for his love and honour to the english vice-admiral in the Amsterdam and seven commissioner adjoin on May-day they set forth from the tessel and keep together till they come to the hopeful promontory where they by ignorance and foul weather part the holland Maurice and ouer-issell hold their way to the i will of saint Marie the other five to the island cerne by they name of prince mauritius * * mauritius island about twenty degree south latitude near to Madagascar mountainous full of tall tree of black red and yellow ebony and have a good air tortoise able to go with four man on their back and to hold ten man sit on the inside of the shell unkind guest eat their host store of fowl desolate and dis-habited by man or beast they leave there hen and sow a certain plain with diverse seed dec. 26. 1598. the other three ship have water at saint Maries able to yield little else come to Bantam in the end of the year who suspect they to be the same which former have be there and refuse trade till they send Abdol a Chinois carry into Holland by the former fleet with present to the king than a infant and Cephate the protector and procure traffic four week after come in the other five ship many of they sick and thirty five dead the bantamese have eject the portugal now bring they store of provision use they kind admire their pewter and for one spoon give as much food as will serve a man a week but abdol tell of the other ship to come raise the price of pepper four ship be lade be send home and arrive at the tessel the nineteen of july 1599 speedy voyage to and fro the indies in 15. m. Tuban the other resolve for the Moluccas and Neccius be return Warwick be their admiral these set sail from Bantam the eight of januarie on the one and twenty they come to Tuban a town of java the king thereof potent and pompous the people delight in ride their silken saddle portray with devil they use exercise and game on horsbacke here have get provision on the eight and twenty they come to Madura a island lie northward from java fertile of rice the people live in great part on robbery here they divide their fleet two ship the Gelderland and Zealand for jortam in Madura the vtricke and Amsterdam to Arosbay a town on the west of Madura where they have no soon land their man to seek provision but they be take spoil and captive by the inhabitant and after they three other send to see what be become of their fellow they demand for their liberty two great piece one thousand rial and other commodity but the admiral have call the rest from jortam put on land one hundred and fifty man to recover they by force on the five of February and see many in arm two portugal be their captain treachery while they be in fight a storm arise which make the hollander mind their ship but two boat in their return be overturn with forty nine man of which twenty five drown and slay the rest be keep prisoner with their fellow in all one and fifty for which they pay in money and ware two thousand rial of eight on the seventeen they have sight of celebe on the nineteen of the i will Camboyna on the one and twenty of Cebesa betwixt which and botun lie shoald diverse land which they happy escape on the five and twenty byr on the six and twenty blau the first of march they see three land adjoin Atypoly Manyba and Gyta before Amboyna to which they come on the three in Amboyna be store of clove orange Limonds citron Sugarcanes the inhabitant simple and poor their weapon long pike hook which they dart very sure their coracoras or boats have some representation of a dragon of the head in the prow and the tail in the stern adorn with streamer here they agree for trade and a house but because here be not sufficient for all four ship therefore the Zealand and Gelderland be send to Banda on the fourteen they pass by polo Setto the Dutch first trade at Banda 1599 polo Setton a island not inhabit five league northwest from Banda whereof also they conceit I know not what devilish possession insomuch that their foolish indian pilot with a terrible ghastly countenance when they come against it thrust forth the boat-hooke with like gesture as they do in boat as if he will thrust the ship thence and be weary lay it by he with the hook forward seem to triumph of his devill-conquest when he be pass on the fifteen they come to Pooloway and have sight of poolaroone poolaway and anchor that night at Banda the Sabander come the next day to confer with the admiral and agreement of mutual trade be make betwixt they a house also take for that purpose on the three and twenty come the first merchandise from Ortattan on the four and twenty they begin to buy and sell on the five and twenty the vice-admiral go to the other side of Banda which be most frequent to hire a house there on the seven and twenty come good from on the four of April they have letter from the admiral at Amboyna that by reason of the inhabitant war with the portugal he have yet lade few ware all may they be busy in buy and sell on the five of june the man of labetacke about a hour journey distant from civil war among the bandanese but in heart unmeasurable different make a sally or skirmish in which some be slay on the seventeen the man of with those of Lantore and Pooloway go over to Wayre and kill many who head in disgrace of labetacke they fasten on their boat and at their return with their sword yet bloody make glorious muster of themselves four or five day together they bring some woman captive one of which they cut asunder yet do they after bury the head in cotton clothes the Zealand receive in her last lade on the nine and twenty of june and the Gelderland on the first of july on the second the vice-admiral entreat good usage to those he shall leave behind he in a house build by they and have give gift to the Sabander and the orancaye he take leave for the bandaneses acknowledge no king they be the word of Isacius Pontanus ^ib. 2. c. 25. of his history of Amsterdam see also 5. ind. orient which word be to be mark against whatsoever pretext of ternate or disability of surrender themselves they be rule by their own state or orankaye the inhabitant be Mahumetans and very devout that they begin nothing neither divine nor humane before they have pray in their manner they be a collectitious nation of many people compound the land be diverse Banda the chief in which be six or seven town continual disagree the chief be to which labetacke Comber and wayre be enemy Lantore on the other side of the island and the two land of Pooloway and poolaroone be friend to the cause of these jar and war be the cast down of certain tree many year since in the territory of by the man of labetacke whence they still kill one another like dog their banquet public meskit ceremony and football tennis I omit they be nimble and some very age unto one hundred and thirty year the work in dress their nutmeg mace and otherwise be the woman burden on the four of july they set sail from Banda and on the six and twenty come to jacatra on the eight of August to Bantam from whence they set sail on the nineteen and the twenty of April 1600. arrive in the tessel the two other ship Amsterdam and Vtricke after two month stay at Amboyna set sail thence the eight of May for the Moluccas and on the two and twenty cast anchor near ternate here they hold trade with the king leave and love till the nineteen of August and then leave some in factory they depart the nineteen of December they come to Bantam whence they set sail the one and twenty of januarie the sixteenth of February John Peter a Englishman their treasurer die John Peter a Englishman the thirty of May they have sight of the ascension from whence the next day they make haste homeward much press with defect of victual and safe arrive at Amsterdam many fleet send to the east indies out of Holland and Zealand but before the return of any of these ship in the year 1599 the dutch indian company set forth another fleet of three ship under the command of Stephen hagen the four of may. likewise the four ship of the former fleet which have make so speedy a voyage be send again forthwith under the command of james Williams and beside the former company a new company of Amsterdam and Brabant send forth a navy of four ship under Peter bot. these set sail from the tessel the one and twenty of December 1599 which return two year after rich lade also this last society prepare two other ship a. 1600. to which the former company add six other of five hundred ton the piece under the command of Neccius which make happy return mean while the zelander entertain the business and in the year 1601. thirteen ship depart from Amsterdam on the three and twenty of April under the command of james Heemskirck four and four under John Grenier and four under wolphard Harminius against these the Spaniard set forth a strong armada of thirteen sail which encounter eight ship of the dutch before the rest be come to they a fight follow wherein a small Hollander pinnace be so batter that they take out her ware and send she back see davis his first voyage pag. 117. this slaughter of Houtman some ascribe to the Portugal wile part oct. Ind or. how Houtman be slay at Achen be elsewhere deliver this king be by Portugal wile further instigate do give good entertainment notwithstanding this year 1601. to some Zealand ship under the command of Laurence bicker as also to George Spilberg he send his ambassador also to prince Maurice with bicker one of which die at Middleborough who epitaph in great letter have 71. m. D.CII h. m. p. c. company unite but when as it happen by the diversity of stock and company that great loss ensue to the adventurer it be by common consent conclude that all these several company shall be unite and by proclamation forbid to all but this society to adventure to the indies for one and twenty year space see Pontan pag. ^04 and that Amsterdam shall in the expedition of new fleet bear half the charge Middleborough a four part delfe Rotterdam Horn and enchusen each a sixteenth etc. present after this unite company make ready a fleet of fourteen ship according to these proportion under the command of * * other say wibrand warrick or else that which follow of Herman de bree be another Fleet. Stephen hagen the capital sum or common stock bring into the treasury exceed six million of florens the portugal which alone before enjoy the indian trade do much enrich the dutch by their opposition which while they seek to make prize of the hollander be often surprise the Portugal decay in those part unto this day Wolphard Harminius before name admiral of five ship in the straits of Sunda a a qu^re whether this name Sunda be not as sound in these part that be a straight be tell by a China junke that Bantam be besiege of a Portugal armada under the command of Andreas Fortado Mendoza b b of he see pag. 421. Portugal insolence a naughty christian be the worst man hollander rich and quiet trade at Banda consist of eight great ship and near twenty frigate seek to cause the bantamese to have nothing to do with the dutch. Wolphard take counsel and adventure on the portugal of who he take two frigate and three ship some he sink other they set fire on themselves the rest depart to Amboyna and there slay diverse of the inhabitant for hold trade with the dutch and as have a evil eye at nature good eye and angry with the very element cut down their Clove tree which the moor have no where do in their most despiteful opposition to the Portugal proceed in the east Wolphard after gratulation of the bantamese and some time there spend direct his course for Ternata and Banda and hear that the portugal be go to tydore where they have a fortress they divide their fleet two for Banda three for Ternata where they find Francis verdusi^s who the dutch have leave there in the great favour of the King and have well furnish their ship at Ternata they set sail for Banda to the rest of their fleet where Venius their factor be well and have provide store of mace and nutmeg so that they present send home three ship lade the other two stay there till clove be ripe HEemskirk with two ship take a Portugal carrack of Macao value at diverse million of florin she be of fourteen hundred ton have eight hundred man one hundred whereof be woman her lade silk sugar Cotton musk Tinti^ago her name saint Katherine which first hang forth a bloody banner but be shoot betwixt wind and water exchange it into a white seventy man be slay the rest according to composition set on shore he return 1604. SPilberg return the same year he have fight with three Portugal caravel at cape Verde Spilbergs go to Zeilan in Zeilan he receive of the king honourable entertainment with liberty of trade first with the king of Batecoli and after with the king of cande invite by he and accommodate with a elephant to carry he by the king of Batecoli meet by the king of cande his elephant a day journey on the way and a litter with costly furniture of arras and after that with more honourable accoultrement and attendance of the captain grace with banner and colour take from the portugal their profess enemy to the city for after the death of Darma king of Zeilan this Fimala of cande educate with the portugal in the fortress Columbo Columbo and baptize by the name of John de Austria by the help of his friend make himself king and expel the portugal there remain a daughter of the decease king baptize by the name Catharina who the portugal intend to make queen and to marry she to Peter Lopes governor of malacca and with a great army bring she to cande and make John de Austria hide himself in the wood John de Austria or Fimala how king of Candey or Candy who do beleaguer the way mean while that no provision may come to the city slay the portugal which come in his reach whereupon Lopes be constrain to take the field and try it by battle 1590. in which he be slay and Catharina then nine or ten year old be marry to Fimala who subvert the Portugal fort and every way fortify himself against they this king the next day after Spilbergs arrival send he horse to come to the court which go thither with some present prince Maurice his letter and picture and the portraiture of the battle at Newport the king question much of these part say he have think that there have be no white man but the portugal he feast he in a room furnish with arras hang chair a long table and other furniture like the portugal and as for league he say that he and the queen with his noble be ready to carry mortar on their shoulder and stone to erect a fortress in his kingdom where and whensoever the state and prince Maurice please Spilberg also to gratify the king take three Portugal ship not far off burn the vessel and give the captive to the King he give he two musician also because he see he therewith delight wherewith he be so please that he make one of they his secretary will needs learn the dutch language and have his kingdom call new Holland new Holland Spilberg bring thence first cinnamon and precious-stone among which a a kind of carbuncle so great as have not be here see weigh four hundred carat of this island and the veneration of their elephant by other of other part etc. see Linschoten this island from north to south be two hundred and fifty mile broad one hundred and forty fertile of fruit and odoriferous plant abundance of cinnamon gem both by sea and mine and elephant it be divide into seven kingdom one whereof be principal the chief city Columbo now whole possess by Fimala except the fortress of the portugal for the reader further delight and because I find little trade of our English on this island I have borrow hither hundius map of Zeilan CEILAN Neccius his voyage to China the dutch report of the english as here the portugal of they see the king of Ternatas letter to the the king and sir H middletons first voyage note that the hollander in reckon the king of Ternatas kingdom name not Banda which before their author testify a free state and to entertain civil war which one king may easy have pacify beside the king of Ternata offer his kingdom to the queen of England see sir fr. Drake Macao hollander lose there IAmes Neccius before mention set sail the eight and twenty of june 1601. in the end of march come to Bantam where he find Paulus carden he speak with the governor who will he to beware of the portugal tell that one have be with he from the king of Tuban Ragielella a Portugal bear to solicit for leave to assault the dutch in harbour for which purpose they have a fleet of forty sail at jacatra the second of April he depart from Bantam for the Moluccas here at Ternata he find aforesaid and Peter lindius the captain of a fleet which have pass the magellane straits which here at Ternata have bilge his ship on a rock but save her good by these Neccius hear of a sh^p of fleet at Tidore take by the portugal or betray rather and their captain treacherous slay with all his company except five they have also belabored the king of Ternata against the hollander say they be impious perfidious without God or goodness sodomite of who for their love to the king they give he fair warning promise also reward the hollander in revenge set upon the portugal at Tidore where Neccius be wound on his right hand eight or nine of his company lose and the dutch go by the worst retire some of his company he leave at Ternata and after festival entertainment for want of merchandise he be force to seek trade in China or elsewhere this king of Ternata be call lord of ternate Machian motir Amboni Gulolo etc. he style himself also king of celebe although he possess nothing there but some force place and in Mindanao and other land Neccius come to Coyo one of the in eleven degree tributary to the Spaniard where th^y have kind entertainment after that they come to Mendare not far from the bay of and eight day together be endanger among the rock the twenty of September they come to a land unknown and then be encounter with a terrible tempest this be one of the land before Canton when they think themselves twelve or fifteen league from Macao they proceed three or four league and see building at the foot of a hill and certain boat with one man and one woman beside child in each of they as if they have be so many family dwell therein they question with they for none will come aboard of Macao and they point to the mountain but they not think it so near set some ashore who when they can not see return at night they misdoubt and find too late that it be Macao and their man there detain see seven and thirty little island before they they send the master to see if he can find any sure harbour by sound who be also intercept with boat from the town together with his consort thus be twenty man lose among who the treasurer and the captain of the soldier which be also master they think to write but can get no carrier and stay two day at Sanchona without hope of effect any thing the three of October they depart and the next day be carry on the shelf of pulo Cynon and in danger to be carry upon cauchin China pulo Cynon after that endanger with tempest and the shelf and the swiftness of the current to the south they come to Quami where find nothing but wood desert and budal footing cauchin China they pass to Auarella Talca in eleven degree and thirty minute Auarella Falca here the general with twelve other go on shore come to a open field encompass with goodly tree where he find many buffal feed and store of bird but they can get none find then the tract of a cart they follow it to spacious wood and field footing of man and beast but no habitation which make they think that they live like the tartar they call the place Sotternym of a distraction which they get by eat a certain fruit Sotternim every man distract for a time with a madness answer his proper humour see angel devil serpent all thing and nothing the one and twenty of October they pass by polo condor polo condor Sangora trade at Patania the next day by Sangora and the seven of November arrive at Ba^ane where they have excellent entertainment procure trade and a house and by the queen favour leave there eight in factory thither also come Heemskirke who tell they of his take the Portugal Caricke and therein of a letter that don Paulo have hang fifteen of the hollander take at Macao the quester and master be send to Goa which act before they attribute to the Chinois dutch execucut^d now see it to be the portugal although as they think by help of the Chinois in Patania they use the malayan syan and China language patanian diversity of language and writing the malayan writing like the arabecke the syan like the europian and all most in latin character the chinese from the right hand but downward adultery be punish with death inflict by their parent in what kind themselves choose common woman be common offer to stranger to do household service by day and other office at night some of the Syanites wear two or three silver ball or of other mettle in their yard insert betwixt the skin and flesh as big sometime as a tennis ball the country be fruitful and wholesome ball in yard^ one cut out one out of his yard before cap. Saris and g^ue it he their goose and duck lay twice a day the wood be store with wild beast there be turtle with fair feather like parrot they take wild elephant in fight with a tame put into the wood of purpose while both be fasten by the tooth some man behind with rope captive the wild they arrive at the ramekin the fifteen of july 1604. in the year 1602. a fleet of fourteen sail be send out under the command of wibrand Warwick admiral and Sebalt de wert vide-admiral the Maurice of four hundred ton Herman werts voyage to Ze^lan the holland three hundred and fifty the nassau three hundred and forty the sun two hundre^h and eighty the moon two hundred and fifty the star one hundred and eighty the parrot a pinnace of five and twenty all by Amsterdam three Zelanders one of four hundred the flush two hundred and fifty the goose one hundred and forty by the e^chuseners two the hedge two hundred and twenty the virgin one hundred seventy and five by the roterdamians two the Erasmus two hundred and fifty and Rotterdam eighty it be determine that the three zelander shall go for Zeilon and Achen the Maurice and moon to the Moluccas the nassau and Erasmus to China the holland hedge and star to Achen the sun virgin etc. to Bantam in the hedge Herman de bree be cape merchant these all but the three zelander which go three month before set out from the tessel the seventeen of june 1602. the ten of march they come to Achen there they find the three zelander and Spilbergs two ship Sebalt de wert the vide-admiral the eight and twenty of November 1603. come to Zeilon and go with six elephant forty league journey to cande or Candy and have be honourable entertain with his fifteen follower he be bring into the city as if he have be a king the citizen and soldier make a rank hal^e a * * dutch. mile long on both side the way and such a thunder of ordnance and sound of trumpet that none can be hear speak to the court he be have with like pomp where he see the royal counsel and prince Maurice his picture with a stately carpet before it to receive his present the king stand in a place by himself with his child before who he fall on his knee and be take up present and demand what countryman he be and wherefore he come who answer of Holland govern by that prince there portray whereat they all rejoice have place it there to try whether he know it and the truth of Spilbergs relation he add that he come for trade of merchandise the king protest much his hatred to the Portugal and after ask how he dare without pledge or any assurance adventure so far into that country he answer because the portugal be hate alike of both their prince whereat they laugh in more private conference promise ^o the hollander he promise with twenty thousand man to besiege the Portugal castle Columbo if the hollander will prevent help from Goa and will give the hollander all their castle which he shall take and will reserve his merchandize for they the next day he feast he give he before a golden toothpick now a bowl of gold wherein he make his little daughter to drink to he and if his son be old enough say he will send he to prince Maurice to be instruct in martial discipline at his departure he give he twenty five quintal of cinnamon and sixteen of pepper and honourable convoy to his ship he notify these thing to his fellow at Achen and counsel they to embrace these opportune promise for they can not easy be provide of merchandise they have hear of two french ship one shipwreck at the the other return with a small victory as also the state of the english there which have take two french ship sir james Lancaster a prize and build a store-house at Achen thus six ship with a pinnace set forth the three of April not a little hearten by the old and young king of Achen who send a ambassador with they to Zeilon they lose many in the calm betwixt the sixteenth and one and twenty of April on the four and twenty they arrive Motecalo and march in battle array on the six and twenty to Motecalo the king there entertain they well but their religion prohibit to eat beef and buffal whereof they have great plenty they will not sell any to the hollander they be disquiet with fly also and gnat which will not suffer they to sleep against which the native make fire and smoke all the night the place where they sleep the sacrilegious murder of beef some unruly person cause great disturbance by kill of certain kine and can not appease they with offer satisfaction and seek to make the king intercessor for they to the owner he also take it to heart and say the portugal have never offer such indignity neither can he any long tolerate such wrong some forsooth imagine that the soul of the ox have themselves any thus slay be precipitate to hell yet at last upon promise of better bear he be entreat punto de gallo the thirteen of May they have answer of their letter to the king of Candy now encamp at desire the hollander to come with their ship to punto gallo promise to besiege it first and to give the hollander that which he have promise and one thousand quintal of cinnamon Vintane and as much pepper for tribute that be win he desire also the vide-admiral to meet he at Vintane half way betwixt Matecalo and Candy mean while the hollander take three Portugal ship seb. wert and 49. hollander slay they write that the king suspect he of treason as intend to take and ship he some impute it to the delivery of the port p^i^oners some too peremptory word use to the King two of two hundred ton the three of seventy and after that a four of eighty but the good not worth the while except to gratify the king of Candy two of they they send away with the prisoner according to promise which be very distasteful to the King the first of june two hundred choice man be set on shore to meet the king in best array but he desire the vide-admiral to stay with he and send his man aboard to come in like manner the next day thus they which make speed save their life the rest doubt no evil be most of they slay the next day they understand by a letter from the king of the death of the vide-admiral with his retinue pretend his insolence and offer good term or war as they please the sixteenth they have letter again by a germane of Candy from the king swear all kindness before promise if they will help he take gallo and Columbo to which they answer they be ready to trade at shore but for the fortress their ship be some go and they unfit at present for that which may in fit time be do many message pass betwixt they but little trust or trade the nine and twenty of july they depart these zeilonians worship Pagodes Adam of which the hollander see some in Candy of five or six fathom represent Adam as the inhabitant affirm proportion by artificial symmetry to the foot-print of Adam in a mountain near the king of Panane Matecalo and poligamme acknowledge the king of Candy their superior who be thus report to have attain * * see before Spilbergs voyage the sceptre a certain king of sitabague fifteen league from Candy about thirty year before have take Candy the king whereof with this his son and daughter flee to the portugal who at Goa baptize he by the name of John of Austria as be beforesaid and bring he up in Columbo but Candy rebel against the other king the portugal send he after that king death to Candy where he be acknowledge king and then follow that which before you have of the king daughter of sitebague to return to the dutch they return to Achen and thence again to the i will of daru near sumatra daru and thence after diverse Portugal prize take to Maccasser they learn of a island call end famous with a Vulcano or burn hill call Gun^api Macesser at last they not know whether to go come to jor where they help the king against the Portugal Fleet. thence they go to Patane whether they come the first of November end 1603. here they hear of the Erasmus and Nass^n there take a rich ship sail to japan near to Macao after they have pillage she they burn she after trade here they return to Bantam and home voyage Pan or Pahan COrnelius in another ship of that fleet say they come the twenty one of june to pulo Timon on the three and twenty to Pahan where the king receive they kind on the first of july to and agree with a chinese to conduct they to Canton than set sail on the eleven and find no matter of great note till the thirty when they come to Macao Patane or Patania and take a Portugal ship find for japan the portugal flee and leave they their ship with the good and twenty black these they set on shore and have light the ship on the ten of August fire it and set sail for Bantam on the eighteen of September they encounter a great juncke which they suppose to be portugal and after a hot fight force she find they Chineses and be sorry that they have ignorant hurt their friend great China juncke seventy of which perish one the captain who valour lose himself and they they let they depart with their good in friendship the sixteenth of December they arrive at Bantam and the thirty of August 1604. at the tessel in the year 1603. twelve ship be send under the command of Stephen Verhagen Verhagen^ voyage they set sail the eighteen of December on the seven and twenty of june they come to Mosambique and anchor without the castle in sight and spite whereof they take a Portugal ship in the harbour and after that diverse other vessel but not able to do any thing memorable against the island on the five and twenty of August they depart and the sixteenth of September come before Goa Goa but find the portugal so provide that they imagine themselves before betray and their design bewray in Europe on the fourteen of October they therefore depart for Cananor whither they come on the six and twenty but by intercession of the king they remove to Calcutta Cananor Calcutta where they take a Portugal ship with powder and provision find for Zeilan the three of November they have fight with nine Portugal ship in which many be slay none take the eight of November they enter league with the Samorine ratify by oath and instrument in writing it be order that the Zealand and Enchusen shall go for Cambaya the rest to cochin Cambaya cochin before which they come on the fourteen but attempt nothing on the two and twenty they sail before Columbo and shoot at the castle the second of january they come to Bantam the delffe stay at Achen to return their ambassador on the seventeen they depart for the Moluccas the one and twenty of February they come to Amboyna and assail the castle Amboyna castle take see sir h. mid. of this who they slander for assist the port. castle of Tidore win and the portugal drive out of the Moluccas see the late state in capt. Saris l. 4. c. 1. and Spilberg p 87. which without further ado be deliver on composition of free passage for such portugal as will and such as will to stay the castle and ordnance leave to the hollander which present receive the dutch colour forty six marry Portugal stay and swear allegiance to the state six hundred other depart five ship be thence send to Tidore the horn remain here and the admiral go to Banda those five arrive at Tidore on the second of May 1605. on the five the vice-admiral summon the castle to yield which the portugal refuse and manful defend their honour against the assailant till a unfortunate fire how or whence uncertain light in their powder blow up a great part of their castle wi^h sixty or seventy of their man this force they to yield and consequent they be dispossess of all the M^luccas except the king of Ternata with fourteen Corocoras contain each one hundred and forty soldier aid the hollander and hel^ fast the king of Tydore both prove spectator of the european prize they raze the castle this year 1605. the king of Spain have make a terrible edict against the hollander forbid tr^de with they under grievous penalty but prohibition without inhibition be vain and the fox the more he be curse thrive the better for in the same year they send forth Cornelius with twelve ship four of which be seven hundred ton each the next year Paulus Caerden be set forth with eight other in May 1606. 1607. the peace or trace be in treaty they set forth another fleet of thirteen sail under Peter williamson verhuef 1608. three ship return lade with spice three hundred ton of clove one hundred of nutmeg fifty of mace etc. have in charge to enter league with the indian king against the portugal mateliff expedition in the end of April 1606. send to the king of jortan * * jor. malacca besiege to aid he who come with two thousand black and on the ten of May they both go on shore against malacca and possess the suburb but continue their siege to little purpose and hear of the Portugal fleet come they arise and on the seventeen of August set sa^le to encounter the armada consist of fourteen great ship and as many small a terrible sea-fight follow in which the hollander be force to forsake the mauritius one of their best ship sea fight and Mateliff himself be in great distress by three Portugal ship together with the Middleborough till other come into his help with fiery shot he free himself but the Middleborough with two Portugal ship fasten to it be burn together the man save themselves in the boat as well as they can of other ship the hollander divert to their confederate king see of this fight pag. 421. the portugal go to malacca where have leave seven of their ship the rest return the dutch have now repair themselves take this opportunity and make a unexpected return take one of the Portugal ship slay the man fire the vessel two other fight with the dutch vice-admiral tell both on fire and be consume in both element anger a four also yield the rest be fire by the portugal at malacca be before disfurnish lest they shall fall into the enemy power dutch woman and family send ja^an the dutch also enterprise a n^w trade at the (@) of go^d ho^e for t^ayne oil and scale skin and ox hide o^ which Isaac le more bring home at once 45000. seal skin and 500 803. shed of train etc. sup. p. 385. see Floris 321. and 324. kee^ing Middleton etc Peter W^lliamson verhu^f or verh^ef or half mosambike take and the castle besiege jesus take I omit admiral Peter both send with a notable fleet 1609. with garrison soldier with woman also and family send to inhabit and a ship that return from japan 1610. where she have the emperor license of trade and have leave a factory and another ship send thither 1611. and the forty ton of gold which that japan ship and another be say to have bring back I have do sufficient in this treasury of navigation to show the beginning as of the spanish and Portugal before so here also of the dutch plantation in the indies and in the course of our english voyage we have many of they interlard thus many river bring we into a immense sea of their present trade but because Banda be the baneful and ban occasion of this digression you may see in diverse of we also relation of the dutch do and suffering there as 1606. some of their man slay while they seek trade and of the quarrel betwixt the islander and they continue long after and I have think good brief to add the history of their forcible possession thereof by verhuef out of their own relation verhuef with a navy of nine ship and four Pinnasses the three and twenty of December 1607. set sail from the tessel the thirteen of july 1608. they see the land of Sofala on the eight and twenty they come to Mazambique where they take a ship under the castle most of the portugal have run away very rich but casual or by the portugal set on fire the next night whereby great part of the good be lose they take also two Pinnasses a thousand man they set on shore in six band command by captain bitter on the nine and twenty but find none in the town but five or six portugal and a few old folk child and black slave three hundred with fifty turk who they set at liberty and set on shore in safe place the town they find great with convenient house wall two church and monastery the merchant have convey themselves into the castle but leave much good behind to the dutch prey the first of August they begin to batter the castle on the ten they go into the continent and destroy two village but the Monlon be near they raise their siege the eighteen forty of they be slay and a hundred wound and have burn a town and monastery in a adjoin island they depart they take a Portugal ship call the jesus on the one and twenty whereby they understand that nine galleon and five other great ship have be send from Lisbon towards the east indies of which company this ship be separate from her consort by foul weather they fight with the dutch nine hour who find in she remain one hundred and forty soldier of one hundred and ninety Goa coromandel on the eighteen of September they anchor before Goa on the six and twenty they send the Arnold to coromandel where they have great trade the five of October they sail along the malabar coast to refresh themselves near Cananor and on the eight towards Calicut on the eleven the admiral with two hundred man visit the Samorine who on the thirteen and fourteen send out hunter which kill above forty great boar and give to the hollander Samorine he deliver to the Samorine the captain and cape merchant of the jesus the ship they have before sink on the sixteenth he set sail on the two and twenty come before Zeilon malacco the two and twenty of November they come before malacca where they take a Portugal ship and fire it the good be by the inhabitant before carry away on the four and twenty they send to the king of jor to acquaint he with their purpose to besiege and take the town and castle of malacca on the six and twenty they set man on shore in the little island of saint Peter where the next day the portugal set on they and lose their admiral with three captain and six prime officer beside many of the mean of the hollander seven be slay and three take on the eight and twenty fifteen frigate of black pirate adjoin themselves to the hollander but the king of jor can afford no help his fleet be then abroad some vessel be take and their three man recover by exchange of prisoner they depart on the nine and twenty Ratispont king of jor describe the ten of january they go to jor and the king with his son and brother with twelve frigate come to the fleet on the fourteen his name be Ratispont he have on a white Cotton waistcoat to his knee with a fringe hang to the foot silken sandal a black Shash on his head three gold chain about his neck with many jewel annex two thick gold ring on his left arm and one on his right six on his finger a crisse very artificial in sheath of solid gold set with many diamond saphire carbuncle value at fifty thousand florin of mean stature comely shape moderate speech whitish complexion have with he thirty wife his frigate adorn gallant with a tent bear up with four golden pillar his seat be in new jor. t^e fourteen of February they come to Bantam on the second of April 1609. they come to teralta twenty four league from which be a rock burn in the sea half a hour iourn^y in circuit with a huge open in the top always smoke on the eight arrive at Banda there he find captain keeling in trade for the english company with other dutch ship for they the english have begin and continue trade ever since the beginning in manner of that society captain colthurst who go with sir Henry Middleton in the second voyage have spend one and twenty week in trade at Banda the dutch ship belong to the fleet of Paul Vande Caeraen these land of Banda say the author of this journal and one of the chief commander be seven in number about ten league in circuit see l. 2 c. 5. and ^ see ind. orient ^ar pag. 216. eighty league from the burn rock the best land in all the east produce mace and nutmeg to serve the whole World the people in they be suppose ten or twelve thousand say Pontanus in his history of Amsterdam Banda be a free commonwealth as before they acknowledge no king or in dutch English they be free state and for the king of Ternata Isacius sleight it off as a trifle some seem of some challenge of some part that be some nothing thus the story of Amsterdam write and print of and at Amsterdam purposely handle these indian affair neither do verhuef now challenge that or any right or have any of their journal which I have see publish so much as mention any such challenge or break title on that king part or such acknowledgement on they that any shall now become redemptor or incur a writ of champerty in his behalf which yet the english may best do as appear in sir Francis drake voyage their cruel war which the hollander find betwixt they at their first come before mention show that no superior interpose as be just cause to command better bear verhuef on the nine as keeling have it or after their story which I follow all these relation of the dutch and after their new style nineteen go on shore at Ortattan where the Orankayas or the state and governor assemble here he cause prince Maurice his letter to be carry before he in a silver di^h cover and be meet by a Ora^kaya and convey under a great tree where be two hundred of ^he chief sit crosslegged like tayl^rs after their manner and he convenient set and his letter read in Portugal first and after in Malayan the content whereof be that prince Maurice understand that the islander have not keep promise with the hollander to have trade only with they see of this letter pag. 199. here mark no right of the hollander or Ternata pretend see al^o the du^ch allegation to Keel^ng 202 and 203. the hollander what they can get by entreaty se^ke to win by force who have now trade there six year and be at great charge and be often much abuse do therefore desire they to permit the hollander to build some castle in some of those land in place most fit for they not thereby to endamage any way the inhabitant but to defend themselves and the whole country from portugal which happy may come thither the hollander be to satisfy they for the place and for stone and all appurtenance to the structure and no way to be troublesome to the inhabitant these letter be read the people be in a uproar and but for fear of their ship will have slay the hollander as after appear but consult among themselves in present answer that he shall depart aboard his ship and they will communicate the business with the rest of the land and in three day give he a answer which be give on the two and twenty and prove a flat negative whereupon the hollander provide themselves for fight and some go on shore and fight with they the same evening one ship also and two Pinnasses they send to that the ship company may forage that island at pleasure on the four and twenty the islander come to the admiral and desire three day respite which the hollander deny but say they will next day try by force their fortune with they which answer receive they soon return with answer that the islander think better to abstain from batteil and to permit they to build a castle on on the five and twenty six company of hollander each one hundred and fifty go to and find the inhabitant of it and flee to the other side of the island wher^fore they keep good watch the three of May be a great earthquake not unusual in those part and the four they begin their castle in or nero. on the one and twenty the islander s^nt to the admiral desire he to appoint a place where they may meet and confer the next day he go with one hundred and fifty soldier to a place near half a hour way distant from the new found castle and the fiscal go to the islander to bid they send some with full power to treat they send to desire the admiral that he will meet their Orankayas or state-governour in a grove for some of they fear his force there where he be lest the soldier shall offer they violence the admiral hereupon with his military council two gunner and two boy go among they command the soldier to look to their arm and expect his return but they within a quarter of a hour hear a great cry * * the bandaneses still ^biect (@) business in cry at his de^th which th^y think more childish th^n manly and brave in the wood and two piece discharge send Verciu^ to see what be the matter with six musketeer who have scarce go thirty pace into the wood before they be encounter by a great company of black at who they discharge their piece verhuef he dutch a^miral with many other treacherous slay nassau castle in S^ ple^n ^nd orient the other soldier come in and rescue they put the black to flight and in the chase find the admiral and his company slay who they bring on their shoulder to their new found castle of the hollander be that day slay in all forty two person on the three and twenty they slay the dutch fiscal with diverse other on the thirty the hollander with two company spoil all they can in the island on the twelve of june the dutch kill fifty black in a junke on the thirteen the castle be well-nigh finish be name nassau of james bitter the captain on the three and twenty of july the hollander attempt Slanga a town of the black but return with the loss of thirty and one hundred hurt bitter himself have his leg break whereof he after die on the fourteen of August the islander send to treat of a peace say that though they have offend the hollander in kill the admiral and chief man yet they also shall remember what harm they have do to the islander in subvert their city * * mark the usage allege by our man against their sepulcher and meskit and temple fire their village and fort with great slaughter every where the hollander answer that they will grant peace on condition they will swear that they will thereafter have trade with none other nation * * there be no europian nation then in trad^ with th^m but the english that it wa^ don^ purposely against they but see kee^ings story then here and d. Middleton after in the three book before with Floris and other relation whence this business appear whatsoever it be but sell all their nut and mace to the hollander only who on the other side promise to defend they from their enemy and to provide they of Rice and necessary for food with a reasonable price for their ware on these condition peace be conclude and by oath on the Koran confirm the fifteen of August how brittle this force peace be appear before by the journal of captain keeling then there and David Middleton soon after and by the dutch own story which complain of their trade with captain Middleton their conspiracy also against the hollander the hollander sack of Comber the black kill diverse hollander in a wood of a kind of siege of their castle bloody fight the castle almost famish all in the same year that this peace be conclude so little force be make of force when any evasion appear especial when Mercury be turn to Mars and man beg trade will force fort upon free state and governor no marvel if hereupon they find the hollander perpetual work as you have before read in Floris and at last send and obtain trade with the english ratify the same by resignation of so many land to his majesty which sovereignty the dutch story by i trace and faithful follow in the former relation do no so much as mention by they seek in article of treaty or to they by the islander offer hence the war betwixt the english and dutch and the hateful disaster before recite the hollander make a bridge of english ship to get over english body and blood to these land even without denutiation of war fore hear of have now gather this out of the dutch own history and journal I presume not to dispute for even they themselves and these their historian be judge who see not the state of the case but I have think good to add for further illustration this relation of their gain by that trade as one of that society have late publish after which I will give you the testimony of the priest of poolaroone a man there of great esteem touch the Banda case a discourse of my own add for illustration and that man may not misconstrue these thing to the distaste of the hollander in general but rather of some of their major or commander and committee there which you may understand also in like difference with the portugal I have add to end this business a extract of a little book translate out of dutch which as he speak mean of their gain by this trade so he impute the fault to the ill government and governor the gain which the hollander have get by the east India trade take out of a book translate out of the dutch persuade to a west Indie trade now to let you see how much we shall be hinder if we shall leave off the east indian trade and the like hindrance we shall consequent also fail of touch the power and strength of these country in the record of the east indian company it appear that from 1595. to 1601. include they send out forty and six ship whereof there arrive three and forty again in these country rich lade ship that bring for return all charge deduct two hundred and thirty ton of gold clear gain for the merchant of the say company further by the record and book of the say east Indian company it be also show that for the space of eleven year we have still about thirty ship continual in east India with five thousand seafaring man and that they expect to receive from thence at least three hundred tun of gold in capital beside that which they have in the land now I refer it to your judgement what the say company in the last ensue ten year until this time have gain who within the time of six month have have a good return of forty tun of gold I doubt not but you have hear of the rich lade that the two ship bring hither within the space of a month be value to be worth four and twenty tun of gold in such manner that the particular partner from 1605. every man full adventure be deliver in have gain upon every hundred gilder unto this day in ready money the sum of two hundred gilder and whensoever any man will sell his stock which at this time he have in the company which he may do when he will he may for every hundred have two hundred and thirty gilder whereunto add the interest which the partner from the first money receive to this present have gain which also be half a capital there rest to the partner particular upon every hundred if they have venture and trade sixteen year in the east indian company in clear gain above four hundred gilder I speak not this by report but as a witness thereof be one of the partner that have receive my part of the gain and may have the rest within eight day if I will sell my stock which I may at all time do second we may by the trade use by the say company until the year 1614 include declare and prove that the custom house of the country by mean of c^nuoyes licence toll and custom which the say east Indian company have and pay inward and outward have profit and receive above five and thirty ton of gold for the which the state of the land have at some time as need require aid the say company towards their war in India with money and ship partly to ease the say company of some portion of their charge now what they have receive in the custome-house of the country from 1614 to 1621. without doubt it be a great sum and much more than the former note what a rich return they have make within these seven year now to show what furtherance and benefit the common people have have and get by this east indian trade we must note that a fleet of twelve ship do cost in money and all other thing thereunto belong about eighteen ton of gold to set and send it forth and common there be not above five or six ton of gold in ready money send out with it all the rest be buy and prepare here in the land to the great benefit and welfare of the country and gain by the inhabitant that sell and deliver the same and every ship that come home again one with another pay above a tun of gold for monthly wage whereby the officer and sailor also be enrich which also be get and spend by and among the inhabitant whereby it be manifest what the common people have profit beside the great number of so many thousand people that by mean of this trade aforesaid be set on work and well pay for it to the great comfort and benefit of many poor people three to show what the public commonwealth have yet further get by this trade you must understand that the great profit of the land consist in the most great hurt and damage which the enemy have first and last endure and yet endure in east India for since that we be prohibit to trade and traffic in Spain and other of the spanish territory which notwithstanding against his will by other nation we do continue with good profit from 1596 we have overcome and spoil eleven of his great huge carracke galley and other great ship and have make about forty of his ship unserviceable beside those that in the last ten year ensue we have spoil and take whereby our enemy trade there have be great impair and we by God blessing who only be to be praise therefore to the admiration of the whole world be great increase in such manner that the staple of all manner of spice and other rich and costly ware which for the space of two hundred year together be in Venice whereby the say town increase and become exceed rich and after that by mean of their navigation be in Portugal for the space of one hundred year and last for five and twenty year have be in Holland and Zealand and since that by a good agreement make the last year be also bring into England in such sort that the king of Spain merchant he reckon the king loss yearly above one hundred ton of gold beside what the portugal lose be force in the year aforesaid contrary to all man expectation to buy nutmeg clove and mace of we I will brief declare the present state of the say company in east India you must understand that matter of traffic be in very good term which we hope by God help and blessing shall from year to year still be better and better now the englishman by mean of a contract make with they a year since join their force with we and we for our part have in east India that be come home and here in the country above fifty ship double furnish with lusty sailor as also all other thing fit for the war and for so long a voyage and about ten strong fort whereof some we h^ue take from the enemy the rest have be erect at the great cost and charge of the company and make defensible which for the security of our own people and good as also for the defence of our confederate be sufficient provide last when they of Bantam begin to lay a extraordinary toll upon our nation and cause we to pay fifty custom and yet we can not for all that obtain licence of they to build a Warehouse of stone and mortar for the security of our ware and merchandize for that be of wood it be twice burn we be constrain to transport our trade in Bantam to another convenient place which be a firm island and have many good and convenient haven in it for in my writing I find that five year past Mataram the great emperor of java who be able to bring three hundred thousand man into the field dwell about one hundred mile distant from Bantam have also seek to make some contract of alliance with we offer to deliver we pepper toll free and licence to to build we a castle of mortar and stone with all thing convenient in japara which be not well like off by the king of Bantam and his lieutenant at last our nation build a convenient town about jacatra reasonable well fortify and call it batavia where there be about one thousand house of all nation there to traffic and deal in merchandise which be defend and govern by a governor Scout and other officer for the maintenance of good government and policy and to administer justice unto every one and to the end that before all other thing God service and honour may be maintain whereby the blind heathen may be bring out of their great darkness and young child teach the knowledge of the truth of jesus Christ our saviour the company diligent and careful take order to erect a church and a school therein to the which end they send thither certain learned man as at the first also they do which with great benefit and increase have teach the heathen the gospel of Christ in their own language as well as unto our man in their language in such manner that a king and a prince of Amboyna where the country people be much addict unto devilish and heathenish superstition send two of their son into these country with a letter the prince of Orange to have they bring up at school and teach our language and christian religion that they may at their return into east India be a mean of plant the church of Christ there in India and learn how to defend their own native country the relation of the priest of poolaroone touch the beginning and occasion of quarrel betwixt the dutch and Bandaneses write in the malayan language with his own hand in a very fair Arabecke letter and the sense render to i in english by m. rob. Haies this be the begin of contention betwixt the hollander and the bandanese two hollander run from they and turn slamme or Mahumetans and in the priest house at Nero be slay by three hollander which in revenge be slay by the native who stay not there but in the fury slay other three hollander this be ill do of they to add a double revenge soon after the general of the hollander come thither with thirteen ship and demand satisfaction for the slaughter of his countryman the bandaneses offer diet that be the wont satisfaction there use for manslaughter in money for those last three but the general answer that he come not now to demand satisfaction but to make peace and league with they which be do the next year come another Holland general Peter williamson verhuef with fifteen ship into the haven of Nero and ask leave to set up a fort at taniung Ratoo or Ratoo which the bandaneses grant but then he refuse it and demand leave to erect a fort in another place at taniung Minangis which they refuse but he come before the castle of Nero with his ship and ordnance terrify the inhabitant which flee away and he possess the castle and fortify there then do the bandaneses subtle dissemble friendship and show the general and fifteen captain with other about one hundred man in all a discourse of those war and the effect with their cause brief present in a short summary hence the war betwixt the dutch and Bandaneses and hence the war so portentous in the midst of peace not betwixt the two nation their prince and state which hold confederacy and amity but betwixt our merchant and they our mariner and they our sea-commander and they the two indian company in those part the guilty of they as it be grow fierce with infection of those fierce nation change their condition more than their complexion travel from themselves in so far navigation put off with their warm clothes in that hot climate their solid virtue put on heathenish quality with their commerce put up fiery freity with their hot spice put out in great part humanity civility Christianity in those various current and diversify sea shoalds land and who can but be amuse and amaze with wonder at such prodigious transformation that so near neighbour in region part with a narrow channel near yet in long society of arm seal with so many life and death against one enemy and near than all name of nearness in the near dear and sweet of name religion both profess in substance one reformation that this threefold cord have be so easy break their reformation in religion become a deformation of religion among unbelieve ethnik and misbelieve papist there follow the same arm by sea and land become a train to great harm to each other by sea and land that propinquity of dwell shall make remoteness of neighbourhood and what neither Portugal policy nor infidel treachery can do themselves may do to their own undo with their own hand and the heart of both nation at home may be in danger of dis-joining by the dis-jointed part and faction abroad the spark of that fire of hell seem to break out at Goun Apee with that terrible earthquake before mention see fitzherberts relation unto a more terrible heart-quake there to set that world on fire and here to endanger this sphere have be hereby turn to spear ware with addition of a canine letter to war word with a new hiss sound from that old serpent into sword ship charge of so many ton in freight to discharge of so many gun in fight merchant to martialist exchange their gayn-good or gayn-god Mercury for those payn-god or devil Mars and or that wont function which poetical divinity ascribe to Mercury of patronise merchandise for that other of conduct soul to Hell Hercules have bring up Cerberus that hell-monster and set he unchain on the indian shore with the three infernal fury crown his triple head and hence have we have this hell upon earth such be war and especial when the son of peace make war when unchristian christian war together gen. 6. when the son of God see these fair daughter of man the riches of infidel and take they wife where they lust will not woo with traffic but ravish by force gen. 6. nor make their voyage but a conquest be it any marvel if the issue prove giant and the earth be fill with violence even the poet also fable their giant to be Neptune son hence be commerce divine and human impair peace blow up charity blow out right of neighbourhood and rite of hospitality exile merchandise in unlawful copulation with Mars procreate I know not how many bastard such be usurpation oppression insultation jealousy treachery invasion lie force fraud and the rest of that restless black guard hateful to God and man which here I have historical express not delight in tragedy but it will be delightful to some to have escape such disaster as have swallow so many other and profitable to posterity to prevent like mischief in the like beginning the beginning of this quarrel be first a strangeness whereof Syverson a dutch captain be charge to be the author who uncivil condition infect the rest see Scot sup. pag. 180. and seqq. and make they withdraw their familiarity with our nation which before they have kind use when this sun of charity shine in love society be set in this cloud of strangeness stormy weather follow and darkness Psal. 104.20 and it be night wherein all the beast of the forest creep forth the young lion roar after their prey the ghastly ghost walk abroad in the dark eph. 6.12 1. th. 5.5 and the ruler of the darkness of this world among the child of night and of darkness domineer at pleasure this strangeness as the darkness of hell open a passage to those hellish fire follow and be the womb of those hellbred monster as privation be a preparation to habit and corruption to generation which be indeed many but their three captain be drunkenness covetousness and pride this that threefold head of Cerberus and triple crown of fury before mention in the first Bacchus make a new expedition into the indies with a band of rack Rackapee and other hot drink display the colour of the flesh oppugn the spirit of GOD and expugn the reason of man whence so many fray brawl scott sup etc. and sometime blow and wound this wildfire or graecus burn most in moisture while man play the greek after this vanguard of Bacchus and the flesh follow the main battle lead by the world arrange under the colour indeed of covetousness which find some sweet of gain with a evil eye grudge at any partner cohibit they by undermine wile lie pretence prohibit by open proclamation inhibit by confiscation and surprisal attend with chain fetter prison torture famine and manifold death GOD help the man that come under the power of covetousness a over-drie ever-thirstie fire of hell kindle from thence and burn thither still flame on the altar and before the idol of the golden calf and kindle there that be in the covetous man heart such zeal of that devotion that he know not hate persecute the gordian knot whatsoever stand in his way and if he be able answer all objection with Ius in like another Alexander chap that knot insunder by force which neither wit learning nor religion can untie after these battalion of the flesh and the world the devil follow in the rear though as general of the field he general infuse himself his standard be advance by pride which have cast angel out of heaven and man out of paradise will dispossess mankind of humanity christian of society the just merchant of his trade and the world of Iustice hence inordinate confusion and the confuse confound order of contention only by pride do man make contention combustion supplant neglect contempt scorn indignation vexation persecution exultation insultation insolence cruelty pro. 13.10 hell he that put off himself in drunkenness and put on the world in covetousness shall lose both and find the devil ready blow these spark of hell with the bellows of pride the division of Reuben be great thought of heart till both he and they be encompass with the unquenchable flame of Hell drunkenness begin with Bantam fray jud. 5.15 search the author in the former story covetousness proceed with prohibition of profitable trade wheresoever it can hinder and with the help of pride rape sovereignty and reap a enforce jurisdiction violent exercise the same against all gainsayer this as in other place so principal in Banda there the stage of this tragedy and out of that burn hill this burn hell of diabolical fire first as be say seem to break forth the parcel sum and a true account give of the Banda case and cause of the war we and they the first original beginning with apostasy as you have hear in some dutch fugitive which perhaps to escape deserve nishment deny that which they never have Faith second other in unjust justice punish the same with murder express piety with oppress impiety blind zeal be a hell fire indeed a burn fire without any shine light three the bandaneses in their suppose sanctity of religion profane and sanctuary of their priest house violate see no mean in revenge and repent at leisure what be do in hasty fury four this be somewhat compose and peace make when revenge be asleep covetousness awake and in cold blood by force which entreaty can not procure erect a fort that be a prison to the liberty a storehouse for the wealth and a gibbet for the neck of the inhabitant that I omit the suppose sacrilege and wrong to their meskit and sepulcher in the five place they unable to revenge by force borrow help of treacherous fraud and kill verhuef and the dutch. this be pursue by war be solder a little while by peace but for aught be extant never keep on either side and the dutch continue master in their hold the native elsewhere which yet prove burdensome to they as the dutch know other nation have do they seek protection of the english and upon composition surrender themselves to his majesty the english name before distaste be now detest and contemn of the dutch who before have grow strange and with who brall and faction have not be strange towards we with hindrance of trade and the like they seize our ship good man and use they as you have hear after which the english pretend by just force to recover what by unjust force they have lose and sir Thomas dale long after * * they take the swan and the defence 1616. the Solomon and attendance in march 1618. the Speedwell etc. where as sir Thomas Dales first fight and take the lion of they be in Decem. 1618. with captain bring and other seek by offence to defend wherein their prowess at first succeed but their misfortune after exceed in the casual burn of the black lion and in the death soon after of a more heroic lion sir thomas dale who valour have shine in the western be set in the eastern India so far as death can be a solstice to honour who loss the loss of the sun at Engano seem to presage after which follow the surprisal of four ship at tecoo two at Patania another in the straits may some say for man of war so prepare to take their opportunity of disperse busy unprovided merchant I will I can not add except in another sense but the company of both nation and their wise governor at home come to a composition and agree on article of peace which be on both side there already weary receive with joy and publish with approbation all this notwithstanding in the midst of this calm and fair weather there arise a new storm at Banda which as a beautiful and rich bride be envy to english arm and seem by the cry on both side to have be late ravish from her new husband unwarn unarmed I know not whither by great force or fraud or whither may cause great indignation the seize on the english fellow and friend the bandanese with their own good and body also cast down their colour and ordnance * * the sun admiral of sir Thomas Dales fleet lose pag. 634. at the i will Engano and abuse their person in one place or the let stand in another their fort as a cage to be show in derision when the bird be flee or steal away this now remain that violent thing remain not and be not usual permanent and we doubt not the bright beam of his majesty prudence and justice with the mature wisdom of prince Maurice his excellency and the illustrious lord governor of the unite province shine on those trouble indian water will like the great GOD out of darkness bring light and chastise the wrong-doer nor will permit personal quarrel to become Nationall or indian brall of merchant to become european broil for soldier but cause the remote member to communicate in the head amity and soundness this they will do this they do how soon and it be do and amen that it may appear that we do not impute the former wrong to the holland nation in general nor seek to make a state-quarrell with the state lord governor and the estate of that republic but attribute the same to private spirit and misdemeanure of some in authority and place of command in the indies I have add a piece of a book translate out of the dutch. so * * the former part of the book which prove this I have omit as less to our purpose as the adventurer have gain nothing near the simple interest of six and a quarter cent ann and ordinary assurance by this may be gather what profit the adventure have enjoy and how thankful they ought to be to the major now as concern the government it be a thing certain that be it good or bad the profit arise according for we daily see and find that by negligence and ill government a great estate be soon bring to nought and on the contrary through a good diligent and provident govern great gain arise out of a small stock or mean whereas during all this patent so little profit arise though great gain be ordinary to be make in the east indies so as hereby may well be conclude that the same must be so by reason of the direct or govern the same ill government of the dutch indian commander now as concern the well govern first of all be require a good understanding and experience which I persuade myself have be and be in many of the major without all doubt but that be not enough except there be care and diligence withal but what care and diligence can be expect from they who be so continual employ in their public office and function beside their particular affair that they can scarce once or twice in a week spend a few hour in this weighty business which indeed have need of a constant and continue sale according as the greatness and importancy thereof require etc. further be require in every mayor that he by all mean seek to procure the common good of that which be commit to his charge seek their own private benefit and not his particular but how or wherein have they hitherto seek the common good of the company so long as they take a liberty to sell the company good unto themselves in which sale they no doubt seek their own particular profit and not the company at sometime one mayor buy the company good of another mayor and at another time it happen quite contrary viz. that he which be at first the buyer be now become the seller to he that former be the seller himself one may well conjecture how these thing be thus carry by such who it may be be not so honest as they shall be what hindrance hereby befall the adventurer and what profit to the major one may well conjecture by the small profit which the adventurer have make and the great wealth which the major have attain unto when as the major have buy great quantity of the company good for themselves be to be imagine what kind of advice they will send to the indies concern such good as themselves have buy and whether their advice shall not tend to their particular profit etc for may one peruse their book no doubt thereby will be find that many among they have little or no adventure at all with the company and it will plain appear the major have little or no adventure with the company that their provision or factory concern they near than the profit of the stock they have there to respect and therefore do ready resolve to the set forth of great ship or fleet when as few and small will have be sufficient for conquest and few for trade from port to port whereof that fleet which go through the straight of magellane be one which fleet alone do charge the company with more than a capital it be likewise the practice of these kind of major know the choice to be in their own power to prefer their friend and kindred to the government prefer their friend to government and exclude those that be great adventurer take ofttimes such as be none but such as when they stand in nomination to be do then begin to buy conditional so they be choose than their buy to stand but if not than the barga^ne to be void what good service the company be to expect by such nimbling may well be conjecture beside they ofttimes prefer their friend to be send as committee and other officer to the indies committee se^t by their procurement great ship although very unfit thereto whereas it high concern the company to have both honest and fit person there for hardly can it be imagine the great wrong which the company have sustain through the have so base vild and proud insolent committee in the indies further what loss the company be put unto by the build of so great and costly ship each chamber strive which shall make the great ship and all for great stowage to cause the great return to be bring into their chamber their employment thereby to procure to themselves the great factory or provision ca^not well be imagine for as well may it be do with lesser and ship not so costly and so the more stock to be employ in trade or otherwise to free themselves of their interest money which great ship be partly use to carry wood and stone in the indies for the build of the fort jacatra some be wear and spend there so as indeed one may have do as well between this and the indies with half as many great ship also many sum of gold have be spend in the make of diverse costly fort and castle in the indies the wall be all of stone be kinglike work whereas to have make they of earth as the they be here in our country the Netherlands have be as useful for keep the trade from other committee of foreign land so have this needless charge be employ in trade may have advance the company more than a capital male content seek foreign employment also the company have free endure some loss by reason of the complaint of those person who have do the company good service can obtain little salary for the same whereby be befall that some have put themselves into the service of other company of foreign land etc. chap. 16 extract of a journal of a voyage to surat and to jasque in the persian gulf set forth by the east India society of merchant wherein be employ four new ship the London of eight hundred ton and therein andrew shilling chief commander of the whole fleet WILLIAM baffin master the hart of five hundred ton richard blithe master the roe Bucke of three hundred richard swan master the eagle of two hundred and eighty CHRISTOPHER Browne master write by RICHARD swan the six and twenty of February 1619. all our fleet set sail from Tilbury hope the twenty of April 1620. about eight degree north latitude we begin to have a taste of the turnado from the down hither we may always have carry a top gallant sail the nine of May we cross the we will have cross it more easterly but the current and wind will not permit the ten of june we see great store of fowl and on the three and twenty we have sight of Soldania road and anchor there the next day here we find the lion homeward find and nine dutch ship find for Bantam their commander Nicholas Vande a gentleman which by report live seven year in Oxford nic. Vande a Oxford man gen. of the dutch. king james his title to Soldania publish after kind sea-salutes the next morning the lion and the dutch depart each their way and the same evening arrive the schidam of Delft outward find which be suspect by both admiral the master be send for his commission examine and good satisfaction give the three of july be make a solemn publication of his majesty title to Soldania and on the seven king james his mount erect the three and twenty I have a cable of eleven inch spoil with other hurt and the hart have a great deliverance two of her best anchor break at once and the eagle break two cable the five and twenty we set sail note that if at any time you have occasion to ride under Pengwin island note for such as go into Soldania Road. you bring the northern end thereof west by south or within half a point on either side thereof and anchor about a mile from the near part of the island in ten eleven or twelve fathom white and gray sand have a little pass the cape of good hope be much wind at northwest north northwest and north note for troublesome sea at the cape the sea be exceed trouble and go so upon heap by the meeting of the northwest and southeast ocean that it labour our ship to the trial of all their joint from the eight and twenty of September to the first of October we be hinder eleven or twelve minute every day by a current to the south latitude from one to five degree thirty two minute north. the seven of October latitude nine degree and fifty minute north. these four and twenty hour island Rasif I have come over the island Rasif one of^ the mamales as it be place in my card. note that every day since we be in six degree north latitude we have see land fowl as castrell quail martins butterflies but not any sea fowl the nineteen we be due west from Batecala six league off depth two and twenty fathom ozie sand Goa the twenty two at six in the morning we be thwart of Goa four league off the latitude be fifteen degree and thirty minute rather less than more the six and twenty Dabul we put into Dabul ride in seventeen degree and thirty four minute and stay till the second of November our man refresh and recover and the two ship for Persia well provide the six the hart and eagle eight league from the high land of saint john take their leave of we the seven latitude twenty degree sixteen minute now be we true west from Damon six league off Damon depth eighteen fathom the nine in the morning we anchor in the outer ride of Swally where we find the wappen Zealand a ship of one thousand ton at our come she take in her flag and salute the London with three piece and the roe buck with two I be send on shore and find master Thomas kerridge precedent master james and master hopkinson who I bring aboard the next day a consultation be hold for our speedy dispatch after the hart and eagle four Portugal galleon attend at Ormus or jasques ride for their surprisal the nineteen after business dispatch we set sail towards jasques the one and twenty we descry a ship which yield without resistance her name morce near two hundred tun come from muscatte find for Chau a Portugal prize in her two and forty arabian horse be her principal lade as build for that purpose the residue date and raisin the captain name Francisco Mirando HONDIUS his map of persia. the five of December latitude four and twenty degree fifty five minute we meet the hart and eagle come from jasque towards surat not be sufficient to encounter the Portugal force there attend to ruin our master persian trade thus happy rejoin we make haste towards jasque to accomplish our design the eight at their own earnest solicitation we set all the portugal and moor on land except some seaman moor who we detain for our service and the pilot which misdoubt hard measure entreat to stay the ten the lord supper be administer aboard the London the twelve the man who voluntary undertake to burn the prize aboard the portugal admiral be put aboard she in the night the thirteen and fourteen the wind against we the fifteen we have sight of the east point of land in jasques ride which have upon it a tomb or a old square flat house bear west northwest by compass twelve mile off so then from Diu head to this point I make the longitude by the plain ordinary sea Chartley nine degree fifty five minute and three five part and by mercators projection ten degree and one and fifty minute from this place we may discern the Portugal man of war set out from Lisbon who fleet consist of two Portugal galleon one big than the London and two flemish ship one as big as the hart the other less than the eagle their general Ruy Frere de Andrado John Boralio vide-admiral the fleming be command by Antonio musket and Baltazar chave the sixteenth in the morning our admiral with the master of his fleet go aboard the prize and carry two barrel of powder some tar and other combustible provision intend with she to lay the Portugal admiral thwart the half to burn together thus fit we bear up with the man of war but it fall calm and the current set we so near they that they reach we with their ordnance all night we keep under sail and in the seventeen be by reason of the land-turne to leeward of they they weigh and make towards our fleet which attend their come albeit they have and careful keep the benefit of the wind the fight about nine the fight begin which continue nine hour without intermission in the afternoon a fine gentle westerly sea-wind blow and we to windward of they their admiral whether of necessity to repair some defect about his rudder or of policy for some conceit stratagem anchor and to the eastward of he his vice-admiral and the great Fleming the lesser to leeward of all stop his leak now be we in great hope of our fire design which yet be too soon fire and forsake of those which have it in charge prove frustrate drive clear of all their ship to their rejoice our disgrace and our employers loss we see they abide at anchor and keep the wind of they turn to and again close ahead of they rake they especial their admiral thorough and thorough fore and after with all our broad side receive from they only their praw and bow piece out of who as I pass to the north two unfortunate shot cut a-sunder the robucke weather-leech rope of her foresail and before topsail in the middle depth of both sail which rent we can not make she stay but be enforce for reparation of our sail to bear up to leeward betwixt they and the shore in which time their three great ship play upon we with their whole broad side yet God be praise with less hurt than I can have imagine thus have compass the three last mention ship and luff to rejoine with our own fleet which all this while hold the benefit of the wind play upon the portugal with their great ordnance as fast as with so many musket I have get to windward of the small Fleming who stand off as I do until he have bring the fire ship direct between he and i then turn tail and steer with all the sail he can make right afore the wind alongst the shore to the eastward who to rescue the other three set sail now so gentle that the hart pass along their broad side receive from some of they few from other none either great or small shot but our fleet at present reunite desist their further chase the darkness of the night and the general weariness challenge a surcease from so toilsome a work and anchor after midnight in their before usual Road. in this fight the London and hart receive very little hurt in their hul and tackle less or none among their man the eagles main mast be shoot in five place whereof four quite through and one John bank lose his right arm I in the robucke have one Edward Browne slay with a great shot through his head a piece of who skull together with some splinter of the same shot wound master Thomas Waller one of my mate in the forehead to the loss of his left eye also John phoenix and Robert Hopworth lose the use of their right hand never god be praise do I hear of so little hurt in so long a fight as we have on our part I can true particularise their hurt by report of our merchant John Boralio their vice-admiral and another captain be slay with thirty or forty portugal out of their admiral for Moor they account not in the number of their man the rest unknown the eighteen in the morning we have fight of the portugal at anchor ten mile to the east of we they have the wind fair to come to we but do not whereupon we have a general conference whether it may be fit with the first of the sea-turne begin usual about noon to stand with they and try it out for the mastery before they can have supply from Ormus or Muskat or expect aid from Goa or else to make sail for jasques ride there to land our money and good for surprisal whereof they fight and we defend and this late be conclude thither the London attain that night the rest ride a league without Portugal supply the two and twenty descry the port Galliones open of the road to come in as we suppose with the sea turn we haste and stand off with they they steer direct towards Ormus till they meet with two or three frigate from thence with supply of man and munition which have ship they make towards we but soon repent and clap upon a tack and till the eight and twenty be either to windward or so at anchor that without disadvantage we can not attempt they we try on Christmas day but be enforce back with a present encounter of a gust which make some black aboard we say that the port have bring a witch from Ormus to serve they with fair wind on innocent day perceive the drift of our Fabius cunctator the second fight we take the opportunity of a easterly gale weigh and put thing in order for fight the London and hart next anchor within a cable length and half from they upon their broad side and so endure the hot burden of this second day fight for no soon be they at anchor but it fall calm and so continue all day insomuch that the robucke and eagle who have steer near the shore with intent to anchor one upon the bow of the port-admirall the other on the bow of their vice-admiral be eastern can not with any diligence come to do any service in half a hour space and no soon be we within the level range of our ordnance from they than there be not a breath of wind and the current against we we be drive to anchor or drive further off but our broad side once bring up the great ordnance from our whole fleet play so fast upon they that have our man knowledge equal their resolution not one of they have escape we how ever loath to receive a supper as hot as their dinner at three a clock they cut their cable and drive with the tide then set westerly until they be out of our reach the flight and loss of the portugal then come their frigate to they which the day before have domineer with their music pendant and flag alongst the shore now with a fit task to tow they away all mangle and for their admiral in the great fury of the fight be enforce to heel his ship to stop his leak his mayne-top-mast overboard and the head of his main mast. the great Fleming have both his top-mast and part of his bow-sprit shoot away the less have never a shroud stand never a topmast the vice-admiral which both day do we most hurt escape best have common this day one or other of their ship betwixt he and we we keep they company all night in hope the next morning to have give they their passport but survey our shot and find small store leave notwithstanding that by some happy mistake the eagle have a double proportion and consider the voyage which we have to perform we return and leave they glad man the two great ship tow the two small at their stern their slay I hear not we lose in the London slay Henry Cran^ John gore our admiral and Peter Robinson die of their wound afterward in the hart Walter Davie William hall John Muskat and Edmund Okely be wound but recover the great shot of several sort spend in the London one thousand three hundred eighty two hart one thousand twenty four Robucke eight hundred and fifteen eagle eight hundred in all four thousand twenty one captain Richard Blithe according to the order open the white box n 1 succeed our worthy admiral myself remove into the hart Christopher Browne to the robucke and Thomas Taylor be make master of the eagle the fourteen of january have have for eight and forty hour precedent continual extremity of rain wind or rain be usual here for three or four day at the change and full otherwhiles fair weather we set sail from jasque where we have dispatch our business to surat where we arrive the first of February follow nothing in our passage occur worth recital save that the seven and twenty of january we surprise betwixt Diu and the sand head a small ship of war call of burden one hundred ton Francisco de Sylva captain with thirty five portugal and twenty five moor for sailor set out by the captain of Diu to guard their small merchant ship from the malabar the man be dismiss and the ship keep for our use and call the Andrew shee have in she neither meat a port money nor commodity and scarce so many poor suit as back the seven and twenty of February we begin to take in good the five of march the eagle be send down to guard the prince juncke and to hinder she further lade till free leave and liberty shall be grant for passage of cart with good and other our provision which have be restrain six or seven day by the grate governor of vlpare by which mean no cotton wool can come down till our ship be full lade forward on the sixteenth upon notice that the agra Caffila be rob by the Decan army resolution be take to seek restitution upon the ship of the say Decan prince and his confederate in the action and the red sea intend for our ship winter the nineteen the prince his juncke be dismiss the governor of surat have grant under his hand to supply our want of powder and shot for our money with redress for many other discourtesy since the five and twenty of march till the six of April 1621. the wind have be outward viz. south and south south-west and west and from noon till midnight blow so hard that the great stuff by the shore permit no business to be do except on the last quarter ebb and first after flood the seven we set sail the nine the eagle and dutch pinnace call the good fortune depart our company consign for Achen and Bantam the London hart Robucke and Andrew intend for the red sea if not too late the first of May the Andrew and our boat surprise the saint Antonio a ship of two hundred ton which we call the may-flower her principal lade rice take in at barcelor a prise whence she go to Goa and the eight of April have set sail for muscat and Ormus by these we understand that Ruy Frere de Andrado be busy in repair his four ship at Ormus c. that don Emanuel de Asseredo be depart about fifty day pass from Goa in his succour with two Galliones one whereof be the same in which the viceroy be personal Eman. Assaved^ send in supply from Goa when he fight with captain Downtons Fleet. the seven in a calm we surprise the jacintha small ship build of a frigate from mozambique find for Goa we call she the primrose thence to the thirteen wind variable calm reins the may-flowre hinder we much and the pilot either be malicious or blind whereupon we resolve to trust to our own endeavour to find a anchor place whence we may discover some convenient road for our safe ride till the strength of the monson be pass we resolve for Macera Macera the second of june we descry land and anchor in seventeen fathom three mile of shore here we find in four or five pit three quarter of a mile from the water side water in abundance I have forty ton out of one well which we roll down in hogshead the people tractable little other refresh the latitude twenty degree twenty minute variation seventeen north-westing the date tree by the water place bare northwest by west the other end of the island north-east half east five league off the twelve we set sail for the north-east end of Macera and in the afternoon anchor in seven fathom in a fair bay clean ground a fast black ozie sand the north-east point bear south half a league off the land place west south-west two mile off the norther part of the bay north by west four mile off the latitude twenty degree thirty minute variation seventeen northwest you may ride in this bay from five to twelve in what depth you will a excellent hungry cold and healthful place but a tumble roll sea for ship fresh water enough to be have in pit dig but except at the usual land place very ill to boat yield no better refresh then the first a few goat and lamb in truck for cannekeen while the hart and Robucke be here resolve to stay till the monsons fury be pass on the nineteen we send abdelavie a inhabitant of Macera with letter in quest for the admiral as far as soar which return the six of july with letter of their be there at soar cape Rosalgate or Rosahalt so the native call it seven league within cape Rosalgate their difficult water at teve surprisal of simons the chirurgeon and the preacher boy on land by the portugal and moor etc. the six of August the hart and Robucke set sail from Macera the eight in the evening we anchor by our admiral this road differ from Macera in be calm usual clear and by heat take away the stomach the fifteen set sail the first of September a boat of Chau come aboard the robucke etc. the one and twenty of November our fleet set sail from Swally the jasque fleet of nin^ ship and anchor before the bar of surat the seven and twenty at noon n latitude twenty and by judgement twenty eight league from near land we take leave of the jasque fleet consist of the London jonas whale dolphin lion Rose shilling Richard and Robert the first of january we find ourselves between johanna and Mayotta the nine and twenty we anchor in Soldania ride have be from surat hither nine week and three day bless be God for our safe and speedy passage here we water wash fish in the river bury our letter buy three cow one calf four sheep all unsavoury meat the three of February we set sail the nineteen anchor at saint Helena here we find the wappen and the holland dutch ship this last fall on fire the two and twenty with her clove take in green at Amboyna there be another small dutch ship they arrive eleven day before we and can in ten day more discharge and relade their damnify clove the eight and twenty we set sail from saint Helena and the seven of june 1622. anchor in the down for further satisfaction touch the fight I have add this letter or relation send to the company from the chief of the Fleet. relation of the fight of four english ship with four Portugal ship two galliat and ten frigate in the gulf of Persia in the month of December and january 1620. the London and the robucke arrive at surat the nine of December there understand that the portugal have send into the gulf of Persia a armado purposely to attempt the english ship at their come thither whereupon it be forthwith resolve by the english factor at surat and the commander of the abovenamed two ship that they shall apply themselves to the gulf of Persia to rejoine themselves with two other english ship namely the hart and the eagle which part from the London and Robucke before their come to surat and be go direct towards jasque in the say gulf of Persia and so the say London and Robucke set sail from surat towards jasques the nineteen day of November and the first day of December follow they meet with the hart and the eagle about eighty league short of jasque where all the four ship join together they receive most certain intelligence by a Portugal frigate which they meet that the Portugal Armado consist as aforesaid of four galleon two galliat and about ten frigate be attend they at the easter end of jasques road where the english ship must come and so go along towards the same where the sixteenth day they find the say Portugal Armado consist in these particular before name the general or chief commander whereof be name Ruy Frere de Andrado who themselves call the pride of Portugal the vice-admiral John Boralio and inhabitant of Ormus and late admiral of those sea of the other two ship the commander be Anthonio musket and Balthasar di chave this day prove calm so that it be night ere they come in shot one of another the seventeen of December be the lord day we intend to have sanctify his service be under sail a league to sea-boord of they but about eight of the clock with the land turn they weigh anchor and bear up with we for who albeit they have the wind we shorten sail and stay near about nine of the clock we join fight with they which continue until the darkness of the night just challenge a end to so long and weary a work they like a kind host to stranger leave we their anchor place to lodge in and retire some ten or eleven mile to the eastward there to amend and repair themselves we can true particulate unto you their hurt and loss in this fight save by report of our merchant that John Boralio their vide-admiral and the captain of one of the other ship be slay with some thirty or forty man out of their admiral the rest yet unknown the loss or hurt of our man in your own ship the enclose note of this seventeen present will make manifest thus for a time we be not disturb by our enemy though by contrary wind we can not get into the usual road before the twenty current the twenty one and twenty two the most part of your good be land and descry the Portugal galleon open of the road to come in as we suppose with the sea-turne we therefore set sail and stand off with they but after some small show of bear up with the sea-wind they clap upon a lake and be so fortunate until the eight and twenty day that either they be to windward we can not come at they or else at anchor we can not without our great disadvantage meddle with they the eight and twenty be innocent day both fleet ride at the easter point of the road not a mile distant one from the other we omit no opportunity to give battle to our wary protract enemy who as by his work appear if he can have avoid fight and by linger delay and the benefit of his frigate have hinder we from the prosecution of your persian designment he attain unto the full height and scope of his employment but about one of the clock the lord send we a pretty gale our fleet weigh and put all thing in order for to fight the London and hart next anchor within a cable length from they upon their broad side and so endure the hot brunt of this two day fight for no soon be they at anchor but it fall calm and so continue all day insomuch that the roe Bucke and eagle who be somewhat a stern and steer near the shore with intent to anchor one upon the bow of the Portugal admiral and the other upon the bow of the vide-admiral can not notwithstanding all diligence use come to do any service in half a hour space but be come near anchor and all our ship so fit to keep our broad side full upon they the great ordnance out of our whole fleet play so fast upon they that about three of the clock in the afternoon not willing to endure so hot entertainment they cut their cable and with the tide drive down from we until be without reach of our ordnance their frigate come and tow they away wonderful mangle and tear for their admiral in the hot of the fight be enforce to heel their ship to stop his leak his main topmast over board and the head of his main mast the three ship both his topmast mizon mast and part of his bow spirit be shoot away the lesser ship have never a shroud leave stand nor never a topmast the vide-admiral escape best for most common he have one or other of their ship between he and we all this night we keep they company with hope the next morning to have give they all or some of they their passport but survey our shot and find no great store leave and withal consider the great weight and import of the voyage we have to perform we resolve our return to jasque for the speedy dispatch of our business in hand thank God for put our enemy to flight before we of who unto the present writing hereof we have hear no news neither be any of they arrive at Ormus or muscat as our merchant report only it be rumour by some caffaire who by swim escape ashore that Ruy Frere de Andrado * * this prove not true be slay all your ship praise be God remain serviceable and not above five man slay on our part in these two long and great battle and not many wound as by the list of their name here enclose will appear among who our worthy admiral and kind commander receive a great and grievous wound through his left shoulder with a great shot which hurt he with such courage and patience underwent that give great hope to we all of his much wish recovery but have beside his former wound two of his uppermost rib on the left side break the six of januarie he depart this life show himself as ever before a resolute commander so in his passage through the gate of death a most willing humble constant and assure christian his body we intend to have carry to surat and there according to his desert to have perform his last funeral right the chyrurgians confident promise by embalm and waxe-cloth to preserve he without annoyance thither but notwithstanding this cost and their promise his body in regard of his great wound prove noisome we be enforce to bury he at jasque which be effect the seven current with what respect solemnity and decency the time require the thirteen of january 1620. aboard the ship London in jasques Road. underwritten by all the four master of the four ship ri. blyth chr. Browne rob. swan Will baffin while we be publish these thing there be late news of english persian occurrent as namely that nine english ship have be in those persian sea and together with the persian have pay part of their Portugal debt chisman in three day be take the spoil divide betwixt they also the bassa of Xeras help by the english both in set over his man and in beleagr the town have in two day take the town of Ormus the castle hold out though little hope remain of it their water and all hope of help be take from they the english have win much honour and reputation of valour and if they take it beside share the spoil be to have the castle commit to their keep they be say also to have take a rich ship call the Mosambique part of a letter write from Mr. Robert smith to his brother Henry Smith relate of a rare attempt and exploit of a small english pinnace in take a Portugal ship in our passage from joanna to this place we lose sight of the rose and Richard but within six day after the Richard come to we with a Portugal prize at her stern which she have take that night we lose her company it be a wonder to tell it the Richard be a pinnace of about twenty ton man with fourteen man and boy and have but two small falconet in she and the Port^gall of two hundred and fifty ton with two hundred and fifty in she whereof seventy be portugal the rest mestico and slave the Richard come up with they ply her demi-dog so well that in the shoot off twenty shot it please God they kill their captain which the rest perceive strike all their sail amain and like tall man come aboard the Richard six at a time where the master cause they to be find but fear to have too many aboard though find he send a terrible command to the rest aboard that upon their life they shall depart their ship into their great boat which they very valiant perform and leave their ship to the utter disgrace of themselves and all their nation etc. Giles Hobbs his travail from Musco to Spahan write in a letter by himself to the east indian company right honourable my duty remember etc. the four of October lose pass a year since my arrival at Spahan your then agent master Thomas Barker be then advise for England mention of my arrival tho. Barker and also of his appointment to resend i so soon as he hear of the safe arrival of your ship but it please the lord in the meantime to take he from we by a sudden death who appointment be the first cause I omit to write to your honour the second a long and tedious journey by let on the Volga and also in this land the three cause my convoy take from i and not suffer to pass but with the king caravan of boats for that the report be the cossacke do purpose to make fight with the caravan which prove the contrary it wound be too long to trouble your patience to relate at large the accident in this my journey wherein little happen worthy your notice or expectation or my hope to effect your desire I will therefore brief make relation thereof the eight of May 1619. I set off from yeraslave and arrive at astracan the sixteenth of june from whence I purpose to take my journey and passage for Turkey and from thence by the emperor post to pass the cherkass country and so for Spahan by land this passage I can not proceed of but with the emperor caravan of provision which will not be in twelve day in the interim I inquire when the Guilan buss will go the master and merchant promise fourteen day at further so I resolve to pass in they the ten of july I set off from astracan and by occasion of the boat stay to be clear by the searcher it be the fifteen our come aboard the buss no compass use in the caspian Sea the eighteen the buss set sail steer south till we make the persian shore they use no compass but direct their course by the sun moon and star the six and twenty we make land have great tempest of wind at north-east the land lie south and west at evening the wind come of the land still increase the next day the buss lose her sail from the yard and for to succour she they hang up fig basket coverlet and cow hide tempest throw great store of the lade overboard the first all our provision after the good this night we have small rest the next morning the wind be out of the sea and it please the lord to bring we in between a small island and the main land and both we and the vessel save the eight and twenty the master and most of we go on land the place call callopsheray no inhabitant the wind increase still that until the first of August the boat can not row aboard the buss this day the merchant unlade their good and the five we procure horse for Shomakee Shomakee Guilan Ardevil Spahan and arrive there the nine the buss find herself for a port call to lade neft^ere she proceed for Guilan the nineteen of August I depart with the Cafala from Shomakee and arrive at ardevill the nine and twenty of the same the nine of September with the Cafala I depart ardevill and arrive at Spahan the four of October 1619. thus in brief you may please to understand of my long journey from yeraslave to Spahan in Persia no less than five month which no doubt may be do in eleven or twelve week if no let in the way as in these subsequents I shall declare the first passage be at the open the river Volga from yeraslave to astracan and so to Turkey by water which may be do in five and twenty day and from Turkey by the emperor convoy to derbent or Shomakee three passage to Persia from Musco city under this king and from those city to ardevill and Casbin with Cafala and from Casbin as they please to Spahan the way clear and may be effect as abovesaid the second passage be to come off from yeraslave the first of june until the ten and if no let may be at astracan in eighteen or twenty day in good time to take the first passage in the Guilan buss for leygoint a league from Laigon and from resht from whence this year silk be take seven league and from thence to Spahan sixteen day journey this may prove the speedy passage if it please God to lend favourable wind to pass the caspian sea from astracan sea passage be to be have in july August and September the three passage which no doubt may be procure by your honour agent there be to have your letter send from Musco by the emperor post to the governor of astracan to send the say letter if over land to the Chan of Shomakee to be send to the english nation at Spahan by the chans post if by sea to Guilan to the governor of resht according to be send to the english at Spahan the charge to be defray by your honour agent and no doubt so long as you have here trade your letter by these governor will be safe deliver and for the better safety of they the agent may at his next go to the king procure two to those governor to that effect and thus much for the needful transport of your letter from Musco to Spahan in persia. I will now return and speak something of the trade at astracan the mart begin at the arrival of the boat which be in june at which time the persian come in and bring die silk dorogoe calico and other persian stuff which they sell by retail and in barter the commodity they return be cloth but no great quantity sable martens red hide caviar butter the hinder-part of horse skin for leather and old Russee money which they buy at forty four and forty six do Per roble for exchange these be the commodity likewise the ruff transport whereon he make small profit the old money fail and your honour trade here will prejudice he much if not quite overthrow his trade in my passage on the Volga I hold nothing worthy notice except the take the sturgeon and the make the caviar and isinglasse the river they pale in from bank to bank that no sturgeon pass up or down the river but they fall in the weere make of caviate the roe they lie in salt fourteen or fifteen day then take and wash the salt of they and pack they in the Fat the fat sturgeon have a yellow roe which they pack up as it come to hand which roe spoil all that lie near it and much hinder the sale of the caviar at our market the isinglass be make of the string take out of the sturgeon back this year the but of caviar sell a^ five roble the hundred and six roble isinglass gentleman I be find by commission to advise how many day from arash to the caspian sea and to astracan from arash to derbent a port town seven day journey Arash this port lie opposite to the river Volga and may be sail in five day all other place where the king silk be make lie near the sea as rash peomin Shoft and Leygon in the province of Guilan the far eight league from the port in monzendroan resht peomin Shoft Leygon monzendroan be the plantation for the make of silk and this year a good quantity make of which as yet have never proof be make for his goodness thus much for nearness of the place where the silk be make to the caspian sea by which your honour may perceive how necessary the silk do lie for its transport by the way of the Volga if passage may be procure from the emperor of muscovia whereas now they be carry three month journey by land to the port and not without great charge and trouble as by the general advice you will well understand to which I humble refer you gentleman this your persian trade as it be in her infancy have many enemy the Turk arabian armenian and the proud Portugal who lie tongue cease not to dishonour our kingdom and nation but the lord I hope will turn the dishonour upon his own pate the overthrow of the three first enemy must be by the presence of a ambassador here who no doubt will persuade and pull down the king now lofty price of his silk as you will well find in this year silk receive and no abatement to be expect but by treaty of a ambassador who have be expect and demand for by this king also to accord a agreement with the king for the silk that be most in esteem and profitable for you and as he be turn merchant for sale of his silk so likewise to be your merchant for the good you shall yearly send into his land at such price as may countervail the price he set on his silk but I doubt you will say I pass the bound of my commission or order in write this brief relation of which may be speak at large but doubtless not more than your grave wisdom do foresee or the better experience then myself do advise to which I humble refer your honour pray the success may prove to your heart desire gentleman I be sorry you think i not worthy to nominate i your servant in your letter and more sorry you write i several name and not my own name for which cause I have be a daily table sport by some which of these name they may take for your honour servant other wish i to return and make my wage with you and have I good occasion in your honour employment I shall be very willing thereunto but howsoever I refer i to God and your honour not doubt but you will deal as well with i as other and that I may not return as promise I willing remain your honour oblige servant ready to undergo any your affair desire your honour will please to nominate i a certain yearly stipend for the time I shall so spend until my return to your honour for which I shall be find to pray for your honour help and happiness in this world and in the world to come eternal rest your honour may please that yesterday we receive a letter from the agent from port jasques a second letter direct to master William bell and the rest at Spahan advise the truth as near as they can be inform the occasion of your honour ship not arrival as yet to which I humble refer you be order also by the agent that the copy thereof shall be dispee to your honour I have fit those former line long by you expect of a brief relation of my journey from yeraslave to Spahan in Persia also the fit time for transport of your letter to have speedy passage since my arrival here at mina with the last Cafila of silk nothing have happen worthy your honour notice we expect hourly to hear the happy news of the safe arrival of the ship at port jasques that we may proceed thither with your good which God of his mercy grant to who bless tuition I ever commend your honourr and rest mina the thirteen of December 1620. your honour oblige servant GILES Hobbs HONDIUS his map of the east indies chap. 17 a discourse of trade from England unto the east indies answer to diverse objection which be usual make against the same write by t. mun. the trade of merchandise be not only that laudable practice whereby the intercourse of nation be so worthy perform but also as I may term it the very touchstone of a kingdom prosperity when therein some certain rule shall be diligent observe for as in the estate of private person we may account that man to prosper and grow rich who be possess of revenue more or less do according proportion his expense whereby he may yearly advance some maintenance for his posterity so do it come to pass in those kingdom which with great care and wariness do ever vent out more of their home commodity then they import and use of foreign ware for so undoubted the remainder must return to they in treasure but where a contrary course be take through wantonness and riot to over-waste both foreign and domestic ware there must the money of necessity be export as the mean to help to furnish such excess and so by the corruption of man condition and manner many rich country be make exceed poor whilst the people thereof too much affect their own inormity do lay the fault in something else wherefore industry to increase and frugality to maintain be the true watchman of a kingdom treasury even when the force and fear of prince prohibition can possible retain the same and therefore as it be most plain that proportion or quantity must ever be regard in the import of foreign ware so must there also be a great respect of quality and use that so the thing most necessary to be first prefer such as be food raiment and munition for war and trade which great blessing when any country do sufficient enjoy the next to be procure be ware fit for health and art the last be those which serve for our pleasure and ornament now forasmuch as by the providence of almighty God the kingdom of England be endow with such abundance of rich commodity that it have long enjoy not only great plenty of the thing before name but also through a superfluity have be much enrich with treasure bring in from foreign part which have give life unto so many worthy trade among which that unto the east India by name the report whereof although it be already spread so famous through the world yet notwithstanding here at home the clamorous complaint against the same be grow so loud and general that my self be one of the society it have much trouble my private meditation to conceive the mean or true ground of this confusion but at the last I resolve myself that the great number of these exclaimer be lead away in ignorance not have as yet discern the mystery of such weighty affair some have be transport with envy as not participate in the say society or be thereby hinder as they conceive in some other trade and other whole corrupt in their affection who whilst they willing run into these error do also labour diligent to seduce other that so this good and glory of the kingdom may be subvert by ourselves which by the policy and strength of stranger can so easy be abate wherefore it be now a fit time to meet with such injurious course by a true narration of the passage in the say east India trade answer to those several objection which be so common make against the same that so these misunderstanding and error may be make know unto the whole body of this kingdom which at this present time be most worthy represent to those noble assembly of the high court of parliament where I hope the worth of this rich trade shall be effectual inquire and so in the end obtain the credit of a honourable approbation the first objection it be a happy thing for Christendom say many man that the navigation to the east indies by way of the cape of good hope have never be find out for in the fleet of ship which be send thither yearly out of England Portugal and the low-countreye the gold silver and coin of Christendom and particular of this kingdom be exhaust to buy unnecessary ware the answer the matter of this objection be very weighty and therefore it ought to be answer full the which that I may the better perform I will divide the same into three part in the first I will consider the necessary use of the ware which be usual bring out of east India into Europe namely drug spice raw-silke indigo and calico in the second I will imitate the manner and mean by which the say ware have be heretofore and now be bring into Europe in the three and last I will prove that the treasure of England be not consume but rather great to be increase by the performance of the say trade touch the first who be so ignorant in any famous commonwealth the first part concern the use of indian ware which will not consent to the moderate use of wholesome drug and comfortable spice which have be so much desire in all time and by so many nation not thereby to surfeit or to please a liquorish taste as it often happen with many other fruit and wine but rather as thing most necessary to preserve their health and to cure their disease sir Thomas eliot his castle of health rembert Dodoneus his history o^ plant the french academy second part and other even as it be most notable set forth by some learned man who have undertake to write upon this subject and therefore it shall be altogether needless here to discourse upon their several operation and virtue see that he that list may be well instruct therein if he will peruse the volume which be pen by the learned for the benefit of all those who shall make use thereof but if peradventure it be yet further urge that diverse nation live without the use of drug and spice the answer be that either s^ch people know not their virtue and therefore suffer much by the want of ware so healthful or else they be most miserable be without mean to obtain the thing which they so much want but sithence I intend to be brief I will insist no further upon this point for the obiecter may aswell deny we the use of sugar wine oil raisin fig prune and currand and with far more reason exclaim against tobacco cloth of gold and silver lawn cambric gold and siluer-lace velvet satin taffeta and diverse other manufacture yearly bring into this realm for a infinite value all which as it be most true that while we consume they they likewise devour our wealth yet nevertheless the moderate use of all these ware have ever suit well with the riches and majesty of this kingdom France and the low-countries (@) late year do make gre^t quantity of wrought silk of which ware they be heretofore serve from Italy France Italy south Barbary and other country but I will come to the raw silk and indigo this be so excellent for the die of our woollen clothes thereby so much esteem in so many place of the world that ornament together with the great relief and maintenance of so many hundred of poor people who be continual employ in the wind twist and weave of the same insomuch that by the cherish of this business as his majesty for his part be gracious please to perform in remit the impost of silk it may well be hope that in short time industry will make the art to flourish with no less happiness to this kingdom than it have do through many age to diverse state in Italy and late also to the kingdom of France and to the unite province of the low-countreye now as touch the trade of calico of many sort into which the english late make a entrance although it can be true say that this commodity be profitable for the state of Christendom in general in respect they be the manifacture of infidel and in great part the wear of christian yet nevertheless this commodity likewise be of singular use for this commonwealth in particular not only therewith to increase the trade into foreign part but also thereby great to abate the excessive price of cambric Holland and other sort of linen cloth which daily be bring into this kingdom for a very great sum of money and this shall suffice concern the necessary use of the indian ware in the next place I will set forth the manner and mean of their import into Europe the second part show the manner and the mean by which indian ware have be and now be bring into Europe it be a error in those man who think that the trade of the east indies into Europe have first entrance by the discovery of the navigation by the cape of good hope for many year before that time the traffic of those part have his ordinary course by ship from diverse place in the indies yearly resort with their ware to Mocha in the red-sea and Balsera in the persian gulf from both which place the merchandise with great charge be after transport over-land by the turk upon camel fifty day journey unto Aleppo in Soria and to Alexandria in Egypt which be in the mart town from whence diverse nation as well turk as christian do continual disperse the say ware by sea into the part of Europe by which course the common enemy of Christendom the Turk be master of the trade which do great employ and enrich his subject and also fill the coffer of his own custom which he exact at very high rate rate upon all sort of spice 22. cent raw sikes esteem about 2. cent indigo about 8. cent but by the providence of almighty God the discovery of that navigation to the east indies by the cape of good hope now so much frequent by the english portugal and dutch and also attempt by other christian kingdom have not only much decay the great commerce between the indian and the turk in the red sea and in the persian gulf to their infinite hurt and to the great increase of christian trade but it have also bring a further happiness unto Christendom in general and to the realm of England in particular for the vent of more english commodity and for export of a less quantity of silver out of Europe unto the infidel by many thousand pound yearly then have be accustom in former time as I shall prove most plain by that which follow and first it will be necessary to set down the quantity of spice indigo and persian raw silk which be yearly consume in Europe and in they all to consider the cost with the charge to lade the same commodity clear aboard the ship from Aleppo and the like of all the self same ware as they have be usual dispatch from the port of the east indies wherein will appear that happiness which many do so much oppose especial our own countryman such people as effect not the good of this kingdom under the gild term of the commonwealth while be indeed either ignorant or ill affect they do not only gross err themselves but also cause other to hinder as much as in they lyerh the glory and welfare of this kingdom but leave they I will set down the say ware in their quantity and price as follow and first at Aleppo the quantity of spice Indido and persian raw silk yearly consume in Europe six thousand thousand pound of pepper cost with charge at two shilling the pound six hundred thousand pound four hundred fifty thousand pound of clove at four shilling nine penny the pound cost one hundred six thousand eight hundred seventy five pound ten shilling one hundred and fifty thousand pound of mace at four shilling nine penny the pound cost there thirty five thousand six hundred twenty six pound four hundred thousand pound of nutmeg at two shilling four penny the pound cost forty six thousand six hundred sixty six pound thirteen shilling four penny three hundred fifty thousand of indigo at four shilling four penny the pound cost seventy five thousand eight hundred thirty three pound six shilling eight penny one thousand thousand of Persia raw silk at twelve shilling the pound come to six hundred thousand pound the whole sum of all be 1465001. pound ten shilling now follow the same ware both for quantity and quality at their several price as they be to be buy and lade clear of charge in the east indies six thousand thousand pound of pepper cost with charge at two penny half penny the pound sixty two thousand five hundred pound four hundred fifty thousand pound of clove at nine penny the pound cost sixteen thousand eight hundred seventy five pound one hundred and fifty thousand pound of mace at eight penny the pound cost five thousand pound four hundred thousand pound of nutmeg at four penny the pound cost six thousand six hundred sixty six pound thirteen shilling four penny three hundred and fifty thousand pound of indigo at fourteen penny the pound the exportation of the value of 953543. l sterling out of Christendom into Turkey yearly save cost twenty thousand four hundred and sixteen pound twelve shilling four penny ten hundred thousand pound Persia raw silk at eight shilling the pound cost four hundred thousand pound the whole sum of all be 511458. pound 5. shilling 8. penny so that by the substance and sum of these account it do plain appear that the buy of the say quantity of raw silk indigo and spice may be perform in the indies for near one three part of the ready money which be accustom to be send into Turkey to provide the same so that there will be save every year the value of nine hundred fifty three thousand five hundred forty three pound four shilling four penny sterling of ready money that heretofore have be export out of Christendom into Turkey which be a matter of such note and consequence that it may seem incredible before the circumstance be due consider and therefore leave I shall leave the matter in doubt it be requisite that I do make a explanation of some particular and principal it must not be conceive that this great advantage which have be speak of be only the merchant gain for the commonwealth of Christendom have a very great part thereof in the cheapness of the ware as shall be God will prove hereafter in his due place second the time of the merchant forbearance and interest be very long his adventure and assurance much dear his charge of ship victual mariner and factor their wage far great than by the voyage into Turkey for the same ware so that the former great difference must be understand in these particular whereby we may perceive to our comfort that the material of the kingdom instance only that ten shilling employ in pepper in the east indies will require thirty and five shilling for all charge whatsoever to deliver it in London the great sum of money which the persian and the indian carry yearly out of Turkey the east India company do endeavour to bring the raw silk from Persia direct by Sea Marseilles send yearly to Aleppo and Alexandria at l^^st 500000 l. sterling and little or no ware Venice send about the value of 100000 l. and a great value in ware the low country send about the value of 50000 l. sterling moni^s and little ware Messina 25000 l. in ready money and the employment of the subject in lieu of ready money become a very great part of the price which be pay for the say indian ware which can hurt the state as some erroneous suppose but great help it as I shall better prove in that which follow first therefore I show for a undoubted truth that the persian moor and indian who trade with the turk at Aleppo Mocha and Alexandria for raw silk drug spice indigo and calico have always make and still do make their return in ready money for other ware there be but few which they desire from foreign part some chamlet coral wrought silk woollen cloth with some trifle they do yearly vent in all not for above forty or fifty thousand pound sterling which be no valuable sum in respect of that wealth which be carry from Aleppo and Constantinople into Persia for raw silk when least five hundred thousand pound sterling and from Mocha about six hundred thousand pound sterling likewise yearly into India for return of calico drug sugar Rice tobacco and diverse other thing so here be still a very great commerce maintain between those infidel not only for the calico of many sort and other ware which concern their own use but also for the raw silk of Persia which be altogether transport into Christendom how worthy a enterprise be it therefore in the english east India company by who endeavour there be now good hope to turn a great part of this wealthy trade into England by ship direct from the persian gulf whereby the employment traffic and custom of the turk may be still more and more impair and the general treasure of Christendom much less consume as be already perform for the business of spice and indigo and who shall then doubt our want of silver to maintain the trade if by this way we do obtain the silk which with more advantage and conveniency will draw the money to this mart than it have be heretofore convey unto those remote dominion of the Turk and lest peradventure it shall be think that the traffic in those part by the christian for the persian silk be perform by change for other ware or by the money which proceed of the sale of many rich commodity which yearly they sell at Aleppo Alexandria Constantinople and these part the answer be that neither the venetian french nor dutch do vent so much of their own country commodity in those part as do provide their necessary want of the proper ware of turk such as be the fine raw silk make in Soria chamlet grogran Cotten wool Cotten yarn gall flax hemp fleece wool Rice hides wax and diverse other thing so that still the raw silk of Persia must be buy with ready money only the english have more advantage than any other nation in this kind for they vent so great a quantity of broad-cloth tin and other english commodity that the proceed thereof do not only provide a sufficient quantity of part of the say turkish ware which fit their use but also a proportion of about three hundred great ball of Persia raw silk yearly and if in any year they chance to buy a great quantity of silk then must and do they furnish the same in ready money from the port of Marseilles Genovay Leghorn Venice or the Netherlands neither be these the only mean whereby the empire of the Turk be so abundant store with gold and silver to the performance of the indian trade for many be the christian ship which yearly lade with corn for ready money in the Archipelago great be the commerce from Poland Hungary and Germany with gold and dollar for chamlet grogran Abassens a people in Ethiopia who influence have make they dull lazy and without art enjoy diverse mine of gold and one of silver which do procure their want of foreign ware and other thing but that which be very remarkable be the great quantity of gold and some silver coin in Grand-Cairo which by two several caravans in bullion be yearly bring thither from the Abassens country in Ethiopia for return of many rich commodity as velvet satin cloth of gold woollen cloth polish coral and other thing thus by the coherence of the turkish trade with the christian persian and indian I have show both the manner and the mean whereby the east indian ware have be heretofore and yet be in part procure into Christendom but lest it shall seem incredible that the Turk will let so great a mass of treasure yearly to pass his dominion to the indian and to the persian his profess enemy I will make the matter yet more plain and first concern the raw silk it be already show that he have the money from the christian beside the benefit he reap in their custom with great employment also for his subject Turkey have little mean for linen but only from India and for calico his whole empire have little or no other mean for linen he can possible be without they although it have and do great exhaust his treasure neither do he gain any manufacture by the same as the christian have always do by the raw silk to the great relief of innumerable poor people so much provide for by the policy of all well govern and flourish commonwealth as by this occasion and in a business of the like kind the proceed of some state in Italy for the maintenance of Arts. the ready money which be yearly carry from some state of Italy into Sicilia I may instance the state of Genovay Florence and Luca who for the maintenance of art and trade do provide raw silk out of Sicilia for the value of five hundred thousand pound sterling at least yearly and for the payment thereof they do vent at Naples Palermo Messina and those part a certain quantity of Florence Rash and some other ware for about one hundred and fifty thousand pound sterling so the rest be three hundred and fifty thousand pound sterling be supply all in ready money which treasure they do willing forsake to procure their trade for experience have teach they that trade be their employment and do return they treasure for by those silk be wrought transport and sell at Frankford and other mart they have the better mean to furnish their contract with the king of Spain in Flanders and so from Spain the silver must return again to Italy but if I shall run out in this and other particular fit our purpose it will make i too tedious and so carry i beyond my aim which be to be brief wherefore I will proceed to clear some doubt in those man who perhaps not have the knowledge of occurrent in foreign part may think that neither Venice nor Marseilles have the mean or yet the mind to export such great sum of ready money yearly out of those dominion especial Marseilles be a part of France where neighbourhood do daily tell we that gold and silver may not be convey out of that kingdom for any valuable sum more than be permit for the necessary use of traveller yet nevertheless experience have likewise teach we that for the effect of those trade whereof we now speak and which they esteem so much there be a free extraction out of the say place of money both gold and silver whereof with they there be no want for the say ware do procure it abundant how Marseilles and Venice be furnish with ready money first to Marseilles it come not only from Genovay Leghorn Cartagenia Malliga and many other port town of Spain and Italy but also from Paris Rouen sainct-malloes Tolouse Rochel deep and other city of France who want not mean to have great store of rial and dollar from Spain and Germany and in the like manner the venetian disperse the say raw silk and other ware into the several state of Italy Germany and Hungary who have but few commodity fit their barter or exchange but only money be there with abundant serve for the mine of Hungary and Germany afford good quantity of gold and silver and likewise the state of Italy especial Genovay Florence and Milan have ever store of rial out of Spain in satisfaction of many great disbursement the italian merchant do furnish the king of Spain with money in Italy and Flanders the three part do show how the east India trade do enrich this kingdom which those merchant make for that king in his occasion of Italy and Flanders of all which I may make a large discourse but I conceive I have say sufficient to show how the trade of the east indies have be and now be bring into Christendom general what money be yearly send out by who and the possibility or mean which they have to perform it I will therefore in the next place satisfy the objector that it be not the east India trade which waste the gold and silver coin or other treasure of this kingdom in particular for first who know not that gold in the east indies have no ratable price with silver neither have the silver coin of England any equal value with the spanish rial according to their several price here beside that his majesty have not authorize the east India company to send away any part of this kingdom coin either gold or silver but only a certain limit sum of foreign silver yearly which as they dare not exceed so never have they as yet accomplish the same for it do plain appear in their book that from the original and first foundation of the trade in 1601. until the month of july how much money and ware the east India company have send forth ever sithence the begin of this trade 1620. they have ship away only five hundred forty eight thousand and ninety pound sterling in spanish rial and some dollar whereas by licence they may have export in that time seven hundred and twenty thousand pound s^^rling also they have lade away in the same term of nineteen year out of this kingdom two hundred ninety two thousand two hundred eighty six pound sterling in broad-cloth kersey lead tin with some other english and foreign commodity which be a good addition and vent of our ware into such remote place where heretofore they have have no utterance at all and note I pray you how time and industry have better this trade the vent of english ware increase in the indies when in the last three year there have be send more ware to the indies then in the sixteen year before and yet our expectation be not at the high for those new bear trade within the red sea and in the persian gulf do bid we hope for better thing as late by letter from Spahan we understand of great quantity of raw silk prepare by the english factor which by God assistance we may expect here about the month of August next with encouragement also to vent our english cloth and kersey in good quantity the like of iron tin and other thing whereof experience of those already sell have give we sufficient approbation of their validity and now omit much matter which may be write touch the discovery of other trade from one kingdom or port to another in the indies with the commodity thereof our stock may be much increase by trade from port to port in the indies for this see the former relation of the trade from surat to Achen and all the southern and further eastern indies as thence also to the red sea etc. the money send to the indies be all foreign coin the east India company be oblige to bring in as much money as they carry out of the realm tobacco raisin oil and wine whereof there be no want but rather too much smoke a proportion of such trade as be hope yearly to be bring into this realm from east India whereby the employment of our ship together with the stock of money and good which be send out of England in they may be much increase I will draw to a conclusion of the point in hand and show that whatsoever sum of foreign ready money be yearly send from hence into the east indies his majesty in the letter patent grant to that company have notwithstanding with singular care provide that the brethren of the company shall yearly bring in as much silver as they send forth which have be always true perform with a overplus to the increase of this kingdom treasure neither be it likely that the money which be thus contract for by the company at certain price and to be deliver they at time appoint will be otherwise bring into England but only by virtue and for the performance of the say contract for without this assurance of vent together with a good price for the say money the merchant will undoubted make their return in other ware the use and extraordinary consume whereof will be find less profitable to the commonwealth when the matter shall be due consider as I shall yet further endeavour to demonstrate and here I will suppose that the east India company may ship out yearly one hundred thousand pound sterling yet it be most certain that the trade be thus drive with sum of ready money it will not decay but rather much increase the treasure of the kingdom which to prove I will brief set down the substance of the english trade unto the east indies concern the quantity of the several sort of ware to be yearly buy there and sell here with the usual price give for they in both place and first I will begin with their cost and charge lade clear aboard the ship in the east indies in the east indies two thousand five hundred thousand pound of pepper at two penny halfpenny the pound cost twenty six thousand forty one pound thirteen shilling four penny one hundred and fifty thousand pound of clove at nine penny the pound cost five thousand six hundred twenty six pound one hundred and fifty thousand pound of nutmeg at four penny the pound cost two thousand five hundred pound fifty thousand pound of mace at eight penny the pound cost one thousand six hundred sixty six pound thirteen shilling four penny two hundred thousand pound of indigo at fourteen penny the pound cost eleven thousand six hundred sixty six pound thirteen shilling four penny one hundred and seven thousand one hundred forty pound of China raw silk at seven shilling the pound cost thirty seven thousand four hundred ninety nine pound fifty thousand of calico of several sort rate at seven shilling the piece one with another fifteen thousand pound the whole sum of all be one hundred thousand pound all the say merchandise have be often experience or buy at or about the price above write and we do hope for our part beside the trade of raw silk from Persia yearly to lade from the indies such quantity of the several sort of ware as be here set down if it shall please his majesty to protect and defend we concern the article of agreement make with the dutch that they may not violate any of they to our hindrance or damage all which ware in England will yield as I do conceive the price hereafter follow viz. in ENGLAND two hundred and fifty thousand pound of pepper at twenty penny the pound cost two hundred and eight thousand three hundred thirty three pound six shilling eight penny one hundred and fifty thousand of clove at six shilling the pound cost forty five thousand pound how much the kingdom stock may increase yearly by trade to the east indies 2500. tunnis of ship will lade home all the ware afore write from the east indies and the material of the say ship unwrought be worth about 15000l sterling India ware will bring ready money into the realm we h^ue no other mean to procure treasure but by trade and merchandise the french and the venetian send the value of 600000l sterling yearly in ready money into Turkey trade make some state very rich which have littl^ other mean if the general trade of this kingdom do export a great value in ware than it do import yearly then do our treasure increase the trade to the east indies may be say to export 480000 pound and to import 120000 l. yearly so the overbalance be 360000 l. sterling every action ought especial to be consider in his end the east indian ware whi^h be send beyond the sea be sell and have their final end in money which may be bring into this realm in that kind if our other trade do not divert the same one hundred and fifty thousand pound of nutmeg at two shilling six penny the pound cost eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty pound fifty thousand pound of mace at six shilling the pound cost fifteen thousand pound two hundred thousand pound of indigo at five shilling the pound cost fifty thousand pound one hundred and seven thousand one hundred forty pound of China raw silk at twenty shilling the pound cost one hundred and seven thousand one hundred forty pound fifty thousand piece of calico of several sort rate at twenty shilling the piece one with another cost fifty thousand pound the whole sum of all be four hundred ninety four thousand two hundred twenty three pound six shilling eight penny so that here will be our own money again and more the sum of three hundred ninety four thousand two hundred twenty three pound six shilling eight penny advance towards the general stock of the kingdom for although the east India company shall disburse the great part of the say sum advance unto his majesty for custom and impost and also unto the factor officer and mariner for wage together with the cost of ship victual munition assurance and the like yet all these the material of ship only except be but transmutation and no consumption of the kingdom stock but if any man object and say that the say commodity be bring into England as be before write they be either consume in the land or be transport into foreign part they be change into other ware so that still we want our hundred thousand pound in ready money the answer be first that in the occasion of this dispute we must conceive the say ware to be of no use for this kingdom but only for so much as do concern the trade thereof and second in the say trade we must consider that although the say good be send out and return home in other ware from foreign part yet still they be negotiate to the increase of the say stock and for the employment of the subject last if there be a resolution to determine and end the business who doubt that the whole value may not be present return hither in ready money for in Italy Turkey and other place where they be most vendible to profit there likewise be the money free to be export at all time and by whosoever and as it be most certain that some other merchandise send out of this kingdom be the mean to bring in the hundred thousand pound in ready money which be here suppose to be send and employ in the east indies as aforesaid so likewise there be the same power in these indian ware to procure other sum of ready money to be bring into this kingdom for let not man doubt but that money do attend merchandise for money be the prize of ware and ware be the proper use of money so that their coherence be unseparable and if the french and the venetian make any doubt of this they will not so willing permit the value of six hundred thousand pound sterling or more in spanish rial and dollar yearly to be carry out of their dominion into Turkey whereof three quarter part at least be employ only for the buy of Persia raw silk which commodity do present enable they with ready money from diverse other state to perform the trade whereby their wealth do much increase and their people be great employ so to conclude this point I will only add that the east India trade alone although it be drive in no amply manner than be afore write be a mean to bring more treasure into the realm than all the other trade of this kingdom as they be now manage be put together for if the rule be true that when the value of our commodity export do overbalance the worth of all those foreign ware which be import and consume in this kingdom than the remainder of our stock which be send forth must of necessity return to we in treasure I be confident that upon a diligent and true inquiry it will be find that the overbalance of all our other trade together will not amount unto so great a sum of money as the east India trade alone do overbalance in this kind and to make the matter yet more plain whereas it be already say that one hundred thousand pound in money export may import about the value of five hundred thousand pound sterling in ware from the east indies we must understand that part thereof to be proper call our importation that this realm do consume which be about the value of one hundred and twenty thousand pound sterling yearly so the remainder be three hundred and eighty thousand pound be matter export unto foreign part in the nature of our cloth lead tin or any other native commodity to the great increase of this kingdom stock and that also in so much treasure so far as the east India trade can be right understand to subsist in this particular for as all human action have their termination and end so likewise there must be a end assign unto the affair of the east indies which be then true say to be finish when this realm be serve and the remainder of those ware which be send from hence beyond the sea sell there and convert into money which likewise from thence may be bring away free and without the danger of law or prohibition forasmuch therefore as it be well know to many man that money be thus procure by the sales of indian ware to profit in the part of Turkey and at Leghorn Genua the Netherlands Marseilles and other place yet notwithstanding if all the say coin or any part thereof shall be divert from this realm by some other new employment or affair it must nevertheless be grant that the say India ware have their final end in money but I will cease to heap up any more argument to prove a matter which be already make so plain wherefore leave this objection I will endeavour to give answer to the next the second objection the timber plank and other material for make of ship be exceed waste and make dear by the build of so many great ship as be yearly send to trade in the east indies and yet the state have no use of any of they upon occasion for either they be not here or else they come home very weak and unserviceable the answer this east India trade seem to be bear and bring up a unthrift for it waste and consume all neither do it good to any 1 but the objection in some part be very weak 2 and in the rest it be mistake for first concern the weakness thereof the first part concern the folly of the objection will man have we to keep our wood and goodly tree to look upon they may aswell forbid the work of our wool and send forth our cloth to foreign part for both be mean alike to procure the necessary ware which this kingdom want do they not know that tree do live and grow and be great they have a time to die and rot if opportunity make no better use of they and what more noble or profitable use then goodly ship for trade and war be they not our barn for wealth and plenty serve as wall and bulwark for our peace and happiness do not their yearly building maintain many hundred poor people and great increase the number of those artesman which be so needful for this commonwealth and be not all this good perform also with great providence by bring in yearly store of timber the providence of the east India company for timber and plank the east India trade h^th not endear the material which serve to make ship and other provision from Ireland why then where be the great waste and dearness I be sure the east India company find it not for whereas they do only buy their provision in Hampshire Essex Kent and Berkshire in all which place they now may have both timber plank sheathing board Trenals and the like both for goodness and price as cheap yea better cheap than they have be this fifteen year and likewise in all that course of time their book do plain show that those ware have never vary much for if they have rise any small matter in one year they have fall as much the next and yet I pray you observe beside the east India company building the many goodly ship which be daily make for other private merchant such as England never have before and that which be most remarkable be the continual late building of his majesty thereby yearly add more strength and glory of great ship to his royal and matchless navy so that here we see this suppose waste and want be not considerable yea but say they the east India ship be never here to serve the kingdom upon occasion or if they be at home they be weak and unfit for service the second part show the mistake in the objection the warlike provision which the east India company keep in stor^ his majesty strength in the east India company alone in trade of merchandise our ship must go and come they be not make to stay at home yet neverlesse the east India company be well prepare at all time to serve his majesty and his kingdom with many warlike provision which they always keep in store such as timber plank iron-worke mast cordage anchor cask ordnance powder shot victual ready pack wine cider and a world of other thing fit the present building repair and dispatch of ship to sea as may be plentiful see in their yard and storehouse at deptford and more especial in those at blackewall which be grow so famous that they be daily visit and view by stranger as well ambassador as other to their great admiration of his majesty strength and glory in one only company of his merchant able at short warning to set forth a fleet of ship of great force and power for it be well know to all man who please true to be inform that the east India company beside their fleet of ship go and come and also abide in the in^i^s be continual build repair rig victual and furnish to sea with all provision needful for such a long voyage some seven or eight great ship yearly which be to be see at a anchor in the river of Thames in a great forwardness some five or six month together before they common depart for the indies which be about the month of march and they be no soon get off from the coast of England but short after be the season of our ship to return from the indies the ship which return from the east indies home may be repair in a very short time who come not home so weak as some will have they for how often have experience be make of our ship which have perform two or three several voyage to the east indies yet at their return they have be indock n^w trim and launch out again fit for the like voyage in less than two month but it will be needless to spend any more time in show the error of this second objection therefore I will rather come to the handle of that which follow the three objection the voyage to the east indies do great consume our victual and our mariner leave many poor widow and child unrelieve beside that many ship be yearly send forth to the east indies and few we see as yet return also this trade have great decay the traffic and ship which be wont to be employ into the straits and yet the say trade to the east indies be find very unprofitable to the adventurer neither do the commonwealth find any benefit by the cheapness of spice and indigo more than in time past the answer why what a world of mischief have we here first dearth second mortality three destruction four beggary five and never a whit the near a very team of calamity draw on to misery be it not then high time to seek a remedy yes very and it will be easy do because these evil never be as yet at least procure by the east India trade as I shall show by answer all the part in order as they stand and first of dearth it be both natural and just that every kingdom state or commonwealth shall feed and cherish up the native people of all degree and condition whatsoever the first part concern dearth to their preservation of life and health with such mean and moderation as their plenty shall afford and this be not only due to they in the time of their abode at home but also upon all occasion of voyage into other country beyond the sea wherein they shall be employ for their own maintenance and for the good of the commonwealth now therefore concern the povision of victual which in this kingdom be yearly prepare for the set forth of those ship which sail to the east indies it be well know to many man the manner how the east India company do victual their ship that it be always proportion for about eighteen month whereas common the voyage prove a year long so that this overplus of time be furnish with the victual of foreign part and likewise for the bread and biscuit which be ship from hence have it not always be make of french corn purposely bring over hither and that at a dear rate only to preserve the plenty of our own grain until now of late day that the farmer here begin to cry out and say that the cheapness of corn do dis-inable they to pay their dear rent thus do the east India company every way accommodate their proceed for the good of the kingdom and further concern their drink be it not a very great part water some wine and cider and but little beer also the flesh they eat be beef and pork and that only for three day in a week the rest of their victual be fish some butter cheese pease oatmeal and other thing all which be proportion into a very spare diet to every man by allowance so that here be no excess nor riot or any other mean to make our victual scant and dear as be by some erroneous suppose but rather by this course of life our plenty be much advance and so I will give answer to the next part which be mortality and great decay of mariner the life of man be so precious that it ought not light to be expose to danger and yet we know the second part concern mortality that the whole course of our life be nothing but a passage unto death wherein one can neither stay nor slack his pace but all man run in one manner and in one celerity the short liver run his course no fast than the long both have a like passeage of time howbeit the first have not so far to run as the late now it be this length of life which nature seek and state likewise endeavour to preserve in worthy man but none be account so worthy in this nature save only they who labour in their vocation and function both for the public good and for their private benefit thus may we esteem our good mariner to be of no small use unto this commonwealth but take they from their laudable and accustom employment good mariner be account worthy man in a commonwealth for want of voyage to sea we see what desperate course they do then attempt by join even with turk and infidel to rob and spoil all christian nation so that we may conclude we must not only breed up mariner but also seek by trade to give they maintenance well all this be true but say they the east India company do neither breed nor maintain but destroy the wont number of our mariner how can this be when it be most certain that England beside the east India fleet have never yet more ship then at this present neither do any of they stay at home for want of mariner no not at this time when many hundred sailor be employ in extraordinary service for his majesty in a royal fleet of ship now at sea beside those great number of our best mariner which have be and daily be waste and take prisoner by the turk so where be this want or what be our misery more than the want of true information in they that be so ill persuade of our company be it not certain that as the east India voyages be long the breed of 400. mariner yearly beside that the fear of a few man death ought not to overthrow or hinder the performance of honourable action for the service of the k. and commonwealth our mariner own disorder life be that which kill many of they the three part concern the decay of ship which have be send to the indies of the dutch wrong and the ship take by they see the former relation of Spurway hore Knowles etc. with the deposition of diverse man and in manner all these indian voyage the twelve ship be the swan defence Solomon attendance all take at Banda before sir tho. dale begin the war the Speedwell the star the dragon the bear expedition rose and the Samson with the hound our trouble with the do the sum of the affair to the east indies ever since the trade begin account of all the money and good which have be send to the east indies ever since the begin of the trade 256288. l. sterling have be return from the east indies which do produce here towards charge 1914600. pound sterling so likewise in nature course many shall die by length of time although they stay at home and to recompense the loss of those that die do not the east India company with great providence yearly ship out at least four hundred land-man in their fleet which in one voyage prove good mariner to serve the kingdom and commonwealth unto which many of they be a burden before they obtain this employment and thus be the kingdom purge of desperate and unruly people who keep in awe by the good discipline at sea do often change their former course of life and so advance their fortune neither indeed be these voyage so dangerous and mortal as be report for how many of our ship have go and come from the east indies without the loss of five man in a hundred other again have have worse success in the first beginning when the season the place and their contagion be not so well know unto we yet time have teach we many thing both for the preservation of health and speedy performance of our voyage then heretofore but the method of my discourse bid i write more of this in the next part which be destruction and this I must divide into two part in the first I will consider the want of diverse ship send to the east indies which be waste there and in the second I will answer the suppose overthrow of the Turkey trade together with much of our ship which be wont to be employ thither first therefore concern the decay of our ship in the indies it can be deny but there have be great spoil of they in these three last year not by the danger of the sea or by the strength of enemy but by unkind and unexpected quarrel with our neighbour the hollander who have take and surprise twelve of our ship at several time and in sundry place to our unspeakable loss and hindrance together with the death of many of our worthy mariner who have be slay and die prisoner under their hand and this have so much the more increase the rumour of their mortality neither listen I here to aggravate the fact more than thus brief to give answer to the objection for our late union with the dutch do promise a double recompense of gain in time to come and they who make this trade so poor and unprofitable be much mistake in the reckon for the present loss which cause many adventurer so much to despair be not in the substance of the trade but by the evil accident which have befall the same and to make this point more plain I must yet declare some other particular in which I will endeavour very brief to set down the sum of the whole business which the english have hitherto perform in the east indies first therefore I do observe that since the begin of this trade until the month of july last 1620. there have be send thither seventy nine ship in several voyage whereof thirty four be already come home in safety rich lade four have be wear out by long service from port to port in the indies two be overwhelm in the trim there six have be cast away by the peril of the sea twelve have be take and surprise by the dutch whereof diverse will be waste and little worth before they be restore and one and twenty good ship do still remain in the indies so this be a true account of our ship and next concern our stock it be a certain truth that in all the say ship there have be send out in ready money as well out of this realm as from all other place wheresoever beyond the sea which have not be land in this kingdom the value of five hundred forty eight thousand and ninety pound sterling in foreign coin and together with the say money there have be ship the value of two hundred ninety two thousand two hundred eighty six pound sterling in sundry sort of english and foreign commodity all which money and ware amount unto eight hundred forty thousand three hundred seventy six pound have be dispose as hereafter follow first there have be lose thirty one thousand seventy nine pound sterling in the six ship which be cast away and in the thirty four ship which be return in safety there have be bring home three hundred fifty six thousand two hundred eighty eight pound sterling in diverse sort of ware which have produce here in England towards the general stock thereof one million nine hundred fourteen thousand six hundred pound sterling for the charge arise here be but a change of effect from one to another as have be say before in this discourse so there ought to remain in the indies to be speedy return hither four hundred eighty four thousand eighty eight pound neither can we conceive that our charge and trouble with the dutch will have waste more than the odd eighty four thousand eighty eight pound sterling so that I be confident that there yet remain four hundred thousand pound sterling of good estate for both the joint stock and what a great value of indian good this sum of money may by God blessing short return in our ship there remain yet in the east indies to be return home from thence about 400000. pound sterling which be there ready to bring they the example here do teach we to make up the reckon so that notwithstanding our great charge of discovery our loss by the danger of the sea our quarrel and infinite hindrance by the dutch yet here the kingdom have and shall have her stock again with a very great increase although the merchant gain concern the two joint stock will prove but poor in respect of the former voyage which have not have the like hindrance and thus in a few line may be see much matter true collect with some pain out of the diverse volume of the east indian book now concern the decay of trade and ship which be wont to be employ into Turkey concern the decay of ship and trade in to Turkey I doubt that in time it will likewise be affirm that the east India company have hinder the vent of our white cloth in the Netherlands which to report be a very strange thing but praise be God to our comfort we see the great increase of goodly ship daily build and employ by the Turkey merchant with vent of more of our english cloth by one three part at least then in time before the east India trade begin yea but say they we have lose the trade of spice and indigo from Aleppo into England well I grant they have yet the kingdom have find it with more profit by another way and they likewise be recompense with a great trade by the export from hence of the selfsame commodity into Italy Turkey and other place neither can it be less profitable for this kingdom to turn the trade of raw silk from Aleppo and to bring they from the persian gulf with one three part less money than it do now cost in Turkey beside that by this mean the money proceed of our english cloth tin and other ware in Turkey not find commodity fit to return for England will undoubted be bring home in gold as it have be perform heretofore when by superfluity of stock send from hence in spice the Turkey merchant can and will justify this truth together with our english ware the merchant be thereby furnish with a sufficient quantity of turkish commodity bring home the remainder of their stock of those year in gold for a great value thus do it plain appear that these revolution of trade have and do turn to the good of the commonwealth neither have the affair of the east indies impair or decay any other trade ship or mariner of this realm but have mighty increase they all in itself wherefore let we now take a view of this noble addition of the kingdom strength and glory but this I must not do by set down the number of our english ship now in the indies or late go that way for they have be heap thither these three last year together without return save only five ship in all that time the rest have be keep there to oppose the fury of the dutch but now we be at union we shall by God assistance daily expect diverse great ship with rich return the strength of the east India ship and for the future time this trade I do conceive will royal maintain ten thousand ton of ship continual that be to say go and return and abide there in the indies which say ship will employ two thousand and five hundred mariner at least and the build with the repair of the say ship here at home will set to work five hundred man carpenter cawkers carver joiner smith and other labourer beside many officer and about one hundred and twenty factor in several place of the indies and so from these matter of great consequence I must begin to write of beggary the four part concern the poverty of widow etc. the east India trade do employ many poor man and deboist people which other trade refuse wage before hand be not give in other merchant voyage neither yet so great wage as the east India company pay the poverty of widow and fatherless be matter of great compassion and do always move christian heart to commiseration and charity whereby many receive relief and help of those who God have bless with better mean but how this poverty shall total be prevent it seem not only difficult but altogether impossible for beside the evil accident and misery which ever attend on our humanity we see how many daily even through their own folly and wilfulness do as it be desperate plunge themselves into adversity and thus the number of those be great who have the charge of wife and child be notwithstanding altogether without mean and art to procure their maintenance whereby some of they want grace do run a desperate course and have untimely end other again be better inspire seek for employment but find it not or with great difficulty for who do willing entertain a man poor and miserable charge with a family and peradventure debauch in condition neither do any of our other merchant voyage to foreign part accept of those novice who never have be use to the sea so that when all the other door of charity be shut the east India gate stand wide open to receive the needy and the poor give they good entertainment with two month wage before hand to make their needful provision for the voyage and in the time of their absence there be likewise pay unto their wife for maintenance two other month wage upon account of every year service and also if any chance to die in the voyage the wife receive all that be find due unto her husband if he do not otherwise dispose it by will and this often happen to be more money than ever they have of their own together in any one time and likewise be not many poor widow when do any of these widow beg for relief in our church as other often do the east India company their charity wife and child of Blackwall limehouse Ratcliff shadwell and Wapping often relieve by the east India company with whole hogshead of good beef and pork biscuit and doale of ready money be not diverse of their child set on work to pick Okam and other labour fit their age and capacity what may I not say of repair of church maintenance of some young scholar relieve of many poor preacher of the gospel yearly with good sum of money and diverse other act of charity which be by they religious perform even in the time now of their worst fortune for all which I hope there shall be a reward unto they and they and so I come to the five part of this three objection and here I must intimate how much they be deceive who think the five part concern the cheapness of spice and indigo at this present in respect of former time that spice and indigo be no better cheap in England now then in time past before the east India trade begin for it be a undoubted truth that in those day we often pay six shilling or more for a pound of pepper and seldom or never less then three shilling and six penny the pound whereas since the trade have come direct from the indies it have be buy common at several price between sixteen penny and two shilling the pound but I will make the difference of price appear more plain by set down the quantity of spice and indigo which be yearly spend in the realm of England together with the low price which they be wont to sell at when we bring they from Turkey and Lisbon and the like concern their usual price now that we bring they from the east indies direct and first as from Turkey price of spice and indigo in former time four hundred thousand pound of pepper at three shilling six penny the pound be threescore and ten thousand pound forty thousand pound of clove at eight shilling the pound be sixteen thousand pound twenty thousand pound of mace at nine shilling the pound be nine thousand pound one hundred and sixty thousand pound of nutmeg at four shilling six penny the pound be six and thirty thousand pound one hundred and fifty thousand pound of indigo at seven shilling the pound be fifty two thousand five hundred pound all these sum be put together come to one hundred eighty three thousand five hundred pound sterling and the self same quantity and sort of ware be common sell at the price here under write now in these late time price of spice and indigo in these latter time four hundred thousand pound of pepper at twenty penny the pound be thirty three thousand three hundred thirty three pound six shilling eight penny forty thousand pound of clove at six penny the pound be twelve thousand pound twenty thousand pound of mace at six shilling the pound be six thousand pound one hundred sixty thousand pound of nutmeg at two shilling six penny the pound be twenty thousand pound one hundred fifty thousand pound of indigo at five shilling the pound be seven and thirty thousand pound all these sum be put together be one hundred eight thousand three hundred thirty three pound six shilling eight penny sterling so that this trade in spice and indigo only do save the kingdom yearly seventy four thousand nine hundred sixty six pound thirteen shilling four penny which be a matter worthy to be observe and so much the rather because it be a certain truth that l^sse than a quarter part of this sum of money which be thus save yearly shall buy in the indies less than eighteen thousand pound sterling in the indies will buy spice and indigo to serve this realm for a year whi^h be not half so much money as it spend beyond these be to buy currand only or to buy tobacco the ware only which be send out of this kingdom into the east indies be of sufficient value to furnish this realm with a overplus of all manner of indian ware Persian Raw silk only except the full quantity of all the several sort of ware before write which do serve for a year provision for this realm of England but still it must be remember that the custom impost wage victual ship and other charge which be to be add will be a great sum than the money which be pay for these ware in the indies but as I have note before the say charge do not consume the kingdom stock although it do great abate the merchant gain and to conclude this point I will add unto that which have be say that the commodity only which we now send yearly into the east indies and Persia be of sufficient value there to return we indigo spice drug and all other sort of indian ware raw-silke of Persia only except for one year consume or more in this kingdom so that now all the money which be send forth in our ship do procure a overplus of the say ware to the furtherance of trade from India hither and after from hence to foreign part again to the great employment of the subject and enrich of this realm both in stock and treasure all which be matter very worthy to be diligent observe and so I come to give answer unto the four and last objection the four objection it be general observe that his majesty mint have have but little employment ever since the east India trade begin wherefore it be manifest that the only remedy for this and so many evil beside be to put down this trade for what other remedy can there be for the good of the commonwealth the answer this four objection may be divide into three part first a evil declare second a remedy propound the first part concern his majesty mint twenty five thousand pound weight at least of silver yearly melt down into plate beside old plate new fashion as by credible report there have be coin great store of gold and silver in his majesty mint since the east India trade begin there have be little or no silver coin in some year when the east India company send out very small sum of money some cause and mean whi^h be wont to bring silver into the realm be cease at this present time th^ second part concern the put down of the east India trade the east India trade be great desire by other christian nation the dutch may grow strong and rich by our destruction the three part concern the council which the obiecter demand three and counsel demand and first concern the evil or want of silver I think it have be and be a general disease of all nation and so will continue until the end of the world for poor and rich complain they never have enough but it seem the malady be grow mortal here with we and therefore it cry out for remedy well I hope it be but imagination make we sick when all our part be sound and strong for who know not the inestimable treasure of this kingdom in plate possess by the people thereof almost of all degree in such measure as never have be see in former age and for his majesty mint it be well know that there have be coin in five year together since the east India company begin six thousand two hundred fourteen pound weight of gold and three hundred eleven thousand three hundred fourscore and four pound weight of sterling money all which gold and silver do amount unto the sum of twelve hundred thirteen thousand eight hundred fifty pound of sterling money how then do this trade turn the currant and employment of the mint but upon the sight of this truth perhaps it will be say that we must resort unto the present time the mint be idle now to which I answer that likewise the mint have little or no employment for coinage of silver in former time when the say company do not export above fifteen or twenty thousand pound sterling at the most no nor yet in the year 1608 and 1612 when in the former they ship out but six thousand pound and in the latter but one thousand two hundred and fifty pound sterling so that both way we see that the mint have have very great employment five year together sithence the east India trade begin and also it have be without employment diverse year when the east India company have send away but very small sum of money wherefore of necessity there must be some other cause and mean whereby our silver be not export only but also it be not import into the realm as in former time for we have not have the mean by our own plenty nor by the scarcity of our neighbour for the space of the last fourteen year together to send out hundred of ship lade with corn as in time past which be return home in silver but rather of late year as be much to be fear a great quantity of our money have be carry out of the kingdom for that corn which have be bring we from the east country and other place to supply our want thus time do change and our fortune change with they neither listen I to make this matter plain by set down those mean which heretofore bring we store of money even out of France and other place which now be cease but without any further meddle in the mint I will come to the remedy which some propound by put down the east India company but here our comfort be that the objector be not our judge who wisdom and integrity labour for the honour of his majesty and the good of his kingdom will soon perceive the mischief of this supposed remedy and that the pretend evil which many with malice chase be that great good which other nation seek by policy and strength to keep and likewise to obtain in which proceed it concern we especial to observe the diligence and practice of the dutch who with more gladness will undertake the whole trade to the east indies then with any reason we can abandon that part thereof which we now enjoy neither can our restraint from the indies keep our silver from thence as long as the dutch go thither for we know that device want not to furnish such design and when their ship return from India shall not our silver out again to help to pay a double price or what they please for all those ware which we shall want for our necessity thus shall the dutch increase their honour wealth and strength while we abate grow poor and weak at sea for want of trade and call you this a remedy no rather term it ruin destruction or what you listen and so I come unto the conclusion or last part and here I must confess myself aground for this matter be much too high for my handle beside my excuse be fair have already do my task to clear the east India trade from imputation the which for want of learning although I have perform without variety of word or eloquence yet it be do with all integrity of truth in every particular as I shall be ready to make proof upon all occasion which may be offer and yet before I make a end although I can satisfy every man desire in such measure as be necessary yet I think it not amiss to perform the same so far as I be able by common practice and my observation in the trade of merchandise which be my profession and first therefore all man do know that the riches or sufficiency of every kingdom state or commonwealth consist in the possession of those thing which be needful for a civil life this sufficiency be of two sort the one be natural and proceed of the territory itself the other be artificial and depend on the industry of the inhabitant the riches of a kingdom be of two sort the realm of England praise be God be happy possess of they both as first have great plenty of natural riches both in the sea for fish and on the land for wool cattle corn lead tin iron and many other thing for food raiment a^d munition insomuch that upon strict term of need this land may live without the help of any other nation but to live well to flourish and grow rich we must find mean by trade to vent our superfluity therewith to furnish and adorn we with the treasure and those necessary ware which foreign nation do afford this kind of industry make some country which be poor of themselves to grow rich and strong by other nation who have great mean and be less industrious four principal cause which carry away our gold and silver and here industry must begin to play his part not only to increase and guide the trade abroad but also to maintain and multiply the art at home for when either of these fail or be not effect with such skill as their mystery shall require then do the commonwealth abate and grow poor neither be it easy perceive at first until some evil accident do stir up our diligence to search out the true cause that so they be remove the effect may cease and this be the subject of our discourse which we now pursue that which I have hitherto deliver have be altogether negative still defend and prove by argument that the east India trade have not hurt this commonwealth and now change my style I must affirm as fast the true cause of those evil which we seek to chase away these cause then as I conceive be principal four the first be the breach of intercourse by foreign nation the second be the abuse of the exchange betwixt we and other country the three be neglect of duty in some subject the four be our damage in commerce with stranger now concern all these I may make a very large discourse but my purpose be only to explain the meaning of every point in order as brief as I can and first for the breach of intercourse by this I understand those nation the first cause concern the standard proceed against intercourse who have either debase their standard or else over value the price of their coin from that equivalence which former they have with the standard and money of this realm and also do tolerate not only their own money but also the coin of other country and especial of this kingdom to be current with they at high rate than the price of the exchange by which course be direct against the intercourse there be a great cause give of exportation of the money of this realm than otherwise there will be for although this be do with great danger to the exporter of the same it be a act against the law of the land yet notwithstanding covetousness be ever conversant in wicked action think nothing unlawful which promise a certain gain and how to remedy this evil practice I find it not easy for the debase of the coin or raise the price thereof in this realm will much impoverish the estate of particular man and yet in the conclusion will prove a business without end for who do not conceive that which will follow beyond the sea upon any such alteration here with we so that still the evil will remain until we find some other remedy and for the exchange of money use betwixt nation the second cause concern the exchange of money with foreign country the practice of those stranger here in this realm who make a trade by exchange of money foreign ware bring in with our ready money carry out of this realm the three cause concern neglect of duty our heavy money be convey beyond the sea and melt down into plate here in the realm although the true use thereof be a very laudable and necessary practice for the accommodate of merchant affair and furnish of traveller in their occasion without the transport of coin from one state to another with danger and loss both to the public and private wealth yet be the abuse thereof very prejudicial unto this kingdom in particular while in the interim the benefit do arise unto other country who diligent observe the price whereby the money be exchange may take advantage to carry away the gold and silver of this realm at those time when the rate of our sterling money in exchange be under the value of that standard unto which place they be convey for in respect the price of the exchange do rise or fall according to the plenty or scarcity of money which be to be take up or deliver out the exchange be hereby become rather a trade for some great moneyed man than a furtherance and accommodation of real trade to merchant as it ought to be in the true use thereof and thus many time money may be make over hither by stranger to a good gain and present carry beyond the sea to a second profit and yet the mischief end not here for by this mean the taker up of money in foreign country must necessary drive a trade to those place from whence they draw their money and so do fill we up with foreign commodity without the vent of our own ware but for this great evil there be a easy remedy and so I come to handle the next cause which be neglect of duty neither be it my intent to write of duty in their several kind but only of that kind of duty which be here think to be neglect by some man in their several vocation as it may peradventure come to pass in those who have the work of his majesty coin either gold or silver if diligent care be not have in the size of every several piece to answer just to his weight for howsoever upon trial of many piece altogether the weight may be sound according to the covenant and within the remedy ordain in the indenture yet notwithstanding many of those piece may be size too light and other as much too heavy which give the great advantage to some people to carry away that which be over-weight and so to leave we they which be too light if they leave we any and this mischief be not single for thereby also some gold smith regard profit more than duty may be the more ready draw to melt down the heavy coin into plate and other ornament both of gold and silver but what may we think of those man who be place in authority and office for his majesty if they shall not withal dutiful care discharge their trust concern that excellent statute wherein it be order that all the money receive by stranger for their merchandise shall be employ upon the commodity of this realm 17. Edward 4. the due performance whereof will not only prevent the carry away of much gold and silver but also be a mean of great vent of our own ware whereof I purpose to write some thing more in the next part which concern our commerce with stranger the four cause concern our commerce with stranger unskilful merchant overthrow our trade and now I come to the last point which I fear be not the least among the cause of our want of money so far as any such may be and let it not seem strange to any man that trade shall hurt and impoverish a commonwealth since it have be always account a excellent mean to help and enrich the same for as this truth can be deny with reason so it be likewise most certain that the unskilful manage thereof have ever prove a great decay unto those nation who have be entangle with such error and be not the example too frequent in many of our own merchant who not only by the peril of the sea and such like misfortune lose their good but also even through want of knowledge wise to direct their affair do overthrow their whole estate neither may we proper call this their loss but rather the kingdom loss in they wherefore it be to be wish that this mystery of merchandise may be leave only to they who have have a education thereunto merchant by education be only fit to trade in foreign part and not to be undertake by such who leave their proper vocation do for want of skill in this both overthrow themselves and other who be better practise but there be yet a far great mischief by our trade beyond the sea when peradventure there may be import yearly a great value in foreign ware then by any way or mean we do export of our own commodity which can otherwise come to pass then with a manifest impoverish of the commonwealth how rich commonwealth may become poor foreign ware bring in for trans to can hurt but great help the commonwealth hope to increase trade by exportation of indian ware to foreign part for as it be a certain course to make we rich both in stock and treasure when we shall carry out a great value of our own good than we bring in of foreign ware so by consequence a course contrary to this must of necessity work a contrary effect neither be this importation mean otherwise then concern those ware which be consume in this realm for the commodity which be bring in and after carry out unto foreign part again can hurt but do great help the commonwealth by increase of his majesty custom and trade with other employment of the subject by which particular I may yet set forth the glory of the east India trade which have bring into this realm in fif^eene month space not only so much spice as have serve the same for the say time but also by the superfluity thereof there have be export into foreign part for about two hundred and fifteen thousand pound sterling so then let all man judge for what a great value we may hope hereafter to export yearly when unto these spice we may by God assistance add the infinite worth of raw silk ^ndicoes calico and some other thing all which be to be issue in the nature of cloth lead tin or any of our own merchandise to the enrich of this kingdom by increase of the common stock so then to conclude this point we ought not to avoid the importation of foreign ware but rather willing to bridle our own affection to the moderate consume of the same the particular trade to the east indies will bring great store of treasure into this realm if the general trade of this kingdom do not hinder and consume it the dutch in particular be say to reap such infinite wealth yearly by this fish trade that without more certain knowledge thereof I dare not set down the sum it seeme^meth so incredible see hereof d. dees book as also cap. smiths for otherwise howsoever the east India trade in particular be a excellent mean great to increase the stock of money which we se^d thither yearly by return home five time the value thereof in rich commodity all which in short time may be convert into treasure as be plain show already yet notwithstanding if these indian ware thus bring home can be spare to serve for that purpose of treasure but must be send forth together with our own native commodity and yet all little enough to provide our excess and extraordinary consume of foreign ware then be it likewise as certain that the general trade of this kingdom do hinder and divert the come in of the say treasure by overbalance the value of our ware export with the importation and immoderate consume of foreign commodity therefore forasmuch as the number of the people in this realm be think to be great encreas^d of late time both in themselves and stranger whereby necessary the commodity of this kingdom and also foreign ware be the more consume and waste a double mean to abate the commonwealth it therefore concern we all in general and every man in his particular to stir up our mind and diligence to help the natural commodity of this realm by industry and increase of art see that the material can be want to make such stuff and other thing as be daily bring unto we from foreign part to the great advantage of stranger and to our no less damage neither shall we neglect the riches which our sea afford while other nation by their labour do procure themselves great treasure from the same and as the diligent performance of these thing will plentiful maintain the poor and much increase the common stock of this kingdom so likewise for the better furtherance thereof we ought religious to avoid our common excess of food and raiment which be grow to such a height in most degree of people above their ability that it be now beyond all example of former age neither be it needful for i to set down the particular of these abuse for they be too well know and I be confident that the wisdom of our government do endeavour to see they as well amend to the glory of God the honour of the king and the good of the commonwealth amen courteous reader I can have add other endeavour in this defensive argument for the east indian trade and especial that of that learned gentleman sir dud. diggs but because himself be now absent in weighty employment and I know not whether he will be willing to see it muster and marshal in my file I be loath to do it for his ill-will I have cause to be unwilling to purchase who goodwill have purchase i and i a worthless purchas in effect my present good in affect great that I may have be enable to have bestow on the world my promise perfect World wherein not to have succeed be yet as that vast and incompetible design of i to have exceed as other otherwise so herein himself beside late occurrent have minister other string for busy finger to harp on though not with best harmony since the edition of that book I have think also to have add somewhat out of master misselden free trade fit the present business but seem to have make not a indian voyage but a plantation in so long stay there I will bring you homeward and because the wont way of return be by encompass Africa that course also we will here take and to prevent sea-sickness and the lazy scorbute we will not only touch on the Shore but adventure into the main land and follow the best guide both english and other through the african both desert and habitation of who John Leo be the best that have write in that argument and as a lion may conduct the most fearful through the most perilous passage for what may not coward do have a lion to their guide and captain the end of the five book