THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE. The Prooeme. HERODOTVS in his CLIO, reportes that CROESVS King of LYDIA had a ſonne borne dumbe: and his Countrey being invaded, and the King himſelf in imminent danger of death by a certaine Perſian ready to lay violent hands on him; the Kings ſonne affected with the preſent danger, then ſpake that neuer ſpake before, and cryed alowd, O homo ne perimas Patrem! O man kill not the King! 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Herodot. in Clio lib. 1. And ſurely my ſelfe being conſcious of mine owne wants, yet as ſenſible as any, of the terrors without, and errors within, wherewith the Commerce of this Kingdome is encountered; layd mine hand on my mouth and kept long ſilence: becauſe it was a ſubiect fit for a more able man, and a more exquiſite pen: but when I beheld this former flouriſhing Trade of ours, to be threatened by many as eminent as imminent dangers, and the very life thereof to lie a bleeding; whilſt I was muſing the fire kindled, and at the laſt I ſpake with my pen, as I neuer ſpake before, O homines ne perimatis Patriam! O men kill not the Kingdome! Or had I ſtill beene ſilent, and were all men mute, ſurely the cauſe it ſelfe would haue called for redreſſe: or the ſtones would haue cryed to the timber, the ſhippes to the ſeas, the ſeas to the ſhores, one deep to another deep, becauſe it is the complaint not of a common man, but of a Common-wealth; not of a Companie of men, but of a Kingdome. Things once out of order, repetitis paſsibus, double their pace, and run haſtily vnto ruine. The fire that even now was ſpyed in a ſparkle, hath enflamed the whole Citie, all the Kingdome. The Clowd that ere while roſe vp like a mans hand, is ſpred abroad, and hath ouerſpread all our Horizon. Theſe were the motiues that led me along to that labour, which I lately offered to the honour of the King, and ſeruice of the publique. Therein I layd a Baſis or foundation onely, for a more skillfull worke-man to erect a more ſtately building. Mine, was but a modell or frame, rough hewen, ſlightly ſet vp and pinn'd together; to try how the parts and joynts thereof would trent and fit the ſquare: that ſo in due time I might haue wrought ouer, and fitted each part and piece for their place and vſe. But now his Maieſtie, whoſe eye is not dimme, and whoſe hand is ſteadie to the going downe of the Sunne; who waketh when his ſubiects ſleepe, and whoſe candle goeth not out by night; who ſtandeth in the Watch-tower all day, and keepeth the Sentinell by night; out of his Princely prudence and prouidence and vnwearied watchfulneſſe ouer the welfare of his ſubiects, hath been graciouſly pleaſed, firſt, to grant a ſpeciall Committee, as a preparatiue or enquirie; and now a ſpeciall Commiſſion as a wholeſome medicine or remedie, for the dangerous diſeaſe of the decay of Trade. Which laſt, it hath pleaſed his Maieſtie to direct to many Noble Perſonages of dignitie, and other worthie Perſons of ranke and qualitie, ſelected and collected like a Court Parliament, from all the parts and places of the Kingdome. And that no due information might be wanting, which might conduce to the reformation of ſo many growing grieuances in Trade, it hath pleaſed the State to honour ſome men of my profeſſion to be ioyned in this Commiſſion, who according to their choyce and worth, will no doubt infinitely ſupply whatſoeuer might haue occurred vnto me, for this ſeruice. So that now I ſhall only draw the Circle of Commerce, and contract trade to its owne Center, the Ballance of trade: & leaue thoſe other pieces, vnto theſe Maſter-workemen, to be poliſht for their vſe, in this Royall Edifice, commanded and commended by his Highnes to their ſtructure. The rather for that heretofore ſome Noble & learned in this Kingdome, obſerving ſome concurrence in the cauſes and remedies by mee lately publiſhed,In Free Trade. with thoſe of more worthie Perſons reported to his Maieſtie; conceived that their labours had beene publiſhed by my pen: wherein, as I muſt acknowledge the vnworthineſſe of my perſon, to receiue ſuch gueſts vnder my roofe, and the vnfitneſſe of my pen, to repreſent ſuch pieces; ſo alſo had I not the happines to attend Thoſe then, or Theſe ſince, in any of their aſſemblies as did other Merchants; whereby my diſcourſe might haue receiued ſome life and force from their worth and influence. Their good acceptation of my poore endeauours, together with the approbation of many other Noble and learned, graue and iudicious, is more then I could haue hoped to merit: which wil abundantly ſupport me and it againſt the Malignitie of one Malynes onely, amongſt thouſands of better inſtructed and affected perſons. Whoſe palate being fallen, is become ſo farre out of taſte, that he can reliſh no meats not cook't by himſelf; and his owne cookerie hath in it ſo much of his Coliquintida, his ſtirre about his Par, that it hath ſpoiled all his pot of porrage. Himſelf, his ſubiect, much more his rude ſtile, and vnmannerly manner of writing, deſerue contempt rather then the honour of an anſwer. But for ſome Gentlemens ſakes of qualitie, to whom I owe my ſelfe, who doe profeſſe they know not in many things what the man meaneth, for when he that writeth vnſtandeth not what he ſayes, how ſhall he that readeth? For their ſa•es I ſay, not for his, I am I know not how, enclos'd within this Circle, through the Center whereof I will draw a Diameter, and diuide the whole Circle into two Semicircles. In the firſt, I will conſider, whether Malynes obiections ſcattered here and there in his little Fiſh, and great Whale, againſt my Tract of Free Trade, may haue any place within the Peripheria or circumference of this Circle. which if you pleaſe, may alſo be the firſt part or draught of this Ballance of Trade. In the other Semicircle, I will demonſtrate the nature and vſe of Exchanges in generall, and therein the Ballance of the Trade of this Kingdome with forraine Countries: which alſo may bee the ſecond part or draught, of this Ballance of Trade. But before I begin with either, I am diſcomforted in both: Becauſe I am led within the liſts, to deale with a daſtardly Combatant: of whom Martiall could tell me long agoe, that I might expect conqueſt, but no contentment: Seu victus ſeu victor eris, maculere neceſſe eſt,Martiall. Si ſit cum vili ſtercore pugnatibi: Nor flight, nor fight, will bring thee but diſgrace, If that thou fight with one that's vile and baſe. Nor can there be any delight to thoſe that are lookers on: for Malynes received my Modell in ſome forme, but returned it to mee pull'd in pieces, all out of frame. You know I conſidered Trade, as it is Deformed, as it might be Reformed. Trade Deformed, I conſidered in the Cauſes, in the Effects. In the Cauſes, the Matter and Forme of Trade. The Matter I ſhewed to be either Naturall or Artificiall. The Forme occurred in Gouerned or Vngouerned trade. The Effects reflected on the King, the Kingdome. Trade Reformed, I preſented in the Remedies: to euery maladie, a medicable remedie: and theſe I purſued every one in their order. But now theſe Rankes are broken: this order's diſordered: nor Right nor Left hand file is left, nor Front, nor Rere. Now I muſt follow my Leader: whether you finde Poſture or Impoſture in his order; t'is his not mine. I ſhall therefore in this my Semicirculary Angle, or firſt Draught of my Ballance, firſt diſplay Malynes Colours; and then purſue his Poſtures in his owne Diſorder. His Colours are ſet vp in his Title, thus: The maintenance of free Trade according to the three Eſſentiall parts of Trafique: namely, Commodities, Monies, and Exchange of monies by bils of Exchange for other Countries. THE FIRST PART. Malynes obiections refuted. WHat hope can we haue of this mans Treatiſe,Section 1. when hee failes in his Title? The Cauſes of things are wont to bee conſidered, in the Efficient, & Matter; the Forme, and the End. Some ſay theſe cauſes are either External or Internall. Externall, as the Efficient and End. Internall, as the Matter and Forme. All agree in this, that theſe two, to wit, the Matter and Forme of things, doe conſtitute their Eſſence. There is no place in the Eſſence of things, for any third thing. Commodities and mony, are the Matter of trade: the manner of buying and ſelling, is the Forme of trade: He that tradeth the Efficient: gaine the End of trade. So that the Matter and Forme of trade, are the Eſſentiall parts of trade. But if Malynes would make Exchanging of monies to be a kinde of buy-and ſelling, and conſequently to fall within the Forme of trade; or as it is a merchandiſe to be the Matter of trade, yet here's no third thing to approue his Title. Yea, but Malynes will haue you take the Head of this his little fiſh, and the fin or tayle of his great Whale, and put them both together: and then he will giue you an anſwer paſt peraduenture. Will you heare what he ſayes? Great Whale, Page 500.Concerning the beeing, eſſence or Exiſtence of things, he wil make no difference betweene naturall things, and things artificiall: and ſo there is but two eſſentiall parts of Materia & Forma: albeit that ſome Philoſophers haue eſtabliſhed three beginnings of Naturall things, Matter, Forme, and Deprivation. The Matter hath no other office or function, but the changing from one forme into another; Deprivation giving an inclination thereunto: for deprivation is an Imperfection ſo conioyned to the matter, that without her, if ſhee were ſeparated, nothing would bee ingendered: and therefore in Heaven there is no Deprivation, and conſequently no generation, ne corruption. The Forme therefore giveth perfection to the thing and beeing alſo, and without her, the Matter is more imperfect then the eye is without the faculty of ſeeing, or the eares without hearing. But in Artificials, the beeing hath her parts, as Trafique hath three, namely, Commodities, Money, and Exchange: ſo other things may conſiſt of more beeings or ſimples, wherein the termes of Art are not excluded. COntra principia negantem, minimè diſputandum:§. 2. It is againſt Art to diſpute with a man that denyeth the Principles of Art. This ſentence ſheweth Malynes groſſe ignorance, not to haue learn't to diſtinguiſh the Principles of naturall things from their Eſſence. Wherein firſt he would make a difference betweene the Eſſence or beeing of things Naturall, and things Artificiall. And next he confoundeth the Principles of Phiſicall or Naturall things, with their Eſſence, as if they were all one. For although ſome Philoſophers ſay, that Matter, Forme, and Privation, are the Principles of Naturall things, yet what is that to their Eſſence? Therefore to take off this Pterygium or thicke skin from Malynes eyes; we will firſt conſider the Eſſence of things, and then their Principles. For the Former of theſe, there was never any Philoſopher, Heathen or Chriſtian, nor any man of Divine or Humane learning, that ever aſſign'd any other parts then the Matter and Forme, to the Eſſence of things, whether Naturall or Artificiall. In the Former, we may take for an inſtance, Man, that Maſter-piece of Naturall things: Homo conſlat anima & copore: A man conſiſts of ſoule and bodie. Now the Matter of a Man is a corporeall ſubſtance, common to other creatures: but the Forme of Man is his rationall ſoule: whereby hee differeth from them all. To whoſe exiſtence no third thing can be added. It is true, that Body, Soule, and Spirit, are ſometimes put together in the Scripture: but by Spirit is there meant the facultie of the ſoule. Which ſurely that learned holy Apoſtle did not ſo conioyne without a myſtery. For the word Soule in the holy languages, ſometimes ſignifieth the Mortall life, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Anima. and ſometimes and more commonly, the Immortall ſoule. Now as it ſignifieth the Mortall life, it is common to all other creatures as well as Man. But as it ſignifieth the Immortall ſoule, it is propper and peculiar to Man alone. So that by the Bodie, Soule, and Spirit, the Apoſtle diſtributes the whole Man into the Body, and the Spirituall ſoule; to anſwere that which hee knew the Philoſophers called the Rationall ſoule. There is alſo alike Entity or Eſſence of Matter and Forme, in Artificiall things: wherein Malynes no leſſe groſly erreth. The Matter of an Houſe, is ſtone and timber: the Forme of it, is the faſhion or proportion after which it is built. To which no third thing can be added to giue vnto it being. And thence it is that the Logicians ſay, that Forma dat eſſe rei, the forme giveth to the thing, the perfection of beeing: becauſe it giueth the denomination of the thing. For a Man is not ſaid to bee a Man in reſpect of his matter or corporeall ſubſtance: for then a beaſt ſhould bee a man: but in reſpect of his Rationall ſoule, whereby hee excelleth all other creatures. An Houſe is not an houſe in reſpect of the Matter whereof it is made; for then all other ſtone & timber ſhould be an houſe: but in reſpect of the Forme of it, whereby it is knowne to bee a houſe. And ſo likewiſe in the trafique of Merchants, which is alſo an Artificiall thing, there are no other Eſſentiall parts, then the Matter and Forme of Trade. The Matter as I ſhewed before, is merchandize and money, whether exchanged or not exchanged: the Forme is buying and ſelling, and as we ſay, chopping and changing of one thing for another: which in one word is called Commerce. Without which there would bee no traffique amongſt men, notwithſtanding the materials of trade. And thus much briefly for the Eſſence of Naturall and Artificiall things.Colleg. Conimb. in Phys. Ariſt. lib. 1. cap. 7. partic. 2. Finitū, infinit. Quieſc. mobile. Par, Impar. Rectū, ebliquū. Vnum multit. Lumē, tenebra. Dextrū, ſiniſtr. Bonum, malum. Mas, ſoemina. Qu•drat. long. Eeodē Cōment. lib. 1. cap. 7. partic. 3. Now for the Principles of Naturall things, which Malynes cannot diſcerne from their Eſſence: Some Philoſophers ſay there is but One, as the Earth, as doth Heſiodus in his Theogonia & others. Some the Water, as Thales Mileſius & others. Some the Ayre, as Anaximines and others. Some the Fire, as Hippaſius Metapontinus, and others. Other Philoſophers ſay there are Ten, as the Pythagoreans, who reduced the whole frame of Nature into Decada or Denaria, into Ten coniugations of Principles. All which Ariſtotle reduceth into Matter, Forme, and Privation: yet ſo as he excludeth Privation from the Being of naturall things: for thus he ſaith,〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Ariſt. in Phys. lib. 1. cap. Secundū Paciū. 9. Pacii Cōment. in Phys. Ariſt. c. 8. partic. 20. Idempartic. 17. Privation is not Ens or Beeing, becauſe it is not in the ſubiect which is made by it. And therefore Pacius vpon Ariſtotle thus concludeth: Materia & forma ſunt Principia per ſe, Privatio vero per accidens: There are ſimply but two principles of naturall things, to wit, Matter and Forme; but after a ſort a third, Privation. Becauſe ſaith he, dupliciter conſideratur forma, quà abeſt & quà adeſt: The Forme is conſidered two wayes, as it is Abſent, and there's the Terminus à quo: and as it is Preſent, and there's the Terminus ad quem: which Abſence is nothing elſe but Privation. This cannot ſo well be vnderſtood of thoſe that that are not acquainted with theſe things, as by example: which we will inſtance firſt, in ſome Naturall, and then in ſome Artificiall thing. The Eye is a Naturall thing, the Matter whereof is an Oculary ſubſtance: the Forme is Seeing. Blindnes taketh away the ſight of the Eye, and is therefore called Privation of the ſight: whereby the firſt forme of ſeeing is changed into blindnes. A Ship is an Artificiall thing: the Matter whereof is timber and iron: the Forme is the mould and proportion of the Ship. Now if you will breake vp this Ship, and take her in pieces, and thereof build an Houſe, there will be a Privation of the firſt forme, and a mutation thereof into a ſecond, to wit, of a Ship into an Houſe. So then a blinde man will not ſay, that blindnes is any part of ſeeing: and hee is an ill Carpenter that cannot know a Houſe from a Ship: and as ill a Sophiſter is Malynes, not to diſcerne Privation from the Eſſence of Naturall or Artificial things. Which he might haue better vnderſtood, if he had beene able to conſult with Ariſtotle, or any of his Interpreters. But alas, how ſhould hee vnderſtand him or them, when hee cannot ſo much as tranſlate a ſentence of him out of Latin, much leſſe out of the Originall, into proper or ſignificant words? Witneſſe theſe three in his one ſentence aboue recited, Eſtabliſhed, Beginnings, and Deprivation, for Aſsigned or Conſtituted, Principles, and Privation. Wherein a ſmatterer in Art, could not haue ſhowne himſelfe ſo ignorant. Theſe are this Captaines Colours. His Poſtures follow, I feare Impoſtures. This for one, That the Author of Free trade,Epiſt. p. 2. either ignorantly or wilfully hath omitted to handle the predominant part of Trade, namely the myſtery of Exchange. MEndacem oportet eſſe memorem.§. 3. If Malynes had not forgot himſelfe, hee might haue perceiued his Par of Exchange put out of the Remedies of trade, in Cap. 7. Fol. 104. of my diſcourſe,Free Trade. cap. 7. with the reaſons thereof: and therefore not omitted. Neither was it the ſcope of my diſcourſe to handle euery thing that might occur a mans imagination after Malynes manner; but ſuch things onely as tended to the hinderance of the Trade of the Kingdome, and to preſent their remedies. Now there being no ſuch Cauſality nor Remedy, in that his Par of Exchange, as I ſhall proue anon, there was no more Ignorance nor Wilfulnes in me to paſſe by that, then all other impertinent things. But it is not ſtrange, that hee traduceth me, when hee dares be ſo bold with the Nobility of the Kingdome: thus, I haue theſe forty yeares ſpent much time and charges at the pleaſure of great Perſonages:Epist. p. 6. and nothing did encounter me but ingratitude. A Very ſcandalous aſperſion layd vpon the Nobility of the Kingdome!§. 4. And it is much more vnlikely for him to deſerue, then not to receiue more then his deſert of any great Perſonage. His time and charges if hee hath ſpent any, are more likely to haue beene ſpent in proling Proiects: and I wiſh all were ſo ſerv'd that follow that trade. Nay will you heare him what he ſayes of the whole Kingdome? The Kingdome of England would haue beene more ſenſible of the like loſſe,Little fiſh. P. 18.if the hoſtile depredations heretofore made, had not ſupplyed the ſame. VOx profectò pecudis non hominis!§. 5. What, is the man madde? hath he no leſſe a crime to accuſe the Kingdome with, then with Depredation, with robbing, and pilling, and poling? Its pitty ſuch ſtuffe as this ſhould paſſe the Preſſe. I leaue him and it, to the iudgement and cenſure of the State. But by this time I hope this Captaines paſſion's paſt, and hee come to himſelfe: for now he profeſſeth to ſpeake ingeniouſly, although before hee ſpake without feare or wit: Now he will diſcourſe of Merchants, of whoſe profeſſion himſelfe would ſeeme to bee, though by vſurpation onely. To ſpeake ingeniouſly,P. 4.Merchants cannot enter into conſideration of the quantity of forraine Commodities imported at deare rates, and the home Commodities exported at leſſer rates reſpectiuely in former times: by the diſproportion whereof commeth an evident ouer-ballancing of Commodities. Merchants do not regard whether the monies of a Kingdome are vndervalued in exchange, by the inhanſing of moneys in forraine parts, whereby our monies are exported, when the exchange doth not anſwer the true value by bills, and the monies of other Countries cannot be imported, but with an exceeding loſſe, which every man ſhunneth. True it is, that they obſerue within the Realme to keepe the price of money at a ſtand, according to the Kings valuation: but in forraine parts they run with the ſtreame headlong downe with other Nations, without conſideration of their owne hinderance. Merchants doe not know the waight and fineneſſe of monies of each Countrey, and the proportions obſerved betweene gold and ſilver: nor the difference of ſeverall ſtandards of coyne: a matter ſo neceſſary for them to know, to make thereby profitable returnes of the provenue of our home Commodities, either in Money, Bullion, or Wares. Finally, Merchants ſeeking their Privatum Commodum, take notice onely of what is prohibited and commanded: whereas it may fall out alſo, that to require their opinion for the reformation of ſome abuſes, they may bee thought many times as vnfit, as to call the Vintners to the conſultation of lawes to be made againſt Drunkards. A Las poore man,§. 6. how ſhall hee ſpeake Ingeniouſly or wittily, that hath no Genius at all? His ſpeech bewrayeth his want of wit and honeſtie. No marvell that in page 64. he confeſſeth that to the iudicious Merchants, Little fiſh. P. 64. 48. be knoweth he hath giuen cauſe of offence, to haue written ſo much in the defence of Exchange: and in page 48. that hee hath made himſelfe odious to his owne Nation. It is an ill bird, that foules his owne neſt. And ſurely if Malynes had learn't any good maners, or but common humanity, or had himſelfe ever beene Merchant, Moderne or Ancient; he would never haue abuſed ſo many worthy Perſons of that profeſſion; of ours, of others, yea of his owne Nation: amongſt which as well as ours, that I may giue them their due, there are many learned and expert Merchants, that are aſham'd of his ignorance and folly. For who can enter into conſideration of the quantitie or qualitie of Commodities, whether natiue or forraine, exported or imported, deare or cheape, comparable to Merchants? And if the Ballancing or ouer Ballancing of trade by the diſproportion therof, can be ſaid to be evident to any, ſurely it can be evident to none more then to expert Merchants. Or who are more quicke-ſighted into the values of monies, both domeſtick and forraine, gold and ſilver, waight and finenes, then Merchants; whoſe continuall practice it is, to pry into the price and value of all things? For there is no Merchant of any experience, but as he hath one eye vpon the value of his Commoditie, ſo hath hee the other eye vpon the money, both Intrinſique, in the inward value or finenes, and Extrinſique, in the outward denomination or account as it is currant in euery Countrey, together with the courſe of Exchange, whither he doth direct his trade. Otherwiſe, if the money riſe in denomination, aboue it true worth in valuation, and the Exchange alſo riſe accordingly: if this Merchant doe not raiſe the price of his Commodity in due proportion anſwerable thereunto; he ſhall bee ſure to come home by weeping croſſe, how ever hee make his returne, whether by Exchange; or in Money, Bullion, or Wares. And is it not lawfull for Merchants to ſeeke their Privatum Commodum in the exerciſe of their calling? Is not gaine the end of trade? Is not the publique involved in the private, and the private in the publique? What elſe makes a Common-wealth, but the private-wealth, if I may ſo ſay, of the members thereof in the exerciſe of Commerce amongſt themſelues, and with forraine Nations? And by your leaue Malynes, who are more fit then Vintners, if not to execute, yet to conſult of lawes againſt Drunkards; or Merchants to vnmaske the myſteries of Mounte-bankes, Iugglers, and Impoſters of trade? I marvell who made Malynes a Law-maker for Merchants, if he be ſo ignorant of their profeſſion! Hee ſhould haue beene called, before he came to this Councell. The profeſſion of a Merchant is more noble, then to be ſo diſabled and diſgrac't by ſuch a fellow as Malynes is. Merchants are of high account in all parts of the world, in times of peace, and in times of warre. Merchants are wont to be ſupported of Kings and Princes, cheriſhed of Nobles, favoured of States-men, honoured of all men, diſgrac't of none: becauſe the ſtrength of Kingdomes, the revenue of Princes, the wealth of every Cōmon-wealth, hath a Correlation with this Noble Profeſſion. Merchants are wont to make it their glory, to advance their fortunes, renowne their names, embellize their houſes, beautifie their families with the honour of this faculty: and to perpetuate the ſame vnto poſteritie, as an hereditary title of honour vnto their name and blood. And this is it, that hath made many houſes and families of Merchants famous in forraine parts: and maketh thoſe Common-wealths flouriſh, where there is ſuch a Spring, ſuch an Of-ſpring. For where the father doth thus ingenerate his ſonne, and the ſonne doth not degenerate from his father, there the Eſtate is kept entire, in it's owne ſtock: there the Spring doth not ſpread it ſelfe into ſtragling ſtreames: in which their fame is loſt, their name put out, the Eſtate conſum'd in ryot: and this is a Common loſſe vnto our Common-wealth. Merchants I ſay, beſides their knowledge of Commodities, and the courſe of Exchanges, and the values, waight, and finenes of monies, and the ſtandards of ſeverall Countries, and their generall iudgement in all manner of trade; all which are but the elements of merchandizing, and a kinde of inbred knowledge in a well-bred Merchant; are acquainted with the Manners, Cuſtomes, Languages, Lawes of forraine Nations, yea with the Religion, Revenue, Strength, and Policy of forrain Princes and States: whence it is, that the States and States-men, Governours, Counſellers, and Magiſtrates of Venice, Luca, Genoa, Florence, the Vnited Provinces of the Low Countries, and many other well governed Common-wealths, are by education Merchants: In ſo much as I may truely ſay, and I hope without any ſuſpition or offence, there's none more fit to make a miniſter for a King, then an expert and iudicious Merchant. But if Malynes hath no more skill of Merchants, how will you take his word for Merchandize? yes, he will ſhew you that, vnder three ſimples, ſimply enough I warrant you: thus, Commodities, moneyes,P. 2.and exchange of monies may be aptly compared to the Bodie, Soule, and Spirit of traffique. The firſt, as the Body, vpheld the world by Commutation and bartering, vntill money was deviſed to be coyned. The ſecond, as the Soule in the Body, did infuſe life to traffique by the meanes of equalitie and equity, preventing advantage betwene Buyers and Sellers. The third, as the Spirit and faculty of the Soule, being ſeated every where, corroberateth the vitall Spirit of traffique, directing and controlling by iuſt proportions, the priſes and values of Commodities and monies. VPheld the world by Commutation:§. 7. admirable Oratory, and as incomparable a compariſon! for the Body without the Soule or life is dead: but ſo was not Cōmerce in former times without money: elſe he had much miſtaken his voyage, that when Sir Thomas Mores Vtopia was firſt diſcovered, would needs in all haſte goe dwell there, becauſe there was ſuch a flouriſhing Common-wealth without money. And to ſpeake of the ſoule, without the ſpirit, or faculties of the ſoule, is abſurd: for the ſoule and the faculties of the ſoule, are inſeparable. But before there was any Exchange in monies, trade and traffique did conſiſt in money and merchandize, and ſubſiſt without it: and ſo doe the trades of many Countries at this day, which haue no exchange for monies at all. See another Simile, Even as money is the ſquare and rule to ſet a price vnto all Commodities,P. 3.and therefore called Publia menſura: even ſo is the exchange of money by bills, the publique meaſure betweene vs and forraine Countries, according to which all Commodities are bought and ſold in the courſe of traffique. THe Propoſition is true,§. 8. that money is Publica menſura: but the Reddition is falſe, that the Exchange is the publique meaſure between vs and forraine Nations, whereby Commodities are bought and ſold in the courſe of traffique. For Merchants, as I haue ſhewed, doe vſe to value the Commodities of every Countrie, by the finenes or baſenes of the money of each Countrey, and by their obſervation, whether the ſame Commodities are in more or leſſe requeſt, and not by the Exchange. For it is not the rate of Exchange, whether it be higher or lower, that maketh the price of Comodities deare or cheape, as Malynes would here inferre; but it is the plenty or ſcarcitie of of Commodities, their vſe or Non-vſe, that maketh them riſe and fall in price. Otherwiſe if Malynes rule were true, that the prices of Commodities ſhould perpetually follow the rates of Exchange; then Commodities ſhould all riſe and fall together, as the Exchange riſeth or falleth. But Merchants of experience know, that commonly one Commodity riſeth, when another falleth: and that they fall and riſe, as they are mor or leſſe in requeſt and vſe. See yet another diſsimilitude, As the Elements are ioyned by Symbolization,P. 5.the ayre to the fire by warmnes, the water to the ayre by moyſture, the earth to the water by coldnes: ſo is Exchange ioyned to Monies, and Monies to Cōmodities by their proper qualities and effects. I Would there were a Symbolum or affection in his Elements,§. 9. and not an Aſymbolum or diſaffection or confuſion in them, as Du Bartas obſerved ſometimes to be in the other: whereof hee thus ſpeaketh, La terre, l'air, le feu, ſe tenoyent dans la mer:De la Sepmaine 1. Iour. La mer, le feu, la terre, eſtoyent logez dans l'air: L'air, lamer, et le feu dans la terre: et la terre Chez l'air, le feu, la mer. — Earth, aire, and fire, were with the waters mixt: Water, fire, earth, within the aire were fixt: Aire, water, fire, about the earth did glide: Earth, fire, water, did in the aire reſide. BVt Malynes hath more skill in Philomythy then Philoſophy: §. 10. hee will tell you a tale of a voyage into Barbary, P. 7. where hee learn't ſo much experience in Navigation, that now he can tell you, that the Rudder of a Ship is the Efficient cauſe of ſayling.P. 8. Is this man fit to giue his iudgement in matters of waight, and affaires of State, that ſheweth ſuch groſſe ignorance, in ſo eaſie and familiar things? If hee had conſulted with a Yonker or Novice that had made but one voyage to Sea, he would haue told him, that the Rudder is the cauſe of ſtearing or guiding of the Ship, but the winde of ſayling. For a Ship may ſayle without a Rudder, as ſometimes the Eaſt India Companies Ship the Dragon did, a great part of the way from the Eaſt Indies: but for a Ship to ſayle without winde, it is impoſſible. For that's Cauſa ſine qua non, as the Logicians ſpeake. Or if hee had well vnderſtood the name of the thing, he might haue given a better gueſſe at the nature and vſe thereof: according to that of the Poet, Conveniunt rebus nomina ſaepè ſuis: For the Rudder of a Shippe is therefore called Gubernaculum à Gubernando, becauſe it governeth and guideth the Shippe. But Velum, and in French La voile the ſayle, is derived à volando, of flying and running ſwiftly. For a Ship ſayling with a great gale of winde, is ſayd to fly before the winde. And thence it is that we are wont to ſay, Avis volat, and Navis volat: the Bird flies, and the Shippe ſayles: the one being a proper,Calep. the other a Metaphoricall ſpeech. Or Malynes mother tongue might haue taught him ſo much mother wit, as to haue knowne, that Het Roer van't ſchip is ſo called, à Roeren or Rúeren, to touch or ſtirre a thing, becauſe a Ship feeles the very touch of the Rudder. Which phraſe hath in it a fine inſinuation of the wondrous volubility and facility of turning about that huge and maſſie bodie of the Shippe, by the touch or ſtirring of ſo ſmall an inſtrument as is the Rudder thereof. And Stieren in Dutch, ſignifieth to guide or direct a Ship, and Stierman the Pilot of a Ship: none of them to ſayle a Ship. But God keepe our Ship of traffique from all ſuch Pilots as Malynes is, leaſt it come on ground. ANd thus Malynes having abuſed the termes of Art, which indeed it is not poſſible for him,§. 11. or a wiſer then hee to vnderſtand, without knowledge of the Art it ſelfe; and improperly compared his Par of Exchange like a Parret, to Clocks, and Shippes, and Dialls, and Actiue, and Paſsiue, and what hee liſt himſelfe; the reſt of the pages of his preamble, and of other paſſages in his Pamphlet, hee hath ſtuft with immodeſt termes of his owne Art againſt mee. But knowing that I could not touch pitch and not be defiled, nor reproue a ſcandalous perſon without receiving ill language, I ſhall leaue him and it to the iudgement of the wiſe, having taken it for my direction, Not to anſwer Malynes in his fooliſhnes. In the next place,P. 11. he promiſeth to bring to the Anvill, whether the vnder valuation of his Maieſties Coyne, be the immediate cauſe of our want of money in England: will you ſee how hee hammers it? Hee concurreth with me in the price of the Reall, P. 12. to goe in Holland at 51. Stuyters: in the Rate of Exchange, to come from thence at 33. ſh. 4. d. Flemiſh: in the value of the Flemiſh money, that 5. Reals of 8. make 42. ſh. 6. d. in the value of the Sterling mony, that ſo many Reals make 25. ſh. 6. d. that the gaine between Spaine & Holland at thoſe rates is 25. per Cento: that the gaine betweene England and Holland at thoſe rates is 15. per Cento. Yet becauſe he will be adverſe in ſomething, he ſaith, The 15. in the hundred to be gotten in Holland more then in England, P. 12. is altogether Imaginary and not Reall. For example, let 5. of theſe Reals of 8. bee bought heere for 22. ſh. ſterling, and bee tranſported into Holland, and there buy Commodities with the ſame, according as the price of them is inhanſed there; no man maketh any doubt, but that the ſayd Commodities are alſo rayſed in price, according to the money inhanſed. So that the gaine becommeth vncertaine, for the Commodities may be ſold to loſſe. IF this were true, that the Commodities in Holland were rayſed in price according to the value of the money;§. 12. yet this is no anſwer to the carrying out of his Maieſties Coyne. For his Maieſties Coyne may be carryed out, to bee recoyned abroad in forraine Coyne: and not remitted, neither in cōmodities, nor by Exchange. Others that carry it out to remit it back, doe not reſpect the prices of Commodities whether they bee deare or cheape, ſo long as the Exchange affordeth them meanes to returne their money with advantage. But at that time when I wrote, both the Exchange, and Commodities alſo, did afford encouragement for returnes into England. For the Exchange came then at 33. ſh. 4. d. from thence, which is a very low Exchange; and the Commodities of Holland were alſo low in price. The former no Merchant will deny: The latter you may examine if you pleaſe, either in Spices, Silkes, or Linnen cloath, which are the principall Commodities of the Low Countries. But better in the former, then either of the latter: becauſe Spices, are knowne by their ſorts: Silkes, and Linnens, by their goodnes. In Spices, if you will, take Cloues for an inſtance: which haue gone conſtantly theſe three or foure yeares laſt paſt at 11. ſh. the pound waight in the Low Countries, and at 6. ſh. 6. d. and 6. ſh. 8 here at London. Take the Medium of this price, which which is 6. ſh. 7. d. and that brings out the iuſt rate of the Exchange at 33. ſh. 4. d. The difference of time and waight, is vſually ſet againſt the Cuſtome and charges. So then whether you make returne of thoſe 5. Reals of 8. whereof Malynes ſpeaketh, in Cloues at 11. ſh. the pound, or at 33. ſh. 4. d. by Exchange, is all one. And the like you may finde in the reſt: And Malynes alſo as falſe in the reſt: for thus he goes on, That the Merchants trading in Spaine, which cauſe their Reals to be ſent from Spaine thither,P. 12.or doe tranſport them from the Downes, rely wholly vpon the low Exchange, whereby they are inabled to deliuer their money there by Exchange at an vnder value, in giving there but 33. ſh. 4. d. and vnder, to haue 20. ſh. ſterling paid by bill of Exchange in England, whereby the kingdome maketh good vnto them the ſayd 15. vpon the hundred. THen by Malynes owne confeſſion, here's a double encouragement for the carrying away of the Kings Coyne:§. 13. One in the high price of the money in Holland; the other in the low rate of the Exchange from thence backe againe for England. But that the Kingdom maketh good vnto them 15. vpon the hundred, that make home mony from Holland or any other forraine part, at a low Exchange; whereby he would inferre, that the Kingdom therby loſeth 15. per Cento, is moſt falſe. For the lower the rate of the Exchange is abroad, whereby you would remit home your money for England, the leſſe of that forraine money you ſhall pay for the Engliſh money you would receiue at home. And the leſſe you pay of the forraigne money, the more you ſhall receiue of your owne money: and the more you pay abroad, the leſſe you ſhall receiue at home. And in this caſe the gaine of the Subiects is the gaine of the Kingdome and contrariwiſe. So that indeed, the loſſe to the Kingdome, is of the money it ſelfe that is carryed out, as I haue at large declared in my tract of Trade:Free Trade. cap. 1. the 15. per Cento is gained by them that carry it: the money being abroad, is better remitted for the Kingdome, at a low then a high rate: the priſes of Commodities being anſwerable to the rate of the Exchange, alter not the caſe. So then it followeth, that the gaine in exportation of Reals is reall, but Malynes ſurmiſes are imaginarie. Will you heare another of his ſlurres? This Reall of 8. was valued but at 42. ſtuyvers, P. 13. when the Par of Exchange was made to be 33. ſh. 4. d in the yeare 1586. when Robert Dudley Earle of Leiceſter, went to take the gouernment of thoſe Countries. I Thinke Malynes hath told this tale over 1586.§. 14. times, to one or other, and not a word of it true. For in that yeare, when the Earle of Leiceſter was ſent ouer by Queene Elizabeth, into the Low Countries, there was a treatie or agreement made of the rates of their and our monies, indifferently betweene either Countrey. Then was it agreed vpon, that the Engliſh ſhilling ſhould goe current in the Low Countries at 10. Stuyvers, which making 20. d. Flemiſh, produceth 33. ſh. 4. d. for 20. ſh. Sterling. But that this 33. ſh. 4. d. was then or at any time ſince, ſet for a Par of Exchange amongſt Merchants, I might produce more then 1586. witneſſes againſt him. For all the Merchants Bookes of his owne and our Nation kept there and here, which are the Records of Merchants affaires will teſtifie, that neither the Exchange in the yeare 1586. nor at any time ſince, went conſtantly at 33. ſh. 4. d. but ſometimes was higher, ſometimes lower then that rate. For this is a cuſtome amongſt Merchants, to keepe exactly the rates of Exchanges, for all places every weeke throughout the yeare, from time to time: not only as one or other of them is a taker or deliverer of money continually, but as it is a commendable propertie of a good Merchant, to adviſe and bee adviſed of the rates of all Exchanges in all places, from time to time. So that this is Teſtimonium omni excepsione maius: A clowd of witneſſes againſt Malynes, not to be denyed. But for want of better proofe, he will giue you a precept, That the rule is infallible,P. 14.when the Exchange doth anſwere the true value of our monies according to their intrinſique waight and finenes, and their extrinſique valuation, they are never exported, becauſe the gain, is anſwered by exchange, which is the cauſe of tranſportation. A Lius peccat, §. 15. alius plectitur: The Stranger commits the fault, and Malynes would haue the Engliſh puniſhed. A Rule moſt fallible, moſt vnequall! For it is the Stranger that raiſeth the money in forraine parts, and not the Engliſh: It is the Stranger that carryeth away our money, and not the Engliſh. But it is the Engliſh that is here the cō mon taker of mony by Exchange, & not the Stranger. Now if the gain of the carying out of our money be 10. or 15. per Cento to the ſtranger, then the Exchange by his owne rule muſt bee ſet ſo much higher to anſwer the ſayd gaine & to prevent the exportation, and conſequently muſt fall vpon the Engliſh who is the common taker thereof. What Malynes comes ſhort in Engliſh, you ſhall have in good Dutch I warrant you. Nay hee will fit you with other feates of Exchange, and Exchangers: as To lay their money with gaine in any place of the world where Exchange lieth.P. 16. To gaine and waxe rich, and never meddle with any Princes Commodity: or, To buy any Princes Commodity with the Subiects money, and not one penny of their owne, &c. IF every bird had her owne feather,§. 16. this gooſe would graſe with ſhort wings. All Malynes Pamphlet from one end to the other, is piec't together with ſtollen ſtuffe. So hee began, ſo hee goes on.In Milles his Cuſtomers Reply: in his Epiſt. ded. p. 5. In Milles his Cuſtomers Alphabet and Primer. p. 15. Traffique by nature admirable, by art amiable, ſtollen out of Milles his Reply. His great compariſon of Body, Soule, and Spirit, enſpired out of Milles his Alphabet and Primer. And in this place, here's no leſſe then 20. pieces together, taken out of an old Manuſcript, In a Manuſcript of Monies and Exchanges. p. 12.13.14. which I haue ſeene in many mens hands in London, the copie whereof I alſo haue my ſelfe: whoſe Originall is therein ſayd to bee a Record in the Exchequer of the 28. yeare of Edward the 3. From whence, as alſo from the former, Malynes hath ſtored himſelfe of all this ſtuffe, which hee would now faine vent to the world, both in his Little fiſh, and his Great whale, for Myſteries in Exchange. I might be infinite, if I would trace Malynes in all his by-wayes. But to ſaue that labour, if you will take the paines to compare this his Little fiſh, with his Great whale, you ſhall finde it a meere Spawne thereof: This ſwimming out of That: That ſwallowing vp This againe: and both, nothing elſe but a Gallamalfrey, or Dutch Hotchpotch of other mens Cookeries. It's pitty the Preſſe was oppreſt with ſuch baſe ſtuffe: or the ſame ſuffered to bee caſt in the face of the world: much more to bee preſented to the King, to ſuch a King! The Second cauſe ſaith Malynes,P. 19.of the want of money in England, is the ſuperfluity of Plate, generally in private mens hands. Here he hath omitted to note the great quantitie of ſilver conſumed in the making of ſilver threed, ſpangles, purles, oaes, and the like. THe cauſes which I conceived of the want of money,§. 17. Malynes received them from me by order, not by number. But for the matter hee obiecteth to mee of omitting the great quantitie of ſilver threed, he hath my anſwere alreadie, that it was improper for me to meddle with any impertinent thing, vnles with him I ſhould haue handled all Heterogeneall things, out of kinde and out of order, as he doth every where. For this Manufacture of the ſilver threed, his Maieſty had ſetled, before I wrote, and opened the Importation thereof to the Subject, as in former times. And if there be any cauſe to reſume that action, that Noble Gentleman, who hath beſtowed much time and charge therein, will not ſtand in need of my defence, nor be afraid of his defyance. The third cauſe ſaith Malynes,P. 22.of the want of money in England, is the conſumption of forreine Commodities. YOu ſee we are now all in numbers,§. 18. and the cauſes here pul'd in pieces by Malynes, which I hope he found in ſome better forme. He profeſſeth in his title, that his diſcourſe and mine, are Contraria iuxta ſe: and yet in this, and all the other cauſes, he concurreth with me: but goeth over and over the ſame things againe, to ſpend time, abuſe the Reader, and fill vp the pages of his Pamphlet with vnneceſſary repetitions. And for want of matter, he here maligneth the Merchants-Adventurers; and accuſeth them to be guiltie of the Vnder-ballancing of Trade, by ſelling the Cloth and other the natiue Commodities cheape, and bringing in Silks, Linnen cloth, Cambricks, Lawnes, and other Commodities deare, whereby the ſtrangers Scale is made the heavier, in the Ballance of Trade. Which is a moſt vniuſt and ſcandalous aſperſion laid on ſo worthy a Company, by ſo vnworthy a Perſon. For there are no Merchants of the Kingdome, no diſpraiſe to any, that doe ſo much improue the price of the Cloth, and the natiue Commodities abroad; or diſ-improue the forreine, and ſell the ſame ſo cheape at home, as theſe Merchants doe. And for bringing in of money and treaſure into the Kingdome, wherein is the benefit of bringing the Trade of this Kingdome to an evener Ballance with other Countries, this Company therein exceedeth and excelleth all other Merchants. Which trade alone hath brought in aboue 200. thouſand pounds in Gold ſince September laſt. And it were happie for the Kingdome, that if all the other Trades thereof were brought into a Ballance, they could produce ſuch a foot of Accompt, toward the advancement of the Exportation beyond the Importation, as may be found alone in the Merchants-Adventurers Trade, But this worthy and famous Societie, needeth not my teſtimony, nor can his obloquy detract from it, that hath alwaies obtained ſuch honourable approbation of the State from time to time. MAlynes muſt alſo haue a fling at the French Company, P. 15. §. 19. that the Merchants thereof do alſo hinder the Ballance of Trade, by bringing in wines too deare. But if the rate of the Crowne be riſen from 64. to 75. ſouls in exchange betweene England and France, then our Merchants that deliver their mony here, doe receiue ſo much the more there, whereby they may afford their wines the better cheape. And if the wines bee bought deare, and our Natiue Commodities ſold deare, what doth this hinder the Ballance of trade? And if there were no other cauſe of dearnes of thoſe or other wines, or other forraine Commodities, then the price they coſt abroad, or the vnder valuation of our Exchange at home, which hee ſo much talkes of here and elſewhere, and is nothing elſe but a meere Petitio principij, A begging of the queſtion, without any truth or proofe; neither Merchants nor Trades-men could iuſtly complaine of the dearenes of forraine Commodities. THe Levant Company alſo hee will not let paſſe without ſome cenſure:P. 26. §. 20. The reſtraint forſooth of Corints maketh no Free trade. You may ſee by this, what freedome of trade it is that Malynes meanes. He would faine haue Corints come in againe in Flemiſh bottoms, that Strangers might bee imployed, and our owne Ships and Men lie by the walles. That all ſorts of men might come into that, and all other Companies, how vnfit ſoeuer: 〈◊〉 ſuch men let in, as would let in the Strangers trade with them. The trade of the Levant Company is managed by many graue, expert, & diſcreet Merchants, into whoſe Society thoſe that are of quallity, may bee admitted for a reaſonable conſideration. The fourth cauſe of our want of money,P. 26.in Malynes account, is the great want of our Eaſt India ſtock: whereas moſt men would haue expected, that the ready monies ſent in Reals of Plate to make the employment of the ſayd trade, ſhould rather haue been mentioned. THis Company alſo,§. 21. that deſerveth ſo much pitie, cannot eſcape Malynes envie. For here he endevoureth cloſely and cunningly to inſinuate, that the cauſe of our want of money is the ready monies ſent to the Eaſt Indies in Reals of Plate. Wherein the Eaſt India Company hath againe and againe, ſatisfied the State; that firſt, they carry away none of the monies of this Kingdome: next, that they furniſh themſelues from forraine parts, of all that they ſend out: and laſtly, that they keepe themſelves within the compaſſe of his Maieſties gracious grant, having ſent out much leſſe, even of forraine money then they might, and had need to haue done from time to time. And if it ſhould be granted, that ſome of that money which is brought in for their vſe, might alſo be brought in for the Kingdomes vſe, if their trade were not: yet can it not be denyed, that the increaſe of the ſtocke of the Kingdome by that trade, is incomparably a farre better and greater meanes to bring in treaſure into the Kingdome from other parts of Chriſtendome, then the other can bee imagined to hinder the ſame. And whatſoever is now carryed out by the Engliſh, would be carryed out by the Hollanders, if this trade of ours were not. Wherein, the action it ſelfe, and the diſaffection of Malynes and others of his minde, doe ſeem to exact from me a word or two of the benefites, that may ariſe to this Kingdome, by this trade. Thoſe I ſhall reduce in a word, either to ſuch as concerne the Trade, or ſuch as concerne the Treaſure of the Kingdome. In both which conſiſts the happines of every Common-wealth. Now the Trade of this Kingdome, may thereby be encreaſt, in Stock, in Strength. In Stock: for one hundred thouſand pounds imployed in that trade, and returned from the Eaſt Indies, in Spices, Callicoes, & Indico, beſides the hopes of the Perſian trade of Rawe Silks, will yeeld Fiue hundred thouſand pounds to this Kingdome, in encreaſe of Stocke. In Strength: for this trade will yearely imploy not ſo little as Ten thouſand tunnes of ſhipping, and Three thouſand Marriners, Carpenters, and other Artificers, in the Firſt Employment out and home: and almoſt as many more in a Second Employment after they are come home; by way of tranſportation of theſe Indian Commodities, from hence into all parts of the world. Which is an excellent meanes to advance our Navigation, and to employ our Multitudes of poore. The Treaſure alſo of the Kingdome may thereby be abundantly encreaſt, both in reſpect of the Revenue of The King, and of The Kingdome. Of The King: in the encreaſe of Cuſtomes, which alwayes encreaſe with trade. Of The Kingdome: in the encreaſe of treaſure, which is not as ſome think caryed out, but rather conveyed in through the channels of this trade. For firſt, the Treaſure exported from hence into the East Indies, is not dig'd out of any Mynes of our owne, but is purchaſed from forraine parts, for returne of ſuch Eaſt India Commodities, as the Kingdome cannot ſpend, and are therefore exported from hence into other parts of the world. And next, it muſt be conſidered, that if One hundred thouſand pounds ſtocke ſent out from hence, purchaſeth Fiue hundred thouſand pounds returnes from the Eaſt Indies; and this Kingdome at the moſt ſpendeth but one fourth part thereof: all the reſidue being iſſued out, muſt needs procure the Kingdome ſo much ready money, for returne thereof as the value of the goods amounteth to; or at leaſt, ſuch other neceſſary commodities for the Kingdomes vſe, in ſtead of that money: For which, either ſo much money muſt haue gone out to procure the ſame, or ſo much leſſe money muſt haue come in, as thoſe Commodities would amount vnto. But every one of theſe particulars would require a more large and ſerious diſcourſe, then the limitation of my purſuit of Malynes will permit. I ſhall therefore leave this ſubiect to him, that hath already ſo worthily laboured therein: of whom,Mr. Tho Mun in his diſcourſe of the Eaſt India trade. I hope it will bee thought no flattery, if I ſay, that his obſervation of this trade, his iudgement in all trade, his diligence at home, his experience abroad, haue adorn'd him with ſuch endowments, as are rather to bee wiſht in all, then eaſie to bee found in many Merchants of theſe times. I ſhall alſo leaue the action to the Royall protection of his Maieſtie, to tender it, as a Elower of his Regall Crowne and dignity. The rather becauſe this alſo is a Flower, which Openeth with the Riſing of the Sunne, and Shutteth when the Sunne-ſetteth. It is ſubiect, as all great Actions are, to Fraction abroad, to Faction at home. Both and either are evill Engines, to ſubvert Companyes, yea, Kingdomes alſo. But when the Sunne ariſeth in his glory, all theſe foggs and miſts will vaniſh away. His Maieſtie vouchſafed to deſcend, from his throne of Maieſtie, into that late Colloquy with the Dutch: And with the indefeſſiue paines of his owne Royall Perſon, and the continuall labour of the Lords, hath at laſt reconciled all the differences with the Dutch: much more will He not ſuffer any diſcord amongſt His owne. All which Warres and Iarres being huſht and over-blowne, and the trade purſued with the Grace and Favour of his Maieſty, Good order and government in the Company, and Vnfeigned amitie and vnitie one with another; there cannot but be great hope, by Gods bleſſing, of a Glorious harveſt, from ſo Gracious a Seed-time: and I hope, that thoſe that haue Sowen in teares, ſhall in due time Reape in Ioy. Sr D. Diggs in his Defence of the Eaſt India Trade.Ther's a Noble Gentleman of this Kingdome, did once put the Dutch in minde of their owne Embleame, Si Collidimur frangimur, If the Potts knock, they will quickly cracke: It was then taken for another Meridian; but it may ſerue for London and Amſterdam, and the Eaſt Indies alſo. But Malynes taketh notice of Maſter Mun's Diſcourſe of the Eaſt India Trade, P. 27. whereby he is forced to confeſſe, that the employment of the Eaſt India Company is very profitable and neceſſary: That the gaine of the Trade is very good: That thereby the encreaſe of the ſtocke of the Kingdome is very great: That the ſame is a meanes to bring in much Treaſure: and yet like himſelfe, kick's downe all this at once with his foote, concluding with this abhominable vntruth, That the vnder-valuation of our monyes in Exchange, P. 28. diverteth the ſame, and that the loſſe thereof is greater to this Kingdome, then all the monies employed to the Eaſt Indies commeth vnto. So that this man you ſee, can Simul ſorbere & flare, he can be with them, and againſt them, and all with a breath. The fifth cauſe of the want of money,P. 30.in Malynes Arithmetique, is the Warres of Chriſtendome. Touching the exportation of monyes by the Warres of Chriſtians,P. 31.where he declareth an vrgent inſtance, that the Riecks Daller is raiſed from two markes Lubiſh to twentie markes Lubiſh in many places of Germany, whereby abundance of money is drawne vnto the Mints of other Countries, from all the Mynes and parts of Chriſtendome; herein he is much miſtaken; for when monyes are inhanſed, they are never carryed to the Mints to be converted into other Coine. OR rather Malynes hath need of an Interpreter,§. 22. to helpe him vnderſtand what I haue ſaid in plaine words. For I haue not ſo much as inferred that which he here concludeth, that the Riecks Daller being inhanſed to twentie marks Lubiſh, is carried to the Mint to be converted into other Coyne. But rather that the Riecks Daller, and other monyes of Germany running there ſo high, hath drawne over abundance of our money, which hath there beene converted into their Coine. And this, nor he, nor any man can deny. And that the Riecks Daller then went at twentie marks Lubiſh in Sileſia, Auſtria, and Moravia, and the parts adjacent, both the Souldiers that haue received them ſo in pay, and the Merchants both Engliſh and Dutch, that trade in the Linnens of thoſe parts, will abundantly ſatisfie any man that doubteth in this matter. In ſo much as it hath there beene obſerved for a great indiſcretion in the Boores, or Countrey people of thoſe parts, to take the Riecks Daller at ſo exceſſiue an high rate in payment for their Linnens, and not to raiſe the price thereof anſwerable therevnto. Which hath beene the cauſe that the Linnens of Germany haue theſe two or three yeares laſt, come thence ſo cheape, notwithſtanding the Warres, which naturally are wont to make things deare: becauſe they haue beene bought with money given out of ſo high a rate, and the Commoditie not raiſed. Which quite overthroweth another of Malynes fallacies, that whereſoever the monyes are inhanſed, There the Commodities are alſo raiſed according to the money inhanſed. P. 12. And as well is he over-ſeene in Ariſtotles termes of Action and Paſsion, thus; No marvell therefore that he doth invert things,P. 38.and runneth into a Labyrinth, without diſtinction betweene the thing Actiue and Paſsiue, by approving money to be the rule and ſquare, whereby things receiue eſtimation and price: And yet commending the commutation before money was deviſed to be coyned. Ariſtotle ſaith, that Action and Paſsion are meerely Relatiues, and that they differ no more, then the way from Thebes to Athens, and from Athens to Thebes. We will therefore leaue this Merchant to walke betweene both, vntill he can diſcerne the one from the other. BY Malynes ſentence when I ſpeake of money and merchandize,§. 23. and doe not miſapply therevnto his improper and ignorant termes of Action and Paſsion, I runne into a Labyrinth. Which termes he hath every where worne ſo thred-bare, that they looke like himſelfe. Neither is it poſſible for any man liuing, to vnderſtand what he meanes by them: or to imagine, that himſelfe knowes what he would ſay of them. And I pray you what indiſcretion is it, to approue of money to be the rule and ſquare, whereby things receiue their eſtimation and price; and yet commend the Commutation of wares for wares, before money was deviſed. As for his Quotation of Ariſtotle, he vſeth him, as others whom he abuſeth: and vnderſtandeth Action and Paſsion, as well as he did Matter, Forme, and Privation. Alas poore man, how ſhould he vnderſtand Ariſtotle, that hath neither wit nor art? For if it ſhould bee granted that Action and Paſſion are Relatiues, Yet money is the thing Actiue, & commodities become the thing Paſſiue. Litle fiſh. p. 15. The exchange of monies is in effect like the inſtrumēt that ſtriketh the clock, being therein the thing Actiue: & commodities and monies are therin become things paſſiue. ibid. page 6. doe's that prooue money to bee Actiue, and commodities Paſsiue, as hee here inferreth, and elſewhere affirmeth, page 15? And why then doth he in another place ſay, that the Exchange is Actiue, and Commodities & Money are Paſsiue, page 6. But that in truth the man knowes not what hee ſayes? Or if either, or neither of them were Actiue and Paſsiue, what is that to the thing here by him brought in queſtion, whether Cōmercium be Cōmutatio merciū or not: A change of wares for wares, or money for wares? As if forſooth hee would haue no difference made betweene Money and Commodities, in that his diſtinction: ignorantly ſuppoſing in the one, that Ariſtotle takes Action and Paſsion, and the way betweene Thebes and Athens to be one and the ſame thing: and being as farre wide in the other, that Money and Commodities haue in them the affection of Relation, becauſe Action and Paſsion are Relatiues. I will therefore ſhew him out of his owne Author his groſſe ignorance in both. Ariſtotle diſputing in his Phyſicks de Agente & Patiente, ſaith thus:〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Ariſt Phys. lib. 3. cap. 2. In Pacij Cōmēt. in Phys. Ariſt. l 1. c. 2. part. 10. And although to doe and to ſuffer were the ſame, yet are they not ſo to be vnderſtood, as if the reaſon of their Eſſence were one and the the ſame, as is of the garment and rayment; but as of the way which leadeth from Thebes to Athens, and from Athens to Thebes. Which Pacius would haue taught Malynes to haue vnderſtood, thus; Atqui facere & pati, vel docere & diſcere, non dicuntur omninò eſſe idem, ſeu habere eandem eſſentiam & definitionem: ſed dicuntur aliquo modo eſſe idem, ſicut adſcenſus & deſcenſus, vel profectio Athenis Thebas, & Thebis Athenas, dicuntur eſſe idem, quia idem eſt ſpacium, ſed eſſentiae ratio non eſt eadem. But to doe and to ſuffer, or to teach and to learne, are not ſayd to bee altogether the ſame, or to haue the ſame eſſence and definition: but are ſayd after a ſort to be the ſame, as aſcending and deſcending, or going from Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to Athens, are ſayd to be the ſame, becauſe it is the ſame diſtance, but in reſpect of the Eſſence it is not the ſame thing. Or if Malynes will not beleeue Pacius, let him heare Ariſtotle thus expounding himſelfe;〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. In Phyſ. lib. 3. c. 2. partic. 12. And that I may ſpeake all in a word, neither is the act of teaching and learning, nor is Action and Paſsion properly the ſame: But the motion wherein theſe things are, is the ſame: for to be the act of the Agent in the Patient, and of the Patient from the Agent, is in reaſon different. And therefore if Action and Paſſion, and the way from Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to Athens be in reaſon different, then it muſt needes follow, that Money and Commodities by Malynes owne compariſon, and in common ſenſe and reaſon, are different alſo. Ariſtotle will alſo tell Malynes, It is manifeſt that Relatiues are reciprocal. It appeareth that they are together in nature. Ariſt. Categor. cap 7. partic. 16.17. that Money and Commodities are not Relatiues. For the Philoſopher teacheth, that〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Relatiues muſt be Reciprocall or of mutuall affection, the one not ſubſiſting without the other: and they muſt bee both at once, or both together in nature; as a Servant and a Maſter, or a Father and a Son: for a man cannot be ſayd to bee a Maſter, but in reſpect of his Servant: or to be a Servant, but in regard of his Maſter: or a Father, but in reference to his Son: or a Son, but in relation to his Father. Now Money and Commodities are not Reciprocall, or of mutuall affection, fot Money may be without Commodities, and Commodities without Money. Nor were they together in nature: for Commodities were in nature long before Money was invented: and it is not the Matter, but the Forme giveth the Denomination of the thing, as the Logicians ſpeake. And thus I haue taken this paines, to walke a little betwixt Thebes and Athens, to ſhew Malynes the way to either: leaſt when hee ſhould goe to Thebes, he goe with his Owles to Athens. BY this time Malynes is come to Vſury: which he numbers for the ſecond cauſe of the decay of trade.§. 24. And although hee concurre with me in this cauſe alſo, yet wanting other matter, he muſt Aut accuſari, aut mori: Hee muſt Maligne, P. 39. or not be Malynes. He accuſeth mee to haue taken the whole ſubſtance of my diſcourſe, out of other mens workes: and bringeth for his Voucher, his Englands view, worth no mans view, I'le warrant you. Some poore ſtuffe of his belike hee meanes, ſo called or miſcalled, as his manner is: as if I had ſupplyed my ſelfe with matter thence: which, I proteſt in the word of an honeſt man, never came to my view, nor ever ſhall. Neither durſt any but Malynes haue found this fault, himſelfe ſo groſſely faulty: to whom all's fiſh that comes to Net. Whoſe Whale devours all, both great and ſmall, whole ſholes of fiſh: So that he hath caught himſelfe by the noſe, and his Turpe Doctori reſulteth in his owne face: thus, Turpe eſt Doctori, cùm culpa redarguit ipſum: Quae culpare ſoles, ea tu ne feceris ipſe. To ſuch a Criple Doctor 'tis a ſhame, To cenſure halting, and himſelfe goes lame. Yet for all that, he will perſwade you, he hath ſome over-ſight in Hebrew. For thus he ſaith, If the Brokers had beene Iewes,P. 41.I might haue beſtowed ſome Hebrew vpon them, in deteſtation of the word Neſhech, which is nothing elſe but a kinde of byting, as a dogge vſeth to byte and gnaw vpon a bone: otherwiſe to vſe many languages in a little Treatiſe of Free trade, may ſeeme impertinent. A Las poore man,§. 25. I would he had learnt good Engliſh firſt! But in the beſt he hath ſhewne in this Little Fiſh and his Great Whale, the Reader may perceive great defect, and many of his ſentences Non-ſenſe. Hee is beholding to the Diuines for tranſlating Neſhech into common Characters; otherwiſe hee might haue ſaide of it, as ſome ſayd of Greeke in Eraſmus time, Graecum eſt, non legitur. But if he had beene but a ſmatterer in Hebrew, hee might better haue vnderſtood the Notation of Neſhech, which is commonly taken for the byting or ſucking of a Serpent, not of a Dog, as Rabbi Bechai obſerveth: Becauſe ſaith hee, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Rab. Bechai in Comment. in legem fol. 113. It byteth or ſucketh like a Serpent, and is not felt. Whereof the Gloſſe ſaith thus: Creditor mordet cùm exigit quod non dedit: Debitor mordetur, cùm reddit quod non accepit: The Creditor is ſayd to byte, when hee exacteth that which hee delivered not: And the Debtor is ſayd to bee bitten, when hee reſtoreth that which he received not. Whence it is, I thinke, that our word Snake, by a Metatheſis of the letters anſwereth to Neſhech. But as for Malynes he doth neither byte, not is bitten of this Seprent. He is as little troubled with that, as he is ouer-burthened with the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine tongues, and the knowledge of the Arts. That coſt hee'll ſpare, becauſe to vſe many languages in a little Treatiſe of Free trade may ſeeme impertinent. Wherein hee ſeemes to checke the vſe of tongues in diſcourſe of Trade: Indeed to vſe them as Malynes doth, is to abuſe them: for ſometimes hee tranſlates them wrong, and ſomtimes denies the Author of them the honour of his owne. Otherwiſe the vſe of languages is both lawfull and laudable. And thence it is that Bodin, Bodin de Reg. that great Polititian of France, in his bookes De Republica, and therein alſo of Merchants and Merchandize, doth ſo oft cite Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine teſtimonies. The like doth Grotius that learned Netherlander, in his Mare Liberum, his Free Sea trade,Grotius in Mare lib. and other of his Workes. And this did that famous Orator M. T. Cicero, the Maſter of Eloquence,De Off. lib. 1. both practice himſelfe, and command to his ſonne: Semper cùm Graecis, ſaith he, Latina coniunxi: neque id in Philoſophia ſolùm, ſed etiam in dicendi exercitatione feci, idem tibi cenſeo faciendum. I haue alwaies, ſaith the Orator, ioyned Latine with Greeke: neither haue I done that in Philoſophy onely, but alſo in the exerciſe of declaiming: and the ſame I thinke fit for thee to doe. Beſides it is againſt the rule of Iuſtice, that the vſe of Teſtimony ſhould be denyed to any man, in ſpeech or writing. For there is nothing ſo cleare, but may require Teſtimony, either for confirmation, or Iluſtration of the matter, to which it is applyed: And the want of Teſtimony, is the want of Authority alſo.P. Ram. de Dialect. cap. 32.33. Now all Teſtimony may be ſayd to be either Divine or Humane. Divine, as the Holy Scriptures. Humane, as the Law it ſelfe, or Illuſtrious Sentences. The Teſtimony of Law, is of the Written, or Not written Law. The Teſtimony of Illuſtrious Sentences, conſiſts in Maxim's, Principles, Proverbs, and the Sayings of Wiſe men of all Nations, and in all Languages. Now you cannot do an Author a greater honour, then to vſe his owne words: leaſt in tranſlating of him into another tongue, you tranſlate him alſo into another ſenſe, as Malynes doth Ariſtotle. I know it is growne in vſe in this Kingdome, to cite in ſpeech and writing, the Tranſlation for the Originall. But ſurely it is more common, then commendable. Becauſe it tends to the loſſe of time, and brings no benefit to the Auditor to heare a double tranſlation. For if the Text be Hebrew, and it bee rendered in Greeke; or Greeke, and rendered in Latine; or as the manner is, to cite Latine for both; neither the Author hath any honour, nor the Auditor benefit, more of the Latine, then of the Engliſh, becauſe they are both Tranſlations. And if there be many Auditors that vnderſtand not the Originall, ſo are there not a few, that vnderſtand not the Latine Tranſlation alſo. Which vſe of the Latine Tranſlation, hath brought out of vſe, the moſt neceſſary and learned Languages. Wherein ther's not an Iota in the Greeke, nor a Title in the Hebrew without a myſtery: In which laſt and beſt, our Engliſh tongue hath as great a part, as any other Language of the Chriſtian world: which I ſpeake for the honour of our Language, and the encouragement of thoſe that delight in Tongues. And thus much briefly for Languages, and for defence of thoſe which I haue vſed for divine and humane teſtimony, which in Malynes ſentence doe ſeeme Impertinent. THe third cauſe of the decay of Trade,P. 41. §. 26. in Malynes accompt, are Litigious Law-ſuits. To the Efficiency whereof, Malynes cannot altogether agree, but rather to the Remedie. But I ſhall willingly pardon him that: for he that is ſo ignorant in the Eſſentiall cauſes, muſt needs be neſcious in the Efficients alſo. I would there were no cauſe, for their ſakes whoſe caſe it is, to diſpute this Cauſalitie. Whereby many of his Maieſties louing Subiects are deprived, ſome of their liberties, I had almoſt ſaid, of their liues, many of their livings. Wherein I doubt not, but the graue, ſage, and learned Iudges, the Reverend Fathers of the Law, will at the laſt conſider, and conſult of ſome effectuall meanes, for ſhortning of the time of Suits, and leſſning of the charge of Law. Amongſt whom, double honour belongs to him, that governes ſo well, and labours ſo much in the Word and Doctrine. Good lucke haue thou with thine honour. Ride on, according to the Word of Truth, and moderation of Iuſtice. The Spirit of Elijah reſteth on Eliſhah: Walke in his Steps, who liuing honored thee; and dead, liueth, and is honored in thee: Sic tibi conting at viuere, ſicquemori. Malynes in the next place, though in a wrong place, takes occaſion to ſpeake of Anno 1588. And denieth that the Kingdome was then in ſuch great diſtreſſe, to be termed, in Articule temporis, when the Merchants-Adventurers ſupplied a Shippes lading of Powder and Shot from Hamburgh: I pray God grant we never know the like diſtreſſe, nor ever be wanting to acknowledge ſo great a deliverance. Malynes fourth cauſe,P. 42. is the Fiſhing. Wherein he is better then his word, for he concurreth with me therein alſo. And is not the neglect of Trade, the decay of Trade? And is not the Strangers pulling the bread out of the Natiues mouthes, the decay of Trade? Therefore proper enough Malynes. But becauſe here he wants fuell for his fury againſt me, like a mad man he ſtrikes the next man he meets. And no leſſe then the State firſt, and diverſe worthy Merchants next.P. ibid. Againſt the State he dares ſay, That this Action of the Fiſhing hath beene in continuall agitation aboue thirtie yeares, to make Buſſes and Fiſher Boates, but the Action is ſtill interrupted, becauſe other Nations doe finde too great favour and friends here, to divert all the good intentions of ſuch as haue imployed their time and good meanes therein. And for the Merchants, hee accuſeth the Merchants-Adventurers, Eaſt-land Merchants, and the Muſcony Company, to haue oppoſed this cauſe at the Councell board. And as if hee were a Clerke of the Councell, takes vpon him to ſet downe ten ſeverall articles, which were there had in conſultation with the Lords. For his Scandalum Magnatum, I remit that, to his former reckoning; where he hath more then enough to anſwere. And for his accuſation of thoſe worthy Merchants, I am perſwaded that, there are none of all his Maieſties Subiects, can be more ready and willing then they, to further ſo noble a deſigne. From the Fiſhing, hee comes to the Clothing, P. 45. which he deſciphers for the fift cauſe of the decay of Trade. Wherein alſo hee concurres with mee, notwithſtanding his challenge. Neuertheleſſe, for want of other matter to fill vp the pages of his waſte paper, hee turne's himſelfe to the Dying and dreſsing Proiect: and ſayes thus, I cannot omit to obſerue the Practiſes which were vſed by combination with other Nations abroad,P. 46.and domeſtique Intelligences at home, whereby many good actions are overthrowne, to the generall hurt, and with little advancement to the particular. HEre Malynes endevoureth to lay a Tacite and ſecret aſperſion on the Merchants Adventurers: §. 28. but not being able to produce any ground for ſo malicious a ſcandall, is obnoxious to puniſhment, and ought to bee taken for the Intelligencer himſelfe, vntill he produce his proofes for ſo vniuſt an accuſation. Another Digreſſion hee makes for the defence of his groſſe error committed in his Canker of of Englands Common-wealth:In his Canker. p. 46. where he wiſht, That other Nations might take vpon them to make our Clothes, which might ſaith hee, be eaſily remedied, by ſelling our wolles the dearer, whereof they muſt make them. Can there bee any defence for ſuch a defeiſance? You ſhall heare the beſt he hath, In the latter time of Queene Elizabeth of bleſſed memory,P. 47.and vntill the ſecond yeare of our moſt gracious Lord King Iames, wolles were permitted to be tranſported by the Staplers and others. And the makers of cloth beyond the Seas, muſt needs haue them to cover their wolles in the Indraping, which is now prohibited, and the caſe altered. HEre you ſee the defence is as lame as the Defendant:§. 29. Becauſe there was then permitted a tolleration for the tranſportation of wolles; was it therefore neceſſary, or reaſonable, or to bee wiſht of any good Subiect, that there ſhould haue been a tranſportation of our Clothing alſo? Or would hee haue had the Staplers carry away all our wolles, that his Countrymen might haue made all the cloth? God forbid Malynes! Sic tu be as amicos? Wilt thou play the Ape in the Apologue, & kill vs with kindnes? But the tree cannot be better knowne then by the fruit; nor Malynes, then by this marke. This is he that would ſeeme ſo good a Subiect to our King and Kingdome, to dyet vs with the Fleece, and to feed his owne Country and Nation with the Fleſh and Fat: to confine vs to the Wolles, and convey our Clothing to them, then which there is not a more Royall manufacture in all the world. There could not haue beene deviſed, no not by an enemy, ſo miſchievous a proiect, as to bereaue ſo many thouſand families of this Kingdome, that depend on the making of cloath, of ſuch an excellent living and liuely-hood. The other part of his defence, is as falſe, as the former is faigned. For to affirme, That the Makers of cloth beyond the Seas, cannot make their cloth without our Engliſh woll, is as true as that, wherewith the State hath beene ſo much abuſed, That the Dutch could not ſubſiſt without our Engliſh cloth. That the latter is falſe, our owne ill experience can tell vs: That the former is fooliſh; all Malynes Countrymen, and thoſe that know the State of Dutch-land, will witnes againſt him. But becauſe hee cannot Excuſe, hee will Accuſe: Firſt Envy, P. 48. For looking aſquint vpon him: whereby he ſaith, he hath loſt one Eye, in his reputation with his owne Countrymen, and now muſt looſe the other Eye with our Nation, like Beliſarius mentioned in my diſcourſe. Indeed in blindnes hee may reſemble Beliſarius, but in nothing elſe: more like hee is to blinde Bartelmeus, who the more he was forbid, the leſſe hee held his peace. And next hee accuſeth his ill luck,P. ibid. For his invention of farthing tokens: for which he ſaith, He is accuſed to bring the vſe of copper monies into the Kingdome. But he miſtakes the accuſation, which was rather, that if not himſelfe, ſome fowle of his feather, might be vehemently ſuſpected, to haue brought in counterfait copper tokens into the Kingdome. Which whether it bee right or wrong, I cannot tell, but it is probable, that the tenth part of the copper tokens at this day in the Kingdome, were never coyned in the Kingdome. At laſt hee is return'd from theſe long digreſſions, to the thing propoſed, which is the Cloth trade: but with a change of his note and his coate too. For now hee begin's to perſonate others. Now you may heare a ſong of foure parts: but ſet by a very ill Muſition, one that knowes not his Gammuth, nor can proue a note, not keepe tune or time. You may heare the very voyce of the Strangers, of the Staplers, of the Interlopers, and of the Ports; all in one Noyſe, & the poor Merchants Adventurers are made the burden of the ſong. I am ſory for them all! For Theſe, that they are ſo vniuſtly accuſed: For Thoſe, that their complaint is ſo much abuſed. For thus Malynes canteth and chaunteth, That the Merchants Adventurers having ingroſſed into their hands,P. 50.by colour of their laſt Letters Patents, the ſole power of exporting all white Clothes, coloured Clothes, Kerſies, Bayes, Sayes, Serges, Perpetuanaes, and all other new Draperies, into Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and other parts of the low and higher Germany, hath abated the trade. For all Merchants-Strangers, might, and did heretofore export white Clothes out of the Kingdome, paying double Cuſtome, which now they may not. THe Divines ſay, Conſuetudo peccandi, tollit ſenſum peccati: The cuſtome of ſinning, §. 30. taketh away the ſenſe of ſinne. This man hath vſed himſelfe to ſuch liberty of ſpeech, that now he dare's ſay any thing. For the Merchants Adventurers, vpon whom it hath pleaſed his Maieſtie out of His ſingular Grace and Favour, to conferre many excellent Priviledges and Immunities, in their laſt Letters Patents: yet in poynt of exportation of White and coloured Clothes, Kerſies, Bayes, Sayes, and other new Draperies of the Kingdom, there is no more power given them in theſe latter, then his Maiſtie and his Royall Predeceſſors haue honoured them with, in other former Letters Patents, from time to time. In the eight yeare of Hen. 4. the trade of White and coloured Clothes, Kerſies, Bayes, Sayes, and other the Natiue Commodities of the Kingdome, into Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and Flanders, was entruſted vnto them, by the Kings Letters patents, to bee managed vnder government. In the firſt yeare of Hen. 5. the ſayd Letters Patents were approoved and confirmed. In the eight yeare of Hen. 6. the former Charters, with the conſent of the Lords Spirituall and Temporall in Parliament aſſembled, were accepted and allowed. In the ſecond yeare of Edw. 4. the ſayd Letters Patents and every part of them, were ratified and confirmed. In the firſt yeare of Ric. 3. the ſayd Letters Patents were approued and confirmed. In the twentith yeare of Hen. 7. the ſayd Merchants were honoured with the title of Merchants Adventurers, & had power to keepe their Courts, and hold their Marts in the Towne of Calais. In the fourth yeare of Hen. 8. the ſayd Letters Patents in all poynts were ratified and confirmed. In the firſt yeare of Edw. 6. all the former Patents were recited and approued. In the firſt yeare of Philip and Mary, the ſayd Letters Patents were examined, allowed and confirmed. In the ſecond yeare of Q. Elizabeth, of ever-living memory, the former Patents were recited, approved, and enlarged. In the ſixt yeare of her raigne, their former Charters were reviewed, and they were inſcribed by the name of Merchants Adventurers of England, and authorized To exerciſe their government in any part of the Kingdome, to haue a Common Seale, to be a perpetuall Succeſsion, to purchaſe lands in the name of the Company. In the 28. yeare of her raigne, their Charters were againe reviewed and confirmed, with power To keepe their Courts, and To exerciſe their trade as amply in Germany, as before they had done in the Low Countries: And ſtraightly forbad, vpon paine of forfeitures and impriſonment, all others of her Subiects not free of the ſayd fellowſhip, to trade into any of their ſaid Priviledged places. In the ſecond yeare of the happy raigne of our moſt gracious Soveraigne Lord The Kings Maieſty, the former Letters Patents, Priviledges, and Princely grants, were recented, reviſed and ratified. And laſt of all in the 15. yeare of His Maieſty, the ſayd Letters Patents were againe peruſed and approved, Whereby it is manifeſt that the Cloth, and other The manufactures of this Kingdome, traded into Germany, and the Low Countries; haue with the favour of the State, bin conferr'd on the Merchants Adventurers, not only by their laſt Letters Patens, but by many other former grants before recited. Which certainely had never beene ſo long continued, ſo often renewed, nor they ſo much cheriſhed, had not the trade of Clothing bin quickned & enlivened, by the prudent ordering of the Merchants Adventurers trade from time to time. And theſe things I haue not by heare-ſay or relation, but by mine owne collection, and obſervation; having had occaſion to take ſome ſpeciall paines in the peruſall of theſe particular grants, for the ſervice of the State. And whereas Malynes ſuggeſteth,P. 50. That all Merchants Strāgers might, & did heretofore export white Clothes, That is as farre from truth as the former. For whereas by the Statutes of the 3. Hen. 7. the 3. of Hen. 8. and the 20. and 23. of the ſame King, it is enacted, that no white Clothes might bee tranſported rough, aboue 40. ſh. a Cloth in the time of Hen. 7. and 4. marks, and 4. li. a Cloth, in the time of Hen. 8. it came to paſſe, by the diſcreet carryage of the Cloth-trade in the Merchants Adventurers hands, that the trade of Cloth thrived ſo faſt, and the priſes of Clothes riſſe ſo much, that few or no Clothes could bee ſhipped out by any, whether Engliſh or Stranger, but by a Non obſtante to the ſayd Statutes: whereupon ſpeciall Licences were granted from the State, as Q. Eliz. free licence of Thirty Thouſand white Clothes a yeare, to the Merchants Adventurers; and other licences to the Earle of Cumberland, and others. But when any queſtion ariſſe vpon any of them, they were reſtrained to the Merchants Adventurers onely. If Malynes had ſayd, that the Merchants Strangers might heretofore export White and coloured Clothes dreſt, Kerſies, Bayes, Sayes, Perpetuanoes, and other the New Draperies of the Kingdom, into the Merchants Adventurers priviledges, paying Strangers Cuſtome, hee had ſayd true: And ſo they either doe, or may doe now; and perhaps for leſſe then Strangers Cuſtome alſo. And therefore the Merchants Adventurers haue not the ſole power of exporting thoſe things, as is miſ-inform'd and miſ-affirmed alſo. You haue heard Malynes plaine ſong, will you heare his deſcant? The Merchants of the Staple, from all the Staple Ports,P. 50.as London, Weſtminſter, Briſtoll, Southhamton, Hull, Boiſton, and New Caſtle, haue heretofore exported either Cloth, or Woll, or both, which now they may not. THe Merchants of the Staple never ſhipped any Clothes at any time as Staplers, § 31. but as Merchants-Adventurers. And ſo they may doe ſtill, ſuch of them as are free of the Merchants-Adventurers Company, whereof there are many. But this poynt having of late vpon occaſion, been reſumed into the conſideration of the State, it was boldnes for Malynes to meddle therewith, and to make queſtion of that, which is out of queſtion, in the iudgement of all indifferent men. Or will you heare his voluntary? All other Merchants at large, as well at London,P. 50. 51.as all other parts of the Kingdome, haue vſually heretofore exported coloured Clothes, Kerſies, Bayes, Sayes, Serges, Perpetuanoes, &c. which now they may not. So that all the trade of the Merchants of the Staple, of the Merchants Strangers, and of all other Engliſh Merchants, concerning the exportation of all the Commodities made of woll, into thoſe Countries, where the ſame are eſpecially to bee vented, is in the power of the Merchants Adventurers onely: and it is come to be managed by 40. or 50. perſons of that Company, conſiſting of three or foure Thouſand. IF there be three or foure Thouſand of the Merchants-Adventurers, § 32. then certainely there is the leſſe need of more helpe. And if there be ſo many of them that forbeare, and ſo few that trade, then there will be but cold comfort for new men to begin, where the old haue left. It is true, the number of the Merchants-Adventurers, is very ample and great, conſiſting of divers worthy members, of London, and of all the Ports, and of the Staplers Company alſo; who both doe, and may trade with them at their pleaſure. But it is as true, that the trade, through the late diſturbance of it, the great quantities of Cloth made in forraine parts, and the too heauy charge fallen vpon the cloth, is become ſo poore and leane, that there is now no comfort in the world in it, for new nor old. But it is moſt falſe, That 40. or 50. perſons manage that trade, when there is at this day more traders, then can well liue one by another. And that the trade of Coloured Clothes, Kerſies, Bayes, Sayes, Serges, Perpetuanoes, &c. is not in the power of the Merchants-Adventurers onely, I haue already declared, in the Section going before. But he that can talke at large thus in groſſe, can doe it alſo by retayle. Thus, Nay one man alone,P. 51.hath compaſſed into his hands the whole trade of coloured Clothes and Kerſies for theſe parts, by the meanes of Exchanges and monies taken vp at Intereſt. THat one man which Malynes out of malice picks and points at,§ 33. is indeed an ample trader in Coloured Cloth, but not in Kerſies: yet ſo, as there are very many others of the Company, that are alſo traders in Coloured Cloth, as well as hee. Malynes may barke, but he cannot bite. It is not Malynes Malignitie, that can detract any thing from the worth of ſo worthy a Merchant. Who, becauſe he comes within my Circle, I can doe no leſſe, then deleat and blot out Malynes Oblique line, and giue him his Right and direct line: that is, that hee containes himſelfe within his owne Circle, his Compaſſe, his Courſe, his Calling, with great iudgement and diſcretion, faire and Merchantlike action. But becauſe, for ſome reaſons, I may not ſay of him what I might; I ſhall wiſh what I ought, that wee had more ſuch Merchants, no more ſuch Malynes. From him Malynes turnes himſelfe againe toward the Merchants Adventurers, and vpbraideth them, To haue borrowed 50. or 60. Thouſand pounds at vſe, for the ſervice of the Company,P. 51.and thereby engaged the trade, and ſet themſelues in debt. TTantúmne eſt ab re tua otij; tibi, aliena vt cures, eaque nihil quae ad te attinent.§ 34. Teran heaut. This man certainely hath nothing to doe of his owne, that is ſo buſie in other mens affaires. It is true that the Merchants-Adventurers trade is ingaged in a great ſumme of money: yet not for the ſervice of the Company, but of the State: and therefore it is a very audacious part for a man of his qualitie, to caſt ſuch a calumny, in the face of ſo worthy a Company. It were a great happines vnto that trade, and other trades alſo that depend on it, that ſome good means were thought vpon, either that which hath beene propoſed, or ſome ſuch other as might be thought more fit in the wiſdome of the State, for caſe therein: whereby the Trade of Cloth, and the Traders therein, both Clothier and Merchant, might be more encouraged. The Merchants-Adventurers haue ſtrugled much to leſſen this charge, even with the withdrawing of penſions and deſerved ſtipends from many: which alas, is like a drop of water to the Ocean: And as it can conduce little to the caſe of ſo great a charge, ſo may it much hazard the honour and reputation of the government of ſo famous a fellowſhip in forraine parts, which heretofore hath ſhined in the eyes of Strangers aboue all other Nations. Wherein alſo there's a relation to the honour of the King, and Kingdome: both which are repreſented vnto Strangers in forraine parts in their government: and therefore it's pittie that thoſe that therein haue excelled others, ſhould now be inferiour vnto all. Neither doth this man ſo much as ſpare his aſperſions from the Clothier: for thus he ſaith, This ſmall number to mannage ſo great a trade,P. 51.incourageth the Clothier to adventure to make falſe Cloth, becauſe it is impoſsible, that ſo few Merchants can ſearch and vifit every Cloth, as it ought to be done, and the Clothiers conſcience is ſatisfied, for hee ſaith, that the falſeſt Cloth is anſwerable to the beſt price. VTquiſque eſt vir optimus, ita difficilime eſſe alios Improbos ſuſpicatur.§ 34. Cic. ad Quint. If Malynes were good himſelfe, hee would thinke better of other men. I cannot thinke there is any Clothier ſo bad, that would ſpeake ſo ill. Ill will ſpeake's well of none: nor Malynes of Merchant nor Clotheir. For it is not the ſmall or great number of Merchants that incourageth the Clothiers to make falſe cloth, but meerely the want of execution of the Statute,Free trade. cop. 2. and 7. of 4. of the King, enacted for clothing, as I haue elſe where ſhewed at large. Now the Statute provideth, that cloth bee ſearcht wet and not dry, as it commeth out of the Mill, and not as it commeth to the Market. And therefore the wiſdome of Parliaments hath appointed the ſearch to bee made, where the clothes are made. So that if the ſearch be neglected there, it is not the multitude of Merchants, that can help the ſearch, or indeed try the ſearch as it ought to be. For in the winter time, the ſeaſon of the yeare will not afford drying for the tenth Cloth, to be wet and dryed againe for timely exportation. And ſhould the Clothier bee detained from his money, and the cloth from the market, till ſuch a kinde of vnkindly ſearch or review were made, both Merchants and Clothiers would ſoone be a weary of ſuch a tryall. Neither is there any neceſſitie for the Merchants to make this review, for then the great numbers of the Clothworkers in London, that are ſet a worke by the Merchants-Adventurers to viſit their Clothes, would loſe their employment. So that if Malynes had ſayd true, that there wants Merchants, yet there's no want of Clothworkers to performe this worke. Many other things hee ſpeaketh at Random of the Clothiers, of the Ports, of Chapmen, and others, as generally he doth throughout the whole ſcope of his booke, which deſerue not repetition, much leſſe the honour of an anſwer; and concludeth theſe digreſſions thus, Shall this be proclaimed a free trade,P. 53. when within our ſelues we are in bondage, and haue loſt the benefit of the two eſſentiall parts of traffique, namely, the rule of money and Exchange? And a little after,P. 54. The Merchant Staplers haue obſerved that the Merchants Adventurers haue an inevitable opportunitie of combination, to ſet what price they pleaſe vpon Cloth to the Clothier, of Woll to the grower, and of all Commodities exported and imported. ASpis à vipera venenum mutuatur:§ 36.Malynes calls the Staplers to witnes againſt the Merchants Adventurers: when hee and they are both their profeſt Adverſaries. But for the accuſation, no Subiects, I dare ſay, of this Kingdome, are more free of theſe crimes, then the Merchants-Adventurers: neither haue they any opportunity of ſuch combination, as is moſt vntruely ſuggeſted. For there are no Merchants of the Kingdom, that doe more bid, and out-bid one another at the market, then they. If they did trade as ſome Merchants doe, in a ioynt ſtock, there might be ſome ſuſpition of it: but where there are ſo many buyers, as are continually of the Merchants-Adventurers, every man in that caſe is neareſt to himſelfe. And if all the Orders which ever they made, ſince they had the honour of their name, were ſearched out, and ſiſted over; there would not be found a ſyllable in them of that ſound, whereof Malynes maketh ſuch a noyſe. For the Free trade whereof hee ſpeaketh, and whereby hee pointeth at my Tract of trade: I would to God that thoſe grievances therein mentioned, were remooved: and then mauger Malynes or any other, if any be of his minde, I durſt proclaime, that this Kingdomes trade, would both be free & flouriſh. Wherin nevertheleſſe, I haue dealt freely and fairely, in wiſhing, That the Kings high way of trade, Free Trade. cap. 3. vpon ſuch reaſonable termes as might concurre with the wiſdome of the State, might be opened vnto all men. But I perceiue there's no diſcourſe of Free trade will pleaſe Malynes, and others of his minde, without a Par of Exchange, or complaint againſt Companies, the Merchants-Adventurers eſpecially. But you the Merchants-Adventurers, who worthily haue obtained, honour of his Maieſtie, favour of the Nobility, fame in the world, loue of Strangers, good report of all; that you I ſay, ſhould come vnder Malynes pen, and be made the ſubiect of his ſtyle, the obiect of his envie, is ſuch a diſgrace, as the State was never wont to let you ſuffer, or the honour of your name to vndergoe. What ſhould be the cauſe of this mans enuy? Is his eye evill, becauſe the gracious eye of his Maieſtie is ſo good, to haue beheld your famous fellowſhip with His own aſpect? For his Maieſty looking backe vpon ſome former and later experiments made vpon this trade, and looking forward vpon the danger and inconvenience of Innovations; hath as his Royall Predeceſſors ever did, vouchſafed his Royall grace and favour to Theſe Merchants, This trade. Becauſe the Cloth-trade is the Dowry of the Kingdome, the great Revenue of the King. It is the Axis of the Common-wealth, whereon all the other trades of the Kingdome doe ſeeme to turne, and haue their revolution. And therefore it hath ever beene the policy of State, to entruſt this trade, to ſuch men as are Probatae fidei, of approoved credit and truſt, wiſely to manage the ſame: and not to Novices and new-made Merchants, by whoſe inexperience the trade might bee ſubiect to bee betrayed into the hands of forraine Nations. And certainely the Common-wealth would loſe more, by the loſſe of one expert Merchant diſcouraged and driven out, then it could hope to gaine by twenty Novices let in, into a trade which they doe not vnderſtand. So that this reſtraint is the cauſe of this enuy: which is in nature an innate and inbred thing,Eleg. 3.4. according to that of the Poet, Nittimur invetitum ſemper, cupimuſque negata: Men are commonly moſt fond of that, which they are moſt forbid. Otherwiſe I am as confident, as I am conſcious of it, that there is no trade of this Kingdom, giveth ſo little allurement to thoſe that are without, or ſo ſmall encouragement to thoſe that are within, as doth the Merchants-Adventurers trade at this day. Which notwithſtanding, I hope his Royall Maieſtie ſhall ever finde in them, that loyall reſolution, which heretofore they haue ſhewne, to caſt downe themſelues and their trades in all humility, at his Maieſties feet, to be diſpoſed of, according to the good pleaſure of his Maieſties high wiſdome and grace. And yet I would haue no man thinke, that I would ſeeme hereby to take vpon mee to perſonate them, or meddle in their matters, further then you ſee Malynes hath led me into the ſame. Wherein I muſt vſe this iuſt defence for them and me: that I haue neither had commiſſion from them, nor conſulted with them, or any of theirs, about this thing, or any thing contained herein: But with an even hand and heart, haue without partiality, Craſſâ Minervâ, according to the plainenes and ſimplicity of mine owne poore Genius, purſued Malynes from point to point. Neither doe the Merchants-Adventurers of all others ſtand in need of my helpe. For they are happy in enioying him, who for his learning and integrity, deſerveth praiſe: of whom, if I ſay, that hee is not ſecond to any, of his qualitie, in this Kingdome, I ſhall neither flatter him, nor iniure any, as all that know him doe know, and will acknowledge. To him therefore I ſhall commend this theame, as moſt proper to his perſon and office: who for his parts is more able, and for his place is more fit then my ſelfe, to take vpon him this defence, if there bee cauſe. It is true, I am a brother, though vnworthy of that worthie Society: and ſo I am of other Companies alſo: and ſo alſo am I a member, though one of the leaſt, of the great Common-wealth of this Kingdom: wherein I haue learnt to preferre, that publique, to all theſe particular obligations. Amicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, ſed magis Amica veritas. Thoſe Companies, and that courſe of trade, ſhall be my diſcourſe of Free trade, which ſhall be beſt approved of the State, and wherein the honour of The King, and the welfare of the The Kingdome, are moſt involved. BY this time Malynes is come to Monopolies: the diſcourſe whereof,§. 37. if you will take his word,P. 60. Is without Ryme or Reaſon, becauſe his pure Par of Exchange is not appendix't to it. And indeed there is ſome reaſon that ſuch a Par as hee parret's of, ſhould haue had ſome place aſſigned it amongſt Monopolies. For I'le vndertake, that there is not any worſe Monopoly in the Kingdome, then hee would make of this, If hee might haue his will. For other Monopoliſts would be ſole ſellers and buyers in merchandize, hee in the Exchange. But if you doubt of his iudgement in this proiect, hee will produce his Monſieur Bodin, to approue it by this French proverbe, Il entend le par: P. 61. which was never yet knowne for any good phraſe in the French, much leſſe for a proverbe and is as ill a proofe as a proverbe, to approue his experience. For, Celuy qui eſt d'experience, entend le par: Malynes n'entend pas le par: Ergo, Malynes n'eſt point d'experience. The propoſition is prooved by his owne Proverbe: the Aſſumption, by his Proiect, as the event will manifeſt. But now you talke of a Sill• giſme, will you heare Malynes make a Paralogiſme? Thus, Nothing cauſeth. Merchants to export more money out of the Realme then they bring in,P. 61.but onely the bringing in of more Commodities into the Realme then they carryed out. The vnder-valuation of our monies, cauſeth no more Commodities to bee brought into the Realme, then is carryed out. Ergo, the vnder-valuation of our monies, cauſeth not more money to bee carryed out of the Realme, then is brought in. NEvè negativis rectè concludere ſcibis:§. 38. Seton. There is no good concluſion can bee drawne from Negatiues. And therefore the Philoſophers ſay, Ex nihilo, nihilfit: You cannot make ſomething of nothing. Neither hath it the ſhape of a Syllogiſme, for all the Propoſitions in it, are Negatiue: which cannot come vnder any Mood or Figure of Ariſtotle. Or if it had the forme of a Syllogiſme, yet it makes nothing againſt any thing I haue ſaid. For I do not ſay any where, that the vnder-valuation of our mony cauſeth more mony to be caried out of the Realme then is brought in; but that it cauſeth money to be caryed out of the Realme, when it is brought in: againſt which, this Paralogiſme, if it had beene a Syllogiſme, could haue concluded nothing. For mony muſt be firſt brought into the Realme, before it bee carryed out. Againe, although it ſhould be granted, that the vnder-valuation of our money, doth not cauſe more money to bee carryed out of the Realme then is brought in, yet for all that, it may cauſe a great part of that which is brought in to bee carryed out. Thus you ſee this Sophiſter how he chops Logicke! And great care forſooth hee takes, that it breed not a Dilemma, which hee vnderſtands as well as he doth a Syllogiſme. For a Dilemma is that, which convinceth both wayes: which his Paralogiſme doth no way: or rather convinceth him of folly. For his argument may eaſily be retorted vpon hinſelfe: thus, If nothing cauſeth Merchants to export more mony out of the Realme then they bring in, but onely the bringing in of more Commodities into the Realme then they carryed out, then it is not for want of a Par of Exchange. But the the firſt is true, by his owne argument: and therefore the ſecond. Or will you heare of a hound, that hath a better ſent of a Syllogiſme then Malynes? The hound having loſt the ſent, coaſts the Countrey: and runnes toward the Eaſt, and backe to the Weſt, and then to the North: and thus recenteth and concludeth, Either the Deare is gone Eaſt, or Weſt, or North, or South. But hee is not gone Eaſt, nor Weſt, nor North: Ergo the Deare is gone South. BVt we are not ſo well as to bee a hunting,§. 39. for Malynes hath ledde vs a wilde-gooſe race He propoſed Monopoly, but keeps a loofe from in as the Parſon did, that tooke his Text of faſting and preach't of feaſting. For now he is fallen into a laborinth betweene the Extrinſique and Intrinſique values of monies: and therein takes vpon him to refute a ſentence of mine, before hee vnderſtands it. For I ſpeake of the value of mony in Denomination; hee of the Finenes. And I pray you, when we ſay,P. 61. that plenty or ſcarcity of commodities maketh their Price: will any man think that to be the cauſe of their Goodnes? And when I ſay, that the plenty or ſcarcity of monies, cauſeth their Values: would any man but Malynes haue thought I ſpake of their Finenes? By Price in the one, is ment Valuation: by Value in the other, is ment Denomination or account. This man will take vpon him to teach diſtinctions, before he can diſtinguiſh. So then though Malynes ſay, I deny, and proue nothing; yet to the Iudicious it will appeare, that my deny all of his Par of Exchange, P. 62. is confirmed, with an vndenyable argument, of The plentie or ſcarcitie of moneys, which perpetually doth cauſe the Exchanges to riſe and fall: and which doth as certainely, in forraine parts where monies goe vncertaine, rule their Values or denomination, as the plenty or ſcarcity of Commodities doth their Price. It is true, the name of a thing doth not alter it really, but nominally: and denomination of money, doth alter it in name, though not in ſubſtance. The cloth doth not meaſure the yard, but the yard the cloth: but the greater the meaſure is, the fewer yards the cloth containeth, and the leſſe the meaſure, the more yards: and ſo is the denomination of money, the meaſure thereof to him that receiveth it, whereby it is more or leſſe in account. And thus Malynes having runne himſelfe out of breath,P. 63. and out-run Monopolium, with telling vs a tale, of a Cocke and a Bull, of a Pewterer and a Parater: at laſt he begins to define it, and vnderſtands Monopolion in Greeke, as well as hee doth Neſhech in Hebrew.P. 69. As you may perceiue by this his diſtinction, And as this may be done by authority, ſo may the aboueſayd courſed alſo be committed vnder the colour of authority, by the Princes grant, or Letters Patents. I Marvell what's the difference betwene Authority, and the Princes Letters Patents? §. 40. And why Malynes ſhould terme the Princes grant, or Letters Patents, The colour of authority? But ſomething he will ſay, though nothing to the purpoſe: and rather then nothing, worſe then nothing. For firſt hee accuſeth The Turkey Merchants, of finding fault with his Maieſties preemption of Time: P. 80. ſhould be 70. and then he falleth into the Allome Mynes: and there findes fault himſelfe with his Maieſties grant, That it maketh that Commodity dearer to the Subiect, P. 82. ſhould be 72. and better cheape to the tranſporter or Sranger. And ſo hee is poſted from Monopoly, and is now come to Want of government in trade. And there hee findeth fault, with Too many diſtinctions, which in a little Treatiſe, P. 84. hee ſaith, may ſeeme ſuperfluous. A Litle Treatiſe of Free trade, of a few weeks meditation, may bee as methodically diſtributed,§. 42. as a Lex Mercatoria, or Great Whale ofGreat Whale, P. 8. fiftie yeares breeding and obſervation. And although the Treatiſe be little, yet the Subiect matter thereof is great, and trencheth deepe: and I dare ſay, the Method is according to Art, though Malynes knowe it not. For in all Logicall Diſtributions, and Definitions alſo, there ought to bee Affectio reciprocationis, a certaine Reciprocall affection in both: Illic Partiū omniū cum Toto: P. Ram. Dialect lib. 1. c. 25. hîc Definitionis cum Definito. Of all the Parts with the Whole, in the one: of the Definitiō with the thing Defined, in the other, as the Logicians ſpeake. Definition teacheth what a thing is: Diſtribution, how manifold it is. This is like the Diameter, which divideth the Circle in ye midſt: That the Perimeter, which cōprehends the compaſſe or circumference thereof. Without true Definition, and exact Diſtribution, that worke is weake and imperfect, which otherwiſe ſeemeth never ſo learned. Definition is ſayd to be Perfect, or Imperfect. A Perfect Definition conſiſts of Eſſentiall Cauſes: An Imperfect, of Other Arguments: Diſtributio ſumitur exargumentis toti quidem conſentaneis, inter ſe autem diffentaneis. Itaque tantò accuraetior erit, quantò partium cū toto corſenſio, & inter ſe diſſentio maior fuerit. Eodem. cap. 25. and then it is called Deſcription. Diſtribution is that, which divideth the Whole, into the Parts. The Whole is that, which containeth the Parts. The Part is that, which is contained of the Whole. That Diſtribution is moſt exquiſite and accurat, which is taken of Arguments, Moſt Conſentany with the Whole, and Moſt Diſſentany in the Parts. Thoſe Arguments, are Moſt Conſentany with the VVhole, when the Parts are Eſſentiall to the whole. Thoſe which are Moſt Diſſentany in the Parts, are when the Parts are moſt oppoſed One to another. The Parts are moſt oppoſed One to another, in Contraries onely: becauſe thoſe are oppoſed, not Many to many, or One to many, but onely One to one. So then thoſe Diſtributions are moſt Excellent, which are Dichotomies or of two parts: and thoſe Dichotomies beſt, which are of Contraries. A Dichotomy may be perfect, in Arguments that are either Divers, or Oppoſite, or Diſparat, becauſe they are all Diſſentanies: but it is moſt Exquiſit, when 'tis moſt Oppoſit. But a Diſtribution into Many parts, can neither bee Perfect nor Excellent. It cannot bee Perfect, becauſe Many parts cannot bee truely Conſentany with the Whole, nor Diſſentany in the Parts. It cannot be Excellent, becauſe Many parts cannot be ſayd to be Contrary. And as wee muſt labour for this knowledge, ſo on the other ſide wee muſt not bee ſo curious in our Diſtributions, that in ſtriving for the Method we loſe the Matter, for want of a Dichotomy. For Ramus himſelfe, that famous Logician of France, was ſometimes forc't to diſtribute,De Dialect. lib. 1. cap. 3. Idem cap. 23. into Twiſe two parts: as the Cauſes, into the Efficient and Matter, the Forme and End. And his Ort Arguments, into Coniugat and Notation, Diſtribution and Definition. Which is not without ſome myſtery: for therein I am perſwaded, it pleaſeth The onely wiſe God, to hide ſomething from wiſe and learned men, that They may know, that They doe not know, but in part: and that all Perfection of knowledge is in God alone. As a good Logician of our time ſaith, That the cauſe, why men cannot dichotomize ſome things, is, O•• defectum Intellectus: for want of vnderſtanding. Syntagma Logicum. cap. 48 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, &c. Plato in Timaeu And hence it is that Plato that Divine Philoſopher affirmeth, that To reduce things infinit in multitude, into two parts, is very difficult, but Divine. And Ariſtotle, Platoe's Scholler, was honoured for Dichotomizing, with this knowne Diſtichon, Summus Ariſtoteles trutinando Cacumina rerum, In duo diviſit, quicquid in Orbefuit. Ariſtotle Prince of learning in his time, Poizing the heads of things with skill Divine, Did part them all in twaine, diſtinct in ſenſe: And thoſe he cal'd, Subſtance and Accidence. And as theſe were renowned among the Heathen, ſo is Ramus no leſſe honoured, of thoſe that vnderſtand him, amongſt Chriſtians. Who was ſo admirable in all the Arts, and aboue all the reſt, in this Logicall skill of Dichotomizing; that he ſaith of himſelfe, If he ſhould deſire, a Memoriae Sacrum, Si me de vigiliis ſtudijſque meis interroges, ſepulchri mei columnam è Logica artis inſtitutione deſiderem. In dialect Epiſt. A monument vpon his graue, hee would wiſh it of the Inſtitution of the Art of Logick. And thus much briefly in defence of thoſe Definitions and Diſtributions, which I haue vſed in my little Treatiſe of Free trade, which in Malynes ſentence doe ſeeme ſuperfluous. All the reſt that Malynes ſaith in his 4. Chapter, trencheth no way vpon any thing that I haue ſayd, notwithſtanding his challenge. He thinks it enough to ſet my Title, Of want of Government in trade, over this Chapter, and the title. Of Remedies over the next, as he vſeth to doe the names of his bookes, which like Ianus faces looke two wayes, or like Watermen, that looke one way and row another: and that's his beſt refutation of either. Onely here's a tale or two of his owne telling, worth obſerving: the one of himſelfe, in theſe words, Inſomuch,P. 80.that if I receiue here one hundreth Pieces of 20. ſhillings, I can ſend 90. Pieces to pay my bill of Exchange, and put ten Pecies in my pocket, for an over-plus and gaine. SO that hereby it ſeemeth,§. 42. Malynes is well vers't in this myſtery of tranſportation of the Kings Coine, eitherby practice in himſelfe, or obſervation of others. Which deſerve examination in both.P. 92. The other of a Flemiſh reckoning, of his owne making vp, between a Londoner, and an Amſterdamer: wherein for want of his Par of Exchange, this Kingdome forſooth, was deprived of a thouſand pounds at a clap, in a bargaine of a thouſand pounds employment onely. This is Mirabile dictu! more ſtrange then true. For his report, as the Poet ſpeaketh of Fame, is Tàm ficti pravique tenax, Aen. 4. quàm nuncia veri. For in this ſtory Malynes would ſuppoſe, that the Londoner and Amſter damer made a contract together. The Londoner ſent Clothes to Amſterdam, to the value of 1000. li. The Amſterdamer ſent Silkes to London, for 1500. li. Flemiſh. The Amſterdamer ſaith hee, deſired to haue his mony ſent him ouer in Specie, and ſo got 15. in the hundred, which is 150. li. and the Kingdom ſaith he, loſt the whole 1000. li. The Londoner ſaye's Malynes, could not doe the like, becauſe the moneys were inhanſed at Amſterdam, 15. in the hundred, higher then at London. So that the Londoner is forced to receiue his 1000. li. home by Exhange at a lowe rate, or at 33. ſh. 4d. whereby ſaith Malynes hee doth receiue the ſayd 1000. li. with no gaine at all. This tale deſerue's the title of Cuius contrarium: for 'tis neineither true, in Manner, nor Matter. Not in the Manner, for firſt he propounds ſuch a rate of Exchange, as was never knowne betweene Amſterdam and London, and yet reckons the Londoners 1500. li Flemiſh, at 33.4 d. which is no leſſe then 100. li. difference in 1000. li. Nor in the Matter, for when Malynes tolde this tale, it was October, 1622. And then By the Royall Interceſsion of his Maieſty, the States had decried their monies in the Vnited Provinces, Great Whale. p. 313. 314. whereof Malynes himſelfe takes notice in his Great Whale. So that Vice versâ, the caſe is quite altered. For the Londoner brought over from Amſterdam his 1500. li. in good Iacobus pieces to profit: But Malynes friend the Amſterdamer as is reported, happened vpon an ill Exchange from London: For hee would needs change his 1000. li. into Spaniſh Reals, and ſhip them at Saint Katherins, and the Searcher tooke them vp at Graues-end. And if Malynes for his part, would haue beene as nimble, in fetching an hundred twenty ſhillings pieces from Amſterdam, he might now, as well haue put ten Pieces in his pocket, in bringing them thence, as hee ſometimes ſeemed to doe, in carrying of them hence: and more ſafely too: for money is there a Merchandize, here a treaſure: there tollerated to bee exported, here prohibited. And thus Malynes being put to his ſhifts, and wanting powder and ſhot to charge, or diſcharge any longer; is at laſt encountered of the Remedies: Againſt which hee is forc't to mount his great Ordinance: wot you what it is, a Piece of wood, after Malynes block, painted like a Braſſe Piece: and yet braue's it like himſelfe, and promiſeth A Remedy of great facility, P. 83. P. 85. a Remedie that comprehends all Remedies: No leſſe I can tell you, then his Engine of Exchange. His Par forſooth, pro Pari, muſt ſtand him in ſtead Ad Omnia quare; as the chiefe Oare in his boat, the Key of his work, his onely Antidote. But this his Quare, muſt not paſſe without a Quaere: For, THE CIRCLE OF COMMERCE. The Second PART. Of Exchanges in generall: and therein of the Ballance of the Trade of this Kingdome, with forraigne Countries. THere are certaine Empericks or Quackſaluers in the world,Section. 1. that vſe a Pill they call Panchreſton, that is, a medecine for euery malady, a ſalue for euery ſore. And if Malynes had been but a Smatterer in any Science, I ſhould haue thought him of their Colledge: for he will needs haue his Par of Exchange to be the ſole and ſoueraigne remedy for all the grieuances of Trade. If he had vſed the Flemiſh phraſe, that Butter is good for all things, he had ſpoke more like himſelfe, and you might better haue belieued his word. This Par of Exchange is an old foil'd proiect of his,§. 2. of 22. yeeres growth. For in An. 1601. hee pas't the Preſſe with a Pamphlet called after his manner, The Canker of Englands Common-wealth. That, he then dedicated to that worthy and noble Stateſ-man Sir Robert Cecill, then Secretary of State to Qu. Eliz. wherein if there had been any thing of worth, he could neither haue preſented it to a more worthy Stateſman, nor could there any thing haue fallen to the ground, that might either haue concern'd the Reuenue of the Crowne, or the Common-good of this Kingdom. But this proiect being then found of no worth; both he and it were worthily reiected. Which might haue made a ſober man to haue ſuſpected his own iudgement, or at leaſt for borne to trouble the world any more with ſuch a toy. But he, as if he were ſtill in trauell with a monſter, hath fallen a freſh againe on this ſtale ſtuffe, in his Pamphlet, miſnamed, The Mainte nance of Trade, and againe in his Great Whale: and hath dared with his waxen wings to ſore as high as the Sunne, to preſent the ſame trim'd vp in a turn'd coat, to no leſſe then the Sacred Perſon of the King. Which, he that will take the paines to compare together, may ſay of them as ſometimes the Comisk ſaid of Menanders Andria and Perinthia; Ter. In Prolog. Andriae Qui vtramuis rectè nôrit, ambas nouerit▪ He that knowes one of them, knowes all of them. Onely, as the man is growne more craſie, ſo are theſe latter writings ſtuffed with more vanity, and much leſſe modeſty then the former. Therefore wee will leaue the man for a while,§. 3. Exchanges in generall, may be ſaid to be Perſonall or Prouinciall. and conſider the matter. Exchanges may be vnderſtood 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, in many and manifold notions. For the knowledge of Commerce, and the wealth of a Common-wealth, conſiſt in the vſe of Exchange. Exchange and Permutation, and Commutation are all one. Exchange is a kind of Commerce exerciſed in mony, in merchandize, in both, in either; of one man with another, of one Country with another. All Exchanges then, may be ſaid either to be Perſonall, or Prouinciall. Perſonall, which reſpect the Exchange of mony or Merchandize, betweene man and man. Prouinciall, which reſpect the Exchange of mony and Merchandize of one Kingdome with another. The former hath relation to matter of Trade: The latter to matter of of State. In the one conſiſt's the gaine or loſſe of a Merchant: In the other the gaine or loſſe of a Kingdome in the Ballance of Trade. All Perſonall Exchanges may be conſidered Largely, or Strictly. Largely, §. 4. Perſonall Exchanges Largely taken. when there is an Exchange, or Permutation of any one thing for an other: whether it be, With mony or Without Mony. With mony, when either Merchandize is exchanged For mony; or Mony for mony. The former of theſe is called Buying and Selling: becauſe mony is now become the price of all things; which from the beginning was not ſo. For as the world encreaſed in people, ſo did it alſo in Commerce and trade. So that where before mony was inuented, there was an Exchange, or Permutation in moueable and mutable things onely, as Corne, Wine, Oile, and the like: and afterwards in immoueable and immutable things, as Houſes, Lands and the like; there was a neceſſity of mony, to value ſuch things with mony as could not be exchanged. And ſo by degrees all things came to bee valued with money, and mony the value of all things. The latter,§. 5. Exchange with mony. when money is exchanged for mony is called Mony-changing, when mony is bought with mony. And ſuch Mony-changers, the Grecians called 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, and the Romans Nnmularii; which were Bankers or Exchangers of mony for mony with gaine. Such were thoſe in Chriſts time, as appeareth by the Phraſe in the Originall,〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Matth. 21.12. whom Chriſt whipt out of the Temple, for the abuſe not of the thing, but the place. But, God knowes, were neuer in any age nor language, vnderſtood for Officers of a: Merchants Exchange, as Malynes fondly faineth, amongſt other his fictitia, or feigned fables in his Great Whale; Page. 37.8. whoſe fond conceipts deſerue to bee whipt out of the Common-wealth, for abuſe of the thing, and the place alſo. The Exchange without mony, is properly called Commerce; §. 6. Excchange without mony Free trade. Cap. 1. p. 20. which as I haue ſhewed elſwhere, is Commutatio mercium, an Exchange of wares for wares: and in Merchants termes is called Trucking or Bartering. And if there bee any myſtery in merchandiſing, there is more in this kinde of Exchanging, then in that of monies: for the Commodities of all Countries are more various, then the monies: and the waight and bulk of trade conſiſteth more in Commodities then in monies. And a skilfull Merchant will oft preferre a barter for Commodity, before a ſale for mony: becauſe hee much more aduanceth the price of his Commodity: in which skill, he that hath moſt skill, hath moſt aduantage. A Common-wealth alſo may ſubſiſt with the trade of Commodities without mony: but it cannot ſubſiſt with the trade of mony without Commodities. Wherein conſiſted the policy of Platoe's Common-wealth, and the fine conceit of Sr. Tho. Mores Vtopia, ſo much honoured in the world. And thus much for Perſonall Exchanges at large. Perſonall Exchanges ſtrictly vnderſtood,§. 5. Exchanges ſtrictly taken. are ſuch as are reſtrained only to bils of Exchange, in vſe amongſt Merchants: Which is done, when one lendeth or letteth a ſumme of monie, and another borroweth or taketh it, to pay the like value by a bill of Exchange to a third perſon in ſome remote place. Or it is a voluntary contract, made by the mutuall conſent of two parties, at ſuch price and time as they can agree, for the conueying of mony to, or the drawing of mony from, any remote or forraine part. Or in a word, it's nothing elſe but a tranſmutation of money from place to place without tranſportation. So that this kind of Exchange or Permutation, §. 8. The Name of the Exchange. will appeare to be of ſingular note and obſeruation, if we conſider the Name, or the Thing it ſelfe. The Name is taken, either from the Subiect, or from the Adiunct thereof. The Subiect is the place, and therefore it's called in Latine Cambium: and Cambire is quaſi cum-ire, or conuenire: taken from the place, where Merchants and others come together. And ſo it is in Spaniſh and Italian called Cambio. The Adiunct reſpecteth, either the Action there done, as the Exchanging of mony; or the Actors, the Exchangers thereof. And thence it is call'd the Exchange or Burſe. The latter is common in moſt languages, deriued of the Greek word 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, ſignifying the Purſe or Treaſury where mony is to be ſought vpon all occaſions. The Name and forme of the place, ſome thinke was taken from the Caſtle in Carthage. Whereof Virgil maketh this mention; Mercatíque ſolum, facti de nomine Byrſam, Taurino quantùm poſſent circundare tergo. A peece of ground both long and wide Was bought, gir't round withDido by ſubtlety obtained of K. Iarbus as much ground as ſhe could compaſſe with a Buls hide: which being thought to be little, was eaſily granted. But ſhe cauſed the skinne to be cut in ſmall peeces, and ſtretcht out in ſuch length, as it compa'ſt 22. ſtadia or furlongs of that meaſure, whereon ſhee built Carthage, & in the midſt thereof a Caſtle, which ſhe called Byrſa, frō the name of the Bulles hide: and by a Metonimy, a Purſe. Strabe lib. 17. a Buls hide: Whereon a Towre rare to bee ſeene Was buil't, cal'd Burſe by Dido Queene. And indeed the Burſes for Merchants aſſemblies in moſt places, are of ſtately Structure; as is our Burſe of London: the modell whereof was taken from the Burſe of Antwerpe, which twaine are much alike, and excell all others that I know. That of Amſterdam reſembleth ours: but ours farre exceedeth that in extent and coſtly architecture: and was worthily named of Qu. Elizabeth The Royall Exchange. And thus much of the Name: The Thing it ſelfe followeth.§. 9. The Thing or matter, conſidered in the Exchange Naturallor Politique. Which may be ſaid either to be Natural or Politique. A Natural Exchange is when mony is exchanged Value for Value, according to the Intrinſique or inward finenes, or true value thereof. The Intrinſique value or finenes of monies, cannot be known, but by a diſſolution & melting down of the ſame into their proper bodies: & by a ſeparatiō of the pure from the impure, the fine ſiluer or gold, from the allay or copper by aſſay. In which Naturall Exchange, there is no rate nor price to be admitted for the deliuering or taking of mony: but looke how much fine ſiluer or gold you receiue in one place, iuſt ſo much, and no more you muſt pay or deliuer in another. And this is a better direction, then limitation of Exchanges. For the finenes of monies, is that Cynoſure or Center, whereunto all Exchanges haue their naturall propenſion. But if you ſhould ſo limit or reſtraine Exchanges, that no man ſhould take or deliuer any mony, but according to the iuſt finenes: then the vſe of Exchanges in all places would bee taken away. For then there would be no aduantage left neither to him that deliuereth, nor him that taketh, when mony muſt bee anſwered with mony in the ſame Intrinſique value. For as it is the goodnes of a Commodity that directeth the price; yet that price is greater or leſſe, according to the vſe of the thing, or the iudgement of the buyer and ſeller: euen ſo, it is the finenes of mony, that directeth the price or value of the Exchange, yet that price is greater or leſſe according to the occaſions of both parties contracting for the ſame: which cannot be done in the Naturall Exchange, becauſe it admitteth no aduantage to either. The Politique Exchange, is when mony is exchanged value for value,§. 10. The Politique Exchange. according to the extrinſique or outward valuation. Such as is the intrinſique finenes to the Natural Exchange, ſuch is the extrinſique value to the Politique Exchange. Wherein Merchants are wont to reckon the certaine value of mony in finenes, at an vncertaine valuation, in denomination and accompt: ſometimes at a higher, ſometimes at a lower rate. Which is therefore in Merchants termes, called the price, or courſe, or rate of the Exchange. And this valuation is thus vncertaine, becauſe it is greater or leſſe, according to the circumſtances of time, and place, and perſons. Of time, when money is taken by Exchange for longer or ſhorter time. Of place, where mony is more plentifull or ſcarſe. Of perſons, when the party taking mony, is of greater or leſſe credit, or hath more or leſſe need thereof. In all theſe reſpects, the rates of monies deliuered and taken by Exchange, are alwayes more or leſſe. For as it is a common thing amongſt men to ſell one & the ſame commodity, to diuers men at diuers priſes: ſo is it alſo in Exchange, when one and the ſame finenes of mony, is anſwered by a different value in denomination or accompt. Neither is there any certainty of gaine to the deliuerer of mony in the firſt Exchange, although he ſeem to haue ſome aduantage in the price thereof aboue the value of fine ſiluer; nor of loſſe to the taker, though hee ſeeme to haue ſome diſaduantage in the price thereof vnder the value of fine ſiluer: becauſe the deliuerer may perhaps be ſubiect to remit his mony backe, in the ſecond or forrain Exchange, as much vnder the value of fine ſiluer, as he had before aboue the value in the firſt Exchange: And it may fall out alſo, that the taker may gaine by the riſing of the Exchange abroad; that, which hee ſeemed to loſe by the falling thereof at home. And if it happen that the mony deliuered in the firſt Exchange, bee not remitted in the ſecond Exchange, but otherwiſe employed in trade; that alter's not the caſe, by Malynes owne rule; which is,Pag. 3. That commodities are bought and ſold according to the publike meaſure of the Exchange. So that in theſe Exchanges, there is no certainty of gaine or loſſe to the parties taking or deliuering of mony, vntill the time be run out, and the returne come backe, from thoſe parts and places, whether the mony was firſt deliuered by Exchange: during which time, the manifold occurrents which are contigent to trade, may vary the gaine or loſſe to either party. But becauſe Malynes would make the world beleeue,§. 11. The vſe of Exchange. that there is ſome great myſtery in this kinde of Exchange, let vs come a little neerer home, in conſidering the Vſe, or Abuſe thereof. This kind of Politique Exchange, is an excellent policy of trade, I might ſay of State: and concerneth both The King and Kingdome. It concerneth The King: when by the benefit of the Exchange, his Maieſties affaires of State and high conſequence, may bee furniſhed with monies in forraine parts, vpon all occaſions, without the exportation of any of his owne treaſure. It concerne's The Kingdome: both in reſpect of Noble-men, and Trades-men. Of Noble-men: when by the benefit of Exchange, yong Noble-men and Gentlemen may be ſupplied with monies in their trauels, without the danger & inconueniēce of carrying ouer mony, which without the Exchange could not be auoided. Of Tradeſ-men: and that principally in reſpect of Merchants and Clothiers. Of Merchants, Old and Yong. Of Old Merchants: whoſe meanes although good, yet through the deadnes of times & trades, a good mans eſtate may be out of his hands in debts and wares: which may be ſupplied by the benefit of Exchange. Of Yong Merchants: who hauing little meanes, and leſſe credit with the vſurer without a ſurety, whom euery Yong man, nor Old neither, hath at command, may ſupply themſelues vpon their owne credits with great ſummes of mony by Exchange: the leaſt part whereof, they could not haue had without a ſurety at intereſt. Which is a ſingular benefit to Yong Merchants, and tendeth to a very great inlargement of trade. Of Clothiers: for when the Cloth-markets are dead, and when the Clothier cannot ſell his Cloth, and the Merchant hath not mony to buy his Cloth; the Exchange becometh a ſuccoure, and ſupply to both. When thereby, vpon a ſudden, the Merchant can finniſh himſelfe with mony, and take off the Cloth from the Clothiers hand, to the comfort of the Clothier, & the poore people that depend on him, and to the great quickning of the Cloth-trade: which is highly to be tendered in this Commonwealth. And thus much briefly for the Vſe of this Politique Exchange: §. 12. The abuſe of Exchange. the Abuſe followeth. Which Malynes hath Monopolized to himſelfe, in his Par of Exchange, which is the onely Abuſe thereof. Malynes in diuers parts of his Little Fiſh, and in his Great Whale, where the ſame is ſuck't in againe; would perſwade the world, that there is a great vnderualuation of our monies in Exchange, to thoſe of Germany and the Low Countries. Which is the foundation and maine piller to ſupport his Par, & perillous proiect: ſo if you take that away, all falle's to the ground. In An. 1586. he ſaith, the Reall of 8. was ſet in the Low Countries atPag. 12. 42. Stuyuers, and the Exchange atPag. 12. 33. s. 4. d. Flemiſh for our 20. s. Sterling: and the Riecks Daller went then in Germany atPag. 32. 32. ſhillings Lups, and the Exchange atPag. 33. 24. s. 9. d, Hamburgh mony for our 20. ſhillings Sterling. The Reall ſaith he, is now raiſed in the Low Countries toPag. 13. 51. Stuyuers: and the Riecks Daller in Germany toPag. 34. 54. Shillings Lups. Whereby Malynes would inferre, that by how much theſe monies are inhanſed aboue thoſe ancient values, which is not ſo little as 20. in the hundred, by ſo much our monies are vnderualued in Exchange vnto thoſe parts: and by ſo much our natiue Commodities are ſold in forraine parts too cheape, and the forraine brought in as much too deare: and to be the cauſe alſo of the exportation of our mony; and the hinderance of the importation of forraine Coine into this Kingdome. Theſe are fearefull effects; if wee may giue credit to Malynes Report. And this I take to bee the ſubſtance of Malynes ſuppoſition. Whereunto I anſwer, that firſt denomination of monies, doe alter their names onely, not their true values.§. 13. For there is no more fine ſiluer in a Reall of 8. when it goeth at 51 Stuyuers, then when it goeth at 42 Stuyuers: nor in a Riecks Daller when it goeth at 54 ſhillings Lups, then when it goeth at 32 ſhillings Lups. And next, that as the mony hath been raiſed in Germany and the Low Countries, from that it was in An. 1586. ſo likewiſe hath the Exchange there riſſen ſince that time accordingly: which being oppoſed to the riſing of the mony, maketh the one equiualent to the other. Wherein Malynes error is ſo groſſe, that I wonder, how any man of vnderſtanding could be deceiued therewith: for hee reduceth the inhanſed dutch mony into Engliſh mony, at the low rate of Exchange: whereas he ſhould haue taken aſwell, the inhanſed rate of Exchange, as the inhanſed mony; and then the difference had been none at all. This may be made more perſpicuous by a familiar example.§. 14. An Example of Exchange. A Gentleman goeth ouer into the Low Countries, and maketh ouer 100. l. Sterling to beare his charges there. The mony he deliuers by Exchange in London for Amſterdam, after the rate of 33 ſh. 4 d. vzance. At which rate he is to receiue at Amſterdam L 1•6.13.4. Flemiſh for his 100 l. deliuered at London. This L 1•6.13.4. Flemiſh is paid him in Amſterdam in Hollands Dallers, at 2 Guilders or 40 Stuyuers the Daller, which amounteth to iuſt 500 Dallers. So then theſe 500 Dallers, and that L 166.13.4. Flemiſh, are both equal in value to this 100 l. Sterling. It falleth out that this Gentleman is otherwiſe ſupplied of mony in the Low Countries for his ••pence; ſo that being againe to returne for England, he is to remit his mony backe againe by Exchange for London. And by this time the Hollands Daller is riſen from 2 Guilders to 42 Stuyuers the Daller: ſo that now his L 166.13.4. Flemiſh is in denomination come to be 175 l. Flemiſh: but withall the Exchange is alſo riſen to 35. ſhillings Flemiſh. Now the queſtion is, what this Gentleman ſhall gaine by the riſing of the mony thus vpon his hand in Holland? Surely that which the Dutch-men ſay, is Goet in de ooge, quaet in de buydel; and we ſay, that you may put it in your eye, and not ſee the worſe, which is iuſt nothing at all. For his 125 pounds Flemiſh, being to be deliuered by Exchange for London at 35. ſhillings, that is, to receiue 20. ſhillings Sterling at London for 35. ſhillings Flemiſh deliuered at Amſterdam; is all one, as to haue deliuered his L 166.13.4. at 33. ſhillings 4 pence: and both of them produce only his 100 l. Sterling againe, and not a peny more. But if this Gentlemen would learne of Malynes to reckon without his hoſte; that is, to reckon his Flemiſh mony riſen high, at his low Exchange, he might haue deceiued himſelfe, as Malynes deceiueth others, with his Flemiſh reckoning. Or if it had been lawfull for this Gentleman, to haue ſent ouer his 100. l. in Spaniſh Reals, when the Reall of 8. went at 51. Stuyuers at Amſterdam, and to haue had the lucke of a low Exchange from thence, to haue deliuered his mony backe, which is very rare, when the Species run high; he might haue got 25. in the hundred as they did that carried Reals thither laſt yeere: as I haue elſewere ſhewed vpon the like occaſion. Otherwiſe, when the Species run high,Free trade Cap. 1. p. 8. and the Exchange runne's high: hoc aliquid, nihil: all this ſomething produceth nothing. And this is all the Myſtery that is in this deepe ſpeculation of Exchange, §. 15. wherewith Malynes would amaze the world: Sometimes there is ſome gaine: ſometimes there is ſome loſſe: ſometimes there is neither gaine nor loſſe: but as the rate of the forraine Exchange falleth out, whereby that mony is to be remitted, which was before deliuered by Exchange; ſo is the gaine or loſſe, whatſoeuer the denomination bee. Which Malynes himſelfe proclaimeth in his Great Whale, Great Whale p. 371. in theſe words, Know yee therefore, that the benefit or profit of Exchange is neuer known directly, but by the rechange thereof. But becauſe this Rechange is vncertaine,§. 16. the gaine or loſſe thereof muſt needs alſo bee vncertaine. Whereof there is no other reaſon to bee giuen, then of the vncertainty of all other things, which are bought and ſold in the market. For when there is plenty of things, they are commonly cheape, and deare as they are more ſcarſe, or more or leſſe in vſe. And ſo it is in Exchanges, as there is plenty or ſcarſity of mony, ſo is the price or rate of the Exchange in all places. And thence it is that the King of Spaines mony is ſo ſoone recented and felt of all the Exchanges in all places round about. For his monies that are yeerely diſpoſed, for payment of his Soldiers in the Low Countries, whether Exchanged with the Genoaiſes, or trāſported in Specie, are firſt felt in the Exchange of Antwerpe, and afterwards in all the other Exchanges, as of London, Paris, Lions, Roan, Amſterdam, Delft, Middelburgh, Hamburgh, Venice, and elſwhere wher Exchanges are in vſe: which for that cauſe, commonly follow the Exchange of Antwerpe. And therefore as all other Naturall things muſt haue their courſe, ſo alſo muſt Exchanges, and will no more endure a forſt Par to be put vpon them, then the market will endure to haue the priſes of all things prefixed or ſet. But yet to come a little cloſer to Malynes: §. 17. let vs leaue 1586. and the vncertaine rates of monies and Exchanges that haue been euer ſince, and take the preſent ſtate of the time, and the Intrinſique and Extrinſique value of our monies and of the Low Countries, and the rate of the Exchange as it goeth at this day, and bring Malynes Tenet to this touchſtone. And amongſt other Species, becauſe we haue had ſo much diſpute about the Spaniſh Reals, and that theſe are all one in Intrinſique value or finenes, with our mony: that is, a leauen ounces two peny waight fine.In Great Whale. Pag. 314. Theſe Malynes taketh notice to be now ſet in the Low Countries by a Placcaet or Proclamation, publiſhed the 21. Iuly. 1622. at 2 Guilders 8 Stuyuers, or 8 ſhillings Flemiſh the piece. Now 4 ⅜ Reals of 8 are equall to our 20 ſhillings Sterling in the Vnited Prouinces, in Extrinſique and Intrinſique value: and both are equall to 35 ſhillings Flemiſh, which is the preſent rate of the Exchange. The Reall of 8. waigheth in the Low Coū tries, 17. Engliſh or penny waight & 25. aſes or grains: And the Engliſh ſhilling waigheth 3. Engliſh or peny waight and 28. aſes or graines. For 4 ⅜ Reals of 8, waigh 77 Engliſh or Peny waight, and 25 ⅜ Aſes or Graines: and 20 ſhillings Sterling waieth 77. Engliſh, and 16 Aſes: which is but 9 ⅜ Aſes difference in 35 ſhillings Flemiſh, which is not a peny Sterling in the whole. Againe, 4 ⅜ Reals of 8 at 2 Guilders 8 Stuyuers the Reall of 8, produce iuſt 35 ſhillings Flemiſh: And 20 ſhillings Sterling at 10 ⅜ Stuyuers for euery Shilling, as they are alſo ſet by the ſaid Proclamation, produce the very ſame value. So then our Engliſh ſiluer mony, and the Spaniſh Reals, and the value of both in the Low Countries, and the rate of the Exchange, doe all agree. Wher's the vnderualuation then that Malynes maketh all this ſtirre about?The Iacobus peece, and the golden Rider, contain 24. 8/1• Peeces in the Flemiſh Mark. And our gold mony is rather ouer-valued: for Malynes knoweth, that the Iacobus peece, and the Great golden Rider are of one finenes. Now this Golden Rider by the Proclamation aforeſaid is ſet at 11 Guilders 6 Stuyuers, which is 37 ſh. & 8. d. Flemiſh: And the Iacobus peeces proclaimed for Bullion. The cauſe of plenty of Iacobus peeces brought into England. But if you will reckon them but at the price of the Rider, and at the rate of the Exchange aforeſaid, the gaine is 10 d. Flemiſh in a peece, to bring them from Holland into England. For indeed the Iacobus peece and the Double Rider being of one finenes, and the Iacobus peece proclaimed Bullion, ought there to be valued vnder the Rider, ſo much as is the coynage of the Rider: But the Iacobus peeces being now ſo much ſought after there, to be brought ouer hither; the price of them is raiſed 4 d. Flemiſh aboue the Rider, viz. to 38 ſh. Flemiſh, and yet abundance of them are ſtill brought ouer by Dutch and Engliſh: or els our complaint of want of mony had been farre greater in this Kingdome. What vſe is there then of Malynes Par? §. 18. Or rather what Abuſe would there bee by ſuch a Diſpar, which hee preſſeth ſo hard, and wherewith he would oppreſſe vs much more? For vnder the colour of the vnderualuation of our mony in Exchange, which I haue ſhewed to bee but Imaginary, and a dreame of his own weake braine, hee would bring a Reall loſſe of 20. in the hundred by raiſing of the Exchange, vpon all the Engliſh Merchants eſtates in Germany and the Low Countries, and by a ſecret conueyance would conferre the ſame vpon the Stranger; which would all fall vpon the Cloth Trade of this Kingdome. For all men know, that in England the Stranger is commonly the Deliuerer of mony, and the Engliſh the Taker. Becauſe the Engliſh commonly taketh mony at home, either to draw home his meanes from forraine parts, or els to inlarge his trade. And the Stranger is the Deliuerer of mony here, becauſe when he hath ſold his forraine Commodities here, he is to remit his mony home by Exchange. But in forraine parts, the Engliſh is commonly the Deliuerer, and the Stranger the Taker: becauſe the proceed of the Cloth and other the natiue Commodities of the Kingdome ſold in forreine parts, adminiſtreth continuall occaſion to the Engliſh, of Deliuering of mony for returne thereof. By meanes whereof, this great loſſe would falle vpon the Engliſh, both in England and Beyond the Seas, and become ſo much gaine to the Dutch. For the higher the Exchange is in England, the more loſſe it is to the Taker, and the more gaine to the Deliuerer: becauſe the Taker muſt giue to the Deliuerer, ſo much more Flemiſh mony abroad, for the Engliſh mony hee taketh vp by Exchange at home, as the rate or price of the Exchange is raiſed. And the higher the Exchange is in Dutch-land, the more loſſe to the Deliuerer, and gaine to the Taker by the ſame reaſon: becauſe the Deliuerer muſt there giue to the Taker, ſo much more Flemiſh mony, as the Exchange is riſſen, for the Engliſh mony he is to receiue at home. As for Example: ſuppoſe the Exchange goe from London to Amſterdam at 35 ſh. Flemiſh, for euery 20 ſhillings Sterling: then if I take vp 100. l. Sterling of a Dutch Merchant in London, I muſt pay him or his Aſſignes 175. l. Flemiſh at a Moneths time in Amſterdam. Or if I am at Amſterdam, and will there deliuer 100. l. Sterling for London, and the Exchange from thence for London, goe at 34. ſhillings 9 pence Flemiſh, for euery 20. ſhillings Sterling: then if I deliuer there 173 pounds 15 ſhillings Flemiſh, I ſhall receiue 100 pounds Sterling, at a moneths time in London. But if the price or rate of the Exchange ſhould be raiſed in London, from 35 ſhillings to 40 ſhillings Flemiſh, for euery 20 ſhillings Sterling; which is much leſſe then the ſuggeſted difference before mentioned, then I muſt pay in Amſterdam 200 pounds Flemiſh for 100 pounds Sterling receiued in London. Or if I be a deliuerer of mony at Amſterdam; where I ſhalbe ſure to finde the Exchange to riſe in proportion to the Exchange at London, as Malynes himſelfe confeſſeth,Little Fiſh p. 86. That the price of the Exchange will alter there accordingly, then I muſt deliuer 198 pounds 15 ſhillings Flemiſh, at 39 ſhillings 9 pence, to receiue 100. pounds Sterling at a moneths time in London. Whereby my loſſe will be in proportion to the other, with the difference of time. If this be the Inconuenience, what will bee the euent?§. 19. The Decay of the Cloth-trade threatned by Malynes Par of Exchange. Surely no leſſe then the Decay of the Cloth-trade. For the Exchange is that, which repreſenteth to the Engliſh Merchant, his whole eſtate beyond the Seas, for his ready vſe and imployment thereof in England vpon all occaſions. Which is the cauſe, that the Engliſh Merchants which trade into Germany and the Low Countries, doe buy their cloth with Ready Mony, when other Merchants that haue not this benefit of the Exchange, are faine to Take time of the Clothiers, to pay them at the returne of their Eſtate in Wares. So that if there ſhould be a ſtop in the Courſe of the Exchange, then either the Engliſh Merchant will forbeare to take vp mony by Exchange; or els hee will looke to recouer the loſſe of the Exchange, vpon his Cloth. If he forbeare to take vp mony by Exchange, then he can neither buy ſo much cloth, nor giue ready mony for the ſame as he was wont. Wherby will follow a ſtand in Black-well-Hall, which is wont much to be refreſhed by the ready vſe of the Exchange. And if the Engliſh wil not take, the Stranger cannot deliuer: and if he cannot deliuer, of neceſſity he muſt be thruſt vpon the Tranſportation of Mony, more then euer he was before: and then the remedy will be far worſe then the diſeaſe. And if the Engliſh Merchāt muſt needs recouer the loſſe of the Exchange vpon the Cloth; it muſt either be done in the buying of it at home, or ſelling of it abroad. But it cannot be done in the ſale of the Cloth abroad: for the Cloth-trade grones already vnder the preſent burthen that lye's vpon it, which preſſeth it downe ſo ſore, that it cannot recouer it ſelfe: whereof there are 2. principall witneſſes, the Quantity, and the Price of Cloth, both diminiſhed. Therefore of neceſſity, this loſſe muſt bee expected of the Clothier: which would be a matter of grieuous conſequence, as the termes of trade now ſtand. But will you heare Malynes Prolepſis or anticipation of theſe obiections?§. 20. Thus, All which obiections and anſweres,§. 21. are a Colloquy or rather a ſoliloquy of his owne. Malynes did well to thinke on ſuch obiections, as hee could beſt anſwer. Becauſe indeed the manifold obiections which his proiect bringeth with it, are vnanſwerable. But Malynes is ſo eaſie a Combatant, that a man may giue him any aduantage of the weapon. Let vs take it for granted, that theſe are all the obiections that might occurre this proiect, and apply our ſelues vnto a Reply therevnto. To his firſt anſwer therefore I ſay,§. 22. Malynes oblections refuted. Contractus eſt conuentio, quâ ex duorū pluriúmue in idem negotium ſeu placitum conſenſu, obligatio ad dandum quid vel faciendum contrahitur. Alth. Dicaeolog. l. 1. cap. 64. that it is no more true, that the Taker is ruled by the Deliuerer; then that the Deliuerer is ruled by the Taker. Which Taking and Deliuering, as it is A voluntary Contract, made by the mutuall conſent of both parties; ſo are both alike free to Take and Deliuer at their owne pleaſure, as in all other contracts and bargains of buying and ſelling. And trade hath in it ſuch a kinde of naturall liberty in the courſe and vſe thereof, as it will not indure to be fors't by any. If you attempt it, it is a thouſand to one, that you leaue it not worſe then you found it. And therefore Bodin ſaith excellently, Eſtenim libertas naturalis huiuſmodi, vt voluntas benè à natura informata, imperium alterius poſt Deum Immortalem reiiciat. Naturall liberty is ſuch a thing, as the will being by nature rightly informed, will not endure the command of any, but of God alone. Which muſt be vnderſtood of naturall liberty in the vſe of things indifferent; and not of Regall authority in the exerciſe of gouernment. And hence it is gone into a Prouerbe, Quoà natura dedit, tollere nemo poteſt. That which nature giueth, no man can take away. Iuſtice is ſaid to be Diſtributiue or Commutatiue. §. 23. Diſtributiue Iuſtice is ſo called à Diſtribuendo, becauſe it giueth euery man his owne, by a Geometricall proportion, as the Ciuilians ſpeake: that is, with reſpect to the quality of the Perſon, not the Thing. Commutatiue Iuſtice à Commutando, becauſe cauſe it giueth to euery man his own, by an Arithmeticall proportion: that is, with reſpect to the equality of the Thing, not the Perſon. This laſt is placed in Commerce and Contracts, becauſe by the rule of Iuſtice there ought to be an equality in buying and ſelling: wherein Par eſt vtriúſque conditio, as the Ciuilians alſo ſpeake, the Buyer and the Seller, he that Letteth, and hee that Taketh, ought to bee vpon equall termes. And therefore you breake this law Malynes, when you w••l haue the Taker of mony ruled by the Deliuerer. Malynes addeth, That the Merchant Stranger will be ſooner thruſt vpon the Statute of Employment, for by the exportation of mony he ſhall haue no gaine: how quickly Malynes hath forgot his owne practice, which he ſpake of but ere while, in putting 10 Iacobus peeces in his pocket, by ſending ouer 90 Peeces to Amſterdam! And ſurely thoſe diſcreet perſons, that finde fault with the ſtrangers employments here in this Kingdom, are none of Caeſars friends, nor friends to Caeſars ſubiects. To the ſecond I reply, that Malynes taketh care onely for the preſent,§. 25. as thoſe beaſt of Epheſus did, of whom Saint Paul ſpeaketh,〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 1. Cor. 15.32. Ede, bibe, dormi, poſt mortem nulla voluptas. * Let vs eate and drinke, for to morrow we ſhall die. For by this limitation of the Proclamation, the Engliſh Merchants ſhould once eſcape this loſſe of 20. in the hundred, and euer after pay it to the Dutch. The Ephramites were knowne by the pronouncing of Sibboleth, and ſo may Malynes by his Language, bee knowne what Countriman hee is. To the 3.§. 26. I reply, that although there wanted not takers of mony by Exchange for Hamburgh, when the Exchange riſſe from 28 ſhillings to 35 ſhillings, yet it doth not follow, that therefore there would be takers at his Par of Exchange: for it is a plaine Diſpar, a different caſe. For thoſe that then tooke mony for Hamburgh, the Takers gained and the Deliuerers loſt: becauſe the Exchange riſſe faſter at Hamburgh, by reaſon of the raiſing of the monies there, then it did at ••ndon. Which if Malynes be ignorant of, he was ſurely a ſleepe in his Great Whales belly at that time. But in Malynes caſe, the Deliuerers will get, and the Takers muſt loſe: becauſe his rate of the Exchange at home muſt be higher, then the forraine Exchange; Pag. 14. els the ſtrangers gaine of tranſportation of mony cannot be anſwered by Exchange, according to his owne fallible rule. Headdeth,§. 27. that our Wooll was at 33 ſhillings a todde, which now is fallen vnder 20 ſhillings: and that there was aboue 80 thouſand Clothes ſold yeerely, where now there is not ſold 40. thouſand. Animus meminiſſe horret, luctúque refugit. Malynes produceth ſuch a miſerable eſfect, of the decay of the Cloth-trade of this Kingdome, as would make a mans eares tingle to heare it. What's the inference? mary that his Par of Exchange, may proue alſo another Barre to trade; and cauſe the Cloth-trade both in the Clothier and Merchants hands, to be ſo much dearer to them, and cheaper to the ſtranger, by how much hee would alter the naturall courſe of the Exchange, to the great aduantage of his owne, and the loſſe of our Nation. This is the profit of this and the like Proiects! Theſe are ill ſeeds ſowne in a fertile ſoyle! Theſe are like Cadmus ſerpents teeth ſowne in the Earth,Met. 4. which brought vp men in armes killing one another. Or like the Apples of Sodome, that are ſpecious in ſhew, but if you touch them, they will fall to powder. Qui praemonetur, praemunitur: A man fore-warn'd is halfe arm'd. And I hope we ſhall euer be warn'd by thoſe harmes, not to diſturbe trade for any guilded probability, nor innouate the ſame, without euident vtility. And thus it appeareth, that as Malynes obiections are faigned, ſo are his anſweres alſo. Such is his Par, and ſuch is his Perſon. I ſhall therefore leaue him and it, to the wiſdome of the State: to which I doubt not, it is as cleere as the Sunne, that there is no ſuch Cauſe as Malynes pretendeth, and therfore no need of any ſuch Remedy: That his Proiect is dangerous and damnable: and not ſo difficult to be diſcern'd, as perillous to bee put in practice. ANd thus much of the Perſonall Exchange betweene man and man, in mony, in merchandize:§ 2• Of the 〈◊〉 uinciall 〈◊〉 change. It remaine's now to ſpeake in a word of the Prouinciall Exchange betweene Country and Country in the Ballance of trade. Such as is the Perſonall Exchange betweene party, and party: Such is the Prouinciall Exchange betweene Country and Country. That, reſpecteth the gaine of one Man with another: This, the gaine of one Kingdome with another: That, concerneth the Subiect; This, the Soueraigue. The Prouinciall Exchange, is that generall permutation before noted, which one Country maketh with another, in mony, in Merchandize, in all kind of Commerce. And therefore it may well bee ſad to bee the Periphery or Circumference of the Circle of Commerce; and The Ballance of trade, the very Center of this Circle. For as in the Perſonall Exchange betweene man and man, the gaine or loſſe of ſuch Exchanging cannot bee knowne, but by the returne of the mony exchanged: that is, till that mony bee come backe in Exchange, which was at firſt deliuered, as is before declared: So alſo in the Prouinciall Exchange betweene Country and Country, the gaine or loſſe which one Kingdome maketh vpon another, cannot bee knowne vntill the Returnes thereof bee made: that is, till the forraine Commodities bee brought in, for the Natiue Commodities iſſued and carried out; and both caſt into the Ballance of Trade, to bee waighed and tried one againſt the other. For as a paire of Scales or Ballance, is an Inuention to ſhew vs the waight of things, whereby we may diſcerne the heauy from the light, and how one thing differeth from another in the Scale of waight: So is alſo this Ballance of Trade, an excellent and politique Inuention, to ſhew vs the difference of waight in the Commerce of one Kingdome with another: that is, whether the Natiue Commodities exported, and all the forraine Commodities Imported, doe ballance or ouerballance one another in the Scale of Commerce. If the Natiue Commodities exported doe waigh downe and exceed in value the forraine Commodities imported; it is a rule that neuer faile's, that then the Kingdome growe's rich, and proſper's in eſtate and ſtocke: becauſe the ouerplus thereof muſt needs come in, in treaſure. But if the Forraine Commodities imported, doe exceed in value the Natiue Commodities exported; it is a manifeſt ſigne that then trade decayeth, and the ſtocke of the Kingdome waſteth apace: becauſe the ouerplus muſt needs goe out in treaſure. As for example: If this Kingdome ſend out Clothes and other the Natiue Commodities thereof into forrain parts, which are there ſold for one thouſand pounds of our mony in value; and receiue backe againe in returne, the forraine Commodities of other Kingdomes to the value of eight hundred pounds, for the thouſand pounds ſent out, it is manifeſt that the other two hundred pounds, being alſo due to this Kingdome, muſt needs come in, in treaſure, to ballance and make euen the thouſand pounds at firſt ſent out. Which of neceſſity, muſt either come in, in mony or merchandize: if not in mony, then in merchandize: if not in merchandize, then in mony: and conſequently the more come's in, in mony, the leſſe in merchandize: and the leſſe in merchandize the more in mony. But if this Kingdome ſhall receiue in, twelue hundred pounds in value of the forraine Commodities of other Kingdomes, for the thouſand pounds ſent out, then it is manifeſt, that this Kingdome ſpendeth more of the forraine, then other Kingdomes doe ſpend of our Natiue Commodities, by two hundred pounds in the value of one thouſand pounds: whereby this Kingdome is become ſo much in debt to thoſe forraine Kingdomes: which of neceſſity muſt goe out from hence in treaſure, to ſatisfie that which was brought in, more then that which was carried out. And this experiment is therefore called The Ballance of Trade. Which you may yet more illuſtrate, if you conſider the Forme, and the End thereof. In the One, there's a Quo modo: In the Other, there's a Cui bono. How it may bee done, in the One: Why it may be done, in the Other. There's a benefit in both, and both within the Circle of Commerce. Wee will therefore conſider this Forme, firſt Comparatiuè, §. 29. The Comparatiue forme of the Ballance. and then Poſitiuè. In the former wee will compare and conferre together, ſome Formes of Former and Later times. In the other wee will collect the ſtate of the Preſent time, and digeſt the ſame into a Ballance of Trade. The Compariſon ſhall bee of two precedent Formes which I haue found out. Whereby it may appeare, that this Ballance of the Kingdomes trade is no conceit or Nouelty, but hath been the wiſdome and policy euen of elder times; to make a priuy ſearch and ſtrict enquiry, by this kinde of ſcrutiny, into the ſtate of times and trades. The former of theſe Precedents, ſhalbe an ancient Ballance of Trade, which is ſaid to bee found vpon Record in the Exchequer in the eight and twentieth yeere of Edward the third,In the Manuſcript before mentioned, in P. 18. thereof. in this forme following. Viz. li.ſh.d.One and thirty thouſand ſix hundred fifty one ſacks and a halfe of Wooll at ſix pounds value each ſack, amount to L 189909.00.00195982.01.08Three thouſand thirty ſix hundred ſixty fiue Fels, at forty ſhillings value each hundred of ſix ſcore, amount to L 006073.01.08Whereof the Cuſtome amount's to,081624.01.01Fourteen Laſt, ſeuenteen dicker & fiue hydes of leather, after ſix pounds value the laſt.000089.05.00Whereof the Cuſtome amount's to,000006.17.06Foure thouſand ſeuen hundred ſeuenty foure Clothes and a halfe, after forty ſhillings value the Cloth, is, L 9549.00.0016266.18.04Eight thouſand ſixty one peeces & a halfe of worſted, after ſixteen ſhillings eight pence value the peece. L 6717.18.4Whereof the Cuſtome amount's to,000215.13.07Summa of the Out-carried Commodities in value & Cuſtom amounteth to294184.17.02 li.ſh.d.One thouſand eight hūdred thirty two Clothes, after ſix pounds value the cloth010992.00.00Whereof the Cuſtome amount's to000091.12.00Three hundred ninety ſeuen quintals and three quarters of waxe, after forty ſhillings value the hundred or quintall000795.10.00Whereof the Cuſtome is000019.17.05One thouſand eight hundred twenty nine Tunnes and a halfe of Wine, after forty ſhillings value the Tun, amoū'ts to003659.00.00Whereof the Cuſtome is000182.19.00Linnen Cloth, Mercery, and Grocery wares, & all other manner of merchādize022943.06.10Whereof the Cuſtome is,000285.18.03Somma of the In-brought Commodities in value and Cuſtome is038970.03.06Somma of the In-pluſage of the Out-carried aboue the In-brought Commodities amountch to255214.13.08 The other ſhall be of a Ballance of trade of freſher memory,§. 30. made in the eleuenth yeere of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord the King, by order of the right Honourable the Lords of his Maieſties moſt Honourable Priuy Counſell, vpon the motion of the now right Honble The Earle of Middleſex, Lord Treaſurer of England. It was made in this forme. viz. Merchandize Exported from Chriſtmas An. 1612. to Chriſtmas An. 1613. li.ſh.d.Cuſtome of the Port of London061322.16.07Cuſtome of the Out-Ports025471.19.07Wrappers being the tenth Cloth, Bay, and Cotton007000.00.00Fiſh of our owne fiſhing, and freed from Cuſtome by ſtatute007000.00.00Forraine Goods Imported and Exported again, free of Cuſtome by Priuy Seale003737.04.05The Totall of the Cuſtome.104532.00.07 Merchandize Exported from Chriſtmas An. 1612. to Chriſtmas An. 1613. The which is the twentieth part of Goods Exported: and being multiplied by twenty, produceth the value of all the Exportations to be2090640.11.08The Cuſtome of theſe Goods amounts to0086794.16.02The Impoſt paid Out-wards0010000.00.00The Merchants Gaines, fraight, and other petty Charges here and abroad0300000.00.00The Totall of all the Exportations.2487435.07.10 Merchandize Imported from Chriſtmas An. 1612. to Chriſtmas An. 1613. li.ſh.d.Cuſtome of the Port of London048250.01.09Cuſtome of the Out-ports013030.09.09Cuſtome of the Silks015477.00.00Cuſtome of Venice Go•d and Siluer000700.00.00Cuſtome of French Wines002000.00.00Cuſtome of Spaniſh Wines001200.00.00Allowance of 5. per Cento 004000.00.00To bee added for the vnderrating of Silkes one third part of that they coſt, valued at 12000. pounds. 004000.00.00To bee added for the vnderrating of Wines, two third parts of that they coſt006400.00.00To be added for the vnderrating of Linnen and other Merchandize, one third per Cento for 36000. pounds. 012000.00.00The Totall of the Cuſtome.107057.11.06 Merchandize Imported from Chriſtmas An. 1612. to Chriſtmas An. 1613. The which is the twentieth part of the Goods Imported, and being multiplied by twenty, produceth the value of all the Importations to be2141151.10.00The totall of all the Exportations, is2487435.07.10The totall of all the Importations, is2141151.10.00So there remaines more caried out, then is brought in this yeere, the Summe of0346283.17.10 In the Compariſon of Thoſe ancient,§. 31. with Theſe moderne times, there's as great a difference, as there's a diſtance betweene them. For in the Former, there's an Example beyond Example, a great Exportation, a ſmall Importation. In the Latter, the Exportation, the Importation, are very great in both. In the Former, the forraine Commodities haue little place or price: In the Latter, the farre fetch't and deare bought, are brought in price and vſe. A great deale of Policy, frugality may bee ſeene in the One: much prodigality, ſuperfluity, may bee found in the Other. Yet in this latter, becauſe we had the caſt of the Ballance, and that the Exportation did exceed the Importation, though infinitly ſhort of the proportion of the former time; the Subiects proſpered, Trade floriſhed, Treaſure was imported: And it was ſuch Treaſure as ſtayed with vs, and went not againe from vs: nor were there ſuch complaints knowne then, as now are heard in our ſtreets. That Elder time, was like the Golden age: the Later, like the Siluer age: but the Preſent time, is like the Iron age. And therefore wee will paſſe from this Comparatiue, to the Poſitiue forme of our Ballance, to bring to the Scale, the ſtate of the preſent time and trade. Wherein, becauſe the other Formes are different,§. 32. and as long as there are, Tot ſenſus quot capita, as many mindes as men; euery man abounding in his owne ſenſe; ſo long there will be ſome diſpute about any Forme: it will not bee impertinent, to ſpeake a word of Caution, and then of the Conſtitution, of this Forme of ours. In which Caution, although his Maieſties Records, and bookes of Cuſtomes, are the beſt▪ and readieſt direction, to leade vs to the value of the trade of the Kingdome, by the Cuſtomes of the Kingdome: yet becauſe there are ſome things of ſpeciall conſideration, which cannot be diſcerned by the Cuſtomes: wee will therefore conſider ſuch things as are therein obuious vnto vs, in point of Exportation, and Importation. And firſt of either A part: and then of both together. In our Exportations, wee are to reckon our forraine Commodities imported,§. 33. Caution in point of Exportation for the forming of a Ballance. and not ſpent in the Kingdom, but Exported againe into forrain trade, as the Natiue Commodities of the Kingdome. Becauſe whatſoeuer the Kingdome ſpendeth not of the forraine, is all one, as that it ſpendeth not of it's owne. Alſo the Fiſhing trades, whether within his Maieſties Dominions or without, exerciſed by his Maieſties Subiects, are not to be diſcerned by the Cuſtomes, becauſe the ſame is freed thereof by Statute: which muſt neuertheleſſe be brought into the Scale of Exportation, by the diſcreet collection and obſeruation of Iudicious Merchants, as part of the Kingdomes ſtock. Alſo the Cuſtome and petty charges, the fraight and Merchants gaine, muſt bee reaſonably valued and caſt into the Scale of Exportation: becauſe thoſe are a part of the ſtock of the Kingdome: for if that mony were not laid out in charges, it would bee imployed in the Natiue Commodities, to the encreaſe of the Kingdomes ſtock. In our Importations, wee muſt conſider,§. 34. Caution in point of Importation, for the forming of the Ballance. that much water is wont to goe by the Mill; which, although at firſt ſight a man might thinke, might be ſet, like the Hares head againſt the Gooſe Giblets: yet certainly, there is a great waight hang's vpon the Scale of Exportation in this regard. For our Natiue Commodities, as Cloth, Tinne, Lead, and the like, are of great Bulk and Maſſie, and not eaſie to be ſtollen out: but the forraine Commodities are of ſmall bulke, little in quantity, great in value: as Iewels, Cloth of Gold and Tiſſue, Venice Gold and Siluer thred, Silkes wrought and vnwrought, Cambricks and Lawnes, fine Holland Cloth, Cuchanel, Tobacco, and the like: which as they are eaſie to be pocketed and conueyed, ſo are they very rich to be valued: and this one conſideration alone, may turne the Scale of Importation much againſt vs, in the Ballance of Trade. Alſo whereas in the Importation, the Cuſtomes doe not lead a man ſo neere to the value of the goods, as in the Exportation: ſo that thereby you can neither know, what the goods imported coſt with charges abroad, nor what the ſame are worth at home: there muſt bee due conſideration had, of the one and the other in the Ballance of Trade. For if a Commodity coſt 100. pounds ſterling at Amſterdam, and is there paid for, by the Cloth of this Kingdome, and will yeeld but 90. pounds in England, and perhaps is rated in the Cuſtome but at 60. pounds; yet the Importation in the Ballance of Trade, is to be charged with the value of the Goods as they coſt with charges, and not as they are worth to be ſold, much leſſe as they are rated in the Cuſtomes: becauſe that which they coſt more then they are worth, and more then at which they are rated in the Cuſtomes, is alſo part of the Stock of the Kingdome. And laſtly In both, in the Exportations I ſay, and Importations. §. 35. Caution in Exportation and Importatiō together, for the forme of the Ballāce of Trade. there muſt be Verity, there muſt not be Variety. The Collections muſt be truely made, and one forme muſt be duly obſerued: leaſt if the one be not Exact, or the other Various: the vncertainty of either, may breed obſcurity in both. For he that waigheth a draught, either with falſe waights, or ſuch as are of different ſtandards, can neuer tell whether he get or loſe by his waight: euen ſo in the Ballance of Trade, if either the Collections be imperfect, or the forme of the Ballance different; you ſhall neuer knowe whether the Kingdome gaineth or loſeth, by the caſt of the Scale in the Ballance of Trade. Therefore if it may ſeeme good to his Maieſties high wiſdome, to grant a Commiſsion euery yeare to ſome of his Maieſties principall Fermers of his Highnes Cuſtomes, and to ſome of the moſt expert & iudicious Merchants of the City of London, and elſwhere, to conferre & agree vpon a conſtant Forme to be kept euery yeare; & as conſtantly euery year to take a Ballance of the Trade of the Kingdome, according to the practice of other Princes and Countries; it will proue both facile and familiar vnto them, and an excellent Policy of State vnto the King & Kingdom, in the courſe of trade. And now we will come to the Poſitiue Conſtitution of our owne Forme, to bring to the Ballance, §. 36. The poſitiue conſtitutiō of the forme of a Ballance for the preſent time & trade. the ſtate of the preſent time and trade: wherein I will giue you a taſte of one yeeres collections of the Kingdomes trade, in this forme following. viz. The Ballance of the Trade of the Kingdome is Debitor, for all the Exportations of the Merchandize thereof, for one whole yeare, from Chriſtmas An. 1621. to Chriſtmas An. 1622. as followeth. li.ſh.d.Cuſtome of the Port of London50406.06.04Cuſtome of the Out-ports26756.18.00The Cuſtome of Wrappers of Clothes, Bayes, and Cottons, free of Cuſtume, being the tenth part of 50000. pounds, which is the Cuſtome of them all. 05000.00.00The Cuſtome of the Fiſh of our owne fiſhing, and which is freed from Cuſtome by Statute, by computation07000.00.00The Cuſtome of Goods ſhipt out by Certificate: viz. of forraine goods brought in, and for want of vent in the Kingdome, ſhipt out againe: which are freed of Cuſtome by his Maieſties gracious graunt of Priuy Seale08050.00.00The Totall of all the Cuſtome is97213.04.04 li.ſh.d.Which Totall being multiplied by twenty, becauſe the Cuſtome is valued by twelue pence in the pound, produceth the value of all the Goods Exported to amount vnto1944264.07.01The Net Cuſtome of which value, at twelue pence in the pound, the Wrappers, Fiſh, and Goods ſhipt out by certificate deducted, is the 2. ſummes firſt before mentioned, and is 0077163.04.04The Impoſt of Bayes, Tinne, Lead, and Pewter, which onely are impoſed outwards, amounteth to0007370.01.05The Merchants gaine, fraight, and petty charges vpon 1944264. li. being the whole value of the Exportations as aboue appeareth, at 15. per Cento, is 0291639.00.00The Totall Exportations with charges, Amount to2320436.12.10 The Ballance of the Trade of the Kingdome is Creditor, for all the Importations of the merchandize thereof, for one whole yeare, from Chriſtmas An. 1621. to Chriſtmas An. 1622. as followeth. li.ſh.d.The Cuſtome of the Port of London68280.09.01The Cuſtome of the Out-Ports19579.02.06The Cuſtome of Wines of all ſortes, all other Merchandize heing included in the former, is03200.00.00The Cuſtome amounts to91059.11.07One third part thereof to be added, for the vnderrating of Goods in Cuſtome, to that they are worth, or coſt, is30353.03.10Alſo the allowance of 5. per Cento vpon L 91059. 11. 7. is 04552.19.07The Totall Summe amounts to125965.15.00 The Ballance of the Trade of the Kingdome is Creditor, for all the Importations of the merchandize thereof, for one whole yeare, from Chriſtmas An. 1621. to Chriſtmas An. 1622. as followeth. Which totall, being multiplied by 20 produceth the value of all the Goods Imported, to amount vnto 2519315.00.00Fine Goods ſecretly conueied inwards, more then outwards.0100000.00.00The Totall Importations amount to2619315.00.00The Totall Exportations2320436.12.10The Remainder ſheweth, that there is more imported this yeare then was Exported, by the ſumme of0298878.07.02 So then wee ſee it to our griefe, that wee are fallen into a great Vnder-ballance of Trade with other Nations. Wee felt it before in ſenſe; but now we know it by ſcience: wee found it before in operation; but now wee ſee it in ſpeculation: Trade alas, faile's and faint's, and we in it. And now we are come to the End of this Ballance of Trade, §. 37. The End of the Ballance of Trade. which in Place is laſt, but in Purpoſe firſt & chiefs't, according to that in Philoſophy, Finis eſt Principium in Intentione: The End is the beginning, in purpoſe and intent. A Merchant when hee will informe himſelfe how his Eſtate ſtandeth, is ſaid to take a Ballance of his Eſtate: wherin he collecteth and conſidereth all his Wares, and Monyes, and Debts, as if hee would caſt euery thing into the Scale to bee tried by waight: Which is therefore in Merchants and Accomptants termes, ſo called a Ballance of Accompt, or a Ballance of Trade. And to what End doth he this? Surely to try in what Eſtate he is: whether he goeth forward or backward, whether he hath got or loſt. And if it appeare to him by his Ballance, that his Gaine doth not anſwere his Expence; the firſt and laſt is, he muſt either Gaine more, or Spend leſſe, or els looke to come behind hand. A Father or Maſter of a Family, doth thus alſo conſider his Eſtate, by comparing his Expence with his Reuenue: and if he finde, that his Expence exceedeth his Reuenue; either he muſt Leſſen his charge, or els Conſume his Eſtate. The Royall Merchant, the Regall Father of that great family of a Kingdome, if Hee will know the Eſtate of his Kingdome, Hee will compare the Gaine thereof with the Expence; that is, the Natiue Commodities iſſued and ſent out, with the Forraine Commodities receiued in: and if it appeare that the Forraine Commodities doe exceed the Natiue: either he muſt increaſe the Natiue, or Leſſen the Forraine, or elſe looke for nothing elſe, but The decay of Trade: and therein The loſſe of his Reuenue, and Impoueriſhing of his People. So then, the End of the Ballance of Trade, may be ſaid either to be Propior, or Remotior. There's One End neerer hand; There's Another End farther off. One End of it is, to finde out The cauſe of the Malady: The other, to preſent a Medicable Remedy, for the decay of trade. Hic labor hoc opus erat: in both theſe I beſtowed my former time and paines,Free Trade publiſhed, An. 1622. in that Little tract of Trade, wherein I marſhalled thoſe Cauſes and Remedies, into their rancks, in the beſt order I could: and to which I referre thoſe, that deſire more diſtinctly to vnderſtād the ſame, leſt I ſhould ſeem to Tautologize, after Malynes manner, in vnneceſſary repetitions. For as all thoſe Cauſes doe forcibly conduce vnto the Vnder-ballancing of Trade: ſo alſo the remouing of them, muſt needs concurre vnto the Remedy thereof: and you may ſafely conclude, that vntill the Kingdome come to an Ouer-ballance of Trade, the cauſes of the decay of Trade cannot be taken away: for the Decay of Trade, and the Ouer-ballance of Trade, cannot ſtand together. But if all the Cauſes of our Vnder-ballance of Trade, §. 38. The cauſes of our vnder-ballance of trade, contracted to Pouerty, and Prodigality. might be contracted in two words, ſurely they might be repreſented, in two extremities of the Kingdome at this day: Pouerty alas, and Prodigality. The Poore ſterue in the ſtreets for want of labour: The Prodigall excell in exceſſe, as if the world, as they doe, ran vpon wheeles. The one drawe's on the Ouer-ballance of Forraine Trade: The other keepe's backe in Vnder-ballance our Trade. The one cauſeth an Exceſſe in theirs: The other cauſeth a Defect in our owne. In the one, ther's Too much: in the other, ther's Too little: would God there were a good Medium in both. What's the fruit of theſe things? The Sunne bluſheth to ſee, the ground grones to carry, the perſons of ſauage cruell blood-ſhedders, vnheard of monſtruous murtherers of theſe times: who ſeeme to ſtriue to out-ſtrip Caiin and Iudas' ſinnes. I want words to giue them titles! I know not to whom to liken them, vales to him whoſe they are! It make's me afraid of Idlenes and Exceſſe: that Theſe and Thoſe, are all of one breed▪ He that's Idle, is fit for any Euill: He that's Prodigall, is a prey to the Deuill. There was neuer more, nor more excellent Planters and Waterers, then in this age, in this Iland, in this City. Our Hemiſhphere is ſprinkled and ſpangled, with gliſtering Starres like the Firmament in a cleere night. If St. Hierome ſo long a gone ſaid,Hieron. ad Paulinum. De Hieroſolymis & de Britannia eaqualiter, patet aula Coeleſtis: Heauen is as wide open in Britaine, as in Hieruſalem; what would he haue ſaid, if he had ſeene this our cleere light of the Goſpell at this day in this Kingdome? Is it poſſible then, that ſuch match-leſſe deſperate deeds of darkneſſe, ſhould be done in ſo cleare a light? Is it not a wonder, that the Seed being ſo good, the Soile ſo fertile, the Sowers ſo skillfull, that the Weeds, Such weeds ſhould come vp ſo faſt? No wonder at all! Becauſe the Enuious man come's by night, and ſowes theſe Tares. But be not you diſcouraged yee worthy Workmen: The Lord of the harueſt, will haue them growe together vntill the harueſt. Goe on therefore, ſowe the Lords ſeed, which is the Immortall ſeed of the Word of God. Fight the Lords battailes: bee inſtant in ſeaſon, and out of ſeaſon: ceaſe not to teach, to refute, to correct, to inſtruct: and pray continually, that this great Dragon, that old Serpent, which is come downe into the Earth, may not thus deuoure the people. You are The light of the world ſet vpon a hill: Shine forth yee glorious Lights: keepe on your courſe: breake through theſe Clouds: let no Planet obſcure you: let no Erring Starre deceiue you: you are now placed in this lower Orb, you ſhall one day be fix't in an higher Region, where your Sunne ſhall bee the King of glory: your King the Bleſſed Trinity: your Law, Charity: and your Time, Eternity: there you ſhall ſhine in a Paradice of glory, for euer and euer. The firſt End of our Ballance of trade is to ſhew vs the ſtate thereof.If the people of this Kingdome were numbred from Dan to Berſheba, I am perſwaded, there were neuer more people, neuer leſſe employment: neuer more Idlenes, neuer ſo much Exceſſe! And this is the firſt End of our Ballance of Trade. It ſhewe's vs our Caſe in what Eſtate we ſtand: It ſhewe's the Cauſes of our Decay of trade: It repreſents thoſe cauſes in Capitall Characters, that he that run's may reade Exceſſe and Idlenes. §. 39. The ſecond End of the Ballance of Trade is to direct vs to the Remedy, which is to leſſen our Importations.What's the other End of it? Surely to direct vs to the Remedy: which in a word, is nothing els, but to make our Importations leſſe, and our Exportations more. Our Importations may be leſſened, by a reſtraint of ſuch ſuperfluous and vnneceſſary things, as either we haue of our own, or can make our owne, as may beſt concurre with the Policy of Trade, and the Wiſdome of the State, to which as it become's me, I humbly commend the ſame. §. 40. Or to increaſe our Exportations. By Precept.Our Exportations may be Improued, either by Precept, or Practice. Longum Iter per praecepta, breue per Exemplum. Example is the beſt precept. Wee are ſent to the Belgicke Piſmire to learne a Precept, Prou. 30.27. and why not to the Belgicke Graſhopper? For The 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Ex multitudine dicitur. Sic Belgae per Mare, atque in omni terra multi. Arbch Hebraicè quaſi Herbae: quia ex gramine locuſt. Belgae veròberb• & radicib•• modicè veſcuntur. Graſhopper hath no King, yet they march out, all in Troupes. Wee need goe no further then the Low Countries, to learne this Leſſon. Although, the Kingdome of Naples, the Signory of Venice, the Common-wealthes of Genoa, Florence, Milan, Marcelles, and many others, might teach vs the ſame thing; yet the Low Countries doe ſeeme to be an Epitome of all the Reſt. Which certainly for Policy and Induſtry, may read a Lecture to all the other people of the world. There you ſhall ſee, their Gates ſtand wide open: you may carry out as much mony as you will: It is there held no Paradoxe, to let mony goe out, and yet not to want it within: becauſe they haue an Eie to the Ballance of Trade; whereby they are aſſured, that although it may goe out at one dore, yet it will come in at another. But there you ſhall ſee no Exceſſe in ſuperfluous conſumptions of forraine Commodities. No Proiects, nor Proiectors, but for the Common-good. All kind of Manufactures inuented, that will fit the times, and pleaſe the mindes of forrain Nations. Their own Commodities eaſed of charge, the forraine Impoſed. Frugality, induſtry, policy, all working together for the publike. All kinde of Staples, of Corne, of Wine, of Cloth, of Fiſh, of Silk, of Spices, of Flaxe, of Hempe, of what not? And all theſe, not to breed or feed home-bred Conſumption, but to maintaine Trade and Forraine Negotiation. For indeed their whole Country is nothing els, but a Magazin, a Staple, a Receptacle, of the Comodities of all other Countries. And this is a liuing Precept, a Patterne, a Forme, a plat-forme for our Imitation, for the encreaſe of our Exportation: and this will reſtore our ancient Ballance of Trade. Or if it be too far for vs to goe to them to learn this Precept, they will come to vs. Looke vpon Norwich, Colcheſter, Bocking, Canterbury, and other Cities peopled with the Dutch. There you ſhall ſee at Home, what you might ſeeke Abroad. There you ſhall not ſee that groſſe abuſe committed, and ſo much complained of in our Old and New Draperies. The falſifying whereof hath diminiſhed their quantities halfe in halfe. Which as it tendeth to a great leſſening of our Exportations: ſo cannot the ſame poſſibly be recouered, without reformation of this abuſe in the Clothing of the Kingdome, which is the principall trade thereof. The Remedy come's on ſo ſlow, that it is to be feared, we ſhall need a Precept alſo, from ſome of thoſe of Norwich, Colcheſter, or Canterbury, to helpe vs execute the Statute for Clothing, of 4. of the King. As for the difficulty in Perpetuanoes, the Reformation whereof is thought to want a new Law: I ſuppoſe vnder fauour, thoſe may come vnder the name and title of dozens mentioned in that old Law, as doe Deuonſhire and Hampſhire Kerſies, which are either double or ſingle dozens, and ſo are Perpetuanes alſo. And it were better to haue fewer Lawes, with better Execution; then more Lawes, with more trouble and leſſe vſe. From this Precept, §. 41. By Practice. wee come to the Practice, in the vſe of thoſe meanes, which Almighty God in great bounty offereth vnto vs, both Within, and Without the Land. Within the Land, wee haue Materials and Inſtruments. Materials of our owne growth, Materials of forraine growth, none are wanting. Inſtruments wee haue of our owne Nation, Inſtruments of forraine Nations, none are wanting. We want not Meanes, if our Mindes bee not wanting: wee want not Action, if we wanted not Affection: but alas our children are brought to the birth, and there want's ſtrength, to bring them forth. Or rather wee haue ſtrength, and doe not put forth our ſtrength: we haue meanes and vſe it not. If I ſhould tell you, that there is ten thouſand pounds a yeare, caſt away in the ſtreets of one Citty in this Kingdome, it would ſeeme very ſtrange! But he that will conſider how many thouſand perſons there are in London, that giue to idle poore in the ſtreets, and what one man commonly giue's in a yeare; may computate at leaſt twice that Summe, giuen in the City and the Suburbs. This Summe of mony thus great, thus giuen, is not onely for the moſt part loſt, but it make's the Citty ſwarme with poore, with idle poore: who as long as they can liue by begging, will neuer fall to working, nor liue by labour. I ſpeake not againſt any mans charity, but wiſh from my heart, that he that is charitable, were more charitable, ſo the ſame were not abuſed, or at leaſt were better vſed, for the publique good. For there is not onely the loſſe of ſo great a ſumme, but of the exceeding great benefit alſo, which the employment thereof, in our Natiue and Forraine Manufactures, would purchaſe to the publique; if the ſame were orderly collected, and prudently ordered, for the Employment of the poore. Wherein I know not how to wiſh a greater glory to the City of London, then to haue the honour, to bee the Founder of ſo worthy a worke, to raiſe a Stocke, out of the free will offrings of the Citizens, and wiſely to diſpoſe thereof for the poore's employment: whereby all their owne poore might be ſet on worke; & an excellent patterne of piety and pitty, giuen to all the other Cities of the kingdom, to purſue ſo noble an enterprize by their good example. And it need not be thought to be a new charge to the City, for we ſee the thing is done already, onely it is not ſo well done: wherein my ſelfe, the vnworthieſt of all her Citizens, had rather, if I were worthy, be the firſt, then the laſt, to further ſo happy & hopefull a worke. For it will bring to God, glory: to the King, honour: to the Kingdome, treaſure: to the Subiects, trade: to the poore, employment: and proue by Gods bleſſing, a moſt excellent meanes, to encreaſe our Exportations, and to recouer our Ballance of Trade. Without the Land,§. 42. Or Without the Land. the Perſia trade will not let me paſſe, nor the Fiſhing neither without a word of either. Both theſe doe promiſe much ſupply vnto our Exportation. Both of them, are of very high and important conſideration, for the honour and wel-fare of this Kingdome. The one is a worke for The King: the other for all The Kingdome. The one, if wee will, is our owne: the other, vnleſſe wee will not, may bee made our owne. For the Trade of Perſia, In the Perſia trade. it needeth the glory of the Sunne, to diſpell ſome clouds that doe obſcure and hide from vs, the excellency of this Trade. Which if it will pleaſe His Maieſty to vouchſafe; I am perſuaded it would proue a very happy Commerce vnto this Kingdome, not inferiour vnto any forraine Trade. It promiſeth to vent our Clothes and other our Natiue Commodities, in great abundance: to yeeld returnes of theſe Clothes, that will employ multitudes of our poore: to ſpare vs the treaſure that now wee export to the Indies, through the neceſſity of that trade: to employ many great Ships & good men, with much more fafety, then in thoſe other trads: to furniſh the other parts of the Indies by the meanes of that trade, without other ſupply from hence: to purchaſe the rich trade of the Red Sea, & the benefit of trading there from Port to Port in the Indian commodities; which in it ſelfe, will be another Eaſt Indian Trade: to turne the Current of the Trade of Perſia from Turky; to the weakning of the Turks tyranny ouer the Chriſtian world: Laſtly to draw the employment of many Millions of mony into this Kingdome for the Perſian ſilck; which the Venetians, Marcellians, and other Cities and Common-wealthes of the Italians, French, and Dutch, doe now employ into Turky, in that one Commodity onely: which by Gods bleſſing, we may be able to deliuer them as cheape from hence, as now they fetch it thence: with more contentment alſo to them, and more glory and gaine to vs, in the atchieuement of ſo high and noble an enterprize. And theſe are but two or three cluſters, for a taſte, of the fruit of the Land: This Canaan cannot be knowne, vntill you haue past ore Iordan: the perfection of it conſit's in the fruition thereof. And this is alſo another meanes no leſſe excellent, to enlarge our exportation, and therin alſo to helpe the caſt of our Scale, in the Ballance of Trade. Laſt of all,§. 43. Or the Fiſhing Trade. for the Fiſhing Trade, Res ipſa loquitur: I ſhall need to ſay no more of that, if what is ſaid were done. It is a worke that hath in it, vtility to inuite, and capacity to receiue, all the Kingdome. Wherein the Ports, which are the walles and gates of the Kingdome, might bee ſupported, and trade imported to thoſe Parts and places, which now are deſtitute thereof. Yea all the Citties, or if you will the Counties, may find roome enough to employ their meanes in this trade. And ſurely if profit will not moue men, Auri ſacra fames is falſe, and nothing will moue them. There is no fiiſhing to the Sea, nor Sea-fare for the Kingdomes well-fare, to the fiſhing trade! wherein for the encouragement of the Aduenturers; it is fit, if ſo it may be thought fit in his Maieſties high wiſdome and grace; that euery County, yea euery City if it will, may haue the mannaging and diſpoſing of their owne aduentures, without any General or promiſcuous confuſion with others, and with ſuch Immunities, priuiledges, and encouragements conferr'd vpon them from the fountaine of his Maieſties grace, as may at laſt bring that to action and execution, which wee haue ſo long had in diſcourſe and contemplation. A braue deſſeigne it is, as Royall as Reall: as honourable as profitable. It promiſeth Renowne to the King, Reuenue to the Crowne, treaſure to the Kingdome, a purchaſe for the land, a prize for the ſea, ſhips for Nauigation, Nauigation for ſhips, Maririners for both: entertainment of the rich, employment for the poore, aduantage for the aduenturers, and encreaſe of Trade to all the Subiects. A Mine of Gold it is: the Mine is deepe, the veines are great, the Ore is rare, the Gold is pure, the extent vnlimited, the wealth vnknowne, the worth inualuable. And this is alſo another meanes, not inferiour vnto any, for the recouery of our Exportations, in the Ballance of Trade. THE CONCLVSION. THeſe meanes well purſued, and the Remedies of our former Diſcourſe applied, & ſuch other meanes added, as in the wiſdome of the State, may be more ſeriouſly thought vpon, doubtleſſe will reſtore our ancien Ballance of Trade, and in it, the former floriſhing Commerce, which heretofore this Kingdome happily did enioy. This is that Prouinciall and indeed Potentiall Exchange, betweene vs and forraine Countries, that muſt be the publique meaſure of all our Merchandize. This is that true Par of Exchange, that will not change, that hath no impoſture, froth, nor fallacy to abuſe vs with. This is the practice of forraine Princes, and their Pollicy in point of Commerce, to haue a continuall eie, to this Par pro Pari, the Ballance of Trade: whereby they enrich their Countries, and winne ground of others that neglect the ſame. An inſtance is ſet before our eies, in that Spaniſh Proclamation, which cloſely and couertly aimeth at the ſame thing, for the benefit of that Kingdome. This is that proſpectiue ſight, that will draw Commerce from a farre of,Quel miracle en nature ſe peult trouuer plus grand, que ceſte machine de vitre que fit conſtruire Sapores Roy Perſien? la quelle eſtoit ſi grande, qu'il eſtoit aſſis au Centre d'icelle, comme en la ſphere & rondeur de la terre, voyant ſouz ſes pieds les aſtres & eſtoiles qui ſe couchoient & leuoient: en ſorte que cō bien qu'il fut mortel, il ſembloit eſtre, ſur toute la hauteſſe d'immortalité. Theat. du monde. De l'excellence de l'homme. to a Princes eie. It is ſaid of Sapor King of Perſia, that he cauſed a great globe to bee made of Glaſſe, of ſuch curioſity and excellency, that himſelfe might ſit in his throne, and he and it, in the Center thereof, and behold the motions and reuolutions of the Starres, riſing and falling vnder his feet: as if he that was a mortall man, would ſeeme Immortall. And ſurely if a King would deſire to behold from his throne, the various reuolutions of Commerce, within and without his Kingdome; he may behold them all at once in in this Globe of glaſſe, The Ballance of Trade. For indeed if there bee any vertue in the Theorick part of Commerce, that might attract a Princes Eie to be caſt vpon it; ſurely it is in this kinde of Exchange, that one Country maketh with another in the Ballance of Trade. All the myſteries of other Exchanges are hidde in this myſtery. All the knowledge of Commerce, is preſented and repreſented to the life in this ſtory, in this hiſtory. All the riuers of Trade ſpring out of this ſource, and empt themſelues againe into this Ocean. All the waight of Trade falle's to this Center, & come's within the circuit of this Circle. This is that Par pro Pari, that waighe's down Malynes Parity, Imparity, Impurity in the Scale: & is onely worthy of the Quaere, of th'enquiry of a King. This is that 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, the very Eie of the Eie: or it is 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 the pupill or apple of the Eie, or as the Rabbins calle it, the daughter or image in the Eie: the beauty, the ornament, the complement, the accompliſhment of Commerce. And now at laſt I haue done with Malynes and with his Par, his Diſpar of Exchange: and with Ariadnes thred, I haue got out of the Labyrinth of his Little Fiſh, and his his Great Whale. Which hauing poiſed and found as light as vanity in the Ballance, and therefore deſerue no place within the Circle of Commerce, I ſhall diſmiſſe as ſometimes St. Auguſtine did the Erronious writings of the Maniches, with this farewell, that his Proiect purſued in both,In Manich. Lib. 13. cap. 6. is Puerile ludibrium, Principium truncum, medium putridum, finis ruinoſus. A childiſh toye, a blockiſh beginning, a rotten middle, and a ruinous end. Or with the ſame Father, that it is Paries doalbatus, In Pſal. 103. foris tectorium, intus lutum. It's like a Mudde walle; dawb'd or'e without, all durt within. And ſuch alſo is his Little Fiſh, ſuch his Great Whale: full fraught with ſtolen ſtuffe, out of French Copies, Dutch Bookes, and Engliſh manuſcripts: whole bookes ſwallowed vp in them for his owne: with which, thoſe that are acquainted, will as eaſily point them out, as Ex vngue Leonem, to know The Lion by the pawe. The plants were good and proſper'd well, when they grew in their owne ſoile: but being pul'd vp by the rootes, and as ill tranſplanted, by an vnskillfull workman, in a barren ground ore growne with weeds: muſt needs be choackt, wither, and hang their heads. I once thought to haue put an Index purgatorius, or an Errata to his Lex Mercatoria; but that I ſhould haue ſeemed, to take vpon me one of Hercules labours, and as it is in the Prouerb, Augiae ſtabulum repurgare, To ferme or clenſe Augias ſtalles, which was a worke for Hercules onely. His Law Merchant, ſhould haue Merchants Law, or rather Marſhall Law, to haue been better purged, before it had been approued. I would Malynes had conſulted with the wiſe man, to haue held his peace, that he might haue ſeemed wiſe.Sed Tacitus paſci ſi poſſet coruus, haberet, Plus Dapis, & vixae multò minūs inuidiaeque Hor. Or that he had not been like to Horace his Crow, by too much chattering to looſe his cheeſe: or like Aeſops dog, pardon the word, by too much gaping to let falle his bone. Qualis vir, talis Oratio: the man is confuſed, and ſo is his matter. There's a peece in Ouid reſemble's it right, Quem dixêre CHAOS, rudis, indigeſtáque moles, Nec quicquā niſi pondus iners congeſtáque eodem, Non bene iunctarum diſcordia ſemina rerum. A CHAOS rude it's call'd, confuſed heape, A dull and heauy waight and nothing els, Diſcording ſeeds ill mixt to ſowe or reape Confer'd in one, where all diſorder dwel's. Or if you will haue it neerer mach't, ther's a maſter-peece in Horace repreſent's it to the life, Humano capiti ceruicem pictor equinam Inngere ſi velit,Horat. & varias inducere plumas: Vndique coliatis membris, vt turpiter atrum Deſinat in piſcem mulier formoſa ſupernè: Credite Piſones iſti tabulae fore librum Per ſimilem, cuius velut aegri ſomnia, Vanae Fingentur ſpecies, vt nec pes, nec caput vni Reddatur formae. — As if a Painter void of wit or Art, Should repreſent mans head that lofty part, And thereunto ſhould ioine an Aſſes creſt, And deck with diuers feathers all the reſt: Strang parts cōferd, which Mermaidlike appeare Black fiſh below, aboue a maiden cleare. Truſt me Malyn's, thine ill digeſted theame Is like ſuch pictures, like a ſick mans dreame, That faigneth formes, and yet in no degree, Nor head, nor foot, will thereunto agree. But not willing to be Cenſorious, I ſhall leaue him and it, to the ſentence of the wiſe, with this my iuſt defence alſo, againſt his Cenſure, of Wilfulnes at leaſt, though not of Ignorance: Little Fiſh Ep. dedic. P. 2. of both which he hath accuſed me, to no leſſe, then The Maieſty of ſo great A King. But I haue thought it my happines ô Caeſar, to haue anſwered before Thee, of all theſe things,Apoſtrophe ad Regem. whereof I am accuſed and maligned of Malynes: For my Lord The King, is as an Angell of God. Before whom I ſhall euer acknowledge, my want of knowledge: or if I know any thing, it is only this, Scire, me Neſcire: to know, that I doe not know. Alme Deus pellas coeleſti lumine pellas Ingenii Genii Nubila craſſa mei: Diſcere me doceas, dediſcere caetera prae Te, Scire nihil niſi Te, nam Tua ſcire ſat eſt.