CAP. I. The Causes of the want of Money in England. IT hauing pleased God to giue mee my Birth and Being in this Good Land, and vnder the Reigne of so Great a KING; whose Peace and Piety, whose Prudence and Policy, whose rare endowments of Nature and Literature, absit omnis adulatio, doe Lend to the Christian and Pagan world such a Glorious Lustre, as that the other Great Lights in the Spheares thereof do seeme Eclipsed: I could not but thinke it my bounden duty, in all humble acknowledgement to Almighty God, and deuoted seruice to so Mighty a KING, to endeuour to expresse the same, in some Publique Seruice for the Publique good. The rather for that there seemes to bee a necessity imposed vpon all men, as much as they can, to performe this duty; according to that generall precept,〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Feare God, Honour the King: As if a man could not Feare God, vnlesse hee Honour the King: nor Honour the King, without the Feare of God. And no maruell; when God himselfe setteth these duties in the Frontispice or top of both the Tables of the Decalogue: The one Explicit in the first Table, Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God: The other Implicit in the second Table, Thou shalt honour the King: as if here were 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, A Law and another Law: yea the Whole Law comprised in these Two: 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. and these Two termed the Great Commandements, to giue a deepe Impression and a liuely Expression of so great a duty. Yea, he doth honour Kings with his owne Title, as if he would Part with, and Impart to them, some of his owne Honour. I haue sayd ye are Gods: to which that of the Poet may seeme 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 to haue an elegant allusion,In vita Virg. Diuisum imperium cum Ioue Caesar habet. And this is it I confesse that hath Raised & Rowsed mine Affections, to seeke out a Subiect, wherein I might set my selfe a taske, and as it is in the Prouerbe, might 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, to performe some acceptable seruice, to so Great a King, & so Good a Kingdome. But what need I Seeke that which Seeketh all men? For what is at this time more enquired after then the Causes of the Decay of Trade? And what can be more fit for my Meditation, then that wherein I haue had Education? And what hath more relation to matters of State, then Commerce of Merchants? For when Trade flourisheth, the Kings Reuenue is augmented, Lands and Rents improoued, Nauigation is encreased, the poore employed. But if Trade decay, All these decline with it. Neuerthelesse when I looke vpon the Face of the Great body politique of this Weale publike, and therein consider the High wisedome of HIS sacred Maiesty, as the intellectual part of this Microcosme, or alter orbis as Caesar calles it: the Prudence & Prouidence of HIS Nobles, as the Eyes thereof; the great decay of Trade, the Nerues thereof: together with the Parliamentation and Consultation of all the Parts together about these Causes and Remedies: I feare I shall seeme 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, to light a Candle in the Sunne, to offer my seruice in that, about which the choicest wits of the Kingdome are now in consultation. But hauing had experience of HIS Maiesties gracious interpretation of small seruices of his subiects employed for the publique: though Others much more sufficient are Sent before, yet could I not but expostulate with my selfe, what if I also Runne after, and cast in my 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, into this great Treasury. Therefore if herein, any obseruations of mine, either Forrein or Domestique, may administer any thing worthy the information of that Great common and yet not common Sense, I shall esteeme my part most happily acted, to haue imployed my Priuate paines for the Publique good. The rather, for that, as there are many Causes discussed and discoursed of at this time, of the decay of Trade; so also are there many Remedies: wherein if either the Causes be mistaken, or the Remedies ill applyed; the present sicknesse of the Trade, may be brought from a disease in Fieri, to an Habituated and in Facto, as the phisitians Schoole hath it. To find out the Causes of things, is a worke of Philosophy, Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Virg. and much Felicity, to finde out a fit Remedy, is of high Eminency: But to apply the Remedy, is a matter of State and Policy. And this leadeth mee to the Method of my Discourse: which parts it selfe in twaine: viz. Into a double Quaere, The distribution. of the Deformation and Reformation of Trade. In the former may be considered, the Causes and Effects thereof. In the Causes, the Matter and Forme of Trade. The Matter of Trade, is either Naturall or Artificiall. The Natural matter of Commerce is Merchandize: which Merchants from the end of Trade haue stiled Commodities. The Artificiall matter of Commerce is Mony, which hath obtained the title of Sinewes of Warre and of State. Old Iacob blessing his Grandchildren, crost his hands, and laid his right hand on the Yonger, and his left hand on the Elder: And Money, though it be in Nature and Time after Merchandize, yet forasmuch as it is now in vse become the chiefe, I will take leaue of Method, to handle it in the first place.The Immediate cause of the want of Money in England, is the vnder valuation of his Maiesties Coyne, which hindereth the Importation, and causeth the exportation thereof. First therefore for the Want of Money in this Kingdome, many reasons may bee assign'd. Whereof some are Immediate, some Mediate or remote. The Immediate reasons of the want of Money, are either such as Hinder the Importation; or as such Cause the Exportation thereof. And Both these are occasioned by the Vnder-valuation of his MAIESTIES Coyne, to that of our Neighbour Countries. For who will procure Licence in Spaine to bring Realles into England, to sell them here at Ten in the hundred gaine, which is lesse then the Exchange from thence will yeeld;Spanish Reals worth 15. in the C. in Holland. when hee may haue for the same Fiue and Twenty in the hundred in Holland? Here fiue Reals of eight, which make Twenty shillings sterling, will commonly yeeld Two and Twenty shillings or thereabouts: and the same in Holland will yeeld Forty two shillings and sixe pence Flemish, which is Fine and Twenty shillings sterling. And how can wee choose but want money in England, when the Iacobus pieces are currant at so high a rate in Holland? For there they goe at Twelue Gilders eight stiuers the piece, which is One and forty shillings and foure pence Flemish, which is Foure and Twenty shillings & nine pence sterling. And about this rate HIS Maiesties other Coynes of gold & siluer are there of respectiue value. For although by the Placcaets or Proclamations of those parts, the Iacobus pieces, & other Species of gold and siluer, are there set at indifferent rates answerable to their valuation here with vs respectiuely, which they there call Permissie gelt, Proclamation money: yet they haue other deuices to raise money, and draw it away at their pleasures. As either by their Banckes, when the Banckiers will for their occasions giue a greater price for mony then the Proclamation suffereth, and then it is called Banck gelt: or else by slacke paymasters, that for their owne aduantage in the raising of Money, will pretend not to make present payment of their debts, vnlesse you take their Money at a higher rate, then either the Proclamation, or the Banck Money. Which being paid and receiued, produceth a third kind, which they call Current gelt. And so by the Conniuence of the Magistrate, the same goeth from man to man, and at last becommeth current at an excessiue value So they haue Permission or Proclamation Mony, Three sorts of Mony in Holland: Permission Money: Banck Money: and Current Money. and Banck Money, and Current Money, and all to draw dry the Current of HIS Maiesties Coine. And thus the Hepatites, or Liuer veine of this Great body of ours being opened, & such profusiōs of the Life bloud let out; & the Liuer or fountain obstructed, & weakned, which shuld succour the same; needs must this Great body languish, and at length fal into a Marasmus, or Hectike Feuer. I am not ignorant that there hath beene great abuse in the culling of HIS Maiesties Coyne here at home, and in melting the heauy money into plate: And that there is a great superfluity of Plate generally in priuate mens hands more then is necessary, and farre beyond any example of former times, which must needs also cause scarcity of money: yet on the other side I cannot deny, but that it is better to haue the same in Plate, as a Treasure of the Kingdome; then turned into Coyne, and so turned out of the Kingdome, by the vnder value thereof. Now the Mediate or remote reasons of the want of money in England, The Mediate Causes of the want of money are Domestique or Forreine.The Domestique is generally, Excesse. are either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique are General or Special. The General remote cause of our want of money, is the great Excesse of this Kingdom, in consuming the Commodities of Forreine Countries, which proue to vs Discommodities, in hindering vs of so much Treasure, which otherwise would bee brought in, in lieu of those Toyes. For now a dayes most men liue aboue their callings, and promiscuously step forth Vice versâ, into one anothers Rankes. The Countrey mans Eie is vpon the Citizen: 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Hesiod. the Citizens vpon the Gentleman: the Gentlemans vpon the Nobleman. And by this meanes wee draw Vnto vs, and consume Amongst vs, that great abundance of the Wines of Spaine, of France, of the Rhene, of the Leuant, and of the Ilands: the Raisins of Spaine, the Corints of the Leuant, the Lawnes and Cambricks of Hannault and the Netherlands, the Silkes of Italy, the Sugers & Tobacco of the West Indies, the Spices of the East-Indies: All which are of no necessity vnto vs, & yet are bought with ready money, which otherwise would bee brought ouer in treasure if these were not. A Common-wealth is like vnto a Family, the Father or Master whereof ought to sell more then he buyeth, according to old Cato's counsell, Patrem familias vendacem non emacem esse oportet. Otherwise his Expence being greater then his Reuenue, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Hesiod. hee must needs come behind hand. Euen so a Common-wealth that excessiuely spendeth the Forreine Commodities deere, and vttereth the Natiue fewer and cheape, shall enrich other Common-wealths, but begger it selfe. Where on the contrary, if it vented fewer of the Forreigne, and more of the Natiue, the residue must needes returne in treasure. The Mediate Causes of the want of money are Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique is generally, Excesse. The Speciall remote cause of our want of Money,The domestike cause in speciall, is the want of the East-India Stocke in this Common-wealth. is the great want of our East-India Stocke heere at home. Which is a matter of very great consequence, and causeth the Body of this Common-wealth to bee wounded sore, through the Sides of many particular members thereof. For the Stocke of the East-India Company, being of great value, and collected and contracted from all the other particular Trades of the Common-wealth; and a great part thereof hauing bin Embargued and Detained now for more, then fiue yeeres last past; and that not by a Profest Enemy, against whom wee might haue bin warn'd and Arm'd, but by a Friend, a Neighbour, a Next Neighbor, one obliged to our KING and Nation more then to all the Kings on earth: this losse I say, is not onely thus vnkind, but is the more intollerable, in that the Common-wealth hath lost the vse and employment of the Stocke it selfe, and all the encrease of Trade which the same might haue produced, in the seuerall Trades of the Subiects, whereby abundance of Treasure might haue beene brought into this land in all this time. Crinitus & Volater.It is sayd of Belisarius that great and famous Commander of the Romanes, that euen Rome it selfe owed to him twice her life: and yet at last was so vnkind to Belisarius as to put out both his eyes, and exposed him to beg in a little Cottage built without the gates, where hee often repeated this sentence to those that passed by, Date obolum Belisario, quem inuidia, non culpa caecauit. And certainely our Nation may challenge as much or more of these Vnkind Friends, then Belisarius euer did or could of Rome: and they shew themselues no lesse vnkinde, to depriue vs of the Light and Life of this Trade of ours, and suffer this Nation to vse so much importunity for their owne. Homer reports of Patroclus, Hom. Iliad. that he would needs put on Achilles armour, and ride on Achilles horse, but Achilles speare he durst not touch, and thereby was knowne to Hector, with whom he fought, not to be Achilles, and so lost his life. These friends of ours haue sometimes Put on, sometimes Put off, I had almost said, Put out the Kings Colours: They haue sayled in HIS subiects Shippes, but that Hastam fidei they haue not Vsed or Abused rather; whereby they haue beene Discouered to the Indians, not to be the Subiects of the Faith's Defender, Church-man. pag. 11. as sometimes they would haue faigned, though to an euill purpose. The Romanes were wont to weepe, at the sight of Caesars bloud kept in an Handkercher. Plut. in Caes. & Brut. Caesars subiects bloud is kept, not in Handkerchiefes but in Sheetes, written within and without, the Memory wherof maketh the people mourne. The cry thereof is gone vp: the King will remember it, the King of Kings will auenge it. Euseb.Constantinus the Great, the father of Constantius, was wont often to protest, that he made more account of one Christian then of all his Coffers filled with Treasure. And the Comfort of this Nation is, to be the Subiects of such a Soueraigne, who as Constantly as euer did Constantinus, hath againe and againe profest,In diuers Orations and Proclamations. Not to account himselfe more rich or happy, then in the prosperity of his Subiects. Thus much of the Domestique Remote causes of the want of money in England: The Forreine causes of the want of money are the warres of Christians amongst themselues, or against them by Pyrats. the Forreine causes follow. Which are either in respect of the Warres in Christendome, or the Trades out of Christendome. The Warres in Christendome are Forreine remote causes of the want of money, either by Causing the Exportation, as the Warres of Christians: or Hindering the Importation thereof, as the Warres of Pyrates. I will take the Warres of Germany for an vrgent instance of the former: which haue raysed the Riecks daller from Two Markes Lubish, to Twenty Markes Lubish, in many places of Germany: whereby abundance of Mony is drawne vnto the Mintes of those Countries, from all the other Mines and parts of Christendome. And for the latter, I will instance the Warres of the Pirats of Argier and Tunis, which hath robbed this Common-wealth of an infinite value: the Cruelty whereof many feele with griefe, others heare with pitty, but the grieuance remaines. Needes must Christendome, and in it England, feele the want of money, when either it is violently intercepted by Turkish Pirats, the Enemies of God and man; or the instruments surprised, as Men, Ships, and Merchandize, which are the Chanels to conuey it to vs. An Heathenish policy it is, or Hellish rather, put vpon the Princes and People of Christendome by the Grand Siegnour, A Turkish policy. to hold with them an outward forme of Amity, and in the meane time by his vassalls, vse a cunning and couert Hostility. The other Forreine remote causes of the want of Money,Or the trades maintained out of Christendome with ready money. are the Trades maintained out of Christendome to Turkey, Persia, and the East-Indies. Which trades are maintayned for the most part with ready Money, yet in a different manner from the Trades of Christendome within it selfe. For although the trades within Christendome are driuen with ready Monies, yet those Monies are still Contained and Continued within the Bounds of Christendome. There is indeede a Fluxus and refluxus, a Flood and Ebbe of the monies of Christendome traded within it selfe: for sometimes there is more in one part of Christendome, sometimes there is lesse in another, as one Countrey wanteth, and another aboundeth: It commeth and goeth, and whirleth about the Circle of Christendome, but is still contained within the Compasse thereof. But the money that is traded out of Christendome into the parts aforesaid, is continually issued out and neuer returneth againe. It is true, those trades tend to an admirable encrease of the stocke of Christendome in wares: which if they were purchased with the wares of Christendome, according to the true nature of Commerce, the benefit were farre more excellent.Benvenu t Strac. de mercatur pars. 1. Calepiu. For Commercium is quasi Commutatio mercium, a change of wares for wares, not money for wares. And it is Libera commeandi facultas, ab ijs qui merces vltro citroque conuehunt. Or if the Common-wealth of Christendome were like to that ofAurum & argen•um sic apud se hab•it, vt à nullo pluri• a stimetur •uàm •erum ipsarum natura m•reatur▪ quâ quis non videt quam longè infra ferrum sunt? Vtop. lib. 2. Vtopia, where gold and siluer are of esse esteeme then Iron, it were a braue exchange to lose money to get wares. For the riches of former ages did not consist in Re Pecuniariâ but Pecuariâ. Omnes veterum diuitiae in re pecuariâ consistebant. Guich. Plin. lib. 33. Whence Pecuniâ, as Pliny affirmeth, was so called a Pecude, quia Pecus fuit Pecuniae fundamentum, & antiquitus Pecunia pecudi• estigi signabatur. But when Immooueable and Immutable things came also to be in Commerce amongst men, as wel as those things which were Mooueable and fit for change, then came money in vse, as the rule and square whereby things might receiue estimation and value. Therfore the Ciuilians affirme that Numus est 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, dictus, Lib. 1. ff. de Contrah. c•nt. quòd institutum sit Ciuile. According to that of Aristotle. Lib. 5. Eth. cap. 8. 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Numus non est à natura sed à l•ge. And thence it is that Money in our tongue is deriued of Monela, quasi numi nota. Or if there were a Necessity to Christendome to vse those Forreine wares: or that the Meanes whereby they are to be procured, were without the losse of treasure: or lastly that the same tended to the Encrease of the Treasure thereof, the exchange were excellent. But first there is no such Necessity: Necessarium illud dicitur sine quo fieri non potest. Calep. for that's necessary to doe a thing without which it cannot be done: And that's necessary to the being of a Common-wealth, without which it cannot subsist. But thankes be to God, Christendome is richly furnished within it selfe, with all things fit for life and maintenance: whether wee respect Vitall vse, as foode and raiment: or Physicall, as vegetables and mineralls: or Politicall, as gold, siluer, and infinite variety of Merchandize. Nor are those wares procured without the Losse of Treasure, no nor with Lesse Treasure. For as those wares haue cost lesse in Price, since some late discoueries; so are they encreased in their Quantities, by the ample trade of all parts of Christendome thither, more then before: and then who knoweth not that a Lesse quantity Deare, and a Greater quantity Cheape, is all one in respect of the value. Nor is the treasure lessened by changing the course of Trade into those parts. For the New Trades found out, are furnished with a new supply of Money, and the Old neuerthelesse issue out as much treasure as before: by reason that the same are enlarged and become now as great, Apart, as heretofore they were, Together, when the New Trades, were included in the Old. So that now so much more of the Treasure of Christendome is wasted, as those Old and New Trades are encreased, which is to an infinite value. Nor lastly, is the Treasure of Christendome Encreased by those forreine trades, for the more the stocke of Christendome is thereby encreased in Wares, the more it decreaseth in Treasure: which the parts of Christendome must needes feele by Sympathy and Compassion. And this, that prudent and politique Emperour Charles the fifth perceiued in his time, who vpon a question betwixt the Spaniards and Portugals about this matter, the Emperor vsed words to this effect: You Portugalles for a surety, 15. Hen. 8. Hall. are enemies to all Christendome; for you carry nothing out of 〈◊〉 but coyne, which is hurt to all Countries. CAP. II. The Causes of the decay of Trade, in the Merchandize of England. SVch are the Causes of the Matter of Trade considered in the Want of Money, the Merchandize followeth. Merchandize is that naturall matter of Commerce, whereby men busie themselues in buying and selling, chopping and changing, to the encrease of Artes, and enriching of Common-wealths: according to that of the Poet, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉,Hesiod. Bona lis mortalibus haec est. And to the end there should be a Commerce amongst men, it hath pleased God to inuite as it were, one Country to traffique with another, by the variety of things which the One hath, and the other hath not: that so that which is wanting to the One, might be supplied by the Other, that all might haue sufficient. Which thing the very Windes and Seas proclaime, in giuing passage to all Nations: the Windes blowing sometimes towards one Country, sometimes toward another; that so by this Diuine Iustice, euery one might bee supplyed in things necessary for life and maintenance. 3.4. Na. qu.And this, Seneca thought to be a principall benefit of nature, Quòd & vento gentis locis dissipatas miscuit, & sua omnia in regiones ita descripsit, vt necessarium mortalibus esset inter ipsos Commerciū. Nature by the benefit of the wind, hath so mixed people, dispersed in diuers places, and so distributed her gifts in diuers Countries, that there should be a necessity of Commerce amongst men. Which agreeth with that of Aristotle, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. De Repub. lib. 1 cap. 9. Est translatio rerum omnium coepta ab initio, ab eo quod est secundùm naturam, cùm homines haberent plura quàm sufficerent, partim etiam pauciora negotiatione suppleri id quod naturae deest, quo commode omnibus sufficiat. And that we doe not goe out of the Christian world for an example hereof, let vs consider the state of the Netherlands, in what a miserable case those people were, if they receiued not supply from all other Nations. They haue Nothing of their owne, and yet they seeme to possesse All things, in the Supply they receiue from All the World. And surely if any Kingdome vnder the Sunne can subsist of it selfe, none hath more cause to Blesse God, then this Iland of ours, which Almighty God hath richly adornd with varietie of all things necessary for mans life & welfare. As with Corne, and ourI meane Beere which in forreine parts is of more esteeme then wine. And to vs also in the vse, if there were not abuse is farre to be preferred. Wine: Cattle, Wooll, Cloth, Tynne, Iron, Lead, Saffran, Waxe, Hoppes, Hydes, Tallow, Flaxe, Fowle, Fish, and many others: whereby, thanks be to God, the people of this Land, haue not onely Sufficient for their owne maintenance, but do abundantly Supply the wants of all other Nations. Now the Trade and Commerce of this Kingdome within it selfe, The decay of the Merchandize of this Kingdom, considered Ioyntly or apart. and with Forreine Nations, consisting of so many rich Commodities; let vs consider them all Ioyntly, and then some Principall of them Apart. Ioyntly considered, the causes of the decay of Trade, are the want of Mony, and the East-India stocke.Iointly considered, the Causes of the decay of Trade in them, may be sayd either to be Deficient, or Efficient. Deficient, either in the Generall want of money in the Kingdome; or the Particular want of the East-India stocke. I shewed before, what were the causes of the want of mony: and that the disaster vpon the East-India Trade is a Remote Cause thereof: but these are Both Causes of the Decay of Trade. For Money is the vitall spirit of trade, and if the Spirits faile, needes must the Body faint. And as the Body of Trade seemeth to be Dead without the Life of Mony: so do also the Members of the Commonwealth, without their Meanes of Trade. We say, that an Artizan or Workeman, cannot Worke without Tooles or Instruments: no more can a Merchant Trade without Money or meanes. And in the Want of so great a Stock, as is that of the East-India Company: the Body of this Commonwealth hath lost the vse of many of it Principall Members; by whose industry, art, and action the Commerce thereof might wonderfully haue beene encre'st. The losse whereof, to him that is not wilfully blinde, is apparently sensible in the Drapery of the Kingdome, wherby the Poore are set on worke: and in all the other Trades of the Kingdome, whereby the Subiects are employed: and hath begot that great and generall Dampe and Deadnesse in all the Trades of the Kingdome, which wee vnhappily feele at this day. The Efficient causes of the Decay of Trade Iointly considered,Or Vsury. Entituled a Tract against vsury, presented to the high Court of Parliament. are either Vsury, or Vnnecessary Suits in Law. In the Former I am preuented, and my labour spared, by him that wrote a little treatise against Vsury: which it seeme's for Modesty he refuseth to owe: Though I could wish, that those that deserue of the Publique were knowne to the Publique: least they be serued as sometimes Batillus serued Virgil, and so be forc't too late to proclaime, Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter Honores. I haue a word onely to adde to his Vsury, that it is not an Vsury of Ten in the hundred only, that wringeth this Common-wealth, but an Extortion also of 20. 30. 40. nay of Cento per Cento per Anno, as the Italians speake, giuen and taken onA grieuous abuse in certain Brokers about this City, who vpon the pawnes of the Poore, take this excessiue extortion. Of Litigious Law-suits. Pledges and Pawnes, and that on Poore peoples labours, in London especially: which is a biting Vsury indeede, and a fearefull crying sinne before God. Vnnecessary Suites of Law are also Efficient Causes of the decay of Trade. Wherein certainely this Kingdome exceedeth all other Kingdomes in the world. As the Iustice of this Kingdome is the Diadem of the KING, & doth Stabilire Regis thronum, and Tribuere cuique suum: whereby Men may giue Caesar Caesars, and Meum and Tuum one to another: so is the Iustice of the KING, in the Sacred Person of HIS Maiesty, amongst other HIS Royall Vertues, an Embleme and Representation of Highest Maiesty; and it is an incomparable happinesse of this Kingdome, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 to haue such a Malchizedec, a KING of Iustice, a KING of Peace. Neither may I forget that Royall Testimony hereof, which is worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, and thankefully to bee remembred of euery Tongue and Pen; The Commemoration of a royal protestation in the Star-chamber of His Maiesties sincerity in Iustice. whereof amongst others more worthy, it was also my happinesse to be Oculatus and Auritus Testis: when HIS Maiesty in a Star-chamber assembly, lifting HIS Eye toward Heauen, & laying HIS Hand on HIS Sonnes Head, made such a solemne Protestation of HIS Sincerity in Iustice, as may serue for a matter of Admiration and Imitation, to all the Kings on earth. Those that Went Before, and they that Followed after: Those that Heard it then, and they that Heard of it since; sayd it was 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Nec vox hominem sonat, ô Deus certè! If such then be the Iustice of the King and the Kingdome, how is it then that Trade is hindered by suits of Law? Herein Columellae's counsell is remarqueable, Principi prouidendum est, De Re Rustica. ne legibus fundata ciuitas, legibus euertatur. There cannot be too much Iustice, there may be too much Law. For the vse of Iustice is cxcellent,Honestè viuere: Alterum non laedere: Suum cuique tribuere. Iuris praecept. in contayning men within the bonds of Ciuility and Honesty: in preseruing men from Iniury: and in maintayning euery mans Right and Proprietie. But the abuse there-of is a most pernitious and dangerous surfeit in the Bodie of euery Common-wealth. And this is our case in this Weale-publike: no Kingdome hath better Lawes; no Kingdome so full fraught with tedious, needlesse, endlesse, Suites of Law. For now this Litigandi 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 is become 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, and waxeth so fast, and groweth so great, that Suites of Law doe seeme immortall: time doth encrease them, and length of time would not determine them, if the wisedome of those Graue Fathers of the Law did not put an end to the malice of the Litigants: as is now worthily obserued in Chancerie, to his honour and memorie that hath so happily begun the same. By the growth and greatnesse of which Suites, I say, a great number of HIS Maiesties good and louing subiects are vexed, imprisoned impouerished and ouerthrowne: and whilst the Litigants striue together, another taketh away the Fish, and as it is in the Apologue, leaueth to either of them an empty Shell. And thus mens time and meanes being spent in Law, which should be employed in Trade, trade is neglected, and the Common-wealth depriued, of the benefit that might be purchased and procured thereby. And thus much for the decay of Trade considered Ioyntly. The Decay of trade considered apart, in the Ordinance and Munition. It followeth now to consider them Apart, in some principall parts thereof. Which may be reduced, to such as tend to the Fortification of the Kingdome, or Maintenance of Trade. The former are Ordinance and Munition: the too-too common exportation whereof, hath taught vs wofull experience of an invaluable inconuenience thereby which euery man is sensible of: and therefore I neede not presse it: I wish it did not Oppresse vs. The Latter, I will referre to things essentiall, for the preseruation of mans life, as Victus and Vestitus: yet such of them also as doe aford wondrous variety of Trade, and may be termed the Nourceries thereof, as the F•shing and Clothing of this Kingdome. For on these two, all sorts of Trades and Tradesmen, haue some dependance. The inconuenience in the Former, Or in the Fishing. is that Encroaching of Strangers, in Fishing vpon our Coasts: whereby not onely the Bread is taken out of the subiects Mouth, but that infinite Wealth, which God hath made Proper and Peculiar vnto Vs, is become Common vnto them. Whereby also, their Nauigation is wonderfully encrea'st, their Marriners are multiplied, and exceeding great Trades maintained into all parts of the Christian World. And Victuals commonly yeelding ready money, and tolleration of exportation thereof, the same hath redounded to an infinite enriching of their Countries with Treasure, exhausted out of these Mines of our's. I am not ignorant that a learned man of that side, pressing hard in a Treatise entituled Mare liberum, the Communitie and freedome of the Sea against the Portugall Trade into the East Indies; doth cunningly and obliquely, vnder the couert termes of Populi Romani littus, defend and maintaine, in the fift Chapter thereof, their Fishing vpon our Coasts. For thus hee concludeth, Nemo igitur potest à populo Romano ad littus maris accedere prohiberi, Maere liberum. cap. 5. p. 22. & retia siccare, & alia facere, quae semel omnes homines in perpetuum sibi licere voluerunt. And againe, Exteris ius piscandi, Eodem cap. p. 28. vbique immune esse debet. To part of which Treatise, there is an answere entituled, De Dominio Maris, to which I referre those that desire further satisfaction in this matter. But in my iudgement, which I submit to better iudgement, the Author of Mare liberum, though otherwise very learned, strayneth his Arguments for that purpose beyond their strength. For Ius is said to be scriptum, or Non scriptum. And Non scriptum is Consuetudo. De Arte iuris cap. 13. And Consuetudo non minus est species iuris, quàm ius scriptum. And by both these, the Proprieties of the Seas may be proued, to belong to those Princes and Countries, to which they are next Adiacent. For Custome, the examples of our Neighbor Countries round about vs are frequent. As of Coeldine, Groeneland, Norway, and Friseland, vnder the King of Denmarke. Tunny fishing vnder the the Duke of Medina. The Gulfe of Venice vnder that Seignory. And many others I might instance: In all which there is no liberty of fishing, but by Speciall priuiledge had from those Princes to whō the same belongeth. Which being so, we may well conclude with the Poet, Hor. Cùm ventum ad verum est, sensus moresque repugnant. For the Law it selfe, it is not hard to produce some of his owne Authors against himselfe. As the Emperour Leo: of whom hee thus speaketh,Mare liberum p. 25. Nouella Leo. 56. Voluit 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, hoc est, vestibula maritima eorum esse propria, qui oram habitarent; ibique eos ius piscandi habere. Also Rodericus Suarius, whose testimony because he was a Spaniard, he produceth against the Portugals in the end of his fift Chapter: whom, if hee had pleased, hee might also haue thus cited: Redditus piscariarum consueti, Roderic. Suarius de vsu Maris. consil. 1. vt est gabella, seu aliud tributum solui consuetum, de his quae in mari piscatores faciunt, seu à mercatoribus de his quae emunt aut vendunt, Principibus conceduntur. To which I will onely adde that of Bartolus, L. Insulae ff. de iu. &. L. Caesar. ff. de public. whom the Ciuilians call Iuris Lucernam, thus speaking: Vt Insulae in mari proximè adiacentes, sic & mare ipsum ad Centum vsque milliaria pro territorio districtúque illius regionis cui proxime appropinquat, assignatur. The rest that the Author of Mare liberum enforceth, of the Community and Freedome of the Sea to all Nations, he vnderstandeth of matters in question, betweene the Portugals and those of his Nation, concerning their East India Trade, and not of their Fishing vpon our Coasts. Which Question in my iudgement, being out of question were better determined by Action then Disputation: It being a Royalty of the King, and a Regall Priuiledge of this Kingdome, assigned by Almighty God. Or in the Clothing.From the Fishing come wee to the Clothing or Drapery of this Kingdome: the consideration wherof is of very high consequence, and concerneth both the Soueraigne and the Subiect, Noble and Ignoble; euen al sorts, and callings and conditions of men in this Common-wealth. For this is sayd to bee a Flower of the Kings Crowne, the Dowry of the Kingdome, the chiefe Reuenue of the King. This is a Bound to fortifie, and a Bond to knit the subiects together in their seuerall societies. This is the Gold of our Ophir, the Milke & Hony of our Canaan, the Indies of England: and therefore Desire's & Deserue's to be had in an euerlasting remēbrance. The Draperies of this Kingdome are termed Old and New. By the Old; are vnderstood Broad Cloathes, Bayes and Kersies: By the New; Perpetuanoes, Serges, Sayes, and other Manufactures of wooll. The Causes then of the Decay of Trade in these Draperies, are either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique causes, are some past, some Present. Those Past, are apparent in the late disturbance of the Clothtrade; which is so obuious to euery man, that I had rather Passe by it, then Presse vpon it, because it is Past: and I would to God that so were the effects of it also. In charitie wee may thinke it was Good in the Purpose, though it proued Ill in the Practise. For thereby the Draperies of this Kingdome are much diminished, and the forreine aduanced and aduantaged. The quantities of which last, were formerly few or none, but now they exceede our highest numbers issued out of the land: as by a colection thereof, which my selfe made in those part, by HIS Maiestie, speciall cōmand, in the time of Secretary Winwoods seruice, may appeare. These Present, may be discern'd in the Cloth-trade, either vnder the Clothier, or vnder the Merchant. Vnder the Clothier, either by Ill making, or False sealing the Cloth. The decay of Clothing vnder the Clothier, or vnder the Merchant.For the making of good and true Cloth, many excellent lawes haue bin inuented & enacted by the wisdome of the Parliaments of this land, from time to time. And the Statute of 4.4. Iacob. of the King Cap. 2. doth seeme to bee an Epitome or Compendiary of all the former Statutes in this kinde.Vnder the Clothier, by ill making, or false sealing of Cloth. In this Statute is prescribed, the true breadth, and length, and waight, that may conduce to the making of a true and perfect Cloth, Kersie or Manufacture. If a Clothier make a Cloth of lesse waight, then is set downe in the said Statute, he offendeth in Quantitie: If of lesse breadth, or length, or of forbidden kindes of wooll, hee offendeth in Qualitie. If a Clothier offend in Neither of these by his Owne Act, yet he may offend in Both, by his Instruments or Workmen: Either by the Weauers, in not putting in the stuffe at the making; or by the Tuckers in pulling out the stuffe after the making thereof. A Cloth also may be well made; & yet false sealed. A Cloth may be said to be lawfully made, when it is truly sealed. For althogh it may be impossible to make some Clothes, iust of those quantities and qualities prescribed by the Statute; as the Clothiers terme is, A man cannot cast a cloth in a mould: yet I hope, they will giue me leaue to say, that it is possible that a Cloth may bee true sealed, though false made. And then a Cloth ill made, and true sealed, whereby the buyer may see what hee hath for his money, may bee said to bee a good or lawfull Cloth according to the Statute. Now the execution of the Statute for Searching and Sealing of Clothes, seemeth to be referred to two sorts of men: which are either the Aulnager or Searcher. The former may seeme originally to haue beene an Officer appointed for that purpose, as well by the Notation of the name, as by some Ancient Statutes. 11. 〈◊〉. 4.6. &c. For Aulne, and Aulnage, and Aulnagier, are all French words, taken from the measuring of Cloth. And thence it is, that in that tong they are wont to say Aulner draps to measure Clothes, by a Trope taken from the Instrument by which they are Measured. But because the care of the Aulnage is committed to so Noble and Honourable a Personage, that will not suffer any abuse in the execution of that office: and the said Statute of 4. Iacobi, and the former Statutes of 39. and 43. Elizabethae doe referre the Searching and Sealing of Clothes, to certaine Ouerseers or Searchers, so called by the said Stautes, I will proceede vnto them. And forasmuch as Execution is the Life of the Law, In His Maiesties speech in Parliament. In Iune 1611. as HIS Maiestie in high High wisdoma admonisheth: and the Prudence, and Prouidence of the State, haue beene very great in deuising and enacting such good lawes from time to time, as might tend to the encrease and aduancement of the Drapery of this Kingdome: If therefore now any thing bee amisse therein, it must needs come through the want of Execution of those Lawes. Hincillae lachrymae! This Bonum according to HIS Maiesties Regall rule, Eeadem Oratione Regia. is not Benè. For these Ouerseers and Searchers being silly Countreymen, and generally not expert in the mystery of making of Cloth: in the Search whereof, there is as much neede of skill as in the making: for how should they finde the fault, that know not how it is committed? These Searchers I say, thus being ignorant and vnskilfull in their offices, and nelgigent also, (in which last, it hath beene againe and againe confest, that they haue set the seales of their office, to Clothes they neuer search't nor saw) needs must there be a great abuse, in the Execution of those good Lawes. Nay I would I could not say, how much our Nation hath beene vpbrayded by the people of forreine parts with this abuse, that the Searchers Seales of England are bought and sold as in a market, and put on the Clothes by the Tuckers, and other the seruants of the Clothiers, as if the same had beene lawfully Searched and Sealed according to the Statute; when as the Searchers Eye neuer so much as beheld the Clothes. Wherein the people of the Netherlands are so exact, that you shall neuer find any of their Country Clothes false Search't or Seal'd. For you shall haue a Seale set vpon the Cloth when it commeth from the Weauers: another when it commeth frō the Tuckers: another when it cōmeth from the Dyers: and that by men of good quality, appointed for that purpose in euery City and Towne where Cloth is made, termed Curemasters: so called from the Care they ought, and doe performe, in the execution of their office: wherein indeed they are so exact, that you shall neuer finde any of the Seales aforesaid, set to any manner of false or Defectiue Cloth. For indeed the Searcher being a Sworne Officer, ought to be as a witnes without exceptiō betwixt man and man: that when a man seeth the Searchers seale set vpon the Cloth, it should serue as a true Certificat of the true making thereof. It is a great impiety before God and Man, to be a false witnesse in any case: but these Searchers are false witnesses Ipse facto, when they doe Testifie to the world by their Seales, that those Clothes are Good and True, which indeede are vtterly False. And which aggrauateth the matter yet more, that the Kings Seale of Armes, wich is testis omni exceptione maior, should also bee set to Clothes thus Falsely searched & sealed; whereby not onely the Kings Subiects, but the Strangers also in Forreine parts are deceiued, is a very grosse and grieuous abuse. An example of Clothes ill made, searched and sealed.Amongst other abuses of this kinde, one precedent come's to my minde, of Ten Clothes bought not long since by a Merchant, of a Clothier of Wiltshire. Which Cloathes were all Sealed by the Searchers of that place, for good & true, according to the Statute. But being tried by the Merchant-Buyer, and afterward by the Sworne measurer of the Citie of London, were found so defectiue in length, breadth and waight, that where these Ten Clothes cost but 60. lib. or thereabouts, the faults in these Ten Clothes came to neere 20. lib. which was one third part of the value of the Cloth. And it being a notable contempt of the law, the Lords of HIS Maiesties most Honourable Priuie Councell were informed thereof; who were pleased to send downe a Messenger into that County, and fetch't vp both the Clothier and Searchers, who worthily vnder-went the Condigne Censure of the Lords. Vnder the Merchant also the Cloth-trade suffereth both at Home and Abroad. The Cloth trade suffereth vnder the Merchant, At home and abroad. At Home by Exportation of the Materials, or Imposition of Charge. At Home, by Exporting the Materials, either of Woolles or Wooll-fels from the Sea coasts of England, and the Kingdome of Ireland: or by Ouer-lading the Cloth-trade, either with any generall or speciall charge. The latter I cannot pretermit: for as the chiefe waight of the Cloth-trade lyeth on the Merchants-Aduenturers; so also is the burthen of charge most felt vnder that Trade. For the Impositions and Imprest money by them layd vpon the Cloth, for defraying the charge of their Gouernment, and payment of their Debts; haue driuen many good Merchants out of the Trade, and giuen the Clothiers occasion to complaine of want of Buyers, and thrust the Trade it selfe more and more into the Strangers hands. Abroad by vnfit Residence.And abroad, by the vnfit place of Residence, which the Merchants-Aduenturers are fallen vpon in Holland. Whither they goe with great perill of Shippe and Goods: And where they come farre short of that they hoped for; and of that quicke and ample vent of their Cloth they found in Zeeland. The Agitation of which remooue; is vehemently suspected to haue moued the Merchants of Holland, to procure Priuiledges of the States Generall to Incorporate themselues, and keepe Courts, to confront the Merchant Aduenturers; which they neuer did before: To haue drawne theThat is, abating for the faults thereof Taring of Cloth into Holland, where the Buyers are in some sort Iudges & Parties; which before was in the Mart-towne. where the Seller was present: And lastly, to haue hastned the great Imposition in Holland. All which are matters of moment, and concerne the Cloth-trade verie much, and whereof the English Factors there residing doe generally complaine: Yet These I rather instance then vrge: leauing the further Ouerture thereof to their own relation. Forreine causes of the decay of the Drapery, are the warres and the great Imposition in Holland. Now the Forreine Causes of the decay of the Drapery of England: are either Generall, as the warrs in Germany: or Speciall, as the Great Imposition lately laide vpon our Cloth in Holland. By the Former, the Course of Trade is stopt and hindered, that Merchants cannot passe without perill from place to place: and the monies become so variable, that when a Merchant hath sold his Cloth, and hopeth to haue gained something thereby; by that time that the terme for payment is expired, hee receiueth lesse in value then the Clothes cost, by the Raising and Rising of the monies. By the latter, the Merchants of the Netherlands are discouraged, whereby many of them haue giuen ouer their Trades, which heretofore they followed in ample manner, in our English Clothes bought of the Merchants-Aduenturers from time to time: which hath also tended to the aduancement of the Dutch Draperies; because the same are freed of all manner of charge. CAP. III. Of gouerned Trade, and therein of Monopoly. HItherto the Matter of Trade hath beene considered in Money and Merchandize: the Forme followeth, and that either in respect of Gouernment, or Want of Gouernment in trade. Gouernment is a representation of the Maiestie and Authoritie of the KING. The subiect that is honoured with Gouernment, is inuested with part of the KINGS Honour. The Trades of this Kingdome which by HIS Maiesties especiall Grace and Fauour are reduced vnder Order and Gouernment into Corporations, Companies, and Societies, doe certainely much Aduaunce and Aduantage the Commerce of this Common-wealth; and farre excell the trades of any other forreine Merchants in their vngouerned trades. But as the Vse of Gouernment is excellent for the restraint of vnskilfull and disorderly trade: so the Abuse therof is as inconuenient, if at any time the same be too strict, and come within the compasse of a Monopoly. And because the name and nature of Monopoly, is more talk't of, then well vnderstood of many; and some thinke that the reducing of trade into Order and Gouernment, is a kinde of Monopolizing and restraint of trade: I haue thought it not vnseasonable to bestow some speciall paines in the diligent inuestigation thereof. Not that I would haue the trade of the Kingdome so circumscribed or appropriated to any, that others of HIS Maiesties Subiects should bee depriued of the libertie thereof; but that vpon equall & reasonable termes, trading vnder Order and Gouernment, without that ill tincture of Monopoly, the KINGS high way of trade should be opened vnto all. The name therefore of Monopoly in our English tongue, is deriued, as the learned know, of the Greeke word 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉: whence also the latine word Monopolium is borrowed. Some deriue it of 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Solus, and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Vendo, to sell alone. Others of 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Solus, & 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Versor, to cōuerse alone. Other of 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Solus, and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Ciuitas, quasi vnica negotiatio in Ciuitate. But all these agree in one meaning of the word, that it is Singularis Negotiatio, a diuerting of Commerse from the naturall course and vse thereof, into the hands of some few, to their benefit, and others preiudice. I also find many definitions of Monopolies: and a great question among the Ciuilians, Huiusmodi contractus tanta emptionis & conductionis similitudine confundebatur, vt vix ac ne vix quidem à iuris consultis internosci possit. Hottom. ad tit. in lib. 1•. & 19. De Rep. lib. 1. cap 11. whether a Monopoly may bee exercised of one alone; and whether it consist aswell in Locatio Conductio, as they speak, as in Emptio Venditio. Which last is out of question with all. And of the former, I finde an instance in Aristotle of Thales Milesius his Monopolie: who by his knowledge in Astrologie, fore-seeing one yeare in the winter, that there would bee great plentie of Oyles the next yeare, hired before-hand all the places and engins for making of Oyle through both the Ilands of Melazo & Chius, and afterwards let out the same againe at his owne pleasure & price. In the same place hee maketh also mention of another, who bought vp all the Iron in Sicilia, which afterwards he sold againe, and made one hundred Talents of that which cost him but fiftie. Amongst others I will take the definition of Althusius for all the rest.Politic. cap. 31. n. 10. Monopolium, saith he, Est Commercium emendi, vendendi, permutandiue, à paucis vel vno etiam vsurpatum, reliquis ciuibus praeceptum, quo pretia augentur cum lucro negotiantis, & reliquorum damno. That is, Monopoly is a kind of Commerce, in buying, selling, changing or bartering, vsurped by a few, and sometimes but by one person, and fore-stalled from all others, to the Gaine of the Monopolist, and to the Detriment of other men. The parts then of a Monopolie are twaine. The restraint of the liberty of Commerce to some one or few: and the setting of the price at the pleasure of the Monopolian to his priuate benefit, and the preiudice of the publique. Vpon which two Hinges euery Monopoly turneth. And these two parts are respectiuely repugnant to the two fundamentall requisites of al good Lawes: to wit, Equitie and Vtility. For it is against Equitie, that one Member of a Common-wealth should bee more free then another of equall ranke and condition. And what can be more contrary to Publique Vtility, then that some one or few persons, should sway the price of any thing vsefull to the Common-wealth, to their owne Enriching, and the Common Losse of other men? And heere it is to bee well obserued, that vnlesse these two parts concurre in a Monopoly: it cannot truely and properly bee so called, nor ought it so to bee accounted.A•thusius polit. cap. 32. •ib. Decianus •ract. crim. •ap. 21. Meno•h. lib. 2. •. 569. And therefore Althusius following Decianus, saith well of that restraint of the Cōmon Liberty, which we call Suit of Mill: which compelleth men to vse this or that Mill to grinde corne, and none other: that it doth onely Sapere Monopolium, Sauour of Monopoly: but that it is not truly and properly a Monopoly. For in that case of Suit of Mill, vnlesse there be a greater Tolle or recompence exacted for grinding, then at other Milles, it falleth onely within the first part of a Monopoly, to wit, of the Restraint of the Publike Liberty; but not within compasse of the other part, the Setting of the Price. But for this Restraint of the Publike Liberty of Commerce, it may bee so ordered by the Wisdome of the State, that it may bee both Lawfull and Beneficiall to the Common-wealth. Which assertion, because it may seeme strange to some, I will make euident by Good Authoritie and Examples. Peter Martyr that famous light of the Churches of the Gospell,P. Mart. in I. Reg. c. 10. &c. defendeth the restraint of Solomon, that none should buy Horses of Egypt without his Licence, to bee Lawfull. And of this kinde is the Preemption of Tinne heere in England, granted by HIS Maiesties Gracious Letters Patents to some few, with restraint of all others: which I dare boldly affirme is not only lawful, but very beneficiall also to this Common-wealth. For therby our Thrice Noble Prince receiueth a good reuenue, and the Tinne of this Land is sold for many thousand pounds a yeare more in Forrein parts, then otherwise it would, to the great increase of the Common stocke of this Kingdome. Also the Law of this Realme alloweth, that if any man inuent a new Art, beneficiall to the Common-wealth, hee may haue a Patent to vse that Art solely, with restraint of all others for seuen yeares: as well in recompence of his industry, as for the incouragement of others, to studie and inuent things profitable for the publique Symbiosis. The Statutes of the Kingdome restraine from the exercise of sundry Crafts, all such as haue not serued an apprentishood vnto that Art which they would exercise: to the end that those Artes might be brought to better perfection, and the things made, might be good and seruiceable for those that buy and vse them. The restraint of the Publique Libertie, is sometimes exercised by Priuate Authoritie: sometimes by Publique. Which distinction is made by the Emperour Zeno. Iubemus ne quis pro sua authoritate, Cod. lib. 4. Tit. 59. vel sacro elicito rescripto, &c. Monopolium audeat exercere. The former is practised, when any one or more, haue by their owne priuate contracts, gotten any Commoditie or matter of Commerce, wholly into their owne hands. Of this kinde are the examples aboue cited out of Aristotle. The latter is, when by Publike authority, the liberty of the subiect is restrained: which is done, sometimes by the Prerogatiue of the KING: sometimes by Act of Parliament. The Former, by dispensing with a generall Law in some point, and applying the dispensation to some one or few, with restraint of others. The Latter, by prohibiting all, but some one or few persons to vse the benefit of the Law in some point or other. For dispensing with the Lawes, it is without question, that the KING hath power to dispence with a Penal Law, when it prohibiteth that which is not Malum in se. For the Parliament hauing made a Statute with intent of the Publique good: yet the same by reason of something not foreseene at the making of the Law, may proue verie preiudiciall in the Execution. And then the Malum prohibitum, as the Lawyers speake, may be dispenced with by the KING. Thus the Parliament hauing prohibited the exportation of white Clothes vndrest aboue the price of foure pound the Cloth:33. H. 8. the obseruation of that Statute was found by experience to be very preiudiciall to the Trade, and free vent of the Cloth in forreine parts. Whereupon Q. Elizabeth, granted a Speciall Licence to the Fellowship of the Merchant Aduenturers, Anno 6. Eliz. to transport all sorts of white Clothes vndrest, with a Non obstante to that Statute. And although all other men stood lyable to the Statute still, and were restrained, yet the Vtilitie that hereby arose to the Common-wealth, did farre exceede the restraint of the Publike Libertie. For within few yeares after the granting of this Licence, the vent of Cloth in forreine parts increased to twice as much, as formerly it was during the strict obseruation of the Statute. Other like dispensations of Statutes, I might instance: as that of the 28. H. 8. concerning the retailing of Gasgoigne Wines at two pence a quart: which is dispensed with, by a Licence to the Company of the Vintners: but these may suffice for euery mans vnderstanding of this kinde of restraint. For Prohibition by Act of Parliament: such is the Act whereby all the subiects of this Realme, excepting such as are of the Corporation of the Muscouy Company, are forbidden to trade into any part of Russia. Also that of 3. Iacob. 3. Jacob. concerning Artizan Skinners, whereby all but the Company are forbidden to buy and retaile some sorts of Skinnes. In these and the like, the Parliament maketh restraint of the Common liberty of Commerce, and the same restraint is againe released, not vnto all, but to some persons or Corporations by speciall Exercise and Prouiso of the Act of Parliament. The Later kinde of Restraint by Publique Authority, is when that which seemeth by the Lawe to be free to al, is by some Patent or Proclamation of the Prince, prohibited to all, sauing some certaine Corporations, or persons specially excepted and authorized in the same Patent or Proclamation. Of this kind are generally reputed all Corporations of Merchants, which are not confirmed by Act of Parliament. Which are generally reputed to carry with them a restraint to others, of that Liberty, which the Law doth seeme to offer to all in point of Commerce. Whence it is that so many pleade the Freedome of subiects, and Presse or rather Oppresse that plea of equity, that it is equall that all subiects should bee alike free to bee Merchants in all Trades. To whom I answer, that first there is no good Equality in it, because it is against the Publique Vtility, that all should bee Merchants at their pleasure. For that's not equall, that may seeme profitable to one, and bee hurtfull to many. Atque ipsa vtilitas iusti propè mater & aequi, as Horace speaketh. And yet what point of Equity is broken, when the freedome of Societies is so carryed, that it is open to all men vpon equall termes; that is to say, either by seruice or purchase? Otherwise it were very vnequall, that one man should serue for his freedome, or buy the same: and another man should haue it for nothing. If this point were well thought vpon, I presume the Gracious Grants and priuiledges of HIS Maiestie, conferred vpon Societies, would not seeme so much a Restraint of the Common liberty, as a prudent ordering and accommodating thereof vnto the Publique Vtility. For it hath euer beene a Policy of this State, to reduce the Trades of Merchants of this Kingdome into Corporations and Societies, for the aduancement of Trade, by the benefit of order and gouernment: well foreseeing that there cannot bee any greater Bane to a Well-gouerned Common-wealth, then Ill-gouerned and Disorderly Trade. Whereof I shall haue fitter occasion to speake in the next Chapter, when I come to treat of the Inconueniences of the want of gouernment in Trade. So that in this case the general rule must be this; that such a Restraint of the Publique Liberty, as is before mentioned, is alwayes to be allowed, when the same is recompenced with a Publique Vtility. According to that of Tacitus, Tacitus. Omne magnum exemplum habet in se aliquid iniqui, quod vtilitate publica contra singulas compensatur. Also the liberty that the Law seemeth to giue the subiects in Trade, is to bee vnderstood, of imploiment Within the Kingdome, not Without the Kingdome. For what liberty can a Nationall Law, giue to a Forrein Trade vnder a Forreine Iurisdiction, when the liberty or restraint thereof dependeth vpon those Forreine Princes and States where that Trade is tollerated? Therfore the Law may giue the subiect Liberty Within the Land, but it is the KING that must enable men to trade Without the Land. For all the Trades of the Merchants of this Kingdome into Forrein countries, are grounded vpon the Amity of the KING, and the Treaties of Peace contracted by the KING, with the Kings and Rulers of those forreine parts, at his owne charge, and by HIS own Authority, without the assistance of HIS Parliament. And therefore it holdeth good congruity, that the KING by HIS like Authority, may haue the disposing and ordering of such HIS contracts at his owne pleasure. The second part of Monopoly remaining, of the Setting of the Price at the pleasure of the Monopolist, to his Priuate gaine, & the Publique losse. Cod. 4.59. This Gothofredus calleth the Forme of a Monopoly. And in truth it is the very Soule and Accomplishment thereof. And he or they that haue this power ouer the price of the thing they negotiate, may well be said according to the notation of Monopoly, from 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 and 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, to conuerse alone. For in so doing, they so liue, as none can liue by them, in respect of their singuler gaine in this kinde: Contrary to that honest Prouerbiall rule of the Dutch, that men must Leuen ende Laeten Leuen: So liue as other men may Liue by them. But here I cannot but discharge all those Corporations of this Kingdome, of this part of Monopoly, which afford to euery particuler Trader thereof, the managing of his owne stocke, in buying and selling as hee can, without any combination with others. In which it is as impossible as vnusuall, for any to haue command of the price of their Commodities: because there is such a multitude of Traders of thē; and euery man is at liberty to buy or sell, without any rule by any generall order, or meanes to hold one price. But the greatest suspition of Monopoly in Corporations, is in such as Trade in Ioint stockes. Whereof if there be any that tradeth in a Ioint stocke, and hath the Sole buying or selling of any Commodity, and buy and sell the same Iointly, as by one person or common factor, such is guilty of Monopoly. For particuler men, they may also commit Monopolizing: either by procuring Patents by misinformation of the State, for the Sole Importing or Exporting, buying or selling at their owne prises, to the restraint of the Common Libertie, and the Publique Vtility of the Kingdome: or else when some one or few, without any Authoritie, doe ioine together to engrosse and buy in a Commodity, and sell it out againe at their owne price. Of the former kinde, are those Catalogues of crying Monopolies, which HIS Maiestie in HIS High Wisedome and Grace damned in HIS Princely Proclamation of the tenth of Iuly last, in the xix. yeare of HIS Maiesties most happy Reigne ouer this Kingdome: Many of which were abused in the Practise, from that which they appeared to be in the Institution. And here a pretty question occurreth. When a Patent is granted to a certaine person or persons, so as he or they haue power to licence others to exercise some kinde of Commerce solely, and consequently with command of the price: the question is, who is then the Monopolian, whether the Patentees, or their Assignes? In this case I suppose, that both the one and the other commit Monopoly. For first, the Patentees make their price at their pleasure vpon their Assignes, and they againe vpon the subiects. So that here is Monopoly vpon Monopoly: like your Salt vpon Salt, Interest vpon Interest, or the Decompositum in Grammer. In the latter, some sorts of Trades-men in London, are said to offend. Which being matters of Generall note, and willing to auoid offence, I will passe by such particulars. And this shall suffice for the Definition and Distribution of Monopoly. CAP. IIII. Of want of Gouernment in Trade. SVch is the Forme of Trade considered in the Strict Vse or Abuse of Gouernment, by way of Monopoly. It now remaineth briefely to shew the Too Loose Vse thereof, by Vngouerned Trade. It is a Maxime in the Mathematiques, that Rectum est Index sui & obliqui. And the want of Gouernment, cannot better be demonstrated, then by the benefit of Gouernment it selfe. For thereby the Common-wealth hath beene much aduantaged, both in the encrease of the natiue Commodities of the Kingdome, and the aduancement of their vse and price in Forreine parts: and also in keeping the forreine wares at a moderate rate within this Kingdome. This will be yet more perspicuous, if we cast our eye first vpon the seueral Societies of Merchants which trade vnder Gouernment: and then on those which trade without Gouernment. For Contraria iuxta se posita, magis elucescunt. The Merchants-Aduenturers.In the first place therefore consider we that Ancient and heretofore Famous fellowship of the Merchants Aduenturers of England. Hath it not by their politique rule and order, eaten out the Societie of the Hans-townes of Germanie and the Merchants of the Entercourse of the Low Countries, in those trades, which a long time they enioyed in this land? And whereas those of the Hans, vented in Germany, only a matter of sixe thousand of our Clothes yeerely and at low prises: and held this Realme as it were beholding vnto them for their shipping: yea vpon some discontent for denying of them priuiledges, durst offer some hostilitie in the time of Edward the fourth. Wheras the Merchants-Aduenturers by their Charters, granted from time to time by the Princes of this Realme, and fauoured by Parliaments successiuely; by their orderly mannaging of their trade, haue supplanted the trade of the Hanses in Germany: and brought the said Sixe thousand vented by them in Germany, vnto Thirtie thousand Clothes yeerely & at great prises. And it is worthy to be remēbred to their Honour, that seruice which the Merchants-Aduenturers did to the State in Anno 88. when they supplied the Nauie Royall with a whole ships lading of Powder and Shot from Hamburgh: which came luckily euen in articulo temporis, when there was a very great want thereof. These also haue from time to time employed and bred vp many worthy Masters of ships and Mariners: and built many Tall, warlike and Seruiceable shippes: which as they themselues also, are at all times ready to doe seruice to the KING & STATE vpon all occasions. None of all which they had euer beene able to haue done as particular men, in a loose, distracted, and disorderly trade. The East-India Company.Great benefit also hath arisen from the East-land Company: who haue wonne like ground of the Hanses of the Baltique Sea: and do employ in that trade a great number of proper Shippes and Men. The Muscouy Company The Muscouy Company also by the benefit of Gouernment, besides their imployment of many proper Ships and Men, haue discouered the passage by the North-Cape, as also of Greenland: and done many other seruices to the State: which as particuler men, they could neuer haue performed. The Leuant Company The Leuant Company. likewise by their trade vnder Gouernment, hath built a great strength of warlike, Tall & Lusty Shipping, which they employ in that trade: and by their industry haue wonne from the Italians the trade of the Leuant: the Commodities whereof were before brought into this Realme by Argosies to the encrease of Forreine shipping, and at Deare rates: and is now reduced to the Natiues of this Kingdome, to the encrease of Shipping, and the benefit of the Publike. Which without Gouernment and good order, had been impossible for them to haue done. The French Company The French Company. also, though but lately reduced to Order, haue reformed many abuses in that trade, in maintaining the Natiue Commodities of this Kingdome in much better estimation, and in keeping the Forreine at moderate prices: and in employing greater shipping, then at any time before. Which were impossible for them to effect Singly, without Societie. Lastly, for the East-India Company. The East-India Company. whereof I am preuented to say what I might, by two seuerall discourses published in print, the one by that worthy & rarely qualified Gentleman Sr. Dudley Digges Knight, the other by that discreete Merchant M. Thomas Mun: yet this I say, that this Great and Noble Societie by the benefite of Gouernment, hath set on foot a very Mightie Trade, farre beyond any other Company of this Kingdome: and accordingly hath excelled in Greatnesse of shipping, and making Mariners of land-men, beyond the example of any other Corporation: and had not Enuy thought that Trade too great a Treasure for this Kingdome, doubtlesse they had in Encrease of Trade, excelled all the Companies of Merchants in this Common-wealth. But here the ordinary obiection encountereth me, that in Germany, The obiection answered, that the Merchants of other countries trade without gouernment, which is examined by a particular enumeration of diuers Countries. Spaine, France, Italie, and the Netherlands, there are no such Companies, nor Restraint of Merchants, as here in England: and yet that those Countries thriue better in their Trades, then we in ours. I answer, that if it be granted, that they haue no such Companies nor Restraints of any, and that they thriue better in their trades then we; yet it will not follow, that this their better thriuing is because euery man is at libertie to be a Merchant at his pleasure. This is the Fallacy which the Logicians call 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, Non causa pro causa. For if that were the cause, why then should not our Spanish Trade, that hath no Company nor Restraint, prosper better thē the other Trades which are Gouerned in Companies? whereas to speak as the truth is, This Trade & These Merchants, are the most miserable of all the other Trades and Tradesmen of this Kingdome, and all through want of Gouernment: thorough whose sides the Common-wealth suffereth, and hath already lost many Millions in value of the Wealth of the Weale-publique, as I shall shew anon. But to the Assumption. I deny that the Merchāts of those Forreine Countries, trade without Gouernment. For Germany hath anciently had one Society, As first Germany. or Corporation of Merchants in all their Sea-townes, called the Society of the Hans, before noted: as their houses of Staple, yet standing at Bridges in Flanders, Antwerpe in Brabant, Nouogrode in Russia, Bergen in Norwaye, and the Steelyard in London can witnes. Which trade of theirs flourished, as long as it continued vnder Gouernment: but hauing lost their priuiledges, partly by their own Stragling, and partly being ouertop't by the flourishing of the Merchants Aduenturers Trade, their Trade is now almost quite fallen to the ground. For Spaine and Portugall: Spaine and Portugall. all men know that their Sea Trade is little, sauing to the East and West-Indies. And those Trades are carryed with Gouernement, and farre more restraint then ours. For France, France. there are not (that I know) any Companies of Merchants for forreine parts. Which I take to bee the cause, why those Merchants shipping, is of so small burthen, and of as little sufficiency for seruice. Which is an effect of a stragling vngouerned Trade. For Italy, Italy. that consisteth of so many seuerall Iurisdictions, that it were impossible to make a generall Corporation for any one kinde of Sea-trade. For example, were it not in vaine for Genoa to make a Corporation & Orders for Trade, whilest Florence held a contrary course? It were certainly all one, as to haue a Company of Merchants for Spaine at London, and the West-parts left loose to Trade without Order or Gouernment, which were a meere mockery. But the Trade in many parts of Italy, being carried by Families, and euery Family being as it were one Person, there is a kind of Gouernment in their Trades, and the same performed with merueilous credite, policie, and iudgement. The Netherlands.The Low Countries, by that Vnion which is of the seuerall Townes and Prouinces vnder the States Generall (which neuerthelesse is as much, and endureth as long, as euery seuerall Prouince and Towne listeth,) haue of late yeeres erected their East India Company, and the like for Guiny, and are in hand with the like for the West Indies. Also the Cloth-buyers, the principall Merchants of Holland, haue lately obtained Octroy so termed, which is Priuiledges & Immunities of the States, to assemble themselues, and to keepe Courts, and make Orders for their Trade; and principally to confront & oppose the Merchants-Aduenturers Trade, vpon some differences, lately fallen out betwixt those Cloth-buyers and the said Company about the residence before noted. For their other Trades of Germany, Poland, England, France and Spaine, they rather wish then finde it possible, to ioine the seuerall Townes in one Rule and Order. And who so conuerseth with that Nation, shall find that they very much complaine of the disorders of their Trades, for want of that kinde of Gouernment, which many of them take notice of here in England: and some of them of late haue desired instructions from hence in that behalfe. Besides all this, these people as they are borne and bred in an Vnited Country, so doth their nature and disposition encline much to an Vnion and Communion in Trade. Insomuch as oftentimes they are able to worke their feates by Confederacy and Combination, against an Incorporation in our Nation. For they wisely consider, that their interest is inuolued in the Publique: where, in our Nation, men commonly preferre their Particular, to the Common-good. And thus hauing answered the obiections against Corporations, of Merchants and Gouerned Trades, and shewed the many and manifold benefits arising to the Common-wealth thereby: It is now easie to shew the Iniury and Inconuenience to this Common-wealth by the want of Gouernment in Trade. Those that Trade without Order and Gouernment, are like vnto men, that make Holes in the bottome of that Ship, wherein themselues are Passengers. For want of Gouernment in Trade, openeth a gap and letteth in all sorts of vnskilfull and disorderly persons: and these not only Sinke themselues and others with them; but also Marre the Merchandize of the land, both in estimation and goodnesse: then which there can bee nothing in Trade more preiudiciall to the Publique Vtility. And to make good these particulers, I take this for a ground: Nemo nascitur artifex. Which as it is true in the occupations of Artizans: so is it much more true in the Trades of Merchants: wherein there is so great variety of difficult points to bee learned, before a man can learne his Stucke, as the Dutch-men speak, or be his Crafts master. And how can the Merchant, that hath no skill in his Commodity, looke to it, that the Maker performe his part? Or how can a falsified Commodity, hold his estimation and vse? The ill experience whereof, is not more remarqueable in any of HIS Maiesties subiects, then in those that trade into the Dominions of the King of Spaine, without Order or Gouernment in Trade. For at the beginning of HIS Maiesties most happy Raigne ouer this Kingdome, this Trade by HIS Maiesties Princely fauour, was made a Corporation and Societie of Merchants, and flourished vnder Gouernment. And then the new Draperies, and other the Natiue Commodities of the Kingdome were maintained in their estimation and goodnesse at Home and Abroad: But soone after by the clamour of some who preferred their owne liberty, to the vtility of the publique, and by some misinformation giuen the Parliament of that time, this Company after it had flourished two yeares, was dissolued, and euer since exposed to confusion and disorder in Trade, and is become a receptacle and Rendes-vous for euery Shopkeeper, Stragler, and Vnskilful person: and may serue for a liuely representation of the hopes that may be expected, by such a loose trade, as many now a daies so much desire, not rightly conceiuing or considering the benefit of Gouernment, nor the Inconueniencies that doe perpetually accompany trade in the want thereof. Which in the Effects will be more Perspicuous, to which in their Order we now proceede. CAP. V. Of the Effects of the former Causes as they concerne the KING. SVCH were the Causes considered in the Matter and Forme of trade. The Effects follow: which doe either concerne the KING, or the Common-wealth. Such as are the Causes, such also must needs be the Effects arising from the same: and those doe either respect the KING in point of Honour, or in point of Reuenue: and both in the Matter and Forme of Trade. In point of Honour, there is a relation to the KING from the Matter of Trade,Effects to the King in point of Honour. considered Generally, or Specially. Generally, in the generall neglect of all trades, by remerous, rash, and litigious suites of law: whereby the Peace of the Kingdome is disturbed, the Iustice thereof abused, and in both the KING dishonoured. Or Specially in some speciall Commerce of this Kingdome, abused by the KINGS Subiects, or Strangers. By the KINGS Subiects, in the Drapery of the Kingdome, when HIS Maiesties Seale of Armes, which, as I said, is, Testis omni exceptione maior, shall be dishonoured by false Cloth and other Manufactures, that are vnworthily honoured therewith: and whereby, those that buy the same both within and without the Land, are perswaded the same is good and true, when the same is vtterly false: which is a great indignity offered to the KING. By Strangers, in the East India Action, and the matter of Fishing. In the East India Action certainely the KINGS Honour is interessed; not onely to protect his subiects against the Iniuries done them by the Dutch in the East Indies; but also to maintaine the Glory and Renowne, of HIS Sacred Fame, which hath heretofore beene Illustrious euen vnto the Heathen: which some haue dared to doe what they could to obscure. The Fishing hath also reference to the KINGS Honour: for it is a Royalty of the Crowne, which the KING in Honour cannot but protect. There is also an Effect that extendeth it selfe to the KINGS Honour in the Forme of Trade, as it is too strict, or too loose. Too strict, in respect of Monopolies, wherein the Prerogatiue of the KING is abused, and therein HIS Honour also, by those that thereby seeke to priuiledge and Patronize things vnlawfull. Too loose, in the disorderly Trade of the subiects out of Gouernment. For those Strangers that haue not beene in our Countrey, nor seene the Order of HIS Maiesties Gouernment, must needes Ex vngue Leonem, guesse at the Soueraigne by the Subiect: And like to Archimedes who drew the whole pourtraiture of Hercules body, by his footstep onely found in Mount Olymphus, proportion the Royall and Regall Gouernment of HIS Maiestie At home, by the deportment of his subiects Abroad. And as the Orderly Trade of Merchants is an Honour to the KING, when the same is contained within the listes of Gouernment; so the contrary cannot choose but produce a quite contrary effect. In point of Reuenue the KINGS treasure is diminished,In point of Reuenue. in the Matter also and Forme of Trade. In the Matter of Trade, eyther in the General course of Trade, or in some Particulers. In the Generall, the great want of money, and decay of Trade throughout all callings and conditions of men, must needes cause a great diminution of HIS Maiesties Reuenue, both in HIS Customes and Supplies. For the Customes, those perpetually rise and fall with Trade: And for Supplies, the subiects beeing impouerished through want of Money and decay of Trade, are disabled to doe that seruice to HIS Maiesty, which otherwise they would be willing, and heretofore haue beene able to performe, in flourishing times of Trade. And if our experience hereof had beene in the 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 and not in the 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, in the Contemplation only, and not in Action: we had been much more happy in this Kingdom and Nation. In the particuler course of Trade, it shall content me to instance onely the East India Action, and the Fishing, before referred to the KINGS Honour, here to HIS Reuenue. By the East India Action there is a very great losse to the KING in HIS Customes, by the losse of all the Custome which that Trade would haue produced in all this time: and of the Encrease also of Trade, which that employment had brought with it, which would haue yeelded to HIS Maiesty a great Increase of Customes answerable to the same. Of both which if we had not beene depriued, certainely HIS Maiesties Ferme of HIS Customes had yeelded Many Thousand pounds a yeare, more then now they haue done. By the Fishing, the Customes and Tolles which are vndoubtedly due to HIS Maiestie for the Strangers Fishing vpon our Coasts, together with the encrease of Trade, and consequently of Customes thereby also, wold amount to so great a value, that I cannot wonder enough, that the same hath beene neglected all this while. And lastly in the Forme of Trade, the KINGS Reuenue is mightily diminished, when by the disorder of Trade, the very course of Trade is inuerted, and therein the KINGS Customes and Subsidies also. CAP. VI. Of the Effects of the former Causes as they concerne the Common-wealth. FRom the KING, come to the Kingdome. Wherein there are also manifold Effects of the precedent Causes, both in the Matter and Forme of Trade. And although in the very same things, wherein the Honour and Reuenue of the KING are inuested, the Wealth of the Common-wealth is also interessed; yet the same may otherwise be distinguished, that so they may bee made the more perspicuous and cleere to euery mans iudgement.Effects to the Common-wealth Actiue and Passiue. The Effects then that arise out of the Matter of Trade and fall vpon the Kingdome, may be saide to be either Actiue or Passiue. Actiue, when they are done by Our Selues: Passiue, when they are done to vs by others. Actiue, in the vse of Law, either Too much, or Too little. Too much, in Suits of Law, whereby one subiect vexeth another: which make this peaceable Kingdome seeme to be at Warre within it selfe. For whilest men are thus at Deadly Feude in Law, by the losse of their Times, and Trades, and States; the thrift of the Common-wealth must needes bee neglected. Too little, In the Non-Execution of Lawes, which tend either to the enlargement of Clothing, or the restraint of the Excesse of the Kingdome. The Former is, either in respect of the Ill searching and Sealing of Cloth, or in the Transportation of the Materials of our Cloth before mentioned. In the former of these, the Merchants Aduenturers can giue you an account of Tenne thousand pounds a yeare at least losse to this Commō-wealth, by the Tare or abatements vpon the Cloath in forreine parts, for the false making and sealing thereof: Besides the other Effects of the decay of the Drapery it selfe, and other Trades depending thereon, the losse whereof is vnualuable. In the Latter, euery man is sensible of the losse to the Common-wealth, in robbing it of the Materials: whereby not onely our Draperies are Impaired, but the Forreine also are thereby much Improued. Also the want of restraint of the Excesse of the Kingdome, in Vsury and Prodigality: the one beeing a Viper in a Kingdome that gnaweth through the bowels thereof: the other a Canker that fretteth and wasteth the stocke, in spending the forreine wares, more then it venteth of our owne: both and either doe produce intollerable effects in a wel ordered Kingdome and Common-wealth. Or Passiue, in the ill Effects that fall vpon the Kingdome, in things done to vs by Others. And that either by Friends or Foes. The Former is done by Imposition, or Vsurpation. By Imposition, in the Merchants Aduenturers Trade in Holland: where there is lately taxed vpon a Pack Cloth 9. Gilders; vpon a long Cloth 18. Gilders, and vpon a fine Cloth 24. Gilders, which is 18. 36. and 48. shillings of our money. And yet neuerthelesse they free their owne Countrey Cloth of all manner of charge; nay, they giue encouragement to the makers thereof by many Priuiledges and Immunities: whereby it is more then manifest that they do what in them lyeth, to Plant their owne Draperies, and to Supplant ours, to the infinite disaduantage of this Kingdome. By Vsurpation, those Friends of ours, depriue vs of our East India Trade, and Fishing, which here againe occurre, and offer themselues for this purpose also. By the Former, the Common-wealth hath not onely been dispossest all this while of so great a Stocke, as is that of the East India Company, but of the employment and encrease of Trade also, that thereby in all this time would haue accrewed vnto this Kingdome. And it is to be feared, that their policy is not onely to depriue the Company of their Stocke, but the Kingdome also of the Trade: which they thinke too great and glorious a Fortune for this Common-wealth to enioy, and the onely hope of their's. And hence it is that the Restitution is so hard to be had, because they think by detaining it, and spinning out the time, they shall in time Weary and Weare vs out of that Trade: And so in the meane while, by Plowing vp those Indian Seas and Soyle with our Heifers, they may at last Reape all the Haruest, and possesse and dispossesse at their owne pleasure, to the wonderfull enriching of their Common-wealth, and the impouerishing of our's. By the latter, to wit, their Fishing vpon our Coasts, the Common-wealth looseth that which they gaine: which is merueilous increase of Trade, of Shippes, and Marriners. Whereby their Nauigation is mightily Strengthened, their Marriners multiplyed, and their Trade encreased: Of all which this Common-wealth is depriued, and their's enriched. By Foes also this Common-wealth is lamentably Passiue, in the Cruelty done by Turkish Pirats vpon our Men and Ships, and Goods. The griefe is lamentable, the losse intollerable. Lastly, there are ill Effects that fal vpon the Common-wealth in the Forme of Trade: and that in respect of Monopolies, or Vngouerned Trade. By the Former, this Common-wealth is depriued of that true liberty of Trade, which belongeth to all the subiects: when the Commodity of some few, is preferred to the publique good. By the Latter, which is most remarqueable in the Trade of HIS Maiesties subiects into the Dominions of the King of Spaine, and the Mediterrane Sea; the Trade of this Kingdome consisting in Bayes, Perpetuanoes, Kersies, Waxe, Tinne, Lead, and other the Natiue Commodities of this Kingdome, is betrayed into the hands, both of those with whom we are in Amitie, and others that are with vs in Enmity. The one taketh aduantage of our vnmerchant-like courses for lacke of Order: The other, of our Shippes sent foorth stragling for lacke of Fleets: and both through want of Gouernment in Trade. Whereby the Perpetuanoes and other new Draperies haue by little and little bin made worse and worse, so that now they are become quite out of vse, the Trade lost, the Traders ruinated, the Manufactures by other Nations supplied, the Nauigation hindered, by the losse of many worthy men, and Seruiceable Shippes: In all which, the Decay of Trade is exceeding Great, the Common-wealth's losse Infinite. CAP. VII. Of the Remedy for all the former Causes of decay of Trade. HAuing shewed the many and manifold Causes of the decay of Trade in the Matter and Forme thereof: It remaineth now to present the Remedy. Which according to the precedent Method, I will apply vnto all the particulers in their order. Onely the Remedies for the Effects, I shall present in the Causes: for the Causes being remoued, the Effects must needs cease, according to the common Maxime in Philosophy, Sublatâ causâ tollitur effectus. In my former distribution I considered the Causes of the decay of Trade, in the Matter and Forme thereof: and in the Matter I insisted on Money and Merchandize. The Causes of the want of money, I shewed some to be Immediat; some Mediat or remote. The Immediat Causes, I noted to be such, as either hinder the Importation; or such as cause the Exportation; and both in the Vnder-valuation of HIS Maiesties Coine.The Remedy of drawing money into the Kingdome, must needs be the raising therof. The Remedy offer's it selfe, which is double. First, how it may be got: and next how it may be kept. The former may be done two wayes: By Raising of the KINGS Coine; and by making current Forreine Coines at equall value.And by making forreine Coines currant at like value. Wherin it is to be obserued, that the more the Coynage is abated, the lesse the Coyne it selfe need to be raised. The latter, to wit, the keeping of Money within the land, may also be done 2. waies: By another maner of Execution of the Statute for Employments then heretofore: wherein there is some reason not to expresse my selfe as I might: And by HIS Maiesties Princely and Prudent Negotiation, with the Princes of our Neighbour Countries, the States of the vnited Prouinces especially, to keepe a more constant course in the values of their Coines. Neither of which can be done by that Par of Exchange, which is now againe in agitation, and hath taken more then twenty yeeres to bring it to perfection. Wherein, absit invidia verbo, that I say, there is neither Parity, nor Purity. For it is not the rate of Exchanges, but the value of monies, here lowe, elsewhere high, which cause their Exportation: nor doe the Exchanges, but the plenty or scarcity of monies cause their values. Or if I should grant that to be the cause which is not: yet it doth not follow, that because the Stranger, like enough, would be a deliuerer heere of money at a high rate, that therefore the English must take it. And then the consequence will be ill: for if the rate be such as the Taker like not, then the Deliuerer is yet more thrust vpon the exportation. But I leaue this Proiect to whom it is committed, with this, that his opinion seemes to be eiusdem farinae, with another of the same, in his Canker of Englands Common-wealth, in these words:Canker of Englands Common-wealth. p. 46. published in An. 1601. And it were to be wished, that our Cloth were sold at so deare a rate, and according to the price of forreine Commodities, that thereby other nations would take vpon them to make our Clothes themselues: which might easily bee remedied, by selling our woolles the dearer, whereof they must make them. Which seemes to haue in it much more Dutch then English, to depriue this Kingdome of so Royall a Manufacture, whereby so many thousands of poore families, are maintained in the same: as if hee would cure one Canker with another, contrary to our Sauiours Argument, that Satan cannot cast out Satan. But I returne to mine owne Station: and therein to answer the obiections that doe occurre the raising of Money: which are wont to be principally, either the continuall Raising of it, to follow the Rising of forreine Coine; or else the ineuitable losse that thereby will fall, Generally vpon all men in the endearing of all things; and Particulerly vpon Landlords and Creditors, in their rents and contracts. The obiections against raising of money, answered.For the continuall Raising of the Coine, that will be needlesse, if the meanes be sufficient for executing the Statute for employments, whereby the Money may be kept within the land when we haue it. And for the dearenesse of things, which the Raising of Money bringeth with it, that will be abundantly recompensed vnto all in the plenty of Money, and quickning of Trade in euery mans hand. And that which is equall to all, when hee that buye's deare shall sell deare, cannot bee said to be iniurious vnto any. And it is much better for the Kingdome, to haue things deare with plenty of Money, whereby men may liue in their seuerall callings: then to haue things cheape with want of Money, which now makes euery man complaine. Lastly, for Landlords and Creditors, their losse is easie to be preuented by Prouiso, that the Contracts made before the raising of the Monies shall be paide at the value the Money went at, when the Contracts were made: according to the disposition of the Ciuill Law in this case:Gailius 2. lib. Obseruat. cap. 73. Valor monetae considerandus & inspiciendus est à tempore contractus, non autem à tempore solutionis. The raising also of the Coine, would raise the price of Plate: whereby either there would bee lesse superfluity that way, or else more old Plate, which perhaps in some mens hands is kept vp for Treasure, would be brought out, to be molten into Coine. The Mediate or Remote Causes of the want of Money, I obserued to bee either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique, Generall or Speciall. The Generall, the great Excesse of the Kingdome, in consuming the Commodities of forreine Countries in such abundance, to our owne losse. And amongst those, the great excesse in Tobacco is none of the least: which if it might seeme good to the High Wisedome of HIS Maiestie, A Remedy for excesse. to restraine, or at least to giue a tolleration of the Virginia and Barmudo's only: there might be a great deale of Pietie and Policy shewed in this Remedy. For in the one respect, it would tend to a great enriching of that plantation, which so happily succeedeth through Gods blessing: and in the other it would aduantage the KING and the Kingdome, in the redresse of the disorder of the Spanish Trade, and in bringing in Treasure in stead of that Toye, more then the Rent that is now raised to HIS Maiestie for the same, The Superfluity of other Commodities may bee restrained by lawes Vestiary and Sumptuary, according to the example of Germany & other our Neighbor Countries. The Speciall Remote Cause of our want of Money, A Remedy for want of Money in the remote cause thereof. I noted to bee the want of our East India Stocke in the Common-wealth. The Remedy wherof, is in the Princely Power and Gratious Fauour of HIS Maiestie to apply at HIS pleasure, to this Languishing body. And if HIS Sacred Maiestie will vouchsafe to apply HIS Gratious Mouth, to this Mouth: HIS waking Eye, to this Eye: HIS powerfull Hand to this Hand: then surely this fainted Body will receiue Breath and Life, from the powerfull influence of so Great a Maiestie, and reuiue also the many other fainting Trades, that are fallen in it. The Forreine Remote Causes, I obserued to be the Warres in Christendome, or the Trades maintained with ready Money Out of Christendome. The former, either cause the Exportation of Money, as do the Warres of Christians: or hinder the Importation thereof, as doe the Warres of Pirats. A Remedy in the former of these I know none,A Remedy of the Warres of Christians. besides that blessed disposition in HIS Maiesty to spare no Cost to make Peace: which hath made HIS Fame shine as farre as the Sunne shineth, and shall last as long as the Sunne and Moone endureth: and as sure as the Lord is faithfull, will be remembred on HIS Posterity for euer: Besides this I say, I know none, but Patience and Prayer: that God would auert the heauy Iudgments at this day on the Christian world, and giue vs grace to consider Our peace, in this Our day thereof. A Remedy in the latter,A Remedy of disorderly Trade. may be either by reducing of the stragling trade of HIS Maiesties subiects into the Dominions of the King of Spaine, into Gouernment; whereby they also might goe in Fleetes, as other gouerned Companies doe, and the better defend themselues against so Common and Cruel an enimy: or else by seeking restitution of our wrongs in this kinde, where it may be had: so farre as it may concurre with the Honour of the KING, to whose Great and Princes iudgement, I submit the same. The Remedy for the Exportation of Money out of Christendome A Remedy for the exportation of Money out of Christendome. by the Trades before mentioned, dependeth much on the good Conclusion hoped for, betweene the Dutch and our Nation. Whereby not only the Indian Commodities, which in those Trades are the principall, may be bought much better cheape, and consequently spare a great deale of the Treasure now issued out for the same: but also, the Natiue Commodities of either Country, and as much as may bee of euery Country, may be brought into Trade and Traine with the Indians, and aduanced in their vse and price: that so at last in stead of Money for Wares, we may giue Wares for Wares according to the Law and nature of Commerce. And this good conclusion betweene the Dutch and Vs, is the rather to bee wished, and the more to be hastened, because the subtilty of the Indians is great, in taking aduantage of this vnhappy Faction, or rather Fraction, that is fallen betwixt vs. For those that haue trauelled the Indies, and obserued those people can tell, that the Indians doe ascribe so much to the light of their vnderstanding, that they doe account the rest of the world blinde in Comparison of them. Only they vouchsafe to the people of Europe this honour, to call them One Eied men. Which also Maffeius taketh notice of, in his History of the Indies, that those people dare beyond modesty thus to brag; Chinenses duos habere oculos; Ioan. Petr. Maffeius Hist. Ind. lib. 6. Europaeos vnum; & quod hominum est reliquum, caecutire. That the Chineses haue two Eies, the Europians one, and all the rest of the people of the world are blinde. And indeed they doe approoue themselues to be Quicke-sighted enough: for they are the Antipodes of Christians, and are in scituation farthest remote from them, and yet can finde the Meanes, to pry into the Mines and Treasure of the Christian world. And therefore I say, it is high time that the Dutch and We left Darting at one another, and so ioine together, that as with one Hand, and one Heart, and if they will needs haue it so, with that one Eie, we may collect and contract our sharpest sence & sight into it; that as it is said, some Monoculists, by the sharpnesse of the sence drawne to one Eie, see better with that, then both: we may at last put this remedy in practise, that we seem no longer blind men, to those Indian people. But herein on both parts, are we humbly to implore HIS Maiesties Regall Intercession, that these differences, betwixt the Dutch and Vs, may no longer Hang in suspence, but at last be drawne to that happy and hopefull Period wee haue so long looked & longed for. That so the Maiesty of the KING, arising like the Glory of the Sun-ring vpon this our Horizon, may dispell and disperse all the tempestuous Mists and Fogges, that haue obscured the same; and lend such a glorious Light and Life vnto this Orbe of ours, that They & We, like louers and friends fallen at oddes, may be redintegrated, renewed, and revnited, in vnfaigned Amitie and Vnity, that the name of Hostilitie betwixt Them and Vs, be neuer hereafter told in Gath, nor publish't in the streets of Ashcalon: And that the Publike complaints aswell of theirIn a Translation out of a Dutch Copy, lately published in Holland by the Dutch themselues: in the face or Title whereof, these words are vsed: That notwithstanding the extreme wrongs done by the MAIORS to the English Nation, Trading to the East Indies; yet it is the Iustice of God, they thriue not with it themselues. Printed 26. Iune. 1622. Owne people, as Ours, may no longer come vnder the view and censure of the world. Another Remedy of this kinde, may bee HIS Maiesties gratious protection of the Persian Trade now so happily set on foote: that so neither the Enuy of any at Home; nor the Power or Policy of any abroad, supplant vs in the same.Another Remedy of the former kinde. Whereby the Cloth and Tinne, and other the Natiue Commodities of this Kingdome, may be brought into Vse and Commerce amongst the Persians also. Which through Gods blessing, and his Maiesties Royall Assistance, may be a means to draw the whole Trade of the Persian silke into this Kingdom, and make it the Magazin thereof, for the supply of other Nations: to the weakning of the Turkes power, the increase of Trade in this Common-wealth, and with it HIS Maiesties Customes, the Nauigation, and employment of the poore: to the Great Honour of the KING, and enriching of all HIS Kingdomes. And so much for the Remedies about the matter of Trade in Money; the Merchandize followeth. Which I considered Iointly, or Apart. The things that hindred the whole Trade, I noted to be Deficient, as the want of Money, or the East India Stocke, which haue their Remedy before: or Efficient, as Vsury and Litigious Suits of law, to the Remedies whereof we now proceede.A Remedy for Vsury. The Remedy for Vsury, may be plenty of Money. For then, men will haue no such cause to take Money at interest, as when Money is scant. For as it is the scarcitie of Money that maketh the high rates of interest: so the plentie of Money will make the rates low, better then any Statute for that purpose. For although in the Netherlands, it is lawfull for a man to take twenty in the hundred if he can get it: (wherein it seemes the Author of the Tract against Vsury was misinformed,) yet there, commonly money is let at 6. and 7. in the hundred, by reason of the plenty of Money. Or there is another Remedy for Vsury,Another Remedy for Vsury. in giuing liberty to the subiects, if so it may seeme good to HIS Maiesties High Wisedome, to buy and sell, and to transport Billes of debt from man to man: according to the Custome of Germany and the Low Countries. Which is found to be an excellent meanes to supply mens wants in course of trade; and tendeth also to the enlarging thereof. And for the Extorsion vpon the poore aboue noted: if a stocke of Money were raised in manner of a Lumbard, or otherwise in London, and in the Countries where much poore depend on Clothing, and else-where where there is cause, whereby the multitudes of poore wherewith the Kingdom swarmeth, might be from time to time supplied for a small consideration; it would certainly giue great encouragement to the poore to labour, it would set on worke many fatherlesse children that are ready to sterue, it would benefit the Common-wealth by their labours, and it would be an acceptable worke to Almighty God, so to supply their wants, and not to suffer the faces of the poore to be ground by the extorsion of any. And I am perswaded, that euery good man would be willing, either to giue, or to lend, toward the raising of a stocke of Money for this purpose. For Litigious suits of Law, if men bestowed halfe that study and cost in trade, which now adaies is spent in temerous and rash suits of Law; surely the benefite that thence would arise to the Common-wealth, would equall or exceede in value, that which is spent in Law, which I thinke cannot be valued. The Remedy requireth great consideration, for such is the Cause. That the suites of Law in this Kingdome are now infinitely increast,Remedies for ligitious suits of Law. to that they were in elder times, I thinke it is out of question: The Quaere is about the cause thereof. Litigious suits of Law, may seeme anciently to haue beene restrained, either by Sureties, or Fines, or both. Of the Former there is yet a defaced print in the Commom-Pledges of Doe and Roe. Which were of old the names of true and reall sureties, but are now become formall only, and faigned names of Course and Solemnity. Whence also it is, that in stead of Reall sureties in London, faigned sureties are deuised from the dwelling of the party Plaintife: As for example: if the plaintife dwell in Cheape-side: they enter for his Sureties vpon the Record of Court, Iohn Cheape, and Richard Side. And in like manner wheresoeuer else the Plaintife dwelleth. Of the Latter, to wit of Fines, the vse of them both in the Kings Bench, & Common-Pleas, continueth vnto this day. In the Kings Bench the Fines are not so ancient, for those began in the 8. yeare of HIS Maiesties Happy raigne ouer this Kingdome: neither are they of like value to those of the Common-Pleas. Whereof HIS Maiestie made then a Graunt to certaine Patentees for terme of yeares. But in the Common-Pleas, the Fines vpon Originall-Writs, are held by the learned in the Law, to bee as ancient as the Common-Law it selfe. Now whether the vse of Sureties, or the Institution of Fines, were inuented for the restraint of Ligitious suits of Law: or the Disuse and inequality of them, tendeth to the encrease thereof; I humbly leaue that, to the wisedome and iudgement of the Reuerend Iudges, and others learned in the Law: least I seeme 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Neuerthelesse there seemes to me, to be a print of them, in the Lawes and Customes of Forreine Nations. For which, if you please, let vs heare MAIMON a great RABBI. HEBRAEI,〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 Maimon. lib. 3. litigiosum hominum genus, saith he, duplum rependere coegerunt, qui debitum scienter denegaret. Bodin. de Rep. lib. 6. Also FESTVS POMPEIVS, cited by BODIN. Romani decimam partem eius rei, quae in controuersiam veniret in priuatis, aut qui tam in publicis iudicijs, imperabant. Ac licet Romani in Republica libera, Vectigalia & tributa imperare sibi difficilimè paterentur, Vectigalia tamen Iudiciaria patienter tulerunt. In Part. iuris. De Actionib.Also HOTTOMAN. Romani Sacramentum constituerunt, certam viz. pecuniae summam, vt qui iudicio vicisset, suum sacramentū auferret, victi autē ad aerarium rediret. De Rep. lib. 6. And lastly BODIN. Carolus nonus Vectigal Iudiciarium ad cohibendam litigatorum hominum indomitam atque effraenatam licentiam imperauit. Quo vix vllum afflictis aerarij opibus vtilius, & Galliae Imperio litium innumerabili multitudine oppresso, splendidius cogitari poterat. There is also in France an excellent restraint of Law suits, by a Law Merchant, established in Roan, Lions, and Tholosa: whereby the other higher Courts of Iustice are eased of those Knotty questions that often fall out in matters of Commerce, which are harder to bee determined by the learned in the Law, and not so hard for Merchants and men of Trade. Like to which, is that of the Court of Conscience, and the office for Pollicies of Assurance in London. The one granted by an Act of Parliament, in the 3. yeare of HIS Maiesties happy Raigne, the other by the Statute of 43. Eliz. And both are executed by Merchants and men of Trade: though in the latter the Statute ioineth certaine Ciuill and Common Lawyers with them in Commission, to assist them when there is cause: because such Assurances are grounded on the Ciuill Law. By which meanes HIS Maiesties other Courts of Iustice are eased of the multiplicitie of Questions that might arise by suits of Law of this kinde. And thus hauing been bold to make this short Relation of my poore obseruation herein, I most humbly submit this Remedy to the High wisedome of HIS Maiestie, to dispose thereof in such Manner and Measure, as the Nature and Number of the suits of Law, at this day in this Kingdome doe require. In the restraint whereof, HIS Maiestie shall haue great Honour: HIS Kingdome Peace: the Iudges Ease: the Subiects Quietnesse, and the Common-wealth increase of Trade. Remedies for Ordinance.The Trades considered Apart, I reduced to such, as tend to the Fortification of the Kingdome, or Maintenance of Trade. The former I noted to be Ordinance or Munition. In which case the Philosopher giueth good Counsell,Bias: 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Sic amandum tanquam sis osurus, sic oportet odisse tanquam sis amaturus. The latter I reduced to Fishing and Clothing, The Remedy for Fishing. as the Nurseries of Trade. For the Fishing, the infinite treasure that Strangers search out of our Seas, the variety of Trade that thereby they purchase, the multitude of Mariners they breed, the Fleets of Shipping they maintaine,Quae non pr• sunt singula, multa invant, De remed. me thinkes should euery of them apart, or all of them together, be vnto vs as so many prouocations to rouze vs vp to the exercise thereof: Whereby HIS Maiestie might receiue such a Tolle or Custome of them, as other Princes doe in like case, and be once againe Lord and Master of the Seas, for all the dispute of the Author of Mare liberum: and the Natiue subiect encouraged by some Immunity or Priuiledge, to lay hold on that benefit, which God and Nature hath brought home to our doores. For the Clothing, that also is a point of State and great consequence. The Causes of the decay whereof, I obserued to bee either Domestique or Forreine. The Domestique some Past, some Present. In which former, it may perhaps seeme strange, to speake of a Remedy for a thing past. Wherein the best Remedy I can thinke of, is, to be warned by those harmes, not to disturbe or distract Trade vpon any suggestion, though neuer so specious. It is a safe rule, that in Rebus nouis constituendis euidens esse debet vtilitas. And in Proiects, though they promise much, yet the vtility is commonly Contingent, which may be, or may not be. But in the mutation of the naturall course of Trade, there ought to be Perspicuity and Apparency of Euident Vtility: Else a Breach may be sooner made in Trade then can be repaired: and the Current once diuerted, will hardly bee reuolued, into it genuine Source and Course againe. The present Domestique Causes of the Decay of Clothing, I considered in the Trade vnder the Clothier, or vnder the Merchant. Vnder the Clothier, I noted the Ill making and False sealing of Cloth: and both through the Non-execution of the Statute of 4. of the KING. The abuse wherof is growne to be very great, and the reformation hath beene by HIS Maiesties Proclamations and otherwise, so much and so oft attempted of late yeares, and nothing therein effected, that it seemeth a very difficult matter to reforme the same. Neuerthelesse if it may please HIS Maiestie, The Remedy for Clothing. to commit the care of the execution of the Statute, to some of the Principall Cities and Townes in the Clothing Counties,The Remedy for Clothing. where Broad Clothes, Kersies, and Perpetuanoes are made; and to make them the Ouerseers mentioned in the Statute, instead of those ignorant and negligent Searchers, with reasonable allowance for their paines; I am confident it would proue a singuler Remedy. For we haue not only the example of the Low Countries, Examples of Worcester, Colchester, and Canterbury. where this course is taken, but also here with vs: as Worcester for that sort of Clothes, Colchester for Bayes, and Canterbury for Sayes. In all which places the former abuses are remoued by this means; and the Clothes, and Bayes, and Manufactures of those Cities, triumph in great credit and estimation. Which execution of the saide Statute, is the rather to be committed to the care and charge of the principall Cities and Townes in the Clothing Counties; because by ancient Statutes not repealed,4. &, 5. P. & M. 5. all Clothes and Kersies ought to bee brought to the next City, Borough, or Towne Corporate, to be sealed, before they be put to sale. And if such Clothes so sealed, proue defectiue, that Corporation or Towneship that so hath sealed them, shall forfeit the whole value thereof. The reformation of which abuse will redound to the benefit of the Clothier, as well as the Merchant. For none is more hurt with false Cloth, then that Clothier which maketh true Cloth: because his markets are alwayes hurt by the cheapnesse that false Cloth may be afforded at. Therefore to facilitate this Remedy, I haue made a collection of all the principall Cities and Townes in the Clothing Counties for this purpose, as by a list thereof, fixed to the end of this discourse may appeare, that so a worke of this nature be no longer deferred, wherein the Honour of the KING, and the Benefit of the Publique are so much inuolued. A Remedy for the exportation of Wools.Vnder the Merchant I obserued the Cloth-Trade to suffer at Home and Abroad: At Home, either by exporting the Materials of Clothing, or by Ore-lading the Cloth-Trade with charge. The Remedy in the former, were to lay a restraint of exportation of Wools and Wool-fels out of Ireland, and to quicken the execution of the Statute for that purpose in England, by encouraging the discouerers of such abuses. The latter is the Sur-charging of the Cloth Trade, either generally or specially: this last, in the Impositions and Imprest monies imposed by the Merchant Aduenturers: which as it is a charge laid vpon the Drapery of the Kingdome, I conceiue, vnder fauour, is a matter that trencheth into the Supreme power and dignity of the KING, and is peculiar to HIM alone. And if for Gouernment, or other iust causes in Societies and Corporations, there be a necessity of paying of debts, or defraying of necessary charge;A Remedy for the charge vpon the Cloth. I should thinke it better policy to spare the Cloth, and other the Natiue Commodities of the Kingdom, and to implore HIS Maiesties fauour, to leuy such charge vpon the Forreine Commodities: according to the Counsell of Stephanus, Stephan lib. Senten. Si Vectigal nouum euitari non potest, tunc onerentur merces perigrinae, quae ad luxum magis quàm ad necessitatem faciunt. And this I conceiue would be a good remedy for easing the Cloth Trade of the present charge vnder the Merchants: which would also bee a meanes for paying of their debts, with a little more length of time, and a great deale of encouragement, both to Clothiers and Merchants in the Cloth Trade. And Abroad, if it appeare vpon examination, that the Residence of the Merchant Aduenturers at Delft in Holland be inconuenient for the Trade: As HIS Maiestie was graciously pleased to giue them that liberty for a tryall, so it may please HIS Maiestie to dispose thereof, in some more fit place for their's and the Publique good. The Forreine Causes of the Decay of the Drapery, I noted to bee Generall, as the Warres; or Speciall, as the great Imposition in Holland. The one is the worke of God, the other of the KING, to remoue the same. To whom I recommend them both. A Remedy for Monopolies and too strict Trade.And thus farre for the Remedies in the Matter of Trade, considered in Money and Merchandize: the Forme followeth in Gouerned and Vngouerned Trade. In the Former I obserued a too strict, and in the latter a too loose forme of Trade. The Remedy in the One, if it seeme good to the high wisedome of HIS Maiestie, may be Priuatiue, in racing and rooting out the name and vse of Monopolies from amongst this Nation, as HIS Maiestie hath royally begun in that HIS Gracious Proclamation before mentioned. And to free and open the course of Trade, where now it is vnequally stopt, to the encouragement of the subiects, and the benefit of the Publique. In the other Positiue, by disposing the Trades of HIS Maiesties subiects that are now distracted; into Order and Gouernment. A Remedy for too loose Trade. Whereof none hath more need, as hath been shewed, then those that Trade into the Dominions of the King of Spaine. Whose Trade the rather calleth for redresse, because it exporteth Cloth and other the Manufactures of the Kingdome, and importeth Treasure, the life of Trade: In both which there is now a marueilous great defect, and Trade in all mens hands become so poore and leane, that it doth scarce, haerere ossibus. For where Trade is disordred, and the Traders vngouerned, there they are like a house deuided, which cannot long subsist: according to that of the Orator,Cic. de Legib. Nec domus vlla, nec Ciuitas, nec Societas, nec Gens, nec hominum vniuersum genus stare, nec rerum natura omnis, nec sine imperio mundus ipse potest.