



THE THEATER OF HONOR AND KNIGHT-HOOD.

CHAP. I. Of Armes and Blazons, and their Antiquity.
THE Romaines were wont to acknowledge for Noblemen (whom properly they termed Patricians) such as their Fathers and Grandfathers had beene Senators or Knights. Thereby to learne and instruct vs, that there are two meanes, whereby to atchieue and conserue the Title of Nobility: namely, Armes, and Letters or Learning.Noblemen by Armes, and likewise by Learning. And from these two professions, are come the titles of Excellence, and Honor of Armes, and Knights of Learning, both in the auncient Romane right, and our owne Annales.
For, like as they which managed Armes for seruice of the Prince, did beare their titles of Honour, as Counts, Marquesses, and Dukes, for the Gouernment of Bayliwickes, places on the Frontiers, and intire Prouinces: So in the same manner, such as for their ability and capacitie in Learning, were called to the Princes seruice, and so had continued for the space of two and twenty yeares, in action of the same exercise; such a one obtained the title of Count Palatine, or Count of Learning, and ware the Pearled Circle or Collar, and Guilt spurs. According to the Pragmaticall sanction of the Emperor Theodosius the yonger, the 1.Lib. de profess. Code Theod. de Professoribus, at the Code Theodosian, dated the Ides of March, in the yeare of Grace, foure hundred, twenty six, and the nineteenth of his reigne.
Now, although that Nobility alone, is so properly called onely by Vertue, according to the truest opinion,
Nobilitas sola est, atque vnica virtus;
And that the Title of Noble doth not appertaine iustly, but to him that hath walked ^n the pathes of vertue, making himselfe to be famous by his owne industry, according ^o the remarkeable tract of the Amorous Poet,
Nam Genus and Proauos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,Vix ea nostra voco:
Yet notwithstanding, such is the case, that vse or custome hath so much preuailed, that ^ow we call them Noblemen, as are issued or descended from Father and Grandfather, by one of the two forenamed meanes, or else by both of them together. Howbeit,More Honour for a man to be the first, then last of his race. it ^s much more honorable to be (by one of those means) rather the First, then the last of his Race. As the Orator answered them, who were Noblemen by extraction, but Yeomen or Plebeyans by their depraued liues. Such a one was called a Gentleman of the ^irst Tappe (whose Lance stood at the Hay-stack) in meere contempt.
Ego caeteris meis maioribus virtute mea praluxi.
And ordinarily it commeth so to passe, that the Bramble is a Queene, and the Hysope commandeth the Cedars of Libanus. So the Scripture informeth vs, as much to say, ^hat in the Degree of Nobility, the last go before the first.
Descendunt statua.
It is Vertue alone, which distinguisheth men one from another,Vertue onely maketh men Noble. and the glorie and honour acquired by our Ancestors, noted in Histories and Authenticke Marbles: but

lost, or rather growne rustie by our negligence, through defect of imitating their Vertues, because
Nothing heere beneath is constant,For all things change in an instant:Vnder the circle of the Moone.One hundred yeares a Banner-Bearer,Another hundred yeeres a Barrow-driuer.
So saith the Ancient French Prouerbe, grounded vpon truth it selfe.
All is subiect to the Wheele of Time.Monimenta fatiscunt,Mors etiam saxis, nominibusque venit.
To serue as the burthen of the song, and for a Lesson (a thousand times repeated) to the Prince and Ploughman, to the Gentleman and peasant.
Nobilitas sola est, atque vnica Virtus.
And this degree of Nobilitie, atcheeued by vertue onely, doth both acknowledge and distinguish it selfe by Armes, giuen (as a recompence thereof) by the Prince onely, and Blazoned (according to the naturall disposition and courage of the person ennobled) by the King of Armes, to whom the doing thereof onely belongeth, answerable to the rules and precepts of the Noble Art of Painting.
The Orders of Knighthood from Antiquity.For this cause it is, that by the Ordinances made from all Antiquity, concerning the Orders of Knight-hood; this Article is alwayes the first. That the parties named to enter the Order of Knighthood, must stand bound by Letters, Titles, Partages, Foundation: and other Acts Publique and Authenticke: whether they be Gentlemen of three Paternall descents or races: And whether the Armes which they beare, haue bene borne by their Fathers, Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers. This Ordenance (practised in all times) shall serue vs as the subiect, for this our discourse of Armes.
Antiquitie of Armes and Blazons.From the Creation of the world (which was the first Age) Armes and Blazons haue bin in vse. We will verifie this vndoubted Maxime, by the particularities of each Nation and Prouince, and from Age to Age.
The learned Rabbines do teach vs, that before the Flood, the children of Seth, sonne to the sole Monarch of the world the Patriarch Adam, seeing that they who were descended of Caine, addicted themselues to all wickednesse, which was Idolatry, forgetting the worship of one onely God, Creator of Heauen and Earth: they restrained their Families within the tearmes of dutie, and perseuerance in the feare of God. And the same was continued so still by Enos the sonne of Seth, famous in the Sacred Historie for his deuotion. For this cause, the children of Caine were called the sonnes of Men and Gyants: And the other baptized with the name of Angelles, Filij Dei and Angeli qui coeperunt orare in nomine Domini: As in Gen. 4, 26.Genesis 4, 26.
These men, to continue their Families in the feare of God, and to withdraw the children of Caine from their Idolatry, yea, to leade and guide them (by the hand as it were) to the worship and knowledge of the Almighty: They made vse to themselues of Symboles,visible things instructed the knowledge of them inuisible. and of Hieroglyphickes, and by the figures of Animals, Simples, brute beastes, and other visible things, which fall vnder the sense, are seene, and touched, both with the finger and the eye, they drew them by degrees to those things which were inuisible. For there is not any man, how rusticke or grosse conceited soeuer he be, who both seeing and hearing the young birds at the breake of day, to warble (by way of thankesgiuing) their dumbe praises and prayers: Also the An Hearbe hauing but one leafe. Helioselinum and the A stone, encreasing and decreasing as the Moone doeth. Selenitis, moouing and turning themselues, to regard and follow the motion of the Sun and Moone, with a very sweete and pleasing murmure: but he must needs confesse, that these second causes are agitated and moued to do thus, by a primary and first cause, that is to say, by one onely God, the Author of all these meruailes. The world being a booke laid open, wherein may be read (both in great and lesser Letters) the admirable effects of his Almighty power.
The selfesame exercise was (after the Flood) reduced into practise, by the good Patriarches Sem and Iaphet, to turne away the children of detested Caine from their depraued liues,The Arke an instructer to knowe the wor^ds Creator. plunged euen in the gulfe and depth of all Idolatrie. For, by the Arke or ship made by Noah the Patriarch, they enstructed them to obserue the diuine prouidence, of the conseruator of the whole vniuerse, who ruled and gouerned all things therein.
By the representation of a thicke spreading Forrest, they vnderstood Nature, termed ^y the Greekes Hyle, and thereby also receiued intelligence, that as from forth such a ^orrest, the matter is taken, which serueth for the structure of many buildings:How Nature was vnderstood. euen (...) Nature her selfe serued as a Nurserie or fruitfull Orchard, for the generating and yeel^ing all things whatsoeuer. One of which meanes, our great God made vse of, for the ^roducting of Elementarie bodies.
The selfesame diuine Prouidence was likewise represented, by the painting of a ^cepter, and by one Eye figured thereon: in regard that God seeth all, ruleth all, and ^irecteth all, continuing alwayes right, that is to say, exempt, at libertie, and free from ^l humane passions and changes.
From notion and knowledge of the Diuinitie, they went on still, and descended to ^nferiour causes, which we call Seconds, to induce their Families, to shun, detest,Knowledge of second and inferiour causes, and what they vnderstood by them. and ^bhorre vice, for the embracing of Vertue, and addicting themselues to all good things. ^y Simples, Hearbes and Rootes, they gaue instruction (euen as if it were by tablature) ^o gouerne themselues morally, and the like by other Creatures.
By the Oxe and the Poppie, they designed Fertility: By the Pomgranate, the sociable and coniugall communitie of Man and Wife: By the Oliue, Peace and Tranquility: As also their contraries, by the figure of a Horse, the Symbole of warre, in regard that
Bello armantur Equi, Bellumhaec armenta minantur.
By the Iuy and the Laurell, euermore beautified with flourishing leaues, they vnderstood the immortall memorie and faire fruits of Vertue: As by the Cypresse they acknowledged Death and Obliuion. By the Storke they signified Honour, Loue and dutie of Children to their parents. By the Turtle Doue they meant Chastity: As by the Goate, Lust and Impudicity. The Lyon, power and Command: The Sun, the Yeare: The Moone, the Moneth: The Starres, Night: the Fire, Day: and other such like Figures, as they are made remarkeable by E. Clemens, and S. Cyrille both Alexandrians.Clemens, Alexandrinus, and 8. Cyrill. And according to their testimony, we are taught, that the great Patriarks of the ancient Law, Moyses, Salomon, and others, made vse of these Figures, to giue knowledge (by them) of second causes: by notion whereof, we are exalted to penetrate the heauens, for comming to that of the Diuine Essence.
Zonarus, a Greeke Authour, in the first booke of his Annales, and the first Chapter,Zonar. in Annal. Lib. 1. ca. ^ hath remarkeably set downe (following the doctrine of the Rabbines) that the descendants of Noah being multiplyed, and (by consequent) diuided into Families and Tribes: were knowne by their Armes, and name of the Prince from whom they descended. The same Rabbines say, that the Patriarch Noah gaue for Armes the Lyon (the Symbole of Command and Royaltie) to his eldest sonne Sem, and to Iaphet the youngest,Armes giuen by Noah to his sonnes Sem and Iaphet. whose linage was to acquire the title and right of Primogeniture or eldershippe, aboue his elder brother, and to command ouer the children of Cham,Gen. 9, 26, 27. and all the Nations of the earth. According to the prophesie and blessing of the holy Patriarke in Genesis the ninth Chapter. Dilatat Deus Iaphet, and habitet in tabernaculis Sem fitque Chanaam seruus ^ius. Sem and Iaphet bare then for Armes, L'Escu d'azur vne Lyon rampant d'Or.
That in their imitation, Cham (and his sonne Chanaan, plunged in, and addicted to all wickednesse) tooke for his Armes: L'Escu de Synople vne Leopard Argente, tauele and mouchete de Sable.
That Ismael the sonne of Hagar the seruant of Abraham, tooke the same Armes:The Armes of Cham and his race. Auec la leurre verde en ses accousirements. Which also was held by his descendants, with the naturall fiercenesse and crueltie of the Leopard.
The selfesame Rabbines, expounding the nine and fortie Chapter of Genesis,Gen. 49, 8, 9. where the Patriarke Iaacob lying on the bed of death, gaue his blessing to the two Children, Heads and Princes of the twelue Tribes, and linages of Israel. There (they say) that he gaue them for Armes and deuises, that which the naturall inclination of each person, seemed best to signifie, Armes which their children and descendants retained and kept carefully. As much they say vpon Exodus and Deuteronomy, and that Moyses willing to enter the promised land of Canaan, which God had giuen them to conquer, and to demand backe from the descendants of Cham* because the possessors held it by no valuable title, Tanquam ab i^i^stis possessoribus: That he caused the children of Israel to assemble by Tribes, Bands, Ensignes, and Banners, which hee diuided into foure Battalions,

or foure Corps (...) Armes.
The 4 battalions of the tribes of IsraelThe Banner of the Tribe of Iuda, which marched in the head of the Hoast, and wa^ the Collonell; had vnder it the Tribes of Isachar and Zabulon, holding to the East p^* The hoast of Reuben encamped themselues South, being followed by the Tribes of ^meon and Gad. Towards the West, marched those of Ephraim, with the Tribes of Mnasses and Beniamin, the very least of all. And to the North, the Tribes of Da^, (...) and Nepthaly. In the midst of these foure Battallions, marched the Priests and Leuites, bearing the Arke of the Couenant, and the Sacred vessels.
Each of these foure heads, or principall Conducters, Iuda, Ruben, Ephraim, and (...) had a Colonell before his hoast and Battalion. The Colonell of the whole A^ was that of Iuda: Being D'Azur (c'est Bleu Celeste) au Lyon rampant d'Or.
That of Ruben, De gueulles on Belic (c'est la couleur Rouge) a l'Homme arme d' Argon^.
The Colonels of the tribes describd with their Armes and Colours, the 4. cheefe Leaders.Ephraim had his De Sable (c'est Noir) au Boeuf passant accornue d'Or.
And Danne, hee likewise, Portoit Synople (c'est Verd) au Serpent Dragonn^ d'Argent.
In Armes, there are no more then two Mettalles, Or and Argent, Gold and Siluer: And foure Colours, Azure, Gueulles, Synople and Sable, Blew, Red, Greene, and Blacke. Mettall vpon Mettall, and Colour vpon Colour, are false Armes, if they be not quartered: Otherwise, they are subiect to question, and are good, beeing priuiledged by Princes and Soueraigne Lordes, and giuen vnto particular men by graunt. If not, they are false, and deserue not the name of Armes, but of fooleries, and foppish deuises.
The other eight Tribes had their Standards, each answereable to the colour of his Colonell, but with different charge, agreeable to their greatnesse.

The standards of the other 8. tribes, and theyr Armes.
Isachar portoit d' Azur a l'Asne passant d' Argent.

And Zabulon, D' Azur au Nauire arme and frette d' Argent.
They which were of Rubens Hoast, Simeon portoit de Gueulles, a deux Espees d' Argent en Sautour.
And Gad gaue likewise, De Gueulles a l'Espee d' Argent, mise en Pal, la point enchant.
Vnder Ephraim was Manasses, Qui portoit de Sable au Scepter Couronne d Or: Because hee was the eldest sonne of the Patriarch Ioseph, and hee that had the first lotte in the Land of Promise. To him appertained the Royaltie and the Priesthood* whereof he was despoyled, because he had not honoured his father.

Beniamin, portoit de Sable au Loup passant d'Argent.

Vnder the Tribe of Dan, was that of Aser: Qui portoit de Synople seme d'Espics de Ble^ d'Or.
And that of Nepthali, De Synople au Cerf somme d'Or.
This is thus remarked by the Rabbines, in the place before alledged, and on the second Chapter of the booke of Numbers, and the first and second Verses. Loquutus est Dominus ^um Mose and Aarone dicens, Singuli iuxta VEXILLVM suum, and sub SIGNIS domus Patrum suorum, castra ponant filij Israel, e Regione, and in circuitu Tabernacu^ foederis castra pona^t. The Lord spake to Moses and Aaron, saying, Euery man of the Children of Israel; shall campe by his Standard, and vnder the Ensigne of their fathers house: farre off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall they pitch. Which passage they interprete by the nine and fortieth Chapter of Genesis, and by the ^ick plate of their High Priest, garnished with twelue precious stones, and on each of them was engrauen the names, and the Armes of the Tribes of Israel.
They adde beside, that Iosuah hauing caused the children of Israel, to passe ouer the Flood-Iordane dry foote, he procured euery one of them, to place a great Stone vpon the banke of the sayde Flood, at the highest boundes thereof, and on each of them, was earned the Names and Armes of the twelue Tribes, to serue as a signale or memorie vnto posteritie,The 12 stones on the bankes of Iordan, bearing the names and Armes of the Tribes. of that myraculous passage. And those twelue Stones, about the time when our Sauiour Christ conuersed among men, serued as titles and proofes of Nobility among the Iewes, to declare their extraction.
Saint Iohn, speaketh of the same Stones, reprehending the peoples dissolute and depraued liues; in the third Chapter of Saint Mathewes Gospell, Polens est Deu^ de l^dictus ^st^ suscitare Abraha: God is able, euen of these stones, to rayse vp children to Abraham.
Saul in like manner, appointed to bee King ouer the Children of Israel, tooke for the Armes of his kingdome, the Ensigne Colonell of the Tribe of Beniamin, whereof ^he was descended. And Dauid, being called in his place (as one worthier then hee) tooke that of the Tribe of Iuda, whereunto the Patriarch Iaacob,Dauid had the Armes of the Tribe of Iuda. had transferred the right of Elder-shippe, and the appurtenances of Royaltie and the Priesthoode, as it is saide in the nine and fortieth chapter of Genesis, the eight and nine verses. Iuda te laudabunt fratres tui, manus tua in ceruicibus inimicorum tuorum, adorabunt te filij Patris tui. Thou Iuda, thy Brethren shall praise thee, thine hand shall bee in the necke of thine enemies, thy fathers sonnes shall bow downe vnto thee.
The same Patriarke,Iudaes Armes blazoned by his Father. blazoning the Armes of his sonne Iuda (which the Rabbines deuise to bee D'Azur au Lyon rampant d'Or) saide: Iuda, requiescens accubuisti vt Leo, quis suscitabit eum? He shall couch downe as a Lyon, and as a Lyonnesse: who shall stirre him vp? Dauid taking the Lyon for his Armes, caused it to bee engrauen in his Signet or Seale Royall, yea, and on his monies, which helde in currant course, vntill the declination of the Iewish Estate, according as it is set downe by Rabbi Abraham, in his historicall Cabala.
These Armes were conserued by the great King Salomon, who blazoning on them in the thirtie Chapter of his Prouerbes, saith: That amongest all the Creatures on earth, there are three which doe exceede and surpasse the rest. Also hee compareth them to Princes, as thus: Tria sunt quae bene gradiuntur,Pr. 30, 30, 31. and quartum quod incidet foeliciter. Leo fortissimus bestiarum ad nullius Pauebit occursum. Gallus succinctus lumbos, and Aries; Nec est Rex qui resistat ei. The Lyon, King of Beasts, hath alwayes beene the Symbole of Royaltie, for his Generositie, conioyned with his clemencie, neuer running on any Beast which is humble to him. In like manner, in a good Prince:
-- Hae illi erunt artes,Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos.
In the verie height of his anger, hee qualifieth it of himselfe, so soone as a Lambe is present before him, the Symbole of mildenesse and clemencie. For this cause it was, that the Diuine Poet Du Bartas, made the Lyon a Schoolemaster to Princes,The Lyon a Schoolmaster to Princes. thus:
You Kings whose hands are arm'd with Iustice sword,Pardon the subiect, to Rebelles death afford.The generous Lyons vertue imitate,Who neuer frownes vpon a Soldier prostrate.
The Assyrians (as the same Rabbines affirme) being so called of Assur son to Belus, who conquered Chaldea (afterward named Assyria) from the descendants of Nemrod, the sonne of Chanaan; tooke for the Armes of their Monarchie,The Armes of the Assyrians Monarchie. L'Estendard verd au Belier d'Argent. Their money, stamped with a Ramme, had course throughout all the East, noted in the Scripture, in Genesis the three and thirtie Chapter, the nineteenth verse, and in the seuenth of the Actes of the Apostles, the sixteenth verse. In memorie of this Belus, represented by a Ramme, the Assyrians, Aegyptians, and other people of the East, did so reuerence that creature, as they durst not eate thereof. So we read in Genesis the sixt, the one and twenty verse, and the three and fortieth Chapter, the fiue and twentieth verse.
The same Assyrians, first Authors of Idolatrie, adored their Belus, whom they reputed for a God; and did as much to their Queene Semiramis, wife to Ninus, called ^elochus, placing her among the number of their Gods, charging their Standards and Banners (signed with the Leopard and Ramme) D'vne Colombe Argentee aux aisles esten^ues sur le drappean Iaune. And the selfe-same Colombe releuee d'Argent sur vne Escu de ^in Or, was the first Armes for search and enquirie after. Semiramis in the Assyrian language, signifieth a Fowle or Bird, which serued as an apt subiect to those idolatrous people, to ranke their Queene in number of their Gods, and to say, that after hir death ^he tooke her flight vp to heauen, with her husband Ninus. According as it is obserued by Diodoru^ Siculu^, in the third booke of his Annales, and the fift Chapter.Diod. Sicul. in Annal. l. 3. c. ^
Now although this might be a lying and false discourse: yet so it is, that the Holie Scripture remarketh and designeth the Assyrians by this Doue, as it doth the Aegyptians by the Vulture.The Standard of the Aegyptians. For, the Aegyptians Portoient l'Estendard Iaune a l'Espreuier and Va^tour de Sable. It was also engrauen in the Seale Royall of Pharaoh, giuen to the Patriarch Ioseph. So say the Rabbines, vpon the one and forty Chapter of Genesis.
The Aegyptians called the Vulture a Bird, without any addition, as for Antonomasi^ and excellence: Because that among all the Fowles and Birds of prey, she is the most iust,Or* Apel. in Tract. Sac. Egypt. Notis. imparting equally the prey, to the Fowles which follow her: so saith Orus Apollo in his Treatise De sacris Aegyptiorum notis: Plutarch termeth this Fowle an Innocent, because (saith he) it freeth a man from being offended by other creatures. Moreouer, it is the most full of pitty to her young ones, of all other Fowles that are. For, in the space of sixe and twenty dayes, abiding with them for their nourishing, she neuer leaueth them:A Fowle more kinde to her broode, then many Nurses to their Children. but if she want sustenance for them, she launceth her thigh with her beak, and draweth thence blood for their food and nourishment. In like manner, this Bird was vsed as the Symbole of Iustice and Piety, and many times of Royalty: to serue as a lesson or Lecture to Princes and Monarches, for being clement and kinde Fathers to their Subiects. So I say then, that the sacred Scriptures vnderstoode the Assyrians by the Doue, and the Aegyptians by the Vulture.
The Prophet Ieremie in his twenty fiue chapter,Ie^. 25, 38. verse thirty eight, threatning the Iewish people with the comming of Nabuchodonosor, saith, Dereliquit quasi Leo vmbraculum suum, quia facta est terra eorum in desolationem, a facie irae Columbe, and a facie ira furoris eius. He hath forsaken his couert as the Lyon, for their land is desolate, because of the fiercenesse of the Oppressour, and because of his fierce anger. Nabuchodonosor was King of the Assyrians, as it is euident in Daniel, and the Kings of Iuda and of Israel, led captiue into Babylon, are remarked by the Lyon, Dereliquit Leo sub vmbraculum suum; Because that the Kings of the twelue Tribes (diuided in their Kingdomes) bare the like Armes as King Dauid had taken and appointed.
Oze^ 11.11.The Prophet Ozea, speaking of the Assyrians, ioyned with the Aegyptians against the Iewish people, to bring them into seruitude and slauery, saith: Auolabunt quasi Auis ex Aegypto (by the Bird he meaneth the Vulture) et quasi Columba de terra Assyrioru^. They shall tremble like a Bird out of Aegypt, and as a Doue out of the Land of Assyria. And the same Rabbines interprete literally this Versicle of Dauid, Psalme 68.Psal. 68, 13. Sidormiatis inter medios cleros, pennae Columbae Deargento^ae and posteriora dorsi eius in palleri Auri. Though you haue lyen among the pots, you shall be as the wings of a Doue couered with siluer, and her feathers with yellow gold. Concerning the ouerthrowe of Senacherib King of the Assyrians,4 Reg. 19, 35 and of his Army, wherein the Angel of God slew in one night, an hundred fourescore and six thousand men, as it is in the fourth booke of the Kings.
The Banner and Armes of the Persians.The Persians carried a white Banner, Chargee d'vne Aigle d' Or Esploye and Couronne, which was their principall Ensigne, as it is written by Zonaras, in his first Booke, and nineteene Chapter. And according to Xenophon, in the expedition and institution of Cyrus, the seuenth booke. Erat ei signum aurea Aquila in longa hasta suspensa, and nunc etiam id insigne Persarum Regibus manet. And the Prophet Ozea in his eight Chapter. Ecce sicut Aquila, quae pernicitur volat, ascendet Rex cum copijs suis, and Castrametabitur contra S^crosanctum Templum Domini: Speaking of Nabuzaradan, Lieutenant Generall to the king of Persia (whom the holy Scripture vnderstandeth by the name of King, without addition) which ruined the Temple of God, the Pallace Royall, and the principall houses of Ierusalem into ashes: As it is written in the fourth Booke of the Kings, the last chapter.^. Reg. 25, 9. As yet they haue the Sagittarie, as much to say, as halfe a Horse, and halfe a man, drawing a Bowe to let flye an Arrow. This Sagittarie was the stampe of their Coyne, whereon Agesilaus alluding, complaineth in Plutarch, to haue beene chased from the conquest of Asia,Pieces of gold called Daricks the Coyne of Persia. by thirty thousand Archers to the King of Persia: that is to say, by thirtie thousand pieces of Gold, called Darickes, because on the one side they had Darius, and the Sagittarie on the other.
Alexander the Great, hauing transferred the Monarchie of the Medes and Persians to the Greekes, retained still the white Banner, the colour and Liuerie to the Kings of Persia (so saith Plutarch, in the life of Artaxerxes) which they had borrowed from them of Iuda and Israel,Plut. ^n vit. Artaxerxes. who went cloathed in White, according to the custome of great

King Salomon, who shewing himselfe publiquely, vsed to weare a long white Robe: as is written by Iosephus, in the eight Booke of his Iewish Antiquities,Ioseph. in Aut. Iudaic. l. 8. c. 2 the second Chap^er.
So the most Christian Kings of France, haue retained for their Colonell the colour White, bearing the Crosse and Bauldricke or Scarfe White, whereby the French are ^nowne in battaile from other Nations, that carry them Red, with a Crosse disguised ^n Saultour, vnfitly applyed to Saint Andrew, whose Crosse is to bee seene at Saint Victor of Marseilles, wholly resembling those whereon our Sauiour suffered, Saint Peter, and the other Apostles Martyrs.
Alexander retaining the White Liuerie, Symbole of Royaltie,The Armes of Alexander the Great. and colour of the Diademe, tooke the Lyon rampant Gueulles for his Armes, forsaking the Kingly Eagle: and caused it to be engrauen in his Seale Royall. An Armes, which (in his memorie) was borne by his successors, Kings of the Parthians, Medes, Aegyptians, and other Easterne Princes. Plutarch in the life of this Monarch writeth,Plutarc. in vit. Alexand. that he tooke the Lion for his Armes, because his Father Phillip of Macedon, dreamed the first night of his marriage, that he set such a seale on his wife Olympia, as had a Lyon stamped or imprinted on ^it. This dreame might be true, yet it came so to passe neuerthelesse, that (long time before the birth of Alexander the Great, and of Cyrus King of Persia) their Empires had bin prophesied, That of the Persians, by a creature hauing the visage of a man, to demonstrate the clemency of Cyrus: That of the Greekes, by the figure of a Lyon: And that of the Romaines, by the Royall Eagle. According as it is reported by the Prophet Ezechiel in his first Chapter,Ezek. 1, 10. enstructed by a Cherubin, which he called Chobar: Like as the Monarchy of the Assyrians (finished before) had bin represented by an Oxe.
The like was obserued in the Antiquities of young Phillip, King of Macedon, in the bignesse of a peece of three Blancks, or of a Carolus with the sword, where on the one side, was the head of the King with great bushy hayre not well combed: And on the other side, a King sitting in his chaire, leaning on a small Iaueline, and holding a Gripe or Vulture on his left fist, which serued to expresse the Antiquity of Hawking.A note for the Antiquitie of Hawking. Whereby the Rabbines vnderstood that passage in the Prophet Baruch, his third chapter.Bar. 3, 16, 17. Vbi sunt Principes Gentium, and qui dominantur super bestias quae sunt super terram? qui in Auibus Coeli ludunt. Where are the Princes of the Heathen, and such as ruled the beasts vpon the earth? That had their pastime with the Birds of the Ayre. But I thinke rather, that he meant the Bird, sacred among the Aegyptians, whereof we haue spoken before. Other Antiquities are yet also to be seene, and of the like bignesse, which bee of King Perseus, hauing an Eagle on the one side, and on the other a Squire on horseback, which is the Sagittarie. This may seeme to demonstrate, that these Kings (ouer and beside the Lyon) retained both the Eagle and the Sagittarie of the Persians, as wel as the Vulture or Bird of the Aegyptians.
The Romaines tooke for the Armes of their Empire and Monarchy,The Armes of the Romaine Empire. the Royall Eagle, and for their Liuerie the Colour Red, as Purple and Scarlet. Their Colonell and principall Standard, which they called Labarum, was of purple, made square in forme, round about engirt with a frindge of Gold, carried on a Pike: In longa hasta, and of the same fashion as the Banners are in our parish Churches. The Heraldes and Kings of Armes called the Colour Red by foure sundry names; as Cinabre, Belic, Gueulles,The Red Colour had four names. and Rich colour, by reason of his brightnesse. And allowed it not to be carried, but by the Romane Emperors onely, and Caesars destined to the Empire: For others were not permitted to take it, but by their concession and priuiledge.
The Eagle was borne by Numa Pampilius, Seruius Tullus, and other Romaine Kings.Romain Kings carried the Eagle. Succession of times inducted the Minotaur, the Wolfe, the Horse, the Swine or Bore. These foure beasts serued for Ensignes and Standards to the Legions and Cohortes of the Romaines, vntill the time of Caius Marius, who abolished the vse of them altogether, leauing the Eagle alone by it selfe, as is obserued by Pliny, in the tenth Booke of his naturall Historie, and the third Chapter.Plin. in Hist. nat. lib. 10. c. 3 Romanis Legionibus Aquilam Caius Marius in secundo Consolatu suo proprie dicauit. Erat and antea prima, cum quatuor ali^s, Lupi, Minotauri, Equi, Apri, quae singulos Ordines anteibant. Paucis ante Aquila, sola portari in aciem coeperat, relinqua in castris relinquebantur, Marius in totum ea abdicauit.
Iulius Caesar, Augustus, and their descending Emperors, Parterent de Gueulles a l' Aigle d'Or, aux aisles estendues, and a la seule Teste. Constantine the Great, hauing parted in twain

(as it were) the Roman Empire, into that of the East, and that of the West, transpo^ from Rome to Bizantium, although it was the Emperiall Seate: yet he called it Constannople, by his owne name, leauing an Exarc or Vice-Emperour as Lieutenant Generall at Rome, for guard and conseruation of the West. The Romane Eagle was then painted with two heads circled, which some termed Desplayed, and remained in common, as much to say, As Armes to the one and other Empire. Vntill the yeare of Grace, eight hundred and one,King Charlemaigne, crowned Emperor of the West. when King Charlemaigne (hauing by his valour wonne and conquered Italy) was crowned Emperor of the West, and honoured as he was of the Romaines, after the manner of the ancient Emperors. And for a more signale note, he wonne the Empire to the French (with deere expence of their blood) retaining in his Armes the Mettall and Colour of France, D'Azur a l' Aigle a deux Testes Esploye d'Or. A heauy burthen on the stomackes of numberlesse French, how it should bee so then, and Armes remayning for them too of the Empire, so farre as to the house of Saxon in Germany, who carried of their Mettall and Colour, namely, D'Or a l' Aigle Esploye de Sable.
By the example of Princes and Monarches, their subiects and seruants (neerest to their persons) made themselues separate and distinguished from others, by titles of Nobilitie and Armes, which conserued their Families, and makes them to appeare aboue the common people. For, seeing that Vertue and Vice haue concurred from all times, and they do best distinguish their Louers, by contrarie Liueries to them here meant, euen as white from blacker It is no more then reason, that the Noble and Vertuous (by Blazons and Deuises) should be discerned from the vulgar. Moreouer, of those Nobles, the distinction is to be knowne by diuersitie of Armes, according to their inclination, and good or bad breeding. This is that which the Prince of Poets hath learnedly noted, of Noble by Extraction,Of Nobility by discent, vertue, and Learning. Science, and Learning, in his second Royall Boscage.

Celuy qui desiroit de monstrer sa Vertu,
Portoit sur le Harnois dout il estoit vestu
Ou dessus son Bouclier vne Recognissance,
Afin que par la presse on congnust sa Vaillance.
L'vn auoit vn Serpent, l'autre auoit vn Lyon,
Vn Aigle, vn Leopard. Ainsi vn Million
Par les Siccles passez D'Enseignes sont venues,
Que les Races depuis pour marque ont retenues,
Escussons, and Blasons de leurs premiers Ayeulx,
Que la Guerre ennoblit parfaict Victorieux.


He that desires to shew his Vertue cleare,
Beares on the Armour he doth vse to weare,
Or on his Shield, a plaine Recognisance;
That thickest crowdes may know his Valiance.
One beares a Serpent; Other, hath a Lion,
Eagle, or Leopard: And so a million
(From Ages past) of Enseignes haue beene gain'd,
Which (afterward) their Races still retain'd
From their Fore-fathers; Scutcheons and Blazons knowne,
Victoriously by Warre ennobled for their owne.

Then it is a popular errour, to say, that the inuention of Armes, of Blazons and Devises, appeared not vntil within fiue hundred yeeres, and the Voyages to the East, for Conquest of the Holy Land,The vse of Armes, practised at al times, and by people furthest from vs. Religiously attempted by many famous persons: Because (in all times) their vse is made manifest, and practised by Nations, furthest of all other from our knowledge, as the Inhabitants of the Easterne Isles.
Those people, at the Funeralles of their Yngas Kings and great Lords, caused to be born before their bodies, the notes of Honour and the Trophees, which they had wonne and brought from their enemies in warre. Those Honours and Trophees were carried in the saide Funeralles, by Knights most apparant in Valiance and Nobilitie. And to this effect, exactly they kept the practise and vse of Armes and Blazons, conserued to their Families, and carried them to the enterring of their dead. So writeth Iosephus Acosta, in his fifte

Booke of the Naturall historie of the Indiaes, and the eight Chapter.
In the fourth Chapter of the same Booke, we learne by him,The Armes of the Kinges of Peru. that the Kings of Peru caried in Armes, Vne Arc en Ciel* auecaues deux Couleuures estendues aux costes d'iceiuy.
That the Kings of Mexico carried for their Deuise, Vne Main tenant vnepoignee de fle^hes de Rozeaux. In remembrance and memorie of the first King of Mexico, named A^cam apixtli, which signifieth in the Mexicane language, A handfull of Reeds.
That the Citie of Mexico Tenuctitl^n, had for her Armes;The Citties Armes of Mexico. Vne Aigle Royale aux aisles ^sployees, and l^ Teste esseuee regardant, fixement le Soliel, comme pour receuoir sa chalcur, te^ne bel Oyseau de l'vne de ses serres, and de l'autre plante sur vne Tunal, and Pierre rele^^e. Because that in such a posture, this Bird was found, and in the place where the Capitall Citie of Mexico was builded, now named New Spaine: As the said Acosta affirmeth in the same Booke, and the seuenth Chapter.
The Tlaxcal^ns, coniured enemies to them of Mexico, bare in their Standard and Banner, Vne Grue d' Or estendant ses aisles. And this was their Armes, as it is reported in the life of Ferdinando Corteze, who vanquished the Mexicanes, and conquered their chiefe City*In lib. vit. Fer. Cort. Cap. 17. in Nouember, 1519. And the great Standard of the same Mexicanes, when the King himselfe in person marched to the field* Portoit vne Griffon Furieux deschirant, vn Tigre, qu'il tenoit soubs ses serres. A deuise erected ouer the gates of the Palace, belonging to the saide Kings of Mexico.
But what neede is there of crossing ouer so many Seas, for this Antiquitie of Armes, and to go seeke it so farre off? We haue it at our owne doores, in regard that the Auncestors of the Gaules and French, carried for their ancient Deuise, the Ship.The Ancient deuice of the Gaules and French.
Cornelius Tacitus, describing the Customes of the Germaines (being but badly informed of their Religion) hauing seene, or heard by report, from such as had beene in the voyage of Germanie, that a Ship was figured in their Temples and Ensignes; immediatly he conceyued, that they adored the Goddesse Isis. Pars Sueuorum and Isidi sacrificat,The errour and mistaking of Tacitus. Vnde causa, and or go peregrino sacro parum comperi* nisi quod ipsum Signum in modum Liburnicae figuratum, docet aduectam Religionem.
The men of Suaba, neighbours to the Francs Sicambrians, dwelling in the Marshes of Westphalia, Cleue, and Guelderland, with Gulich, obserued the same Religion, Customes, and Policie, as the Gaules did. And as those two Nations were one selfe same people: euen so they retained (carefully) the figure of the Shippe, which Tacitus (in his language) ^earmeth Liburnicall, in memorie of the passage which their Ancestours made from Asia into Europe, vnder the conduct of their Prince Gomer.
For by the same subiect, the ancient money of the Gaules and Germanes,The Ancient Coynes of the Gaules and Germaines. were of two fashions and stampes on both sides. The one with a Lyon, Armes proper to Prince Gomer (the Gaules Hercules) on the one side; and on the other an Altar, with the number of LXIIII. which represented the sixtie and foure Prouinces of the Gauls (that extended themselues so farre as Rhine) mentioned by Tacitus, in the third Booke of his Annales, At Romae non Treuiros modo; sed quatuor sexaginta ciuitates Galliarum desciuisse videbantur: And thus he saw (of Antiquities) a like number on the backe side and his figure on the o^her, stamped vnder the name of the Emperor Antoninus. And Strabo in the 4. booke of his Geography, and Dion in his 54. booke* vnderstood the Altar to be prepared in the City of Lyons, whereof Iuuenal thus saith:
Aut Lugdunensem Bhetor dicturus in Aram.
This should bee interpreted of the generall Altare of the Gaules, prouided stable and permanent by the Druides, within their sacred wood at the mountaine of Chartres, dedicated to the holy Virgin, that should bring forth the fruite of life.
The other kinde of Coine, had a Shippe on the one side,The descriptio^ of the other Coyne. and a Head on the other figuring the Image of the Patriarke Noah* or of his yongest sonne Go^r. A kinde of money brought into Italy by the first Gaules* when they went thither, and possessed it. Neuerthelesse, the Romaines enuying the glorie and name of the Gaules: referre the inuention thereof to their King Numa Pompilius: So saith O^id in the first of his Fasts.

At bona posterit^s puppim for^^aui^in^r^,Ouid in Lib. 1. de Fastib.
Hospiti^ aduentum testificata Dei

Speaking of a voyage which Saturne made to them, the Romaines hauing retayned some shadow of Gome^ passage to the Gaules obscured (neuerthelesse) with lyes and fables: but the Gaules being possessed of Italy by their Coine, brought the knowledge to

this apparant passage. So the ancient Gaules had a sport, which they tearmed Head, or Ship: for by putting one of those peeces into a Bonnet, and then (casting them both aloft) asked them which they would haue, Head or Ship, Caput aut Nauem. After the maner of a pastime, retained to this present day, by the name of Crosse or Pile.
Tacitus taxed with ignora^ce, in matters of great moment.So Tacitus (shallowly informed) seeing some figure of Frigates and Shippes, with the Gaules and Germaines, equiuocated, by interpreting them of another sort, because hee would not seeme to be deceyued. Also he is constrained to confesse his ignorance, Parum comperisse, by not hauing discouered the subiect of such paintings. But as if hee had bene in Aegypt, he thought (seeing this) that it was the Hieroglyphicke of the Goddest Isis,Apul. in Miles. Methodius. Latin. Pacatus Sed. Apolinaris Beat. Rhenan. whom the Romaines vnderstood, Per peregrinum sacrum, because shee was brought to them out of Syria, and called Deum Syriam. Of whom Apuleius (in his Milesians) describeth the worship and Ceremonies, as we haue learned by Methodius, Latinus Pacatus, Sidonius Apollinaris, Beatus Rhenanus, and others. Non in fignum aduectae Religionis, as Tacitus beleeued: but, In memoriam huc aduecta Nationis Gallicanae, by the passage of G^mer and his children, out of Asia into Europe.
The Citie of Paris (built in the yeare of the World, 2981. the first of Abezan of Bethleem, Iudge of Israel, successor to Ieptah, 1325. yeares after the Flood; and before the foundation of Rome,Genebrard. in Chron. Lib. 1. 199. yeares, according to the testimony of Learned Genebrardus, Archbyshop of Aix in Prouence, in the first book of his Chronologie:) A retenu pour ses Armes le Nauire d' Argent Frette and Arme en Champ de Gueulles, as the Metropolitan of the French Nation.
Lord Maior and Sheriffes in the City of Paris.Some haue written, that Phillip Augustus, second of that name called Gods Gift, and the Conquerour, was the first inuenter of the Lord Maior and Sheriffes in the Citie of Paris, for which he had not any reason or apparance whatsoeuer. For, could it be credible, that so goodly a Cittie, the dwelling place of our Kings, euen from the first and second Lyne, should be without a Body, and Officers fit for the same. Considering, that in the Capitularies of Charlemaigne and his Children, mention is made (in many places) De Scabinis, of Sheriffes, who were as Gouernours and Iudges Polliticke, in the best Townes of France.
In the like errour are they, who report, that the Armes of the Ship were giuen to the said City of Paris, by the same Phillip Augustus. Considering, that from the time of the ancient Druides, the Ship had beene an Ensigne, of the said Citie of Parisians. It may be, for the reason alledged by Stephen Pasquier (treating on the same subiect) that the first limits of that great Cittie, represented the forme and figure of a Ship. For Paris, at her beginning, was no other then a Castle of pleasure, built (for the delight of Hunting) by the first Gaulish Kings, where (at this present) is the Pallace.
Afterward, the inhabitants chose their dwelling within the Isle shaped by Sein, which (in her situation) figureth the forme of a Ship, being large, and like to a Ship in her poop and hindmost part: where is erected the Cathedrall Church, her Cloysters, the Bishops Pallace, with the Hospitall. And the Prowe pointeth to the end of the Pallace Garden, now ioyning to Pont-Neuf, and full of houses, enclosing the Cittie, and liuely figuring the forme of a Ship: which among the Aegyptians, was the Hieroglyphicke of Soueraign Power, the marke or Symbole of command and preheminence: And so Paris (by good right) is called, The Queene of Citties.

Astris, Lunaque prior, quia robore and armis,
Et reliquas Vrbes consilio superat.

The^ Germans are all (almost descended of one countrey, yet varrie in their Armes.The verie greatest part of the Germaine Nations, albeit all (well neere) descended of one Countrie, were neuerthelesse distinguished by their Armes the Lyon, but yet by diuers Blazons.
For the Francs or French, Le port^ient d'Or en champ d' Azur.
The Gothes, Ostrogothes, and Visigothes, Le portoient d'Or en champ de Gueulles. And they that dwelt in Spaine, Le porterent de Sable en champ d' Argent.
Paradine writeth, that the ancient Bourgongnons (in like manner, issued and descended from Germanie, and of whom the Noble Romaine Tacitus maketh mention in his Germania) Portoient en Armes le Lyon de Sable en champ d'Argent. Wee shall shew the contrary, and the same of the Gothes in Spaine.
They of Denmarke, Portoient trois de Lyons de Synople passant l'vne sur l'autre, to shew their Balticke Sea as their descent.
The Alans, Vandales and Sweues, Portoient d' Argent an Chat de Sable: A Symbole of ^bertie, so saith Methodius.Method. in lib. 4. cap. 19.
The Cymbrians had the Bull for their Ensigne, and they made one of Mettall, which ^hey caused to be carried on a Pike in the front of their Armie.Plutarc. in vit. Ca^. Mar. They would sweare by it saith Plutarch in the life of Marius) and this people being subdued by the Consull Ca^llus Luctatius, the Bull was carried home to his house, as a note of the victorie which he ^ad ouer them.
We will conclude this Chapter of Armes and Blazons, with acknowledging and distin^uishing the eldest sonnes from the yonger and inferiour.
The Eldest are knowne and discerned from the other, by the plaine Paternall Armes,Eldest sonnes giue their Fathers Armes, without any difference. ^ithout any Brisure whatsoeuer, except the Father gaue them so.
It is ordinarily seene in illustrious and most Noble Houses, that the second son quar^ereth the Fathers Armes with them of his Mother. But this occasioneth confusion to ^heir descent and Linage, if they haue store of masle children.
Others diuersifie and varie in the Chiefe,The Canton of Honor. or else in the first quarter and Canton of ^he Chiefe, which is tearmed of Honor: Or else, Partissent, Flancquent, Entent en Poincte, ^u mettent sur le tout.
But the most certaine knowledge is made by Brisures,The exten^ of generation. so farre as to the seuenth genera^ion, the end of all Parentage.
It is an assured Rule, that among Masles, the eldest acknowledgeth himselfe,The eldest beareth his fathers Armes and he ought ^o be acknowledged by his Father Armes: If he be not otherwise stipuled by Contracts of marriage, of donation, or of substitution, which doe extend so farre, as to the fourth ^eyre.
And if all the Masles would beare the Fathers Armes: they ought to bee distinguished ^ccording to degree of birth, or primogeniture, by Brisures.
For the second sonne, Doit porter le Lambeau de trois pieces: which is to be vnderstood,Distinction for the seuerall sonnes in order of Mettall or Colour, and which also ought to be obserued in all other Brisure.
The third sonne, Vnc simple Bordure.
The fourth, L'Orle.
The fift, Le Baston.
And the sixt, Le Bande.
If there be any more: the Chiefe, the first or last Canton of the Chiefe, or else, L'En^e en Poincte, will serue to be remarked.
The Assaillants or Challengers of all the younger thus borne,How Challengers are to be acknowledged in their degrees. must bee acknowledged ^y Doubles Brisures.
In regard that the eldest sonne issued of the second, ought to retaine and beare the Fa^hers Armes: Auecques leur Brisure, le Lambeau de trois pieces en Chef.
The second, Le Lambeau de quatre pieces en Chef.
The third, Pareil Lambeau mouuant de Chef.
And the fourth, Pareil Lambeau charge selon sa fantasie d' Aigles, Lyons, Croissants, Roses Aleryons, Merletes, ou Diapre.
The second sonne issuing of the first third, Portera la Bordure engreslee.
The third, Chargee de Besans, ou Torteaux.
The fourth, La Bordure Componee.
The next, Endentee, or Endenchee.
And the rest (if there be any more) Chargee de Annulets, partie de l'vn en l'autre, ou bien de Simple, ou le Double Essonier and Trescheur.
The second sonne issuing of the first fourth: L Orle, which his descendants and he may diuersifie: d'Eschicquette, Pale, Conterpale, Lozange, Frette, Fusille, Faisses, Contre-Faisse,Diuersitie of charges for their best distinguishing. Pairle, Viure, Cheuronne, Contre Cheuronne, Verse, Contre verse, or charged with the before named Beasts, with Pannes, Macles, Mollettes, Estoiles ou de Rustres, or other varieties which may be put into Armes.
The second sonne of the first fift, and his descendants, may charge and varrie Le Baeston, as hath bin said before, and the like.
Of the second sonne, and his Assayllants of the first sixe: A la Band, which may bee Coticee, Iumelee, Bretesee, Feuillee de Six, Componee, Endenchee, ou chargee d' Animaux ou de Pannes
But it is to be held for a Rule, and an infallible Maxime in Armes, and the noble Art









of Painting and Blazon That he which beareth least, is the best; which will serue for question and enquirie.


CHAP. II. Of Scutcheons, Shields, Targets, and Buclers.
IT hath beene an ancient common Prouerbe among the French: That the Knight beginneth to Arme himselfe with his Spurres, and compleateth all with the Shield.The best way of Arming a Knight. But contrary to this popular error, we will begin to honour our Noble Gentleman, that is to say, to Arme him with a Shield, and make our conclusion with the Bathe and Spurres. For, the Scutcheon or Shield, (to speake vprightly) is the essentiall note of a Nobleman, as also of an Esquire and Knight. But let vs first obserue, the structure and fashion of the Shield, and the difference thereof, from the Target and Buckler.
Diod. Sicul. in Lib. 6. de Ant.Diodorus Siculus, in the sixt booke of his Antiquities, describeth the fashion of our Shields: Armae ferunt (saith he, spe^^ing of the Celtes and Iberians, French and Spanish) Scutum ad staturam hominis longum, proque libito cuiusque ornatum. He speaketh much to the purpose, according to the Custome of the French Nation, Scutum, a Shielde, and no^ Clypeum a B^ckler, common to the Italians and other Nations, otherwise (neuerthelesse) then the French, Germaines, Spaniards, and English, who neuer bare any other, then the Shield.
In like manner, there is very great difference, concerning the fashion of Scutum, Clypeus, and Parma, the Shield, the Buckler, and the Target, among the Latines.
The Buckler, which the Romaines called Clypeum, was of round forme, yet shaping Ouall-wise,The Buckler of the Romans according to the manner of the Greekes. This is that which wee vse to call a Rondell, or round Target, in regard of the round figure. In this manner, the Greeke Palladines went to the pretended conquest of their Golden Fleece, described by Apollonius Rhodius in his Argonautes,Apollo^. Rh^d. on Tra. de Arg who carried their Shieldes of round forme, whereon each man had his deuice answerable to his owne fancie, and of them, those Bucklers were termed Bucklers of Argos.
Argolici Clypei, aut Phoebeae Lampadis instar,
Virg. in ^ne^d ^^b. 5.So speaketh Virgill, describing the frightfull eye of the Gyant Polyphemus, great and wide as the roundure of the Sunne, when he is seene on the point of his rising in the East.
The Parma or Target.The Parma, which we call a Target, differed from the Buckler, because it was of square forme, and yet more long then large, and somewhat more narrow both aboue and beneath, then in the middle: which enlarged it selfe more forward, then at the two endes, bowing, vaulting, or turning ouer, like to the ridge Tiles of houses.
The forme of the Buckler.The Buckler was ordinarily in containdure, no more then three foot in circumference, proper for them, termed Enfans perdus, Gentlemen of Companies, reserued for, and exposed vnto all desperate seruices in warre (called by the Greekes Stradiots, of the word (...),The Romaine Velites. placed in the van^gard of the Armie, to begin the conflict and combustion. The Romaines called them Velites, by a Metaphor deriued from the sailes of shippes, which guides them, being swolne bigge with winde. So these aduenturous Soldiers were lightly armed, for the surp^izall of them before.
The Buckler for HorsemenThis Buckler was likewise common to Horsemen, seruing to receyue the blowes of stones cast by Slings, Darts, and Arrowes shot from the enemie.
Three sorts of (...) on (...) Triarios.Now concerning three other sorts of Foote Seruitors which they had, tearming them Hastatos, Principes, and Triarios, they vsed the Target called Parma, which ordinarilie contained foure foote and an halfe in heighth, broad aboue, and beneath two foot and a^ halfe: In such sort, as it might couer the whole man in necessitie, bending one knee down to the ground.
The manner of the French Shield.The Shield proper and particular to the French, and their neighbouring people, was broad aboue and in the midst, but finished in a point. Forma Scuti summum latius quae ^^ctus, atque humeri teguntur, fastigio aequali, ad imum cun^atior, mobilitatis causa, so sayeth Liuius in his ninth booke,Titus Liuius (...) lib. 9. speaking of the Samnites, who (made martiall by the Gaules)

passed into Lombardie, being armed after the Gaules manner: and this was the reason, ^y such shields were called Scuta Ligurina they contained almost the height of a man, ^^ueable at the point, because of turning and making head, on which side soeuer the ene^^e appeared.
Diodorus Siculus, speaking of them belonging to the men of Geneway and Millaine, ^^aulish from all antiquitie, as Plutarch writeth in the life of ^urius Camillus, and of ^arcellus) in this manner describeth their Armes, that is to say, their Shields. Arma ^^ent leutora quam Romani. Operiuntur eorum corpora S^uto longo. Ad formam Gallorum ^^to. Our Ancestors serued themselues with Shields, finishing in the point, as well for ^^en on horse backe, as on foote; as wee finde on Marbles and ancient Monuments or ^ombes.
These words, Operiuntur corpora longa Scuto, doe giue vs to vnderstand, that those ^hields were so long and large,Shields seruing men in need for passing Riuers instead of boats as a man might couer himselfe in warre against the Ene^ies darts and arrowes. And at such time as question was made, for passing and freeing ^y great Riuer; those long and large Shields might commodiously serue their masters instead of boates or Gondolaes for passage. Heereof we haue many remarkeable examples, (...) Saint Gregory Victor Archbishop of Tours, the most ancient Annalist of France, and ^ho serued as a Lanthorne, Guide, or Iacobs staffe for the discouery of the Min^s and vn^^owne Treasures, concealed vnder goodly and venerable Antiquitie. In the third booke ^^d thirteenth chapter of his history of France: Venientes ad Mosellam fluuium, cum tran^ent illum, and detinerentur a quibusdam, relictis equis, ac vestimentis Enatantes super ^cuto (speaking after the Romane manner, he vseth this word Parma) posite, amnem in vl^^iorem egressi sunt ripam. And in the fourth booke, the thirtieth Chapter, describing ^e siedge of Atles in Prouence, and the encounters there performed: Cum exercitus a ^rgo iaculis foderetur, operiretur que lapidibus ab Vrbanis, ad amnem Rhodanum dirigunt, ^^que Scutis Superpositis vlteriorem ripam expectunt. The impetuous Current of that ^^eat Riuer Rhodanus carried a great number of the Enemies; so that the saying of the ^atine Poet, speaking of the riuer Simois, carrying on her waues the miserable Troyans, ^^w it selfe then in practise.Virg. in A^neid. lib. 7.

--Correpta sub vndis
Scuta virum, galeasque, and fortia corpora voluit,
Apparent rarinantes ingurgite vasto.

Qui vix nandi impulsu, Scutorumque adiuti adminiculo, litoris alterius plana contingere ^^uerunt.
Vnto this present time the forme of Shieldes, large aboue, and to the midst,Shields kept in vse both for men and women. haue been ^ept in vse, but finishing in the point, as well in the Armes for men as women, which had ^art of the moitie of those belonging to their husbands on the right side, and on the left, ^e moitie for those women. But as for maides vnmarried, they bare none but the Armes ^f their Father, framed Lozenge wise. And for the same reason, the Tombes of Stone, wherein anciently their bodies had enterrement, were made in the forme of a Lozenge, according to the custome obserued in Greece, on the graues of the Amazones, that is to ^y, Noble Maides: As Plutarch obserueth in the life of Theseus; but so they ought not ^o be made for Wiues.
And because the Shield was the principall part of Armes for a Knight;The Shield the principall piece of Arms for the same re^pect, and in regard of excellency, he is said to be armed, ab Armo, so say the best exposi^ors; because hee beareth it aloft on his arme, or on his left shoulder, which they call Armum.

Quam fortis pectore, and Armis!
What strong brest, What large shoulders!

So saith Virgill in deciphering his Prince, whom he maketh to haue large shoulders, as we vse to speake of large squarenesse. Armillas called Festus, ex Auro, quas Viri militares ^^b Imperatoribus donati gerunt, dictas esse existimant, quod Antiqui Humeros cum Bra^hijs, Armos vocabant.
These Shields, Targets, and Bucklers were made of thinne and yeelding boords, of Birche, Fig-tree, Linden, Willow, Elder, and Poplar, cut and framed into many pieces,How, and of what the Shields and targets were made. and afterward ioyned together one vpon another, with cloth well glued; which being throughly dried, they then vsed to couer the Shields with the strong hide of an Oxe,

being doubled twice or thrice, for to make it the stronger. The amorous Poet make^ his Aiax the Telamonion, to carrie a Buckler fastned and couered with seuen-doubles.
Surgit ad hos Clypei Dominus septemplicis Aiax.
For better keeping the whole substance together, they sur-rounded the Shields, Targets, and Bucklers, with a circle of yron, brasse, copper, gold, or siluer, according to the wealthinesse of the Souldier. Tacitus in the second of his Annales, speaking of our Ancestors,The ancient Order of Bosses in bucklers saith: Nec Scuta quidem ferro, neruoque firmata, sed viminum textus, vel te^^^ and fucatas colore tabulas. In the midst or Bosse of the said Bucklers, there was ordinarily fixed a long pointed yron, which aduanced it selfe halfe a foot in height: The Romane called this pointed yron, Vmbonem. Virgil saith,
Flectuntque salignasVmbonum crates alij.
This was peculiar to Bucklers onely; for in the Greeke and Romane Targets, the^^ was not any point at all, no more then in our Shields: in which place our Ancestour pleased to imbosse some Fowle, or foure-footed beast, as Diodorus Siculus relateth in the sixt booke of his Antiquities, Strabo, Cornelius Tacitus, Possidonius and Atheneus.
Heereupon afterward, they vsed to tearme those Shields Armes, or (speaking mor^ grossely) Armories of Cognisances. And so, such a man, and such a Lord of such a house, carried (as we vse to say) such and such Armes.How Coates of Armes began to be called so. Because their Shield, or Escutcheon, wa^ charged with such or such mettall, hauing an Eagle displayed, a Lion rampant, a Bull passant, or any other beast, d'Or, or d' Argent, d' Azure, Gueulles, Synople, or Sable.
And by these differences of Shield, Target, and Buckler, men learned how to make Shields and Scutcheons of Armes:How the French and others should beare their shields. For the French, Germanes, Spaniards, and English ought to beare them square aboue, and so to the midst, but finishing orderly in a point; without the aduise of ignorant Painters or Caruers, who make them of bias and thwa^ shape, and cut the point in part or wholly short, which should begin much higher. The Italians retaine the ancient forme of their Buckler in their Armes, making them Ouall-wise,The Bucklers of the Italians and not in the round forme. For vs to doe the like after the Italian manner (as those personages are figured in the magnificent Gallery at the Louure) were to mis-prise the Nation for following the fashion of Strangers, or else to condemne faire and venerable Antiquitie, because her face is furrowed with the wrinkles of age.
It is not long since I saw, that the Bretons carried square Armes, which wee call^ Banner,The Bretons descended of Knights Bannerets. to shew that they are descended of the Knights Bannerets, as much to say, as of Lords: to whom for their wealth and number of seruants, the Dukes of Bretaine gaue permission to beare Bannners, and to haue Mottoes in them, as it is in France, bearing the name of Knights Bannerets. This is that whereof the Lord of Ioinuille speaketh in the life of the good King Saint Lewis: that they of the Court of Champaigne had beyond the Seas, in seruice of the said King, lost fiue and thirty Knights, all bearing Banners. And the Ceremonies obserued at the making of these Knights Bannerets, is remarked by Iohn Froissard, where he speaketh of the battell fought in Spaine by Messire Bertrand du Guesclin, afterward Constable of France, for King Henry of Castile against the Prince of Wales; to whom, before the said Battell, an Englishman presented himselfe, named Iohn Chandois, the words in French are thus Englished.
There Sir Iohn Chandoyes brought the Banner betweene the Battailes, which (as yet) (...) had not any way moued out of the Princes Hoast, to whom he spake thus. My Lord, heere y^^ see my Banner, I deliuer it you in such manner, that you pleasing to display it, I may this day beare it: for I thanke God I am well prouided of lands, goods, and inheritances, whereby (...) maintaine and hold this estate, according as thereto appertaineth. So the Prince, and the King Don Peter (who was also there present) tooke the Banner into their hands, Qui estoit d'Argent a vn pieu (c' estoit vn pal) aignise de gueulles, and restoring it to him, spake thus, Sir Iohn, behold heere your Banner, take, and God giue you leaue to vse it well. So departed Sir Iohn Chandois, and brought the Banner among his owne followers, speaking thus vnto them^ Gentlemen, you see heere my Banner and yours, wherefore defend it as yours.
Against intruders to be Banner-bearers.Now such as doe intrude themselues to beare a Banner, without hauing seruants sufficient to defend it, and meanes to support the expences thereto belonging: a mockerie

is made of them, and they are tearmed Knights of the square Carpet: For his meanes (at the least) must be such, as to maintaine (at his owne charge) foure and twenty Gentlemen, well mounted and armed, with each one his Sergeant at the least, for they were called Seruientes, and by a word (I know not whence deriued) Matiberu^, who with the sword, and a lacke of Maile, carried the Battle Axe, and the Shield. There are many Tombes to be seene in the Church and Cloyster of Saint Katherin^ de Val, of the Schollers at Paris of these Seruientes, qualified the Kings Sergeants* though stiled Seriemesly R^ys. Their Maces of Armes (to this day retained by the hundred Gentlemen of the Kings house, with the Pentioners halberts) engrauen by them; for none but their masters are they who carry the Launce.
These Bannerets caused to be carried before them in Battell, A square Pennon,The Bannerets Pennon in battaile. armed with their Armes and Deuises, and thereby called a Banner; because it was made in the fashion of our Church-Banners, which were made the Standerds and Ensignes of the Romanes. After they were granted to beare a Banner, the Bretons cut off the point of their Shielde, and carried it square, matching so boldly with it in the front,For the execution of malefactors vpon the gallowes. to shew that they were become great Gallants. This grant of bearing a Banner, brought them another priuiledge, to haue high authority of Iustice, and to execute Iustice in the right of a Baron. So the States of Bretaigne sitting at Naunes, in the yeare 1451. Peter, second of the name, Duke of Bretaigne, gaue to Messire Rolland Pean, Lord of Grand-Bois, and of the Roche-Iagu, the title of Banneret, Right of Iustice in case of a Baron, and to beare Armes in his Banner. So saith Argentre, a diligent Obseruer of all the Priuiledges and Rights.
Concerning the last Knights of the Holy Ghost, made by the late King Henry the Great (of happy memory) at the Augustines in Paris, among all the Armes of the Princes and Lords, I could not see any Armes in Banner, but those of the Marshall de Biron, Purement ^scartelles d'Or and de G^eulles, and without any charge.
Those Armes in Banner were so nominated,How Arms in Ba^ner became so called. Concerning the word Enseigne. because of their cutting short by the point; so that they containe the same largenesse, as well in point as in chiefe.
Monarches, Princes, and great Lords (whom the Ancients of France honoured with the title of Barons) marching in warre, carried many Ensignes of their Armes and deui^es; for the worde Enseigne, is the generall name applied to the Companies, eyther of Foot or Horse.
In the first place, marcheth the Banner, a little longer then otherwise, and square in ^orme, (yet not after the fashion of Banners in our Churches) cut off beneath,The fashion of the Banner leading the way. like vnto a ^oufanon of Italie (the ancient Arms of the house of Bologne) is not carried by the means ^f a Staffe, trauersing the middle backward, but by a staffe at one of the ends.
Next after followeth the great Standard, carried in the same manner, large alost,The great Standard. but ^nishing in a round point, after the fashion of the French shield, which is cut like two ^ound tongues diuided: And this great Standard ordinarily appeareth, and ought to be ^f much longer extendure then the Banner.
After marcheth the Guidon,The Guidom much lesse by a third part then the Standard, and differing ^om it in this manner: because at the point, it hath one onely round tongue, whole, and without any cutting.
In the fourth place is the Pennon,The Pennon. lesser by halfe then the Guidom, but hauing the same ^orme and tongue. All these are ordinarily made, and fringed with the Liuerres and co^urs of the Prince, or Lord, to whose funeralls they are carried. And beside what hath ^eene said, first of all is carried the great Standard of the Colours,The great Standard of Coulours. charged on the one ^^rt and the other, with the Patrone and Tutelary Saint of his claime or title, and his de^se. As not long since in Picardie, the three most ancient Houses thereof, carried the ^rmes and the title Blazoned on their name.

D' Ailly, Mailly, Crequy,
Such Names, such Armes, such T^le.

The Coronet is of the same fashion as the Banner* square, but long,The Ensigne of a Horse Company. in (...) of the ^tandard, cut by a thred directly forward, and not in descending forme, as the Banners ^oth.
In times p^st, there were no^^ but Princes Sou^^aiga^s, that carried the Cornet, ^hich ought not to be charged with Armes or D^uise, but onely the principall Liuerie

of the Prince. In France it is White, in Spaine Red: in England and elsewhere* i^ i^ of the Kingdomes Colours. This Cornet ought not to be carried, but in the presence of the Soueraigne Prince: vnder which, other Princes and great Lords, haue ordinarily ^sed to ranke themselues, for the conseruation thereof.
Ensignes of the Foot souldiersAs for the Infanterie, they haue Ensignes and Flagges made Banner-wise* the Collonell whereof (like to the Cornet) should be without Charge or deuise: but onely the so^ Liuerie or Colours of the Kingdome, as we haue already sayd.
The Honour of bearing Shieldes, that is to say Armes, belongeth to none but Noble men by extraction,Who ought to beare Armes onely, and none other. or by calling and creation. And it is not yet an hundred yeares, since such as were not of Noble condition, were punished with great fines and amer^ements, if they but attempted to beare any.
It was permitted to them, to haue onely Markes or notes, of those Trades and Professions which they vsed: As a Tailor to haue his Sheares, a Cutler a Knife, a Shearma^ his Cloth-sheares, a Mason his Trowell, and the Compasse or Squire, and so of other* Merchants (for their more honour) might beare the first Letters of their names and surnames,Marks or notes of Tradesmen, and of Mercha^ts enterlaced with a Crosse: as is to be seene in many ancient Epitaphes, and as ye^ to this day, vpon their packes or burthens of Merchandises. All these were called but Markes, they were not permitted to haue Shields, but onely Targets, hollow at the chiefe and flankes: like them which are giuen to Villages, at the Feast of the Saint their Patron, to manifest that they were not Shields.
But now adayes, the very meanest Merchant and Artizane, will counterfeyte to be Noble, and to giue Armes, for the most part falsely made, and worse emblazoned, and their cheefest excellencie,Of such as counterfeyt Gentility. when they rime and make answer to their Names. As Ville-Bichot, a Village, and the Fawne of a Hinde: Bourdin, a Bourrough and a Fallow Deere Clergeon, a Key and a Bull-rush. N^y moreouer, there must be some Starre or Cresce^ (heeretofore the onely marke or note of Nobility) to shew the Diuinity of their spirit, i^ the composition of their representations. I haue seene a counterfeyte fellow, to giue him selfe Armes D'azur a Cheuron d'Or,vpstart Companions will presume to giue Armes. au Croissant de Gueulles, Au hault diceluy deux Esto illes d'Argent au Chef and la Sphere Celeste soubs le Cheuron, with Crest and Mantle (extreme impudence) euen as if hee had beene Noble by foure races: there wanted but a Ladder and a Broome, to sweepe off the Cobwebbes from the roofe-Tiles of his Fathers house.
The cause of this great error and confusionThis corruption and confusion first grew from this; that the Noble Science of Blazon^, was negligently preserued in her auncient splendour, by Kings, Heralds, and Pursuiuant of Armes; whose principall charge (in precedent times) was, to haue especiall care, th^^ not any person should presume to beare Armes, if they were not giuen and graunted by the Prince, or retayned from his Auncestours, who had lawfull priuiledge to beare them* For they stoode bound, to keepe a Register of all Noble Houses, and therein to pay^ their Armes, and describe their good actions in Warre, a Custome remaining well kep^ to this day, in the Chamber of Accompts at Paris, in the Letters of Nobilitie which those Monarches then gaue, in the middest whereof is fairely limned, the Armes of such as were more lately ennobled. Bua returne wee now againe to our former Discourse o^ Shields.
Of the Roman Emperours at their comming to the Empire.By example of the French, the Romaine Emperours comming to the Empire, w^^ exalted and carried on a Shield of fine or purest Gold, enammelle^^ with the Empire, th^ is to say, De Gueulles al Aigle esploye d'Or, a deux testes. First taken by Constantine, at th^ time of his electing Constantinople in Thrace, to bee the Imperiall Seate, the Emp^ being then diuided, into that of the East and West. It is thus reported by Georgi^^ Pa^merus, in the second booke of his Collections, that he who was declared to be Augus^^ that is to say Successor in the Empire, was exalted and carried on the Imperiall Shield^ Imperatorio Clypeo insidetis, qui Imperio destinatur. And those Shields as wel as the sword of the Emperors, were hallowed and consecrated by the Popes, who ordinarily sacred th^ said Emperors.The Emperors sacred by the Popes. As Pope Leo did to the person of the Emperour Charlemaign, who bei^^ crowned Emperour of the West, hee charged his Shielde; d'Or de Esmaux de (...) that is to say, D'Azur au ^esme Aigle esploye d'Or^^ deux testes Couron^es, (...) l'Estomac de l'Lscu de France sans nombre.
According as it was borne by his Grandfathers and Father, Pepin, Charles (...) and Pepin le ^^ef, first King of the second Lyne, the sayd Shield carrying (...)

Crowne, in regard of the Imperiall dignity, and about it the Order of the Ge^et^^, insti^uted in the Noble house of France by the saide Charles Martell, Imperiall Armes, retayned by all the Kings of the second Lyne, and further on in the third. For Phillip Augustus ^n some Charters, styled himselfe Emperour of the French, bearing the Golden Apple, ^s is noted in his Picture, the last of the Kings, on the frontispeece of the Church at Paris,The Empyre translated from the Greekes to the French, in the Emperour Charlemaigne of eight and twentie there figured, maintaining (with truth) the Title of Emperour apper^aining to the King of France priuatiuely, before any other Prince, as descending of Charlemaigne, by whom the Empire came from the Greekes to the French. And the Pope, a Germaine by Nation, Stephen, eight of the name, could not with equitie, spend largely ^pon another mans purse, or disanull (without subiect) that which his predecessour (so many yeares before) had done, Pope Le^, third of the name. For he ordayned (sacting and crowning Charlemaigne Emperour, in Anno eight hundred and one) that by inuesting him, his Successours the Kings of France, should hold the Empire of the West; Cursing, euen to the day of Iudgement (Anathemate Maranatha) all such as should dispossesse or trouble them therein.
The saide Pope Stephen, hauing crowned the Emperour Otho, first of the name (whom the Germaines tearmed Otho the Great) Duke or Count of Saxon: the saide Otho, to deface the memorie of the French Emperours, changed the Imperiall Shield blazoned by Charlemaigne, De Esmaux de France. For, being of the house of Saxon, who,Otho the great changed the Empires armes of the French. as his Armes, Porte D'Or a trois Faissee de Sable, a la Coronne de Synople perie en Bande: He tooke L'Escu d Or a l'Aigle esploye de Sable, Armes which the Germaine Emperors haue retained ^o this day.
We haue formerly saide, according to Pachymerus, that the Emperours (comming to ^he Empire) were exalted vpon a Shield, according to the example of the French:Of the Emperors exaltation vpon a shielde at the first. let vs now see the proofe thereof.
This custome was proper and particular to the French, from whom the Greekes and Romaines deriued it by example. It is very likely, that the Kings of the Gaules (extirpa^ed by Iulius Caesar) were not receyued into the Royaltie, without many Ceremonies, see^ng we haue learned by tradition, that a Prince of the Druides, in whose person the Image of the Gaulish Kings remained, walking in publique, or holding Assembly of the Gene^all Estates of the Gaules, had alwayes carried before him, The Hand of Iustice, vppon a Cubite of Iuorie. And that comming to the saide Authoritie, the Seat whereof was kept ^t Chartres: he was exalted vpon a Shield, and so carried about the Assembly of the sayd States.
The Hollanders, neere neighbours to the Gaules, and with whome also they did take part, being reuolted from the Romaines: established (as King) one named Brinio,The Hollanders exalting of their King. exal^ing him vpon a Shield, and so carrying him on their shoulders about the Campe. As it (...) obserued by the Noble Romaine Historian Cornelius Tacitus, in the fourth Booke of his Histories. Brinio, ipso rebellis familiae omine placuit. Impositoque Scuto, more Gentis, et ^uccolentium humeris vibratus, Dux eligitur. He speaketh to the purpose More Gentis, be^ause this fashion was proper and particular to the Gaules, and to their Brethren the Germaines, altogether conformable in Religion, and manner of life.
Iulian the Apostata, being Gouernour of the Gaules, was by the Gaulish Legions, ^roclaimed Emperour, at his Pallace of Thermes, in the Suburbes of Paris.Iulian the Apostata proclaimed Emperor. This Pal^ace comprehended (in those times) the whole extendure, where now is the Hay streete, ^he Hostel de Clugny, the streets of the Mathurins, of Coupe-gueule (at this present Sor^onne) and of the Masons, so farre as to the gates of Saint Iames, and Saint Michaell: And after the fashion of the Ancient Gaules, exalted vpon a Shield: so speaketh his Hi^torian Ammianus Marcellinus. Impositusque Sento Pedestri, and sublatus eminens, nullo si^nte, Augustus renuntiatus est.
Hee saith Scuto Pedestri, to shewe, that it was according to the Gaules manner, and ^ot the Romaines, because the Romaine Souldiours had the Clypeum or Buckler, and ^he Germaines and Gaules, the Scutus or Shield. Those there, the Target, long, and ^quare both aboue and beneath: and they heere the Shield, large aloft and at the midst, ^he rest finishing fairely in a point. Scutum ad staturam Housinis longum, prolibit^ cuius^ue ornatum: So saith Diodorus Siculus, in the sixt Booke of his Antiquities. For the prin^ipall Armes of French Cheualiers, was the Lance and Shield. As for the word Framea, ^t is equiuocall, namely in the history of Saint Gregory Victor, Archbyshoppe of Tours,

taking it for all kinds of Armes, to be vsed with the hand, Lance, Dart, Iaueline, Arrow Eques Sc^to, Frameaquecontentus est. So saieth Tacitus, de moribus Germanorum. The^ Knight (...) sufficiently armed with his Shield and Lance. For the Gauls neuer went without Swords, which they wore in a Scarfe or Bauldricke, A dextro latere, ad finistrum (...) dente^^, saith the same Tacitus, Hanging from the right side to the left.
Difference betweene the Shieldes for Horse and footBut there was difference betweene the Horsemans Shield, and the French foote Soldiers, which Marcelinus called Scutum Pedestre, because it couered the foote Souldier from the foote to the head, and whereon (when neede required) he might safely passe the greatest Riuers, by swimming on it, as before hath bin saide, according to the Authoritie of Gregorie of Tours, in his history of France. Whereas the Horsemans Shield was little, (...) couer the breast onely, against the dangers of the Lance. As is to be seene in Figures on Tombes and Graue stones, after the Ancient maner: And at this present day, on the great Seales of Princes and supreame Lords, represented on horsebacke, armed from foote to head, with the Shield before the breast, and the drawne sword in his right hand.
The shield the chiefe Armes for a souldier on horse and foote.Now the Shield being the principall Armes for a Souldier both on horse and foot, and an vndoubted acknowledgement, concerning the Noblenesse of his extraction: it was all the care and diligence of the Foote Souldier and Horseman, to keepe and defend it vvith the perill of his life. Because such a one as was so negligent, or such a villaine, as to suffer it to be torne from him, or to loose it in a raunged Battaile: he was abandoned of all the world, as an excommunicated person, hated, detested, excluded, and banished from all commerce with men, so that he might better kill himselfe, rather then to suruiue such a shame, as we are instructed by Tacitus. Scutum dereliquisse praecipuum flagitium, nec (...) sacris adesse (there is excommunication) aut consilium inire (diets and publike assemblies) ignominios^ fas est. Multi superstites bellorum, infamiam laqueo finierunt. In the Salique Law (that is the Code of the Ancient French, from Pharamond so farre as to Lewes the Debonnaire) he that iniuried another, by telling him, that hee had lost or throwne away his Shield in the Hoast; he should pay six times twenty Deniers for a fine, that was three Solles, for the Sol of the French valueth forty Deniers. Si quis alteri imputauerit, quod Scutum suum proiecisset in Hoste, vel fugiendo prae timore CXX. denariorum, qui faciu^^ Solidos tres, culpabilis iudicetur.
Concerning the Salique and Ripuarie LawVnder the first Monarchs of France, at the Seats of Iustice, when the Pleas and suites were debated, contained in the Salique and Ripuarie Law, called Mallos, the place for the Assembly tearmed Mallus, (from whence came the Verbe Admallare, as much to say, as an Appealee, or defendant in an Appeale, Admallatus, Appealed:) there was vppon the Chaire or Seate of the President an Intendant of Iustice, L'Escu charge des Esmaulx, that is to say, A Shield charged with the Armes of the King; to demonstrate, that there was the Bench of Royall Iustice. The Salique Law, at the title De Reippus, concerning the marriage of Widdowes, the first Paragraph: Tunginus, aut Centenarius Mallum indicent, and in ipso Mallo Scutum habere debent and tres Sagibarones.
These Mallus or Pleas were not intended for ordinary dayes, when meetings were before the first Iudges, whom we call Prouosts: but on those held by the Bayliffs, who we^^ called Countes,The titles of Officers of Iustice. in the Law Ripuarie, Chapter XC. Grauiones, Graffiones, Margraff, and Grauen in the Germane tongue, as much to say as Counts, Intendants of Iustice, who had vnder them Vicounts, particular Iudges in Cities and Townes, whose Lieutenants were also named Vicarij, Vicares (a word retained to this day in the Germane Empire) and i^ France knowne by the name of Viguiers. But the Countes were the men, to execute the charges and commands of Iustice, they whom the Salique Law and the Capitularies called Tunginos and Centenarios. And for Associates on the Seats of Iustice, they had three sufficient and honest men at the least, men of good life, without any reproach, who serued to the said Counts as well for Assistants, as also Commissaries, to make the enque^^s, Informations in causes doubtfull, in matters Ciuill and Criminall. Those Associates and Commissaries, were called in the Salique Law Sagibarones, at the title of Afatomie, that to say, of Donations. H^c conuenit obseruare vt Tunginus, aut Centenarius Mallum in^^cent, and Scutum in ipso Mallo habeant, and tres Sagibarones.
Those Mallus were properly such, as in France are called Assises, or Great Session^ because at those times,Assises or times of generall Sessions: they iudged none other but causes of importance, specified in th^ Charter of Priuiledges, granted by King Lewes the Debonnaire, Emperor, to Spanyard^ fugitiues from Cathalogna, Roussillion, and Cerdaignia, Prouinces vsurped by the

^oores. Maiores causa sunt Homicidia, raptus, incendia, depradationes, membrorum am^ationes* furta, latroci^ia, alianarum rer^^^ inuasiones, qua cum viciuis criminaliter accu^is, ad Comitis Mallum venire debent.
And those great dayes of Sessions were prohibited and charged,Prohibited places where the Sessions ought not to be kept. not to bee kept in the ^tes or Porches of Churches, or in sanctified places, which were called by our Ancients ^ria and Paradis^s, and we at this time rearme Paruis, were they couered or inclosed with ^lles, or no. Comes co^uenientem locum consideret and inueniat ^bi stationem ad Mallum ^endum constituat, Qui^ nefas est ibi reos puniri, vbi respectu diuinae reuerentia misericor^m consequuntur. So speaketh the Ordonance of the generall Estates, held at Soissons, the yeare of Grace, 853. So that, if there were not any Paruis, couered or distinguished (...) a wall: before euery Church should be reserued a square Arpent of ground, to serue ^sted of a Paruis, within which the Lay Iudge was prohibited to exercise his Iustice, in ^e Ordonance of King Clotharius the first. Si sunt Ecclesia, quibus Atria clausa non sint, (...) vtraque parte parietum terrae spatium, Arpennis pro Atrio obseruetur. And those Assi^, for the weightinesse of the matters in them to be handled, were not to be helde but in ^e mornings. Placitum Comes non habeat nisi Ieiunus, so saith the Ordonance of Charle^aigne, at the fifteenth Paragraphe.
Aboue those Assises and great dayes of Generall Sessions, was the Parliament held eve^ yeare (as we shall further relate in our second booke) in the open field:The Parliament helde in the open field. In Campo, and ^t of good Citties, by the Ordonance of Childebert, first of the name, with the Gone ^ll Estates, that is to say, in the Generall Parliament held at Vtrect. Traiecti omnibus no^^ adunatis conuenit Campo. Notwithstanding, the Appelations of those great Sessions (...) Assises, were not concerned in the Parliament: because the Counts sentenced crimes, ^y the last iudgement, as the Prouost Marshalles do in France. They onely consulte on ^^e State Affayres, according to the occurrences whereof, they make and publish diuersi^^ of Ordonances. For, from the time of the Druides, who were the Soueraigne Iudges ^f the Gaules, the Parliament tooke knowledge of the State affayres, as well for Peace,The D^uides the chief Iudges of the Gaules. ^s for Warre. And this generall Parliament was composed of Church-men, Nobles, ^ukes, and Countes; that is to say, of Gouernours and Lieutenants generall and particu^^r of Prouinces, and Officers of the Crowne of France, who were all held and obliged ^nder paines) to yeelde themselues to the generall Estates: according to the Ordonan^^s reiterated by King Charlemaigne. De poenis Episcoporum, Abbatum, and Comitum qui ^d Placitum nostrum non venerint. For the Parliament was called Royall, farre differing ^^om the great Assises held by the Countes.
And the marke or signale of this generall Parliament, was a high Pole, planted in the ^iddest of the field where the Assembly was made, on the toppe of which pole or stake,The marke of note of the Parliament. ^as fastened the Shield Royall, that is to say, the Armes of the Kings of France, in like ^anner as ouer the Iudges Seats.
A custome retayned by the Emperours of Germanie, as we are enstructed by Otho of ^ustria, Archbishop of Frisinghen, in the life of the Emperour Fredericke the first, the ^^rst Booke and the twelfth Chapter. Est autem consuetudinis Regum Francorum, quae and ^entonum, vt quotiescunque ad sumendam Imperij Coronam, militem ad trans. Alpinandum passe the Alpes to go into Italy) coegerint, in praedicto. Campo mansionem faciant. Ibi, lig^^ in altum porrecto Scutum suspenditur.
The Poet Guntherus Ligurinus, in the life of the same Emperour,
Ligno suspenditur alteErecto Clypeus, tum Praeco regius omnesConuocat, a Dominis Feudalia iura tenentes.
Thus the French made such worthie esteeme of their Shielde^, that they exalted and ^arried vpon them, their Princes and Monarches, comming to the Crown, to make pub^^ke note thereby, that by the like ceremonies as those, Royall Maiestie was embraced be^weene their armes, as being iudged worthy of such manner of conduct. And that Nati^n, wholly generous and warlike (Gens Francorum inclyta, auctore Deo condita,Titles giuen to the French, by the great King Clouis. fortis in ^rmis, profunda in confilio, firma in pacis foedere, corpore nobilis, candore, and forma egregi^, ^ndax, velox, and aspera, Titles which the Great Clouis gaue them) neuer went but armed, ^n what place soeuer it were: holding it for an assured Maxime, that the very greatest ho^our which they could do to their Prince, was to receiue him into their Armes. Accor^ing as it was obserued by Tacitus. Honoratiscimum Assensus gen^^inter ^os, (...) laudare

principe^: For the reasons rendered by Cassiodorus, in the tenth booke of his diuer^ Indicamus parentes nostros inter Procinctuales gladios, More maiorum Scuto supposit^, (...) lem nobis praestante Deo, contulisse dignitatem.
And this was the reason, why at this ioyfull comming to the Crowne, the gen^ Parlement was assembled in the open Field, where he was exalted on a Shield, and c^ed on the shoulders of the chiefest persons, three seuerall times about the assembly whi^ being done, he receiued their homages, and their oathes of fidelitie, according to th^ ranke,The French first ruled by electiue Dukes dignity, office, and benefits. And so the French would be no longer comman^ by electiue Dukes, in regard of the diuision, which ordinarily followeth plurality of G^uernors, and such as command: wherefore they established (as Soueraigne Monarc^ ouer them) Pharamond, a Prince of equity, iust, and a keeper of his word, vertues (...) necessary in any Prince, that is desirous to haue renowne. The old manuscript Chr^nicle speaketh thus, Marchomirus dedit id Consilij Francis, and elegerunt Pharam^^d^ Marchomiris silium, and leuauerunt Regem supra secrinitum: by long haire, a note for the^ to discerne the Princes of the blood Royall, from them that were strangers.
The Monke Aimonius Regem caterarum more nationum Franci sibi deligentes, Pha^mundum Marcomiri filium solio sublimanti Regio.
S. Gregorie Victor of Tours, in his second Booke and fortieth Chapter of the Histor^ of France, speaking of Great Clouis, taken and chosen for King by the men of Colog^ Colonienses ista audientes, and Plaudentes tam palmis, quam vocibus, eum Clypeo euectum s^ per se Regem eleuauerunt.
Gombauld, tearming himselfe to be the sonne of King Clothaire the first, proclaim^ King of France by the rebels which tooke his part, because they would fish in trouble^ waters: was exalted at Briue la gaillarde in Limosin (called Briua Curetia) vpon the Shield as is auouched by Gregory of Tours in his seauenth Booke and tenth Chapter. Ibi par^ superpositus Rex est leuatus. Sed cum tertio cum eodem gyrarent, cecidisse fertur, ita vt (...) manibus circumstantium sustentari potuisset. Hauing exalted him on the Shield, at the third time as they walked with him about the Campe, he fell so loutishly to the ground as he thought himselfe to be slaine, which was taken for an assured presage, and prog^sticke rule, of this supposed Princes ruine, pursued by the French, so farre as to the foundation of the Pyrenian Mountaines: where he was taken, and afterward slaine in the City of Saint Bert^and de Comenges, vpon whose Reliques is yet remaining the Bourg of B^crauera, somewhat beneath the said City of Comenges.
In like manner Sigibert, King of Austrasia, sonne of that Clothaire the first, w^ (neere to Tournay) exalted on the Shield, and proclaimed King of Soissons, in the plac^ of Chilperic; against whom hee questioned for the Kingdome, as saith the same Gregorie.
The custome of the shield carried from Gaule into Greece.This Custome was, with the French language (to slender purpose called Greeke) carried out of Gaule into Greece, at such time as the Gaules, to the number of three hundre^ thousand soules, vnder the conduct of Belouese, one of the Nephewes to Ambigar, King of Anuergne; about the yeare of the world, 3350. 613. yeares before the natiuitie of t^^ Sauiour of the world, Nabuchodonosor ruling ouer the Iewes, and Tarquiniu Priscus ^e^ning ouer the Romaines. At which time they possessed themselues of the City of Ro^^ of the Estate of Naples and Sicilie, afterward called Great Greece; of Thrace, Macedonia, Galatia, and other Prouinces of Asia, and of the most part of the Isles of Greece: As is recorded by Titus Liuius, Plutarch, Strabo, Pausanias and Lucian in his Gaulish Hercules, and in his Herodotus, where he describeth the marriage of Alexander the Great, with the faire Roxana, daughter to the Satrape Oxiartes.
Zonaras and Zozimus, Greeke Authors, speaking of the eleuation of Iulian the Apost^ta (of whom we haue already spoken, in the passage cited by his Historian) haue well remarked this auncient custome, and practised in Thrace. The first of them writeth in the life of Iustinian, that that Prince being mortally hated of his Subiects for his extrea^^ auarice; the Pretorian Souldiors (that is to say, the Guard of the Romaine, Greeke and Latine Emperors) desired to haue for their Emperor, a poore wretched man named ^parius, to whom giuing a new name of Anastasius: they exalted him vpon a Shield, and carried him (in a brauado) three times about the great Market place of Cons^tinople.
Nicephoras Gregoras, speaking of the eleuation of Theodorus, the sonne of Duca^, ob^eth,

that by vniuersall consent of the people, hee was proclaimed Emperour, seated, carried vpon the Shield, according to the ancient custome.
This ceremonie of eleuation of the Greeke Emperours, is particularly described by ^opalates, in the ^ract of the Crowne Offices of Constantinople, saying. That the new ^perour seased on a Shield, was exalted on high, to be seene of the people, and that the ^res before, which sustained the said Shield, were raised by the said Emperor reigning,The exaltation of an elected Emperor in Greece. the Father of the Elected (if he were liuing) went with the Patriarch of Constantino^ before; on the sides and behinde, came the Princes of blood, and for want of them, (...) principall Officers of the Empire. If it so fell out, that the new Emperour crowned ^ng, had no father liuing, not the old Emperor likewise their places were supplied by (...) first Princes of the blood, and the rest by Princes Strangers, or principall Officers, ^o marched immediately after them formerly named. In this order and equipage, the ^cted Emperor was carried three times round about the field, which the Romaine ^^^rians called Fossatum, where he descended from off the Shield, and afterward was ^nducted into the Church of Saint Sophia, to be crowned and Sacred after the Sacri^e of the Masse, and the accustomed prayers. Postea ^ere Imperator nouns Scuto infidens ^altum extollitur, and spectandus exhibetur omnibus turbis stant bus inferiore loco. Te^ent ^tem partem anteriorem Scutitum ipse Imperator, and Pater eius qui re^^n^iatur, si i^viuis (...) tum Patriarcha, Latera vero, and posteriorem partem qui summas dignitates obtinen^ ^a Domini, and Subastores, si qui sunt, sin minus, Potentissimi Principum, and Nobilissimi.


CHAP. III. Of Helmets; And likewise of their Ornaments, Labels and Crests.
DIodorus us Siculus, describing the furniture of the ancient Gauls, speaketh thus of their Armes for the head. Aerea galea caput muniunt paulum eminentiore, in qua cornua impressa, aut aurum, aut Quadrupedum effigies sculpta sunt. The Gaules had for habillements of the head, Helmets, Murrians, or headpieces of Brasse, the Mezail or Beauers eleuated before the face: And for Crest, the hornes of terrestriall Animals of diuers kindes, and of Foules with wings desplaied. That which this Greeke interpreteth Galeam, the Romaines called Cassidem, and the ancient French Helinum, which ^e call a Helm^t, following the old Law of the Ribarols, in the thirty eight Chapter, ^here there is made some enumeration of Armes, and garments for warre, worne by ^e auncient French: Spatham cum Cogilo, the Sword and the Ponyard, Helmum, the ^ead piece; Beinbergas, the Greues and Tasses, etc.
Of these Murrians, Caskes, Timbres, Helmets, and Head pieces,Two kindes of seuerall Head-pieces for seruice. our Ancestors had ^wo seuerall fashions, for the Horsemen, and for the Infanterie. For the Seruitours on ^ote, namely the Bisognes, that is to say, fresh men, or new come Souldiors, whom the ^omanes called Pyrones; they wore Caps or Coifes of hard boyled Leather, such as ^laggons and Bottles were wont to be couered withall. And this kinde of couering the ^ead, was called Galea, by the Gaulish name Galerus, a Cap or Scull Cap. And as for the ^aske or Murrian, which the Romans called Cascidem: it was made of apt yeelding ^lates of Iron, or of Brasse, which serueth for our better vnderstanding those passages in ^iodorus Siculus, and Cornelius Tacitus in his Germania* Vix vni alter^us Cassis, aut ^alea.
These Murrians of Leather, or of Iron, which in older dayes were tearmed Burg^ne^s, ^y reason the Bourgongnons (their deadly enemies) made vse of such Armours: did or^inarily represent the Muzzell of a Lyon, a Woolfe, a Dragon, or else some other furious ^reature to strike (as hath beene said) feare in little children.
We learne of Homer, in the tenth booke of his ^hades that on the dayes of battaile, ^^g^m^^o^ couered himselfe with the skin of a Lyon and with the head thereof couered ^is owne head ouer his back and shoulder^, the skin reached down vnderneth his C^^ss^* (...) Virgill hath imitated the very same, in the se^uenth book^ of his (...) describing ^he equipage of a certaine man named Auentinus.


Ipse pedes ^egmen t^^queus (...) L^^^mis
Terribili impenan^ seta, (...) alhis,
Indutus capiti, sic R^g^^ ^ecta subib^t.

The same Poet describeth also the fashion of those Caskes of Leather.

Spicula gestant
Boina manu^, f^luosque Lupi de pe^^e Galers.

Our Auncestors enrich them with the Hornes of diuers Beasts, or else the Probo^ and snowts of Elephants: as yet to this present day doe the Nobles and great Lo^^ Germanie, a custome long time put in practise by them, as Plutarch writeth in the (...) Caius Marius: where he describeth their Helmets and Crests with Lyons mouthes, or other wilde and cruell beasts, as also the Homes of them, whereon, because they (...) seeme the more terrible, and greater then naturally they should be, they wore the Pl^^ of diuers Birds and Foules.
The Greekes learned of the Gaules, to sur-round their Helmets and head pieces (...) plumes of Feathers, which we tearme Mantles, or Labels of a File, and the Crest (...) Hornes: As is obserued by Euripides, speaking of Hyppomedon the Myrenian; and P^^turch, in the life of Pyrrhus, reporting, that this Prince was knowne aboue all the Ca^taines of his Armie, because out of his Helmet issued out two great Hornes of a Goate (...) in the very midst of them, a high goodly Plume, wauing ouer the Helmet, which th^ called an Armet.The ordinary adorning of the Helmet, according to the Armes of the person. The word Armet, is a diminitiue of the word Armes, because, ac^ding to the Noble Science thereof; it is, or ought to be, ordenarily adorned, with th^ principallest Armes. For example, if the parties Armes be of a Lyon, an Eagle, or (...) Bull: the Helmet ought to beare as Crest, a Lyon, an Eagle, or Bull, if there be no ma^ for enquirie.
The reason of Enqui^ie.Matter to be enquired is so called, in regard of Supporters (that is to say, which susta^ the Armes) whether they be different, or no.
The Birth, or
The Office.
Concerning Birth; As all they of the famous house of Linsygnan, carrie for Cr^ Vne Cune d'Or a la femme naissante qui se mire, and se peigne: because that this illustrio^ Familie (the sourse of so many Kings of Ierusalem,An example alleadged. of Armenia, of Cyprus, and so many wayes allied to the most famous houses of Christendome) tooke originall and desc^ from a great Lady of Poiton, the Lady of Melle, and of Lusignan, whence was diuide^ the name of Mellusine, whom the auncient Romancers supposed to be a Fayrie. In (...) manner, they of the worthy house of Cleues, carried a Swanne for Crest, by being de^cended of the Knight of the Swan.
Concerning Office.By Office; for the dignity of the person, and namely, if he be an Officer of the Crow^ For, to this effect, the Chauncellor, chiefe of all the Soueraigne Iustices in France, and th^ Presidents of the Mortier, or Cap worne in the Courts of Parlement; doe carrie as Cr^^ le Mortier, as a note or marke of their Soueraigne Offices.
Crests for diuers Officers in great place.In like manner, the Constable may carry for Crest of his Timbre, L' E' spee ^u^ en (...) a ^acr^isee. And the Destrochere of France, the Great Maister, and the Chamberlain^ Le^ B^stons d Or aux Esmaux de France le premier en Pal, and l'autre en Bande. The Marshal^ the Battaile Axe; the Admirall, the Anker; the Colonell of the Infanterie, La Cal^^ bla^che aux Poignees, and a la Trabe de France; the Maister of the Horse, Porte en L^^ ^Espee an fourrea^, and la ceincture Royale seme^ de Fraunce, and in like manner other O^cers of the Crowne onely.
As for the Princes of the Noble blood of France, they haue no other Crest on thei^ Tymbre and Helmet,Princes of the blood of Fra^ce but onely the Floure de Luce double: neither the most famous Monarches and Soueraignes of Christendome. In former times, as the Kings of France the^ had no other Supporters, then two Angels; As also their priuate Seale or Signe^, (...) supported by one Angell onely, and not two: euen so the Princes of the blood of Fr^^, for preheminence and dignity of the Lu^^ or Lyllie, had no other supporters but two Angels. As I have obserued in many Monasteries of their foundation, and as any man may see in the Chappel of Bourbon, neere to the Lonu^e. Now in regard of the Lamb^^quins, which are the Plumes for ornament of the Helmet they ought not to be varied b^ ^ding as the Es^^ux de^ Arm^^^, and no other colors, for otherwise they are false. Returne we now to our ancient Crests:
Titus Livius, speaking of the King of Macedon Phillip, in the seauen and twentieth ^oke of his Romaine History, writeth, that (according to the Gaulish manner) this Prince ^^ried on his Caske, a goodly Crest of Hornes (if he were the Father of Alexander the ^reat* his wife Olimpias perhaps gaue him the Blazon) In arborem illatus impetu aequi alte^m cornu Galeae ad eminentem ramum perfregit. Thus of the Greekes.
The Romaines, at their beginning as it happeneth in euery new-springing Common^ealthes: were as simple in their harnesse for warre, as in their manner of life, yea, and in ^^eir Sacrifices. For in them; they neither offred or burnt any Beasts for Sacrifice.
(Victima pro Victis datur, Hostia pro superabundis.)
On the Altars in their Temples, in the shade of some tufted wood; but only the branches (...) Verueine.

Ara dabat fumos herbis contenta Sabinis,
In sacris nullum culter habebat opus.

This we learne of Quid in the first booke of his Fasts.
They had a custome of delight, for some dayes in the yeare, to visite one another in ^e forme of a Masque rado, and to disguise their inuention, they would maske and co^r their faces with great leaues of Bardane, the rootes whereof do beare Burre-Dockes: ^nd of this hearbe (hurtfull for labour) Virgill speaketh in the first booke of his Geor^cks.
Lapaeque, Tribulique.
The reason was, because this herbe called Lapa, had the surname of Personata: accor^^ng to the testimony of Plinie and Mathiolus, in his iudgement on Dioscorides.
So in the time of their first warres, when they marched on to battaile, or else returned ^cke with victorie: they shaddowed their Cabassets and Murrians with broad leaues of ^anthus, an herbe renowned by Virgill, in the second booke of his Georgicks.
Et baccas semper frondentis Acanthi.
It is that which we call Brank vrsin, whereof Plinie in the two and twentieth Chapter ^his Naturall Historie, Dioscorides, and the great herbalist doe set downe the proper^s.
In time following, the Romans borrowed of the Gauls, the fashion of Helmets and ^ests of Birds, placing Hornes vpon their Armets and Murrians, as Virgill in his twelft ^n^iade.
Ensemque, Clypeumque, and vmbrae cornua cristae.
But concerning the Lambrequins of Princes and great Lords, they made vse (princi^ly) of Ostridge Plumes, for fairer embellishing their Helmets, and Chanfraines of their ^rses for battaile. Plinie Praevia exijs oua propter amplitudinem pro quibusdam habita ^sis, Conosque Bellicos, and Galeas Adornantes.
For want of them, they imployed in the same places, the tailes of Peacockes. Claudian his Panegyricke for the sixt Consulship of Honorius.

Gaudet metuens, and pollice monstrat,
Quod picturatas Galeae Innonia Cristas,
Ornet Auis, vel quod rigidos vibrata per Armos,
Rubra sub aurato crispentur serica dorso.

Some other serued their turns with Plumes of Swans, for their whitenesse, answerable Virgill.
Cuius Olorinae surgunt de Vertice pennae.
But they were practised by Knights of honor.
Concerning the cruell and flesh-deuouring Lestrigons, couetous of humaine blood, ^hout discretion: they couered them and their horses, with the tailes of Horses or Buls, ^adfull for their ruddie colour, and condemned by all Antiquitie: Virgil in his seauenth ^oke, desciphering the cruell and in humane Me^entius, saith:
Cristaque hirsutus equina.
And for the same subiect, Virgill armed Turnus with an Helmet and Crest of a Chimera, most frightfull aspect.

Ipse inter primos prastanti corpore Turnus
Vertitur, arma tene^s, and toto vertice supra est
Cui triplici crinita inba Galea alta Chimerani.
Sustinet, Aetneos sufflantes fa^cibus ignes.

To fixe and fasten those Plumes in the Crests and tops of Helmets: they had alwayes ready three or foure sharpe nayles; according as it is obserued by the Prince of French Poets Peter de Ronsard, in his Franciade of the Combate betweene Francus and the Gl^^^ Phouerus: Thus Englished.

That this Minion should become our prey,
Let vs fasten his nailed Murrian,
Aboue the Temple, vowed to my Father.

And the same man, in describing the Helmet and Timbre of the Gyant, giueth him (...) flash of Lightning for his Crest.

His Lance in hand, the Murrian on his head
Well Crested, the tempest doth resemble
Sent downe from Iupiter in Summer monthes.

How Helmets were beautified in ancient timesIn elder times, vpon the dayes of battaile, Princes and great Lords vsed to adorne an^ decke their Helmets (according to their qualities) with Buckles, Studdes and Circlets of Gold, garnished with rich and costly Stones, and on the top or Crests of them, wreaths of corded Silkes, being the Liueries and colours of their Ladies and Mistress^s, as also som^ curled lockes of their haire. Those Cordons (like wauing Scarfes) dangled downe (behinde them) on the crupper of their horses, the ends of them being fairely tasselled, an^ enriched with Pearles and precious Stones. Because vpon such dayes of Triumph an^ Glory, they rode with like alacritie of spirit, ioy and pompe; as if it were to wedding or solemne festiuals.
Zonaras, in the first booke of his Histories, the nineteenth Chapter, and other following, describing the battaile which Cyrus the Monarch of Persia, gaue to Croesus Kin^ of the Lydians; maketh the Prince Abradatas to be armed by the hands of his wife, t^^ faire Queene Panthea, with rich Armour, which she her selfe had beaten and forged, en^melled with Gold and Azure, because her husband should haue some neere resemblanc^ to his Prince Cyrus. On the Armour was engrauen diuers Histories, which his Panth^^ couered with a Coate of Armes, composed of Tyrian Purple, embrodered curiously wi^^ Gold.
And taking her last farewell of him (for hee dyed in the battaile) shee embellished h^^ Helmet (guilded and damasked with Gold and Azure, like to his Armes) with (...) great goodly Plume of Feathers, resembling the colour of the Hyacinthe, spangled wi^^ Gold. What followeth of this Historie, is at large set downe by Xenophon, in the seauenth booke of the Institution of a Prince: most worthy to be read by Ladies of Honor, w^ in the death of that faire and vertuous Princesse, may see a well polished Christall, of v^^tue and Coniugall loue.
These p^ssages of Zonaras and Xenophon, doe enstruct vs, that the Greekes and Pe^^ans vsed Helmets and Plumed Crests. Ouer and beside which, those men that am^ the Romaines had won any prizes and Crownes, by their valiancie in warre: coue^ their Helmets and Caskes, as is remarked by Virgill, in his seauenth Aeneiad.
Fronde super Galeam, and foelici comptus Oliua,
The Poet Claudian.

Hand procul exacto laetus certamine Victor
Cespite gramineo confederat arbore fultus
Accliues humeros Dominum gauisa coronat
Terra suum.

And from thence it ensued as a custome, that the Helmets and Crests of Monarch^ Princes and great Lords, which by right could carrie close Crownes, Chappeaux, a^^ Circles,Close Crowns Chappeaux and Circles. were relieued, raised or lifted vp, to be distinguished and knowne in fights (...) battailes. And for the same subiect, the Shields of their Armes were adorned and relie^ with faire Mantles (if they were Princes, or Dukes) charged with Esmaux and Blazons^ their Armes, which wrapped about them.
The supreme part of Kings Crownes distingu^shed.But concerning the point or top of those Crownes, they were different. For, am^ Christian Princes, the Noble King of France had his exalted with a double Flour^ (...) Luce. The Emperour; the Kings of England, Spaine, Sicilie, Hungarie, Bohemia, a^ others of Poland, had their Crowns finishing in a Boule or Mounde, supporting a Cro^ By example of the Romaine Emperors, successors vnto Constantine the Great, who ^^ointed

that his Buckler should be adorned with the Cipher and Monagrame of X. P. ^. ^nd his Helmet with a Crosse for Crest, so saith Prudentius.

Clyp^orum insignia Christus
Scripserat, ardebat summis Crux addita Cristis.

And the same Emperors carried also the Globe, on the dayes of their pompe and so^^mnities, to make it publiquely knowne, that by their beliefe in the wholesome signe of ^^e Crosse; they were Lords on the earth, which the Globe represented by his rotun^ty, and their Faith by the Crosse; on the tree whereof Iesus Christ was nailed, to de^uer the world from eternall death, according as it is written by Suidas.
We will conclude this Chapter with this aduertisement, that there are many sorts and ^^fferences of Helmets (as, in the like manner, of Crownes,Many varie^io^ and differences of Helmets whereof we will discourse in ^he last Chapter of this first Booke) practised and kept more carefully, and (if it may be (...) said) more religiously in Germanie, then in all the other Kingdomes. Not permitting ^^eane Gentlemen to cut and square with Princes, nor Yeomen to counterfeit Noblemen (...) Armes, Crests and Ornaments of them. For they will not suffer a simple Souldior, (...) a new-made Captaine, to beare Helmets, Lambrequins, Crest nor Supporters,The honorable care obserued in Germanie. the ^ules of the noble Science of Armes and Blazons, not being prophaned among them, as ^^ey are in other parts, through the ignorance of Heralds, Kings and Pursuiuants of ^rmes, to whom (being learned and skilfull) it appertaineth to giue Armes and Blazons, ^^cording to the quality of such persons, as are capable of bearing them, by the leaue of the ^oueraigne Prince, and to none other.
To Kings onely it belongeth, Porter le Heaulme an Mezail tarre de front a vnze grilles ^o Dukes, A haults fleurons, that is to say, Soueraignes in their Countries, Nine. Others,The distinguishing of bearing Helmets. ^ukes, Marquesses, Counts and Viscounts; Seauen: the high Barons, and Knights fiue; ^entlemen of so Noble a house, as they neither doe nor ought to Tarrer de front, may haue ^on the side onely, that is, Trois grilles* Such as are borne in lawfull and loyall marri^^e, turne to the right side; but Bastards to the left (all in one manner as the placing of ^^eir Armes.) But if they be no Bastards of a Soueraigne house, hauing right to beare ^^appeaux or Circles: in this case they may be allowed to beare it, Tarre de frout.


CHAP. IIII. Of Heralds, Kings, and Pursuiuants of Armes.
AMong all the best gouerned Nations,The dignity of an Ambassadors place and Office. it hath euermore bin held for a maine maxime, that Ambassadours haue the place of inuiolable persons, and euen (as it were) Sacred. Moreouer, whatsoeuer iniuries or wrongs they receiued, were reputed to be done to the persons of those Princes that sent them. Hanon, King of the Ammonites, hauing (in contempt) shaued off halfe the beards, and cut the garments to the thighes, of the Ambassadours sent from King Dauid* the Ammonites, with their King, were quite exterminated, and Rabbah, their capitall City (with all the rest be^^e) consumed into ashes: As it is written in the second booke of the Kings, the tenth ^^d twelfth Chapters.
Now, although Ambassadours (to speake properly) are Spies (couered with a title full (...) honor) to obserue the actions of Princes to whom they are sent: yet notwithstanding,In what regard Ambassadors are punishable. ^^ey haue no such permission granted them, as to debosh and corrupt the subiects and ^ssailes of those Princes, to vrge priuate conspiracies, practises and threatnings, against ^^eir estates and persons. For in so doing they are punishable, according to the right and (...) of Nations, for breaking the lists and order of Hospitality: So that they are no lon^^r to be held and reputed for Ambassadours, but disturbers of the publique peace and ^^iet. There is one example of the ancient Gaules (without seeking any where else) re^^rted by Plutarch in the life of Furius Camillus, where speaking of the Gaules depar^^g out of their originary or naturall Countrey, to the number of three hundred thou^^^d men, vnder conduct of the Nephewes to Ambiga^, King of the Gaules: hee saith,

that hauing vnthralled the Alpes, they conquered Tuscanie, and at the siege of Clas^, (...) Romaines sent three of the Fabij to them as Ambassadours, to deale wisely with them (...) raising the siege, in fauour of the Clusians, who had requested and entreated the Romain^^ so to doe.
Treacherie most infamous in Ambass^dors.The Ambassadours hauing deliuered their message to Brennus, Generall of the Ga^ Armie; insted of returning backe to Rome, they went into the besieged Citie, and en^^ted the inhabitants, to issue forth vpon the besiegers: among whom Quintus Fabius A^stus (one of the Ambassadours) happened to be knowne: Vpon this occasion, Br^* calling the Gods of the Romaines to witnesse, how basely they had violated the rights (...) Nations,The reuenge of a justly offended Generall. by being come as Ambassadours, and yet afterward to performe the action of an enemy; hauing raised the siege at Clusium, he caused the Gaules to march direct^^ to Rome, which they surprised vpon a sodaine, and sacking it, put all to fire and swor^^ but first they sent their Heralds to the Romaines, demanding him who made the offence that they might be reuenged on him. The Capitole was so narrowly besieged, that th^ Romaines were constrained to redeeme both it and themselues, paying the ransome (...) ten thousand pounds of Gold, which Brennus brought into Tuscanie; and this Gold w^^ kept many yeares after, as a marke and especiall remembrance, concerning the dutie o^ an Ambassadour, and the iust reuenge which the Gaules had taken, for the bread^ thereof.
But so long as Ambassadours keepe within the tearmes of their charge, which ought (...) be maintenance of the Princes peace who sends them, with him to whom they are sen^* In this case Sancta sunt corpora Legatorum, and inter Hostes esse debent incolumes; so said Varro, in his third booke of the Latine tongue, and the Oratour also, inueighing again^^ Verres. Their person is inuiolable, and the Prince that offendeth them, without occa^^on; begetteth the title of an enemy, and thereby draweth warre vpon him. So the R^maines ruined the Citie of Corinth, because the Inhabitants had outraged their Ambass^dours. Vpon the same subiect, they delegued Great Pompey, to goe and make warre o^ Mithridates King of the Parthians. Si quis Legatum Hostium pulsasset, contra lus Ge^um id commissum esse putatur, quia Sancti Habentur Legati: So saith the Ciuile Lawye^ Pomponius, in the finall Law De Legato. Digest.
Heralds haue the same priuiledge as Ambassadors.Heralds haue the selfe same priuiledge, their pe^^^ns are inuiolable and sacred: to the^ no outrage ought to be done, neither any violence, by words or deedes.
They tooke their beginning and first originall, so soone as the Kings and Princes of th^ world distinguished their Subiects into Nobles and Yeomen: by drawing the one so^^ neere to their persons, for their prudence and vertue, and reiecting the other from their s^^uice and counsell, because they could not be knowne worthy, or capable.
The Assyrians, Persians, and other Nations of the East had them in honor, their Pr^^ces making vse of their seruice. As the Rabbines haue obserued on the 41. Chapter of ^^nesis, in the aduancement of Ioseph, and on the third of Daniel. Plutarch in the life of Alexander the Great, writeth, that this mighty Monarch had for his ordenary Guard, th^ thousand yong men, all Persians, readily fashioned and prepared for Armes, and fit (...) all honest exercises; especially speaking the Greeke tongue most elegantly. Among the^ some were the Guards of his body; others, Gentlemen of his Chamber, Vshers of (...) Haule, Mace-bearers, Heralds, and Kings of Armes, for the executing of his commands*
The Greekes called these Heralds Ceryces, and Irenophylaces. Dionisius Halicarna^ tearmed them (...): the Romaines Caduceatores, Feciales, Praecones: and the Fren^^ Kings, Heralds, or Pursuiuants of Armes, according to the interpretation of the Greek names (...) Pacis Arbitros,The effect and issue of a Heralds charge. Guardians and Sequestrators of Peace, as their or^^nary appellation sounded of Irenophylaces, taken from the effect and issue of their cha^ which was, to appease differences by the waies of mildnesse, and to appoint Nations en^mies, before they should proceede to handy strokes.
In euery City of Greece there were two Heralds, called by honourable title C^ry^ as we learne of Vlpian, Interpretor of the Oratour Demosthenes, in th^ Oration against ^mocrates.The honorable estimation of Heralds. They were honoured by all estates, in regard of their ch^rge, nourished (...) maintained of the publique purse, and priuiledged aboue all other Citizens, to be the ^postles and workers of Peace, which still they councelled and maintained, inciting the peop^^ to preserue the^selues in peace, and not to seek after war. As did the traitor Herald of the ^^lantides, Lords of Athens, named Leos, who discouered the designs of his Maisters to The^

Plutarche recordeth in the life of the said Prince. Hereupon, and for this reason, ^y carried Rods and Wands, made of the branches of Palme or Oliue (Symboles of ^ce) writhed or wound about with wooll, to demonstrate with what soft gentlenesse, ^y ought to acquit themselues of their charge. Those Rods were called Iresione, of Ire^, which signifieth to accord and make peace. They were painted between two Hornes Amalthaea, or of Abundance: because Peace, which is the best guift that God can giue ^men, produceth all kindes of goodnesse whatsoeuer.
Pax aluit viteis, and sulcos condidit vnae.
The Romaines writhed about the Caduceus of their Fecialians, two Serpents, like to that Mercurie, whom they feigned to be the Messenger, the Herald and Interpreter of the ^ds, and who (as the Poets maintaine) going one day vpon an Embassage;Mercurie the Herald and messenger of the Gods. found in his ^y two Serpents, which fought together. Hauing put his Rod betweene them, they ^thed themselues about it, comming to embrace and kisse each other: And in memo^^ of this miracle, alwayes after, Mercurie carried his Rod writhed about with two Ser^^nts, and in imitation of him, the Caduceatores, Greekes and Romaines, carried their ^^ds in the same manner. These are Poeticall fictions, which carry no probability or ^elihood of truth, it was with the Gaules Heifers that the Romaines ploughed: for Plinie ^serueth in the nine and twentieth Booke of his naturall History, and the third Chap^^, that the fashion of this Caduceus, was borrowed by the Romaines of the auncient ^^ules.
The auncient Druides, Arbitrators and Sequesters both of Peace and Warre, before ^y gaue power to the Gaulish Kings and Princes, to march in battaile against their ene^^es (which they did by the tradition of militarie Standards and Ensignes, whereof they ^^d the custody in their sacred Temples: Signa Detracta Lucis in praelium ferunt, so saith ^citus) they sent their Heralds to their enemies, to incite and summon them to peace, and ^aration of the iniuries receiued. Those Heralds carried their Caducean Rods, made the branches of Verneine, and thereof the auncient Druides made vse (according to the ^timony of the same Plinie, in his fiue and twentieth booke, and ninth chapter) writhed two figures of Serpents, by a certaine proportion and fimmetrie: not for the Fables ^biect inuented by the Greekes (ouer-bold and impudent lyers) but onely to giue know^^dge and demonstration, that those Heralds interpreted the will of their Princes, being ^^rein short, sweete, well aduised, wise and subtile as the Serpent, the Symbole of pru^^nce and wisedome in the sacred Scripture. A vertue necessary in euery Statesman, but ^pecially in an Embassador; if he would worthily accomplish his charge, to the honor ^^d content of the Prince that sent him.
Orus Apollo writeth in his Hierogliphickes, that the Rod or Caduceus, writhed with ^^rpents, was the signale and noate of prouidence and wisedome: because, that among ^^creeping creatures, of a foule and earthie substance, there is not any more aduised and ^tile, then the Serpent; who to warrant and secure himselfe from the Shepheards ^armes, stoppeth his eares, the one with his tayle, and fixing the other firmely to the ^ound. He purgeth his braine and cleareth his sight with a certaine Hearbe,Obseruations concerning the Serpent. the pro^^ty and vertue whereof is knowne onely to himselfe. Moreouer, he knoweth how to re^^w his old skin, becomming yong againe, and conseruing himselfe long in life; by eating ^ertaine Hearbe, remarked by Plutarch, Plinie, and other Naturalists.
For this reason the Druides, consuming themselues continually in the knowledge of (...) naturall things, euen from the Cedars of Lybanus, to the Hysope, knowing the pro^^rties and admirable vertues of the Serpent; caused their Heralds Rods to be so writhed. ^his is that whereof Plinie speaketh, in the passage before alleaged, concerning the Druides (...) their Heralds. Hic complexus anguium, and efferotarum concordia causa videtur esse, qua^exterae Gentes Caducaeum in pacis argumentis circumdata effigie anguium fecerint; neque ^m cristatos esse in Caducaeo nios est: The Greekes and Romaines learned the fashion of (...) auncient Gaules. And thereupon, for the porperty of the Serpent, to make himselfe ^come yong againe: they feigned, that the Rod and Cadaceus of Mercurie, had the ver^^e to cure diseases, and to re-seate the soule in the body, being deuided from it. And o^^er wonders, whereof Homer speaketh in his fourth Odysses, Virgill in his fourth Aeneiad, ^^d the Lyricke Poet.

Tu pias latis animas reponis
Sedibus, Virgaque linem coerces
Aurea turbam, Superis Deorum
Gratus, and imis.

Those Rods and Caduceuses of the Greekes, made of Oliue branches, were na^ Cericia (...), whereof is said in the eight Law De ver. diuis. at the Digess. Sanct^^ est quod ab iniuria hominum defensum atque munitum est. Sanctum autem dictum est a (...) minibus. Sagmina sunt autem quaedam herbae quas Legati Populi Romani ferre solebant, (...) quis eos violaret, sicut Legati Graecorum feruntea, quae vocantur (...).
The Romaines carried them of Verueine, which they called a Sacred Hearbe, and th^ Naturalist Plinie, by the vulgar name of Sagmina, in his two and twenty Booke, the second Chapter. Interim fortius augetur auctoritas, quae quanta debeatur etiam surdis, hoc est (...) nobilibus herbis, perhibetur. Si quidem auctores Imperij Romani Conditoresque, immens^ quiddam, and hinc sumpsere, quoniam non aliunde Sagmina in remedijs publicis fuere, and (...) Sacris Legationibus quam Verbenae. Certe vtroque nomine significatur, hoc est, Gram^^ ex arce cum sua terra euulsum. Hac semper and Legati cum ad hostes Clarigatum mittere^tur, id est, res raptas clare repetitum, vnus vtique Verbenarius vocabatur. So that of (...) hearbe, the Heralds were called Veruenaries, bearers of Verueine.
Of the excellency of Verueine.The Greekes called Verueine Hierobotanon, and Peristereon, held by them (as well (...) by the Romaines) for the most excellent among all other hearbes. And therewith they washed and made cleane the Table of their God Iupiter, and purified their houses; by making Perfumes and Suffumigations, of the masle Incense.
Verbenasque adolo pingues, and mascula thura.
So saith Virgill in his eight Eclogue. And the Greeke Priests, as also the Romaine, clo^thed in their linnen Albes (in imitation of the Druides) making their Sacrifices, were cro^ned with Verueine.
Velati Lino, and Verbena tempora vincti.
Saith the same Virgill in his twelfth Aeneiad. And namely, that from the time of N^ma Pompilius, the Disciple of Pithagoras, who was long time since those wise Druides; t^^ Romaines made no other Sacrifices, but onely with Verueine.

Ara dabat fumos herbis contenta Sabinis
In sacris nullum culter habebat opus.

So writeth Ouid in the first of his Fasts.
We learne of the auncient Annalist S. Gregorie Victor, Archbishop of Tours, in h^^ seauenth Booke and two and thirtieth Chapter of the History of France, that French Heralds vsed to carry (in the deliuery of their Messages) Scepters, and consecrated Rods* which was as much, or rather more ceremony, then water cold or boyling, and barres (...) Iron made red hot with fire, for the iudgement of crimes, which had no proofe at all. (...) such manner were taken, chastised and punished, the Heraulds of false and supposed G^^hauld, saying himselfe to be the sonne of Clothaire, King of France, notwithstanding their consecrated Rods, to haue them declare the motiue and subiect of their Legation before they came to King Gonthran, to whom they were sent. Post haec misit iterum G^dobaldus duos Legatos ad Regem Guntrannum, Cum Virgis consecratis, iuxta Ritum Fr^^corum, vt scilicet non contingerentur ab illo, sed exposita Legatione cum responso reuerter (...) Sed hi incauti, Priusquam Regis praesentiam cernerent, multis, qua petebant explanauerum (...)
Homer giueth Scepters to Heralds (and not Rods and whisking wands) euen as to Kin^^ and Soueraigne Princes, attributing the like authoritie to them, yea, and in such sort: (...) the Grecian Princes would stand vp before them, giuing them honor and reuerence. A^^ in those times then, such as exercised the Office of Heralds, were men well borne, (...) great grauity, delicate in speech, skilfull and vertuous, which caused them to be hon^^red and respected of euery one. In the first of Homers Iliades, King Agamemnon, Ge^^rall of the Grecian Army, sent his two Heralds Talthybius and Euribates, to the Prin^^ Achilles,The two Heralds of King Agamemnon, and their honorable respect by Prince Ach^lles. for recouery of the faire Briseis, that he might restore her to her Father, the Prin^^ Chryseis. (Whereto the said Achilles shewed himselfe gracious and obedient, and entertaining the Heralds honourably, saluted them, by the name of Messengers from the gre^^ God Iupiter) the title giuen onely to God Mercurie.

Te canam magni Ionis, and Deorum
Nuntium.)

And Mediators of men: he caused them to come neere him, cherishing them louingly* taking the^ as his witnesses before the gods and men, that he forgaue and pardoned the offen^

^his Generall, in taking from him his dearely affected Briseis, whom he had won in faire ^rre, to the great good and aduantage of the Greekes.
It belonged to Heralds, to assemble Princes for Councell, and giue them Scepters (for ^ne but the Gods did then weare Crownes) as we learne of Homer in the second of his ^yssees: in the persons of an Aegyptian Herald, making an Oration to the Inhabitants ^lthaca; and of Telemachus, receiuing his Scepter at the hand of his Herald Pisenor. (...) the third Booke, the same Telemachus and the goddesse Minerua, being entertained in^ the Mannor and Pallace of the wise Prince Nestor; the Heralds gaue them water to ^sh their hands, before they sate downe at the Table. In the fourth Booke, and diuers ^^ces else, euermore the Heralds inducted, guided, and made the way for forraigne Prin^^s, arriuing at the Courts of Kings their Maisters, to see and obserue the singularitie of ^^em.
Appollonius Rhodius gaue for Herald to his Argonautes, the Heros Aethalides, whom he ^^gned to be the Sonne of Mercurie, and armed him with his Caduceus: to shew, that hee ^s eloquent and expert, quicke in a delicate flowing stile, and sufficiently capable to ex^^ute their enterprises.
Hereupon the Poets named these Messengers Heroas, which signifieth Demie Gods: And ^eemeth, that the French name of Herauld or Herault, descended from hence, as being ^ry difficult, to finde any where else a truer Etymologie. The Romaines called them ^ciales, a name which Varro in his fourth booke of the Latine tongue, deriued and made descended from the word Fides: becaus^ the Fecialians were in such degree, as the de^^sitaries and Guardians of the publique Faith. Feciales dicti suut, quod fidei publicae in^^ Populos praeerant, Nam per hos fiebat vt iustum conficetur bellum, and vt foedere, Fides ^cis constitueretur. Numa Pompilius, Second King of the Romaines, instituted their ^olledge, ordaining: that it was not lawfull to take Armes against any enemy,The Heralds had a Colledge in Rome without ^^eir consent and appointment.
Whensoeuer these Feciales went to denounce warre, or conclude peace: they carried the one hand the Stone, consecrated to beate downe the Romaine Engine, which they ^d to immolate in swearing Peace; Cum
Caesa iungebant foedera porca.
And in the other hand a branch of Verueine. Ouer and beside these things, they car^^^d a certaine Vaile, made and wouen of Wooll, wherewith they wrapped and couered ^^^ir heads, when they denounced warre, or deliuered their message: as, we learne by ^us Linius, in the first booke of his first Decade. This Vaile came somewhat neare to the ^me of them, which are vsed in Churches ouer the Images of Saints. In following time, ^stead of thus couering their heads, they made a slit or hole in the midst of the Vaile, for (...) heads passage, and so the Vaile was equally diuided, couering the brest before, and ^ke behinde of the Fecialian. And then it lost the name of a Vaile, and became to be ^led a Coate of Armes: which the learned Budeus, the honor of France, on the Law ^ctum de rerum diuis. at the Digest, called Armillas, and Spinteres.
During the estate of the Romaine Common-wealth, the Fecialians wore their Comes Armes, made of fine white Cloath, fringed with fine white silke (the Colour and Li^y of the Romaines for excellency, as yet it is of the French, and was of the auncient ^ngs of Persia) A la Bande Iumelee; And foure Letters of Gold, S. P. Q. R. Senatus ^ulusque Romanum. And from thence is descended the fashion of tearming Armes of ex^ency, called to enquire for Mettall vpon Mettall.
When the popular Estate was changed into Monarchie, the Fecialians of the Empe^^rs wore their Coates of Armes of Purple and Scarlet, fringed with Gold,A richer alteration of the Heralds Coat^ of Armes. an Eagle of (...) same (with the Emperours name reigning) embrodered thereon; Because that the ^abre (called rich colour) was the Liuery of the Emperours, which the Romaines e^lled with their Gods. This they borrowed from the Kings of Persia, who went attired ^he module of the high Priest of Ierusalem, at such times as the Iewes were translated, (...) detained among them in bondage and slauery. The glorious actions of Armes of Kings of Persia, were registred downe in Tablets of Cedar, gummed with Cina^* which we tearme painted with red, like to the Rubrickes and titles of our Bookes, ^t is obserued in infinite places, by Xenophon, Arianus and Quintus Curtius, treating on liues of the Kings of Persia. To whom no one durst present himselfe, or speake,Of the Kings of Persia. with words of Crimosine Silke, as much to say, as in highly exalted tearmes,

and worthy the eare of Royall Maiesty, as we learne of Plutarch. And the magnifice^^ of those Kings of Persia, (making their ordenarie residing in the Citie called Sh^ which signifieth Floure de Luce) is described in the Booke of Hester, the first Chapter. Th^ in the Garden and Forrest of the King, in all parts of the Tents, and Pauillions of Azu^^ were hangings of White, Crimosine and Hyacinth colour, supported with Cords of (...) Linnen and Purple. Penaebant ex omni parte tentoria Aerei coloris, and Carbasini, and Hy^ cinthini, sustentata funibus byssinis atque purpureis, etc.
The Greekes and the Romaines (by their example) made the Idols their Gods of t^^ wood of Cedar, and of Thyma, incorruptible, and not subiect to worme-eating: when of ensued the prouerbe,^uer^ kinde ^f Wood serueth not to make gods of. Non ex quouis ligno sit Mercurius, common to the whole D^monomanie of the Paganes. And Plinie informeth vs, that the Greekes and Romain^ painted and coloured the faces, neckes, hands, and whatsoeuer else was to be seene na^^^ of their Idols, with the red tincture of Cynabre and Vermillion. In such sort, as it was (...) first Article of expences, which the Censors couched in their accounts (saith Plinie in (...) three and thirtie booke, the seauenth Chapter) for Cinabre and Vermillion, bought ^^ transfigure their Idols. By which example, the Captaines, that came home triumphi^^ into the Citie of Rome, were painted in the same manner, so saith Plinie. Triumphan^ corpora Minio illini solita, sicque Camillum triumphasse,
And like as the Romaine Emperors had their Imperiall Mantle, the Cassocke and Bu^kins of Purple,The habite of the auncient Romaine Emperours. and of fine Tyrian Scarlet, Furred with a whitish Gray, or Ermines (^ now adayes goe attired the Presidents and Councellors, of the right Parlements of Franc^ and as heretofore went the most Christian Monarchs, as well of the first, as the seco^^ and third line) In like manner, the Charters, Letters and Placards of the said Aunci^^^ Romaine Emperours, which they called Rescripts, and Pragmaticall Sanctions we^ writen with red Ink, or Vermillion or Cynabre, as is said in the Law Sacri affatus. De di^ sis rescriptis, at the Code Affatus nostrae mansuetudinis in quacunque parte Paginarum, (...) alio vultu penitus, aut colore, nisi Purpurea tantummodo inscriptione lustrentur: scilicet (...) cocti Muricis, and triti Conchylij ardore signentur: For they were not esteemed as Ordon^ces, Commands and Imperiall Rescripts, being signed in any other manner. For this re^son,The great prerogatiue of Red Inke. the composition of that Inke is, (in the same Law) named Sacrum encaustum, and was not permitted to any to make vse thereof, or serue their owne turnes therewith, ^der paine of being attainted of high treason, to be punished with death, and their goo^ confiscated. At this day in Turkie, the Passe-ports and safe conducts of the Grand Se^neur, and the Mandates of Iustice, are written in Arabian Letters, with fine Cele^ Blew and Azure; and the names of God, of the false Prophet Mahomet, and of the Gra^ Signeur, in Letters of Gold: a magnificence retained by this people, albeit barbaro^ ignorant and groser (then euer were any) of the Romaine Emperors, or of Constanti^^ple. So that of one thing, which was not worthy of a Prince, the auncient Romaine P^^uerbe arose in vse, saying:
Nec titulus Minio, nec Cedro Charta notetur.
So saith Ouid, Elegia prima Tristium. But come we now againe to Heralds.
Ammianus Marcellinus, in the foureteenth booke of his History, telleth vs, that her^ fore, Heralds and Kings of Armes, were cloathed with Coates of Armes, made acc^^ding to the fashion, as Deacons of the Catholique Church vsed to weare. Pectu^ tuniculam sine manicis textam, Mar as quidam nomine (vt appellant Christiani) Diaco^u^ latera scripta Graeco sermone portabat,The auncient fashion of Heralds Coats. etc. Euen so, (Silicet miscere sacra profanis) th^ Coates of Armes for Heralds, imitated the Dalmaticke fashion, without sleeues, b^ farre as to the elbow: bearing vpon the said short sleeues, and both before and behi^^ the Armes of the Prouinces whereof they carried name, and such Armes, with their uery, are called Enamels, of the word Ammell, which Goldsmiths worke with fir^ the heads of Rings, when they fixe rich and costly Stones in them; Per latera scripta, Marcellinus spake to very good purpose, in mine opinion:
For like as among the Greekes, and namely in the Metropolitane and Patriarc^ Churches of Constantinople,Order of Ecclesiasticall ornaments in Churches. the Chasuble of Priests, the Dalmatiques of Dea^ and the Pallium or cloake of Bishops, had the name of God wrought in capitall Lette^ bout the hemmes or skirts: So in the same manner, the embrodered and long Tu^ and Dalmatickes of the Romaine Emperours, as also of the Consuls, were charg^^ Gold-embrodery, with the Emperours names. For the Greekes, beside this pass^g^

^arcellinus, Zonaras, Zo^imus and infinite other haue obserued the same. For the Em^^^ors and Roman Consuls, as well of the Old as New Rome; we haue Ioannes Cura^ates, in his Tract of the Offices of Constantinople: where he remarketh the garments of (...) Romaine Emperors, and likewise of their children, brethren and kinred; For so farre to the Hoods or Chapeaus, the plates and skirts were garnished with Letters of Gold. ^gmen capitis Domini quod embella dicitur, ex margaritis est totum, Replo eius habentur no^a eius qui fert ipsam ex virgulis aureis fimbriata, Tunica honorata eius sanguinea, aut ru^ ornata margaritis, quale per illud tempus optauerit.
Concerning the Consuls, we haue the testimonie of the Bourdelois Poet and Senator ^sonius, in the gratitudes and thankefull kindenesses, which hee gaue to the Emperour ^atian, who had honoured him with the Consulship of Rome. Palmatam tibi misi, in ^a Diuus Constantinus parens noster in textus est. Which giueth vs to know, that the ^loake Royall of the Emperours and Consuls, otherwise called the Mantle of Triumph, ^ade of fine Tyrian Scarlet, and Purred with whitish Gray or Ermines; was embrode^d a hands breadth, enterlaced with names and titles of excellence, belonging to the Ro^aine Emperors. Whereby also another note may be obserued, concerning the Medales ^^d antiquefigures, of the Images of our Redeemer and the Virgin Mary, represented with ^antles; the bordures whereof are charged with titles of excellence and honor, which ^isedome and the Church thought fit to giue them.
Among the Heralds of France, there is one aboue all the rest, who is called Mont-Ioye, (...) stiled, at the military cry or proclamation, of the great King Clouis,Mont. I^ye aboue all the Heralds of France, and the reason of his calling King of Armes of France. after he had embra^ed Christianitie: Mont Ioye Sainct Denis. As if it should be said, that the Faith preach^d and brought into France, by great Saint Denis Areopagita, was the ioy and cheareful^esse of the heart; or that that God, whom Saint Denis had proclaimed to the Gaulish ^eople, was afterward to be his Ioue. This Herald, for his greater excellence, is called ^ing of Armes of France; he weareth a Violet coloured Veluet Coate, with the Esco^heon or Shield of France Crowned, and entoured with the two Orders of France, on ^he foure parts of his Coate of Armes. The other Heralds beare but simply three Floure ^e Luces of Gold, with the enamels of France, which is of Violet coloured Veluet, and on ^he halfe sleeues, the Armes and name of the Prouince or Duchie, whereof he is Herald, ^nd so the rest: As Daulphine, Orleans, Aniou,Names and titles of the other Heralds of France. Alanson (Inheritances of the Lords and ^onnes of France) Valois, Bourbon, Berry, Vendosme, Bretaigne or Ermine, Bourgongne or ^oison D'Or, when these two Orders had their course in France, as heretofore the Genette, ^he Starre, La Cosse de Genest, and Saint Michael, names and titles due to Heralds of the ^id Orders.
And as each Prouince and generall Gouernment of France h^d his Herald and King ^f Arm^s, hauing his name wrought in Golden Letters on the sleeues of his Coate: So ^he King of Armes of Nauarre, Porte les Esmaux de Nauarre;The King of Armes of N^uarre, and hi^ habit, as also of the sixe other Heralds. Of Red or Crimsine Vel^et, with the Escocheon of the Kingdome Crowned, and the Order of the Lillie entou^ed about. The other sixe Heralds of Nauarre, bearing names of the Kingdomes Merin^ades; doe carrie the same enamels naked, without Crowne, and without noate of Order. On their halfe sleeues they beare the most, to wit; Nauarre brize, ou componne, ^scartelle des Armes de la Merindade. For in Armes the King thereof beareth the least, ^nd the Heralds the most, as namely; Pampelona, Viana, Estella, Tudela, Olita and Sainct Palais, Capitall of the lower Nauarre, which had (in times past) for cry or proclamation of warre, the Heralds name (then) Roncenaux, after the preuailing against the Emperor Charlemaigne, as the Spanish Romancers say. And as heretofore the Cry of warre, for the first King of Sorrabia or Nauarre, was Begorre; in remembrance,The first Kings of Sorrabia, o^ Nauarre. that they had deri^ed their originall from the Counte of Begorre, who long time was on the Chesse-borde of Nauarre, and for whose Antiquitie, the Countie was charged to the King, but with the wages for three Launces, and halfe, instead of a whole Subside: A priuiledge granted to the Inhabitants of the said Countie, onely for their fidelity.
At Rome there was a Colledge of the Fecialians or Heralds, composed of twenty,The chiefe Herald of Rome Pater Patratus. the chiefe whereof (for excellence) was called Pater Patratus; because, by being chiefe of that Company, he ought to haue children, and his owne Father yet liuing.
In France, not onely the King of Armes Mont-ioye S. Denis, but also the other Heralds and Poursuiuants were of Noble extraction; and Mont-ioye could not be admitted,Heralds of France of Noble descent. without making proofe of his Noblenesse by three races, as well of his Fathers Stocke, as by his

Mothers side.Annuall Pen^ions o^ the Heralds. There was two thousand pounds of rents in Lands and free tenure, allowed for the said Monioye particularly, and a thousand pounds of annuall pension. As for the other Heralds, they haue a 1000. pounds in pension, and other rights, whereof we shall speake he reafter. The Colledge and society of the said Monioy, Heralds and Pursuiuant^ of Armes for France,The Heralds Colledge at Paris. was established in the Church of Saint Anthony the lesse at Paris* where anciently were and are to be seene, the Charters and Statutes of the Officers of Armes, and the Rolles, Names and Sur-names of the said Kings, Heralds and Pursuiuants; which Charters are of the yeare, 1406.
Heralds are allowed entrance into all Courts of Princes and great Lords: and whosoeuer denieth their entrance, is held for inciuill, discourteous, and vnworthy any Noble Title.
They haue power to reprooue the vices of Knights, Esquires, and Noblemen liuing badly:Prerogati^es of Heralds. and if they do not correct such errors in themselues, to expulse them from Iousts, Tourneyes, and all other Martiall exercises.
They ought to counsell and aduise Princes and great Lords, to maintaine the Estate of Nobilitie, alleadging the truth of their words by their owne experience.
Such as eyther by words, deedes, or otherwise offred them any outrage; ought to make them amends in the hearing of the Colledge: otherwise, they were declared guiltie of high treason, degraded from Nobilitie, being published as ignoble and yeomen, both they and their posteritie.
Rights and dues to the Officers of Armes. At Funerals.To Monioy did appertain particularly, the Garments which the King did weare on the day of his Sacring, and before him.
To the Heralds in generall, at the Obsequies and Funeralls of Kings, Queenes, Princes and Princesses, appertained the Cloakes and Chaperons of mourning, the Litters of Violet Veluet, semed with floure de Luces of gold, and the hangings of blacke Veluet in Churches and Chappells, with the Ornaments of the burning Lights, the waxe excepted.At Marriages. The Cloakes at marriage of the said Kings and Princes, Queenes and Princesses, prouided, that there were but one Coate of Armes onely displayed.
At Baptizing of Children.At Baptizing of children to the said Kings and Princes, appertained to the said Heralds and Kings of Armes, the Vessell, Saltseller, Bason and Ewer to washe withall, the Mantles, Swathe-bands of the best, the warming-panne, the cloth of State, and Pillowes for the Infants baptizing. After Baptisme, they haue right also, three seuerall times to cry Largesse, and throw peeces of gold and siluer among the people. The like priuiledge likewise they haue, at the Sacring, Coronation, and entring of the Kings and their Wiues to their marrying.
At the foure chiefe feasts.At the foure chiefe feasts of the yeare, when the Kings keep open Court and great Reuells, they haue then whole Largesse, and new Liueries, as also the Cup of gold, wherein the King drinketh that day.
Proclaiming of Peace.At the publication of any Peace, the City or Towne where it is published by the said King of Armes, or Herald, is to pay him a Marke of gold.
On those dayes when eyther the King himselfe, or the Lieutenant Generall of an Armie doth create Knights;The Creation of Knights. beside the habits of those Nobles, they haue double wages, and whole or entire Largesse: that is to say, both crownes of gold and white money: to wit, the King of Armes to haue twice as much as the Herald, and the Herald to haue twise as much as the Pursuiuant.
Tilting daies or otherwise.On the dayes of Tourneyes, and actions of Armes, as well in fight, as to winne the loue of their Ladies; the defendants stand obliged to giue to the Heralds whatsoeuer falleth to the ground, and all that was carried betweene the two Lists, during the Combat, except the booke whereon the Chalengers and Defendants tooke their oathes. And the Combat or Tourney being ended, the Victors are to giue a Largesse.
Offices of the Heralds.In like manner, the said Herald ought to draw the vanquished by the heeles out of the Lists and Railes, and afterward to set downe in writing, whatsoeuer passed in the said Iousts and Tourney: to paint the Armes of the Challengers and Defendants, their Portraitures, Titles, and Qualities, according to the truth. For this cause, it is very necessary for them, to haue seene many strange Countries, and read the histories of the World; to know the needfull formes and ceremonies, as well for the Creation of a Nobleman, as of a Knight. To be exquisite in the Noble Art of Blazons, Painting, and Limming, for better ordering the Armes of them, whom the Prince shall enoble for their Vertue, according

to their naturall inclination to Armes or Learning. As also the propertie, nature, and condition of birds, creatures irrationall, both on the land, and in the water: the vertues of Plants, Trees, Flowers, Hearbs, Starres, and Planets. And from Heauen, to descend into the bowells of the Earth, there to apprehend the Nature of Mettalls, Mineralls, and precious Stones, as well as of the foure Elements; by whose intermixture, they may learne the composition of Colours, necessary for emblazoning according to Art, such Armes as they are to prepare, and what Creatures are to be Passant, Naissant, or Rampant.
To the said Officers of Armes, euery Knight Banneret that hath the meanes and power to carrie a Banner, ought to pay a Marke of Gold.The dues of Knights Ba^nerets and Captains of bands to the Heralds And euery Captaine of a Companie of Foote, bearing Ensigne open in the Field; ought to pay a Marke of Siluer, due to the said Officers of Armes; for taking the names, sir-names, qualities and Blazons of their Armes, to bee set downe and depicted in the booke of the Nobilitie, of the Prouince whereof they are Heralds or Kings of Armes.
It was also within the compasse of their charge, to aduertise Knights, Esquires,What Heralds are to doe on the daies appointed for battell. and Captaines, when the day of battell is appointed: on which day, the said Officers of Armes are to appeare in their best Ornaments before the white Cornet, or before the Great Standard or Banner of France, and at the brunt of violent encounter, to withdraw to some high exalted place, to make their eyes witnesses of that which is done on eyther side, and who haue carried themselues most valiantly; for making true report thereof to the King, or Generall of the Armie, after the Battell is ended, and then to set it downe in writing, that the memory thereof may remaine to posterity.
It belongeth also to them when the battell is concluded, to number the dead;Their Office after the battel to restore the Ensignes; to demand the Prisoners taken in warre, for making exchange; to summon rebellious Townes and Cities: And in case of composition, reddition, or exchange, to marche first before the Captaine or Gouernour of them, and there to giue him assurance of his person.
At Iousts, Tourneyes, Combats, or Encounters;Of apointing the field, or place for sight it is their charge to make forth the field for Battell, the Lists or the ground for Combat; to impart the Sunne equally to the Combatants at extremitie, be they Squires or Knights. And for their wages or reward, whatsoeuer falleth betweene the two Lists, appertaineth to them, as we haue already said: to wit, Horse, Armour, Armes, Plumes, Bardes, Chaufraines, Caparisons, and other Ornaments of Warre, and whosoeuer is desirous to make redemption of them, is to pay the Heralds the iust value of them.
In Combats or Fights, all the Armes and Ornaments of the vanquished, belongeth to the said Officers of Armes, and the Lists likewise the Chayres and the Cup or Bolle,Vailes of the persons vanquished. wherein the Combatants drinke each to other, after the contention shall be ended.
The Victor or Conqueror is to be conducted by them to his Chaire, with the cheerfull noyse of Trumpets and applausiue shouts of ioy, for exalting the glory, valiancie,Honor done to the Conquerour. and iust quarrell of the victorious: all (afterward) being Registred downe in writing; as the name, sur-name, quality, and Armes of the Partie. In recompence whereof, the Heralds ought to receiue sixe Markes of gold and siluer, to be distributed as formerly hath beene said.
And as for the party vanquished, they are to tread on him with their feete, as a Traitor,Disgraces done to the vanquished person. a falsifier of faith, periured and forsworne: and then both he and his Armes to be drag'd at a horse tayle by the heeles, and so cast out of the Lists with all ignominie, to be deliuered to the executioners of Iustice. Then is the Victor to be conducted backe in Triumph to his lodging, and in the chiefe Church they are to hang vp and affixe his Armes and Shield, to serue as a memoriall of his victory to posterity.
When the King or Prince doth enoble any one, the King of Armes or the Herauld is to emblazon his shi^ld, and to Register him in the Charter,At the King or Princes ennobling any ma^. among the Noblemen of the Prouince, with the name, sir-name, Lordship and quality of the person: for the doing whereof, the new-made Nobleman is to pay him (by ancient right) a marke of siluer, and the new-made Knight a Marke of gold, as a dutie.
Euery King of Armes is to haue two Heralds (at the least) vnder his command and obedience: and euery Herald a Pursuinant onely,Two Heralds vnder euery K. of Armes. who before he may obtaine the title and dignity of a Herald, ought to serue seuen whole yeeres fully compleated.
In elder times, there were three seuerall kindes of Coates of Armes. The first was

called Tunique as we haue obserued by Ammianus Marcellinus,Three seuerall kindes of Heralds Coates. hauing short sleeues, and rounded beneath, which was particular for Kings of Armes.
The second was tearmed Plaque, particular for Heralds, and of the same fashion as the Tunique or Dalmatique for the King of Armes. Onely to shew the difference of Rank^ and Qualitie; in the middest thereof hung two Pendants of silke, with faire tassels of the same colour as the Coate was made of.
The third was called a Coate of Armes, proper for Pursuiuants of Armes, which had wide long sleeues, finishing as in a point.
Heralds distinguished fro^ Kings of ArmsHeralds were (moreouer) distinguished from Kings of Armes, because Kings of Arms bare the Escutcheon crowned with the Crowne Royall, as well before as behinde, and also vpon the little sleeues. The Herald bare it but before and behinde, and on the shoulder or right sleeue, and not vpon the left. Beside, the Herald could not heare the said Escutcheon, but onely crowned with a Chappean, that is to say a Dukes Crowne, or with the pearled Circle, that is, a Counts Crowne.
Poursuiuants from the rest.As for the Poursuiuants, they ought not to beare the crowned Escutcheon, but whollie simple, on the left shoulder onely, and not on the right, as the Kings and Heralds doe, to shew, that they were of meaner qualitie, and may discharge themselues from the place of Poursuiuants of Armes, at such time as themselues thinke fit: but the King of Armes and the Herauld cannot doe so, or quit their places; except it be for mounting to a higher degree, as the King of Armes to be a Knight, and the Herald to the Office of the King of Armes.
Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Counts and Viscounts Souereignes, may haue Kings of Armes: but Dukes, Marquesses, Countes and Viscounts; not Soueraignes, Heralds onely.Of such persons as may haue Officers of Armes in each degree. High Barons, and Knights Bannerets, may haue Poursuiuants onely: but by the approuing and acknowledgement of some Herald. Notwithstanding, sonnes to the King, and Princes of the Blood of France, at all times haue had a King of Armes, as well in their Courts and Houses, as at their Marriages and Funeralls.
Concerning Princes Soueraignes.We call Princes Soueraignes, such as (in Temporall occasions) do not acknowledge any Superiour: as the Dukes of Lorraine, Sauoy, Millaine, and other Potentates both of Germany and Italy, which beare not the Title of King.
Poursuiuants of Armes in their appellations.Poursuiuants of Armes beare not the names of Prouinces, as the Kings and Heralds doe: but onely Epethites of Gallantry, of good encountring or ioyfull tearms; as Plaine. Way, Iolly-Hart, Verdure, Cleare-sight, Bright-greene, No-lier, Tell-troth, Chearefulnesse, Faire-seeming, Loftie-foote, and such like pleasant tearmes. Euery Knight Banneret hath his Pursuiuant, whom he calleth according to his owne minde; and sends to see strange Prouinces: to take knowledge of Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, their Genealogies, Armes, and Blazons, to obserue them in Bookes and Registers.
How Pursuiuants of Arms are baptized.At solemne feasts, when Princes and Lords keepe open Courts, Pursuiuants of Armes are ordinarily baptized: for we call it baptizing, when the name of their Heraldry or Pursuiuance is first giuen them, and the Ceremonie is in this manner. After Supper, the Prince or Lord of the assembly, causeth the Herald or Pursuiuant (whom he would baptize) to be presented before him, he being cloathed in a Coate of fine white Serge. Then the Prince taketh a great standing guilt cup, full of Wine, and in the presence of all his Court, powreth it on the head of the Herald or Pursuiuant, giuing to the Herald the name of his Prouince, or to the Pursuiuant, what pleaseth him, with his Coate and Esmaile, assigning him some good rentage, or some Borough for his support and maintenance.
Froissard writeth thus. After the Battell of Auroy, Iohn de Montfort aduertised the King of England, by a Poursuiuant of Armes standing there ready, with the tidings of what had hapned. Of a Poursuiuant he made him a Herald, baptizing him with the name of Windsore, giuing him great profits and Reuenues to maintaine him: so this ceremony was called Baptizing. And both Kings and Princes instituting the Militarie Orders of Knighthood, ordained therewith a Herald of the said Order; baptizing him with the name thereof. As Lewis the eleuenth named Mont Saint Michael, the Herald of his own Order: the King of England Garter; and them of Orleans, Aniou, Bretaigne and Bourgogne; Porcupine, Cressant, Hermine and Toison d'Or, or Golden-Fleece. In France the Heraulds with their Esmaux, Portent le Sceptre Esmail le d'Azur, couuert defleurs de liz d'Or: As in other kingdomes, Ils le portent des Esmaux, which are particular to them.
Kings of Armes and Heralds began to be respectiuely knowne,At what time Kings of Arms began to bee honored with respect in France. as also to be in great honor and authoritie, vnder the reigne of Philip de Valois, King of France, whose Court was more magnificent and full of splendor, then euer any Kings had beene in France, hee delighting to haue Iousts and Tourneyes daily. Also at that time, and long after, the charges of Kings and Heralds of Armes could not be apprehended, but by the Nobilitie, hauing made proofe of their worthinesse before the Master of the Horse of France, to whom it belonged, to order prouisions, to receiue and install any in charge. Now a daies all is so corrupt and out of order, euery Office being bought and sold: that such as holde the places of Heralds, are Clownish persons, who haue neuer seene any thing; but are so impertinent for the Noble Art of Blazons and Painting, that they know not how to deuise the Armes of a Prince or great Lord.
At the entrance of the late King Henry the third of that name (of happy and glorious memory) made at Paris, he hauing beene called King of Poland; ignorant Painters,Ignorance of Heralds and Painters. vpon the view of Heralds (more ignorant then they) Emblazoned the Armes of Poland d' Argent and de Sable, whereas (indeed) they are De Gueulles a l' Aigle d' Argent coronne d'Or. party demesme au Caualier d' Argent a l'Escu d' Azure a la Croix Patriarchale d'Or, which is of Lithuania, and the white Eagle of Poland, as wee shall better perceiue in the following discourse.
Ignorance in Heralds (who ought to be Controlless of Painters and Engrauers, and who heeretofore acknowledged them as their maisters, and had their Letters,Heralds the Controllers of Painters and Caruers. by reason of ignorance in the said Painters and Caruers, especially concerning the principles and rudiments in the noble Art of Painting) was apparantly knowne, at the entrance of Queene Mary of Florence, wife to King Henry the great, of glorious memory. For then, the Painters deuised and blazoned the Armes of Monsieur le Daulphin (at this present King of France) the one d'Argent, and the other d'Azure, to the Daulphine, the one d'or, and the other de Synople: whereas Monsieur le Daulphine ought Porter de France escartele de Daulphine, qui est au Daulphine pasme Pers, that is to say, d'Azure.
The Armes of Queen Mary, purposely prepared for her entrance;Armes prepared for the Qu. of France. there was defect in the Arms of Florence, which some make d' Azu. a six Besans d'Or. These chiefe charged, de trois Fleurs de Lys d'Azure escartelle d' Austriche, d'Argent a la Fesse. Others, A la Bande d'Argent: and all by extreame ignorance; because Austriche porte de Gueulles a la Fesse d'Argent. And Florence, or rather the illustrious house of Medicis, Porte d'Or a cinq Torteaux de Gueulles. And in chiefe, the place most honourable in Armes, Le Tourteaux de France, that is to say, D'Azure a trois Fleurs de Lys, d'Or. Which King Lewis the eleuenth gaue permission to be borne by Peter de Medicis, and by his Letters Patents, dated in the moneth of May, Anno 1465. As concerning the Armes of the Citie of Florence, they beare d'Argent a la Fleur de lys fleuronne doublement de Gueulles; which King Charlemaine gaue them, so say the Citizens thereof themselues.
The same impertinence, and on the same subiect of Armes,Errors in Arms by negligence of Heralds or Painters are punishable. to honor the entrance of the said Queene Mary, followed at the same time. For the Painters and Sculpters entowred her Arms with Cordeliers d'Argent, instead of Palmes. And the field whereon the said Armes were couched, Blazonne de Tanne, ou fucille morte: All noates of a Widdow Queene, and mourning for a sonne or brother of the King. For the Noble Kings of France mourne in Scarlet violetted, and married Queenes in Estamine de roze seiche, and widdowes in blacke Cypres, but heeretofore Linnen; their vailes white, whereon they were called white Queenes. As concerning Cordeliers; the Armes of Queenes, Princesses and married Ladies of high birth, ought to be entoured with Palmes, Lawrell, Myrtle,Mourning habits for Queens, Princesses, etc. and order of their Armes. and such like light greene things; but widdowes with Cordeliers of siluer, which tooke beginning by the inuention of Madam Anne, Duchesse of Bretaigne, and Queen of France, a chaste and modest Princesse, who being the widow to King Charles the eight, deceasing in the floure of his age, as she did the like: she caused her Armes to be entoured with a Cordeliere of siluer, wearing one also for a girdle about her, bestowing the like on all the Widdowed Ladies, and others that mourned in her traine for the Kings death.
Now, for such priuiledges as were granted to Kings of Armes and Heralds;Priuiledges granted to Kings and Heralds of Arms some doe ascribe them to the King and Emperor Charlemaigne: others to Alexander the Great of Macedon, and others to the Emperor of Germanie, Charles King of Bohemia, fourth of that name, nourished from his youth in the Court of the Father of Cheualrie, Philip de Valo^, King of France, sixt and last of that name, as heere followeth the Tenure in these words.





MEs Solda^s vo^^ serez appellez Heraux, compagnons des Roys, and Inges des crimes (...) par les Nobles, and Arbitres de leurs querelles, and differends. Viurez par cy apres (...) empts de plus aller en Guerre, and de faction militaire. Conseillez les Roys pour le bien, and (...) tilite du Public, and leur honneur, and dignite Royale; corrigez les choses vilaines, and des ^o^ nestes: fauorisez les Veufues; secourez les Orphelins, and les deffendez de toute violence: (...) stez de vostre Conseil les Princes and Seigneurs, e^ la Cour desquels vom aborderez, and (...) demandez librement and sans crainte se qui vous est necessaire, le viure, accoustrements, and deffray. Que si queulqu'vn d'eux vous refuse, qu'il soit infame, sans honneur, and sans g^^^^, tenu pour criminel de seze Maieste. Mais aussi donnez vous bien de garde d'a^ilir vostre^ ble exercice, and l'honneur que vous auex d'aprocher pres de nous a toute heure, and d'a^^r ^e^-trees es Cours des Princes, and Seigneurs, par yurongnerie, mesdisance, flatterie, trop parler pa^ Indiscretion, par Ianglerie, Bouffonnerie, and autres vices qui souillent and honnissent la repute tiou de l'Homme: monstrez bonne exemple par tout, maintenez l'Equite, and reparez les ^or^^ faicts par les grands aux petits. Souuenez vous des Priuileges que nous vous donnons pom recompence des penibles trauaux de la Guerre ou vous vous estes trouuez, a ce que les honneur que nous vous octroyons ne tournent a blasme, and infamie par vie deshonneste, duquel nous reser^ons la peine a nous, and a nos successeurs Roys de France.


The Priuiledges granted to Kings and Heralds of Armes.
MY Souldiers, you are and shall be called Heralds, companions for Kings, and Iudges of crimes committed by Noblemen, and Arbitrators of their quarrells and differences. You must liue heereafter exempted from going any more to Warre, or Military factions. Councell Kings for the best, the benefit of the Weale publique, and for their Honor and Royall digni^is. Correct all matters vile and dishonest: fauour Widdowes, succour Orphanes, and defend them from all violence. Assist with your Councell, such Princes and Lords in whose Courts you shall abide, and freely and without feare, demand of them whatsoeuer is needfull for you, as foods, rayment, and defrayings. If any one of them shall denye you, let him be infamous, without glory or honour, and reputed as criminall of high treason. In like manner also, haue you an especiall care, to keepe your selues from vilifying your noble exercise, and the Honor wherewith you ought to come neer vs at all times. See there be no entrance into Princes Courts, eyther of drunkennesse, ill speaking, flattery, babling indiscreetly, tanglerie, buffonnerie, and such other vices, which soyle and shame the reputation of men. Giue good example euery where, maintaine equitie, and repaire the wrongs done by great men to their inferiours. Remember what Priuiledges we haue granted you, in recompence of the painefull trauells in Warre, which you endured with vs. And let not the Honours which we haue bestowen on you, be conuerted to blame and infamie by dishonest liuing: the punishment whereof we reserue to our selfe, and to the Kings of France our Successors.




The Antiquity of Heralds and Kings of ArmsIt cannot be iustly said then, that Heralds and Kings of Armes were not in request, but since the time of Charlemaigne. For euen from the instant, that the descendants of Adam were distinguished into Nobles and Yeomen; there haue beene Combats, Battels, and Encounters, and consequently Heralds, deriued from the body of Nobilitie.
We read in Arianus, Quintus Curtius, and Plutarch, in the life of Alexander the Great, that that Prince hauing sent Heralds to the Inhabitants of the City of Tyre, to make peace and alliance with them: the Tyrians in a mad incensed rage, (ignorant in the Lawes of Nations) tooke the Heralds, and threw them downe headlong from the battlements of their walies into the ditches, where they were bruised in pieces. Alexander to reuenge this iniury, inuaded the City, and hauing suprized it by a long siedge, he razed it downe to the ground, although it commanded the Sea, and put all the people to the edge of the sword: Because that Heralds walked in the same pace as Ambassadors doe, for honor and assurance of their persons.
But it belongeth, that both the one and the other should gouerne themse^^^^ with al^

modesty, without offending the Princes to whom they are sent. Sigismund,An vnma^nerly Ambassadors hat nail'd to his head. first of the name, King of Poland, caused the hat to be nayled to the head of the Ambassador sent from Basilius, the great Duke of Moscouia; because hee had spoken to him with his head couered, alledging, that it was the custome in his Country of Moscouia.
During the reigne of Ferdinand King of Arragon, the Count of Orgell sent his Herald to defie him, and called to Combat the Count of Cardonna, Ammirant of Arragon. To braue whom, the said Herald came to deliuer his message at Barcellona, attired in a linnen cloth Coate, painted with some dishonest actions, imputed to the said Count of Cardonna, named Iohn Raymond. The foolish Herald performing his charge with al indiscretion, was apprehended by the command of King Ferdinand, who hindered the Combat,An indiscreet Herald iustly punished. and caused the Herald to be whipt naked with rods, through all the streets of Barcellona; a worthy chastisement for his presumptuous folly, so say the Spaniards in the life of the said Ferdinand.
Sabellicus in the eight booke of the history of Venice, and the second Decade, writeth, that the Venecians, hauing reduced the City of Vicenza v^der their obedience, sent their Herald to Don Vincent de Carara, commanding him from warring on the Vicentines, with sharpe words, and full of brauing Rodomontados* Carara much offended at his behauior, commanded the Herald to be taken, cutting off his nose and both his eares, and so sent him backe to the Venecians, with this answer; That they ought not to send him a message in such manner; declaring thereby, that Princes should manage the liues of their Heralds, and not expose them to death by iniurious messages, or of such negotiations, as are difficult and dangerous in the execution.
In these cases, the wisedome of King Lewis the eleuenth may well be followed,The prouide^t care of King Lewis is the 11. in enterprises of perill. who hazarded in great enterprises, men of base and meane quality. To the end, that if they succeeded not according to his minde, and that his people fell into any ill fortune, the losse should be the lesse, where he could not auouch them, but with danger of their liues. So he would not hazard the person of his Herald, by going into England, to mooue the motion for Peace: but employed a man of silly respect, gracing his Coate with the Cornet of a Trumpet, and giuing him the supposed name of a Herald. The same King in like manner, to mannage his affaires in Flanders, serued his turne with a vaine-glorious Barber, called Oliuer the Dane, and otherwise to armed the Wicked, calling himselfe the Vicount of Corbeill (who would needs be reputed Count of Meulant:Oliuer the Dane a foolish Barber.) But he was hanged in the reigne of Charles the eight, on a Iybbet in Paris, by Order from the Court of Parlament, the twenty day of May, Anno 1493. for his notorious robberies, cruelties, and massacres: but especially, because he had vsurped the Vicountie of Corbeill, against Iohn Amyart, lawfull Lord thereof.
But if they be true Ambassadors or Heralds,Of iniuries done to true Ambassadors or Heralds. and such bad entertainment be vsed vnto them, by those Princes to whom they are sent: it might iustly, (as it hath done heeretofore) serue as a new sparke and fire-brand of Warre. As happened, according to the testimony of Varro and Suetonius, betweene the Emperour Augustus Caesar, and the Germanes, who (contrary to the right of Nations) had put to death the Romanes Ambassadours and Heralds, Titurius and Arunculeius. For reuenge of whose deaths, Augustus solemnely sware, neuer to cut his haire or beard, vntill they had felt due infliction. Heereupon beganne the Warre in Italie, and namely at Millaine, in the time of King Francis the first, to reuenge the death also of his Ambassadors, Rinson and Fregose, executed by night in the City of Millaine; by report of the Lord of Bellay, and the History of Italie.
In the yeare 1527. the same King Francis the first, and the King of England, Henry the eight of that name, sent their Heralds into Spaine, to defie the Emperor Charles the fift, and to carry him the Lye, and bid him Combat. Beeing arriued at Burgos in Casti^e, where the Emperor then kept his Court, they had audience granted them, on Wednesday the 22. day of Ianuary, the said yeere 27. and in the Hall of Presence, the Emperour being assisted with the greatest Lords of Spaine, when they spake. At entring into the Hal, Guienne King of Armes for the King of France, and Clarenceaux,Two Heralds sent to Charles the Emperor, and their worthy carriage. King of Armes for England, presented themselues before the Emperour, about the ninth houre in the morning. Their heads were bare, and their Coats of Armes hanging on their right armes, when they demanded permission to deliuer their message, with assurance and safe conduct of their persons, for returning backe to France, without iniury or disturbance,

which the Emperor promised them on the worde of a Prince. Guienne then defied him, on his Masters behalfe, as well by Sea as by Land, and deliuered him the Lye in w^^ting, Signed Guienne King of Armes: dated at Paris the eleuenth day of Nouember, i^ the said yere 1527. Guienne hauing heard the Emperors excuse, By the arrest of Rome, d^tention of the Pope, and the sacred Colledge of Cardinalls, tooke his Coat of Arms, and put on his body: the same Ceremonies being obserued by Clarencieux the Herald of England, who defied him likewise in his Masters name, and the Emperour gaue them their dispatche, and sent them away the said second day of Ianuary. So should Heralds and Kings of Armes gouerne themselues, when they are sent vnto Princes, and carry words of displeasing nature: to demand (first) assurance for deliuery of their message, or else, not to deliuer it all.
The Emperors answer returned to the Kings of Fra^ce and England.The said Emperour, Charles the fift, was seauen or eight moneths in sending backe an answer to the Kings, euen vntill the tenth day of September, in Anno Dom. 1528. His Herald Golden Fleece, or Toison D'or, presented himselfe first to the King of France, in the great Hall of the Pallace at Paris, the King being assisted with all the Princes of his Blood, diuers Ambassadors and strange Lords, with an infinite number of Prelates, Peeres of France, and other. But because the Herald had discouered his message with impudence,The impudence of an Embassador from the Emperor. indiscretion, and Spanish Rodomontado tearmes, in presence of the King, and cloathed in his Coat of Spaine; hee was summoned to giue his Patent for acceptation of the fight, and the field for battell.
When he had declared p^bliquely, that he had nothing in writing, but onely his cred^nce by word of mouth; the King denied him audience, and forbad him (before all present) on paine of his life, not to vtter or moue one word that might offend him. And so the H^rald of Spaine returned backe, without doing any thing.
The Ceremonies whereby the Kings Heralds of France and England made vse, for denouncing Warre to Charles the fifth, were very simple, yet very sprightly.
The manner of defiances sent to enemies by sundry Nations.The Ancient Romanes defied their enemies to extremitie, by throwing an enflamed Torche vpon their land: expressing thereby, that they would make their passage by fire and sword.
The Scythians, Tartares, and the Nations of Germanie (seated vnder the North) gaue to their Enemies the choyse of winde or sword; that is to say, eythet Peace or Warre: Peace by the winde, which causeth vs to breath; and Warre which is death, by the sword.
The Mexicanes, and people of Peru, defied Kings th^ir enemies, by sending them Presents of Armes of defence, the Heralds rubbing their foreheads with a certaine oyntment, such as they embalmed their dead withall, round decking their heads likewise with plumes of feathers, such as they bestowed on the dead, before they gaue them enterring. And in making these Ceremonies, they defied them to the field, saying: Seeing you will not like of Peace, we will take away the life of you and yours: According as it is auouched by Iosephus Acosta, in his naturall history of India, the seuenth booke, and twelfth Chapter.


CHAP. V. Of Honors, and Military Recompences, Shields, Collers, Girdles, Crownes, and Rings of Gold.
THE Romanes, (a most Warre-like Nation, and the best gouerned in all the inhabitable World) recompenced the valiancie of their Citizens and Souldiours, with certaine Prizes of Honour: which at the first were nothing else but fruites, producted by the Earths enemie; according as Crownes were not then composed, plaited and fitted, but with simple Herbages of Gramen, Dogge-grasse, Oake, Lawrell, and other branches of Trees, as Titus Liuius writeth in the seauenth Booke of his Romane History, and Plinie in his Naturall History, the two and twentieth booke, and the

third Chapter, and onward. But as excesse and riot crept into Rome, by the aboundance of Conquered Prouinces; euen so in the same manner, the Prizes of Honour became changed and altered into Siluer and Gold. Nay more, those Mettalls were also releuated with the excellency of precious stones, tripled Collers, or Chaines of Gold,Plenty is the Nurse of excesse. Crownes, Rings, or Horses, bredde and maintained at publique expence, became added thereunto. And then began the vse likewise of making Images and Statues (according to the life) of such men as had brauely exposed their liues in dangers, for the Cities safety and Honour. So that Amazonian Romane A Noble Romane maide, that being in Hostage with Porcenna, deceiued her keepers, and swam ouer ^yber to the Citie. Cloelia, was honoured with her Statue on Horse-backe, planted in an honourable place, mounted aloft in the sacred street to serue as a Mirrour or Beacon, for conduct of the Romane youth, to arme themselues with courage, casting in their faces the reproach of a cowardly or home-keeping life, as the old Latine Poet said:
Vos etenim Iuuenes animos geritis muliebres,Illaque Virgo Viri.
Now these departments and distributions of Honors were not done but with great and good knowledge of the cause. For, although at Rome the Temple of Honour stood with open face to the East, West, South and North, as granting entrance indifferentlie,The temple of Honor at Rome. to all them that cherished vertue, as some by one meanes, and some by other: yet notwithstanding, that they might be equally vsed, or knowne after one and the same manner, the Reward and the paine (according to the quality of persons) were alwaies different; because the distribution of them ought to be different, and ruled Ad Pondus, and ad Iustitiam.
In the same manner, in all well gouerned Soueraigne Estates, distinct and separate by degrees of honour and preheminence, as Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Counts,Acknowledgment of eminent persons. Vicounts and Barons; they are knowne as well by their Ornaments, as neere approach to the person of the Prince and Soueraigne, who for the distribution of those great honours, ought to locke them vp, and restraine them to the smallest number as possibly hee may. Hee should bestow them on his owne, as a sport or exercise of great price,How Honors and dignities ought to be distributed. earnestly wished for by all, but granted or admitted to very few; for nothing in the world doth more abase the worth of glory and honour, then when it is made common, or granted (without choyse and merit) to men of meane and wretched condition.
There are sufficient testimonies in one of the French Historians, concerning what contempt was made of the Order of the Starre, in the reigne of King Charles the seuenth, who gaue it (without choyse) to all such as offered him any seruice. The Princes and Lords disdained it, and the King himselfe abolished it from all vse, hauing giuen his Starre to the Captaine of the night watch, in the City of Paris. Another, in the learned Commentaries of Blaise de Monluc, Marshall of France, one of the very brauest Captaines in his time, saith: That as an excellent testimony of Honour, King Henrie the second gaue him the Order of Saint Michael, which was not then prophaned, as it was in the time of Charles the ninth, when the Court was more full of Knights then it was of Horses: the Order being then so basely abused, that for giuing fiftie Crownes, any one might be made Knight of the Order of Saint Michael, without any regard or merit, neyther were those new-made Knights Gentlemen, or yet so good as the Farmers sonnes of the Countrie.
Sleiden in his second booke, obserueth the restriction made by the Emperor Sigismond King of Bohemia and Hungaria, concerning the number of Knights of his (ouerthrown) Order of the Dragon; consisting but of thirty persons (himselfe being chiefe of the Order) signale for vertue and well-deseruing. And the Emperour Charles the fift, whose life was of sufficient length, held but foure Chapters of his Order of the Golden Fleece,Of prophaning Knighthoods dignity. instituted by the house of Bourgongne. It is likewise the prophaning of the Dignity of any Order (the sole prize of honour and valiancie) in conferring and giuing it indifferently, to all such as desire it, or get it (vnder-hand) by fauour, and no merit.
Amongst the Romanes, In Equite Romano Census, and Probitas spectabantur: So saith the Light of Ciuill Lawyers, the learned Cuiaux, in the one and twentie booke, and ninth Chapter of his Obseruations. Hee ought to haue goods and faculties sufficient to maintaine the Estate of Knighthood, and with those meanes, probitie of life.

His reuenues ought to be foure hundred Sestertiaes, the Sestertia valuing two Assis and a^ halfe, which made the fourth part of the Romane Denarius, which valued fiue Sols of French money, whereby the Sestertia amounted to the peece of three Blanks: so that foure hundred Sestertiaes arose yeerely to Foure score Parisian pounds, which make an hundred pounds Tournois.
The probatio^ of him that was to be Knighted.Probitie or integritie, consisted in good manners, and a life without the least taxation, or reproofe, being very neere to Noble nature: whereof he was to make proofe, by Antiquity of Triumphs, and olde duskie Images. Milites fieri non poterant, qui de genere militum nati non essent. And no one could be registred downe in the Rolle of Honor, vntill he had formerly verified his Descent, to proceed from a Grandfather and Father of free condition: Constitutum ne coj jous esset, nisi coj ingenouo Patri, Auoque paterno Sestercis CCCC. Census fuisset: so saith Pliny in the three and thirtieth booke, and tenth chapter of his naturall history.
But after that the Romane Emperors had admitted into the ranke of Knighthood, all kinde of persons indifferently, as well free as enfranchised; by money or fauour; the Honor of Knighthood became changed into contempt and dishonor.
Now, among the Romanes, the prizes of Honor and Recompence, were Crownes, Collers and Rings of Gold,Honourable Recompence^ among th^ Roma^^^. Bardes and Chanfreines for horses; Coronae Torques, Phalera, and Signa Militaria: and Standards, Banners, and Penons of Warre.
Concerning Crownes there were different sorts, and some more worthy then the other: Aulus Gellius in the fift booke De Noctibus Atticis, numbreth seauen or eight. The first was called by the Romanes, Ouall, Oualis Corona, of the olde Latine verbe Ouare, which signifieth to reioyce, and the word Ouatio, Reioycing. This Crowne was made of Myrtle, a Shrub dedicated to the goddesse Venus:
Populus Alcidae gratissima, Vittis Iaccho,Formosae Myrtus Veneri, sua Laurea Phoebo.
So speaketh Virgill.
Corona Ouali^, how bestowed.It was giuen to the Generall of an Armie, who without receiuing any wound, and effusion of bloud, had the vpper hand of his enemie: Or had beene sent against wretched slaues and Pyrates, vnworthy the exercise of Romane valiancie. This Generall might enter into Rome Triumphally; but on foote, being followed onely by the Senate (yet not on horse-backe) with the bands of the Armie.
Corona Na^alis.NAVALIS The second was Corona Naualis, the Nauall Crowne, made with a Circle of gold, releuated like Prowes and Poupes of Gallies and Ships, of the same Mettall. It was bestowed on a Captaine or Souldier, that first grapled the Enemies Galley, and leapt into it.
Corona Valla^CASTRENSIS The third was tearmed Palissado or Vallaris, made of the selfe-same stuffe, and releuated with Pales, Piles or Stakes. The Generall of the Armie gaue it to a Captaine or Souldier, who first enfranchised the Enemies Campe, and so forced the Palissado.
Corona Muralis.MVRALIS Of the same temper was that called Corona Muralis, raised with Bretesches, Parapects and Battlements of gold; seruing as a Recompence and Prize for him, who first mounted on the walls of a besieged Towne or City, and there fixed the Standard, belonging to the Generall of the Armie.
CIVICACorona Ciuica, more esteemed then the Precedent,Corona Ciuica. Or the Cities Crowne. and made with flourishing branches of the greene Oake; was giuen by the Citizens of Rome to their fellow Citizen, who had saued a Citizens life in a siege, or in a ranged battell. The ancient Romanes (as well as the wise and learned Druides) held the Oake in singular estimation, as beleeuing verily, that the fruit of this tree serued (in former times) for bread and sustenance to their elder predecessors, and that Wheate and Rie was in no practise for the vse and nourishing of men, but by defect of Mast or Acornes, as the Latine Poet speaketh in his Georgicks.

Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere Terram
Instituit; Cum iam glandes, atque arbuta sacrae
Deficerent syluae, and victum Dodona n^garet.

Rome gaue it likewise to them, who had well deserued of the publique estate, and managed matters for her conseruation. For this cause the Orator obtained it, hauing discouered the mine of treasons deuised by Catiline and his Complices. Iulius Caesar desired it aboue all the rest, and yet could not obtaine it;Cesar could not obtaine the City Crown, and the reason why. because he had sullied his hands in the bloud of his fellow Citizens. But the very fairest Title of Honour which the Romanes could excogitate, to illustrate the memorie of Augustus: was to call him their Father, and gaue him the Oaken Crowne: so that the Medalls and Moneyes (as well gold as siluer) of that good Emperor (vnder whose reigne the King of Kings, and Monarch aboue all Monarchs pleased to take birth in his humanity) had on the one side the Image of the said Augustus, and for a Legend round about, Divus Augustus Pater: And on the other side, a Crowne of Oaken leaues, sustained or carried by two Harts, Symboles of Eternity,The Moneys in Augustus Caesars tim^. for their exceeding long life, and vnder them a round bowle of the world, with a Scepter of Antiquity. Within the Crowne were these Letters engrauen, Ob Ciues Ser. Ob Ciues Seruatores, on the sides these two Letters, S. C. Senatus consulto, to shew that this money was stamped by Decree of the Senate.


SC OB CIVES SER


DIVVS AVGVSTVS PATER


TRIVMPHALISThe Triumphall Crowne was plaited with branches of Lawrell, the Symbole of Victory;Corona Triumphalis for Victors. and (soone after) made of the purest gold; whereupon it was named Aurum Coronarium. It was giuen to the General, that returned home with Victory from a dreadfull enemy, by whose surprizall or ouerthrow, the Romane Estate wonne great aduantage: According to the ancient Prouerbe of our reuerend Forefathers; Let him haue the Honor of the Warre that bringeth home profit.
GRAMINEA But the most excellent Crowne of all, was Corona Graminea, called by the Romanes Corona Obsidionalis, obserued by Virgill in his Bucoli^s;
Qui Graminis attigit Herbam.
Plinie in the two and twentieth booke, and third chapter of his naturall history, saith: That this Crowne was giuen by all the people of Rome; but the other, by the Emperors or by Generals of the Armie. Corona quidem nulla fuit Graminea nobilior in maiestate Populi Terrarum Principis, praemijsque gloriae, Gemmatae, and Aureae, Vallares, Murales, Rostratae, Ciuicae, Triumphales post hanc fuere. Caeter as Imperatores dedere, sola Graminea ab vniuerso Exercitu seruato, Seruatori Decreta est. The Ciuica or City Crowne was giuen to him that had saued the life of a Romane Citizen: but this was giuen to the Captaine, that deliuered a whole enclosed Armie, sharpely besieged on all sides by the enemies.
The compos^tion of the Obsidionall Crowne.This Crowne was taken, and made of the same grasse and hearbs, which were first found in the same deliuered field. Dabatur haec viridi e Gramine decerpto inde, ibi obsess^s seruasset aliquis. Because, that like as the ancient Aegyptians, Greekes, and Romanes (so speaketh Porphirius in the book of Sacrifices and Magicke) made present (in elder times) of nothing else but hearbs to their gods, but afterward fruits gathered from the ground, and (in the end) liuing creatures: In the same manner, the honor and sacrifice (if it may be so said) which the Souldier rendred to his Generall, that had deliuered him from death, was to present him with the first hearbs found in the field, where hee had so happily receiued a second life* Summum enim apud Antiquos (so saith the same Plinie) Signum Victoria, erat Herbam porrigere Victoribus, hoc est Terra, and Altrice ipsa Humo, and humatione etiam cedere. A custome practised (saith Plinie) and deriued from the ancient Gaules, who vsed the same; by report of Caesar in his Commentaries of the Gaulish warre. In obseruing that sprightly and Warlike Nation, he saith, that while they attended the shocke and signall of Battell, they would sit down on a Sod of earth, and tufte of greene grasse in their fielde of battell. And the Romanes (according to the testimony of Plinie) had not any thing in greater estimation, then Verueine, and the hearb called Dogges tooth, which is the Graminea. Auctores Imperij Romani Conditoresque immensum quidam sumpsere ex ignobilibus herbis, quoniam non aliunde Sagmina in remedijs publicis fuere, and in sacris legationibus, quam Verbenae. Certe vtroque nomine idem significatur. Hoc est gramen ex arce cum su^ terra euulsum: Hac (Verbenae) semper Legaticum ad hostes Clarigatum mitterentur vsi, i^ est, res raptas clare repetitum vnus vtique Verbenarius vocabatur, as wee haue obserued in the former Chapter.
The meanest Crowne in value, but the most honorable.This Obsidionall Crown was the meanest in value of all the rest, but the most excellent in honor, and it was giuen to the Generall of an Armie Romane, that had deliuered his followers, and compelled the enemy to dis encampe, and sound the retreat. In the second wa^^e of the Ca^thagenians, Fabius Maximus, hauing deliuered the City of Rome, when it was extreamely besieged by them: by order and decree of the Senate, hee was honoured with this Crowne Graminea.
The Crowne of Peace and Concord.Ouer and besides these Crownes that were of Honor, there remained yet another, and the very simplest of all; which (in Iudging vprightly) ought to haue the prime ranke of honour and preheminence: nay, rather more; because Peace is the sacred gift of God, and the best that man can haue, or wish for, farre excelling and surpassing in felicitie, the wretched and miserable condition of Warre. It was a Crown composed and made of Oliue Branches, which was bestowed on him that had managed Peace and Concord, betweene two mortall enemies, and by solid discretion, brought it to a successefull conclusion, neuer to be dissolued.
A Poeticall ^ontrouersie between Neptune and MineruaIt is sufficiently known, that the Oliue is the Hieroglyphicke or Symbole of Peace, and by a queint inuention of the Poets, it was feigned, that question being moued for naming the City of Athens; the debate and controuersie hapned betweene Minerua and Neptune. To determine this difference, the gods being assembled in their Synagogue, it was ordained, that the preference should appertaine to the party of the Contendants, which could bestow on men the most beneficiall gift. Neptune striking the Earth with his Mace or Trident, immediately bounded forth a goodly horse, the Symbole of Warre.
Bello armantur Equi, Bellum armenta minantur.
Minerua on the contrary, shee produced a flourishing Oliue-Tree, the presage of Peace.
Oleaque Minerua inuentrix.
Hereupon, by an vnanimate voyce of the Gods, the prerogatiue was adiudged to Minerua, the Goddesse of Peace.
The vse of these Crownes became lost beyond measure,The Romaine Honors gre^ out of request by the Empires declination. when the greatnesse and Maiesty of the Romaine Empire, began to totter and decline. And then Kings, who made a benefit of her decadence and fall, subrogated others in their stead. As namely the close Crowne for Imperiall, but altogether of a contrary fashion, to those of the moderne Emperours, both of the East and West; as wee are enstructed by Curopalates, in notice of the one and other Empire, who sets them downe quite otherwise, then they are at this present.

 NOw concerning that belonging to the Sacred Kings of the Lillie, The floure best beloued, which is without any Paragon:The Crowne for France. the Princes which are the yong shoots, and budding branches thereof, haue their Chappeaux and Tymbres honored on the Crest.

 DVkes haue their Chappeaux, with Roses blowne and open spreading.Dukes Crown^.

 MArquesses haue theirs composed of a Chappeau, and a Circle,Marquesses. three vpon one.

 FOr the Count, he hath a Circle with Buttons.Counts.

 ANd the Viscount with Pearles; the first is releuated,Vicounts. but this other without any releuation at all: And the Ordonance of Chappeaux and Circles, is conformable to the preheminence.

 AS for the Crownes belonging to the Kings of England and Spaine,Crownes for England and Spaine. they are represented (without preiudice to their ranke) according to the common obseruation of Geographers.




Returne we now againe to the Romaine Antiquity.
The Emperor Augustus Caesar (whose Ordonances may be taken from the Table of Royall dignity, and the degrees of honor) was long time retained in the distribution of

them: as Suetonius telleth vs in his life, the fiue and twentieth Chapter. Dona milit^ri^ aliquanto facilius Phaleras, and Torques, and quidquid Auro, Argentoque constaret, quam Vallares, ac Murales Coronas, quae honore praecellerent, dabat.
And in the three and fortieth Chapter, speaking of Chaines of Gold, whereof (oftentimes) he made liberall gifts. In hoc ludicro Caium Nonium Asprenatem lapsu debilitatum Aureo Torque donauit, passusque est ipsum posterosque Torquati ferre cognomen.
Caligula, to the Crownes formerly obserued, added other of his owne inuention: as Suetonius saith in his life, the fiue and fortieth Chapter. Participes Victoriae nouo genere Coronarum donauit, quas distinct as Solis, ac Lunae, Syderumque Specie, Exploratorias appellauit.
The same Suetonius noteth (on the words of the Emperor Augustus) that he gaue, as an especiall priuiledge of excellency and honor, to his Sonne in Law Agrippa (who had won the Nauall battaile on the coasts of Sicilie, the Storie whereof is sufficiently knowne) the Blew Standard for Generals by Sea, whom we call Admirals. Marcum Agrippam i^ Sicilia post Naualem Victoriam, Caeruleo Vexillo donauit.
Concerning Collers and Chanfraines.The fore-alleadged passage of the Emperor Augustus: Ve facilius Phaleras, and Torques, affirmeth, that those Collers and Chanfraines were his ordenarie gifts: but yet neuerthelesse, they were not granted at any time, except to persons of especiall merit. As is wel obserued by the learned Budeus, the honor of France, vpon the Law Finale, De Senatoribus, at the Digest. That Torques Aurei Militibus ob rem Strenue gestam ab Imperatoribus donari solebant.
Because that this was the prize of Valiancie, and the most worthy recompence of Vertue. As it is said in the Chapter Ius militare, the first distinction Stipendiorum modus, Dignitatum gradus, Praemiorum honos, veluti cum Corona, vel Torques datur. For otherwise, Iuuenall would haue improued such a distribution, as speaketh his last Satyre.

Ipsius arte Ducis hoc referre videtur,
Vt qui fortis erit, sit foelicissimus idem,
Vt laeti Phaleris omnes, and Torquibus omnes.

For concerning men of merit and honor, such recompences were neuer enuied; but (contrariwise) worthily acknowledged, both by the adornements of their Horses, and by the Coller of the Order, as witnesseth Silius Italicus, in his fifteenth booke.

Phaleris hic pectora fulget,
Hic Torque aurato circumd^t bell^ca colla.

Vpon these two passages, of the Poets, and the speeches concerning Chaines of Gold in Collers, which is the true auncient note of Knighthood: we will insert here some other obseruations, collected from a farre greater number.
The honorable antiqui^ie of Chain^s and Rings.Among the Assyrians, A^gyptians, Medes and Persians, the Chaine of Gold for the necke, and the Ring of Gold for the finger, was the marke or Symbole of libertie, nobilitie and Chiualrie. In the foure and fortieth Chapter of Genesis, Ioseph, being a slaue in the Court of Pharaoh: was proclaimed Vice-Roye of Aegypt, set at free liberty, and the Ring of Gold put on his finger, and the Chaine of Gold about his necke, by King Pharaoh. As much was done to Mardocheus, by the King Ahasuerus, in the booke of Hester: And to the Prophet Daniell (as himselfe writeth) by the great King of Persia Nabuchodonosor.
We learne of Curopalates, in the booke of the Offices of Constantinople, that the Chaines of Gold giuen to Knights or Souldiors by the Romaine Emperors, were ordenarily thrice double.Of the the w^^athes called Stemma (...) Diadema His noate is very remarkeable, for thereby hee enstructeth vs, that those that were giuen in his time (which is aboue eleuen hundred years since) called Stemma, were formerly named Diadema: which was a head-band of pure Gold, couered with Pearles and rich Stones, and therewith were engirt the browes of the Romaine Emperours, being made fast behinde the head, which they then called Stemma. Now concerning the word Diadema, it was taken (in his time) for a Girdle or Baudricke, proper onely to Knights and Souldiors, as a marke of honor, and preheminence. For this cause (saith he) Tyrants and Pagan Princes, desiring to martyrise Christian Knights, that would not offer incense to their Idols:(...) of cruel tyrants to C^r^stian (...). first of all, they would despoile them of their Girdles and Baudrickes, and afterward deliuer them to the Hangmen and Tormentors, to make them endure the tortures of Martyrdome. Obserue here how hee describeth the

Coller, belonging to the Order of those Knights, which hee calleth Strepton, (...).
That which at this present they call Strepton, is a Coller of Gold made and wrought by the Goldsmiths hand, into the forme of a wreath or garland, composed of three chaines, Torques. Aurum ductum, implexum ex tribus quasi funiculis, quod gestabant de collo.
Now you are to vnderstand,Those Collers deriued onely from the Gaules. that the Romaines drew not the practise of these Collers from the Greekes, or any other Nation, but onely the Gaules, a most dreadfull Nation to the said Romaines, since the sacke of the City of Rome. Virgill (I will begin with his testimony, as most auncient) in the eight booke of his Aeneidos, desciphering the Gaules by their long curled lockes of goodly haire, their golden Beards, their Iacquers, Cassockes and arming Coates, Bandezen Pal de diuerses couleurs, (as yet are worne by the Guard of the Kings Gates, and the great Prouost of the Houshold) and about their necks, white as Snow, (bare, and without any necke couering, according to the fashion of the auncient Gaules) but adorned with Collers and Chaines of Gold.

Aurea Caesaries collis, atque aurea Vestis,
Virgatis lucent sagulis, tum lactea colla
Auro inectuntur,

Diodorus Siculus, in the sixt booke of his Antiquities, speaketh thus of the Gaules. Circa collum grandes Torques gestant ex solido auro, and in digitis Annulos aureos.
Strabo, his contemporarie, in the fourth booke of his Geographie, making mention of the Chaines and Collers of Gold, as also Rings of the same mettall, which those Auncestors of the French wore about their neckes, and on their fingers; calleth both the one and the other, Honors of Excellence and Dignitie.
Titus Liuius exalteth one Manlius Torquatus (whom he maketh sourse and originall, of one of the greatest and most renowned Families in the Citie of Rome) for bearing the sirname of Torquatus, A Torque detracto cuidam militi Gallo* by victorie in single Combat of a Gaulish Knight; whom Caesar and Titus Liuius (coniured enemies to that warlike Nation) make more easie to be vanquished and surmounted by their pens, then euer they could haue bin by their Armes. Thus much concerning Collers: come wee now to Rings.
The passages formerly reported by Diodorus Siculus and Strabo, haue made vs an entrance, yea, another passage of the precedent. Manuum articulos, and brachijs armillis aureis, exornant, and in digitis Annulos aureos gestant.
The youths of France, to the end they might attaine to the honor of Knighthood,The endeauor of French youths to gain the honor of Knighthood. so soone as their first Armes were bestowed on them: made shew of wearing but a Ring of Iron, vntill they had made some proofe of themselues against their enemies, and brought to end some enterprise, whereby to win account and reputation. This is the testimonie of the noble Romaine Annalist Cornelius Tacitus, in describing the common manner of life of the Gaules and Germaines, ruled and gouerned by one and the same kinde of poll^cy. Fortissimus quis que insuper annulum ferreum (ignominiosum id genti) velut vinculum gestat, donec se caede hostis absoluat.
He said to very good purpose, Ignominiosum id genti, to a Nation wholly generous and magnanimious, borne to command, and not to serue; borne to subdue all the people in the world by force of Armes, and from their inuincible power, to giue and make Lawes, but not to receiue them from any person. Vndoubtedly, it was a matter very ignominious, to weare a Ring of Iron, the most vile and abiect mettall, that mother nature could yeelde from her fruitfull wombe: a mettall, the marke and Symbole of slauery and seruitude.
The most acceptable presents, which the round neighbouring people could send to these couragious men, to let them liue in peace (saith the same Tacitus) were the goodliest Armours, bright and cleare shining, sprightly Horses, brauely limb'd and accoustred, with costly Bardes, Chanfraines and other furniture for the said Horses, as also rich Collers of Gold. Gaudent praecipue finitimarum gentium donis, magna arma, electi equi, pha^erae, Torques que. It was no wonder then, if they affected Horses, their meere nature made it sufficiently knowne: because (at all times) they haue bin obserued,The Gaules naturally affected to Horses The Iron Ring a noate or marke of Slauerie. to be the most actiue, and very best Souldiors of the world.
The Ring of Iron was (as we haue already said) a noate of slauery to the Gaules and

Germaines, to the Greekes and Romaines, who borrowed from the Gaules the difference of Rings. All Slaues (in auncient times) wore Rings of Iron, in holes bored through their eares, vpon their fingers, and very often on their feete, like miserable Gally-slaues, fastened to the chaine: and in this manner they were condemned to digge and labour in Mines. Ad Metalla, Fodinasque damnati.
Lucian, for this consideration, introduceth Prometheus, fastned on the mountaine Ca^casus, with great Iron Chaines, and on his finger a Ring of the same mettall; subiect to rust, and of no value.
Anulum aureum neque Seruus, neque Libertinus gestabat in publico, sed Anulo aureo Liberi vtebantur; Libertini argenteo, Serui ferreo, so learned Isidore telleth vs. It was by the Ring of Iron, that Slaues were knowne, as Apuleius saith in the tenth booke of his Mil^sians. Donec iussu Magistratum ministeria publica, contrectatis nequissimi, Serui manib^^, Annulum Ferreum deprehensum, cum signosacculi conferunt.
A passage which may make vs to obserue an order well kept in auncient houshold gouernement,A notable obseruation of Auncient Houshold gouernment. when, to hinder the infidelity of Slaues, of vile birth, and worse breeding, as naturally inclined to all vice; those reuerend Elders lockt vp all things vnder key. For the Mothers of the Family, who had no other troubles in their heads, but loyall loue to their Husbands, and respect of the houshold (two points to be most wished in euery wise wife) did weare (on necessity) Rings of Gold. Within the table of some one of them, w^s ^ngrauen certaine carracters, and a Seale on the one side, and on the other a little Key, fastened to a Chaine turning in the hand, to locke and open whatsoeuer might be subiect to pilffering. Because our auncients held this as an vndoubted maxime, Tot serui, to^ hostes: whatsoeuer distinction may be induced of voluntary seruitude, or forced. Simi^ semper Simia, etiam in purpura. Si sperat fore clam, rursum ad ingenium redit, so saith the prouerb^* and the learned Comicall Terence.
Plinie in the three and thirtieth Booke, and the first Chapter of his Naturall History, saith: N^n^ ci^i, and potus, Anulo vindicantur a rapina. In Plautus, the Mother of the Family, to keepe h^^selfe from priuy theeues, went herselfe to Market, and at going forth of her house, lockt and made fast her Cubbords and other places of charge.
Obsignat cell (...), referte Anulum ad me.
Whereof a seruant complained, detesting this dilligence, most requisite in housekeeping, to locke vp all things vnder Key, euen to the Salt-seller, as the same Plantus affirmeth:
Isti parcipromi qui Saliuum seruis obsignantCum Sale.
And Marshall in his ninth Epigrame.
Nunc signat meus Anulus lagenam.
A diligence which S. Clemens Alexandrinus approueth, and commendeth in a Christian woman, in the third Booke of his Institutions. Dat Foeminis Anulum Aureum, nec eum quidem ad ornamentum, sed vt ea obsignent, quae doni digna sunt quae custodiantur, propteres quod domus cura ad cas pertineat. Si enim rectam Paedagogi institutionem omnes probe sequrentur, ni^il opus esset Signaculis, cum omnes essent ex aequo Iusti, and Serui, and Domini. Sed quoniam ignorantia, and mala educatio praebet occasionem propensionis ad iniuriam, fuit op^^ Sigillis. A passage which well deserueth to be translated into English.
The reason why the Ring of Gold was giuen to a Christ^an woman.It was permitted to a Christian Woman, to weare the Ring of Gold on her hand, not for ostentation, or vaine brauery, but for necessity and care of House-keeping. It is giuen her to seale and locke vp such things as are to be conserued; because she was married, to conserue and gouerne the goods of her Husband. For, if euery one vnderstood and knew the rules belonging to a rich Oeconomie, there would be no neede of locking any thing vnder Key: because the Maister and the Seruant would walke equally alike in iustice. But by reason of ignorance in the Maister, and bad breeding in the Slaue or Seruant, doing vniustly to his Maister; he makes his good guard, locking all things safely vp vnder Key.
Romaine triumphe^^ did not weare the Ring of Gold, but one of Iron.Among the Romaines, the Generals of Armes, that had deserued to triumph, were mounted vpon a Chariot, drawne by foure white Horses; hee cloathed in a large Mantle of Tyrian Purple, imbrodered with Palmes of Gold, and the Diademe or triumphall Crowne on his head. And yet notwithstanding, it was not lawfull for him to weare Rings of Gold, but onely of Iron, the marke of Slaues, and of their basenesse. To the end,

^hat on this day of brauery, they should fixe their eies on the vilenesse of the mettall, which ^hey wore on their hands, and thereby acknowledge, the inconstancy of the affaires of the world, whom they tearmed Fortune, who had nothing for her pedestall, but a rowling Bowle.
This is that which Plinie obserued, in the three and thirtieth Booke, and first Chapter, of his Naturall History. Et quum corona ex auro Hetrusco sustineretur a tergo, Anulus ta^en in digito Ferreus erat, aequa Fortuna Triumphantis, and Serui publici Coronam susti^entis.
Concerning that which he saith of the Triumphall Crowne, made of pure Tuscane Gold: it was carried ouer the Victors head, by the publique Seruant which was behinde him (and on the same Chariot of Triumph) vnderstood to be the Executioner of Iustice, whom the Romaines held in such detestation, that he had his dwelling house farre enough off from the Citie, as the Oratour saith, and Iuuenall in his tenth Satyre, is conformable to ^he testimony of Plinie.

Quippe tenet sudans hanc publicus, and sibi Consul
Ne placeat, curru seruus portatur eodem.

This was in regard of feare, to haue the Hang-man for so neere a neighbour.
Zonoras a Greeke Author, in the second booke of his Ecclesiasticall History, hath ^dded another notable noate. That to the Chariot of Triumph, was fastened a withy^and, a Bell and a whip: to let him vnderstand, that (being but a man) he might fall ^nto some such inconuenience, as might cause him to be bound and whipt like a slaue, ^nd passe through the Hang-mans hands; to the end, that he was not to be ouer-proud of his present prosperity. Malefactors condemned to punishment were led bound, ^earing a Bell, or the Hangman for them:Concerning punishment of Malefactors. to aduertise the people walking vp and downe in the streetes, to withdraw themselues from thence, least they should be polluted by so vile company. Which custome is yet to this present day obserued ^n Turkie, in one and the same manner: sauing that the Turkes, not hauing retai^ed the vse of Bels (which are euery where broken) haue none, in leading their con^emned to punishment. In some places of France, Spaine and Italie, offenders are led ^o punishment with the sound of a Trumpet.
The Triumpher, being highly exalted with glory and magnificence, rustling in Gold and precious Stones, brauely glittering in his Mantle of Scarlet, and Cinabre, wherewith his naked body was made to looke red, like to the Pagans Gods, or ra^her like the Persians,The seauen Princes of the Pe^sian Empire. among whom the seauen Princes of their Empire (according ^o the or onance of great King Cyrus) painted their faces and hands with Vermillion, to make themselues both more venerable and dreadfull to their Subiects, by ^heir lookes: This Victor, adored as a Mars, when he returned from battailes in Ho^er: This Triumpher, preceded by all the Squadrons and Romaine Horse, of Kings ^nd Princes subiugated, captiued and chained, with their lookes deiected, and fixed on the ground.
(Manibus post terga reuinctis)
And followed by all the Romaine people, attired in fine white garments, crow^ed with Laurell, and bearing both Palme and Laurell in their hands: This magni^icent man, in the height of all his Royall pompe, was (at diuers times) stearnely ga^ed in the face, by this publique Seruant, who caused him to remember the frailtye of worldly affaires. As we learne of great Tertullian, in the three and thirty chapter of his Apologies. Hominem se esse etiam Triumphans in illo sublimissimo Curru admone^ur. Suggeritur etiam ei a tergo. Respice te, Hominem; Memento Te.
And the same Romaines, setting their Slaues at liberty, which they called en^ranchising; tooke away their Ring of Iron, and gaue them one of Siluer, and, of Slaues, they tearmed them Freemen, and their children Ingenious and Free: to whom onely it was permitted to weare the Ring of Gold: the marke of the Son of ^he Family, returning home againe to his Father, as we reade in Saint Luke.
The Aegyptians at enfranchising their Seruants, gaue each of them a Ring of Gold: as appeareth in the Historie of Ioseph, Genesis the one and fortieth Chapter. To Captaines that had carried themselues valiantly in warre; as a recompence of honour, they gaue a Ring of Gold; within the bea^ill or collet whereof, was engra^en the figure of a Beetle-flye, so saith Plutarch in his Tract of Isis and O^is. Because

that creature is altogether mas^e, and hath not any female: giuing thereby to vnderstand, that Nobilitie maketh best apparance of it selfe, by valiancy and manly courage.
Euen so among the Romaines, the Ring of Gold was numbred among the gift and recompences of honor, giuen to valiant Captaines, as Asconius Padianus witnesneth in these words. Quadam praemia, and dona militaria, and honori, and lucro sunt, vt ^stae, Vexilla, Phalerae; and Coronae Ciuicae. At Anuli Aurei Ingenuitatis signa sunt. Co^cerning Military Gifts and Recompences, some doe bring but Honor onely, and others Honor and Profit together. Iauelins, Banners, Streamers, Ornaments for Horses, and the Citizens Crowne, they onely are honorable: but Rings doe bring both Honor and Profit together, because they are the signale or marke of free condition,How the Romaine Emperors gaue freedome to their Slaues. and of liberty. And this he speaketh to very good purpose, because the Romaine Emperours granting the priuiledge of wearing Rings of Gold to their Slaue^ did also (by the same meane) set them at liberty, so (by little and little) gracing them with Noble titles, among the ranke of Romaine Knights.
What they did in honor to Captaines and men of warre; they afforded to Slaues by fauour,When the Ring of Gold was giuen to the Generall of an Armie. or corruption. The fashion or manner vsed by the Romaine Emperors, in giuing Rings of Gold to Generals of Armes, was with these words. Quando t^ quidem in praelijs, in bello, in re militari versatus es, ob hasce res, Hoc Anulo Aureo Dono. To the former speeches, they added a long Oration, wherein was noted perticularly, the prowesse and heroicall actions (of him whom they made Knight) performed in Battailes and dayes of Chiualrie, done in the sight of the chiefe of the Armie, with obseruation of circumstances, perticularities of place, time, and the occasions, according ar the Orator remarketh, inueighing sharpely against Verres (Diuinatione quinta* who contrary to all the auncient formes, had granted the Ring of Gold to his Tabellion or publique Notarie, vtterly incapable, and vnworthy to be made^ Knight.
By money and corruption, Slaues obtained to be made Knights; as we learne of the great Arnobius, Aduersus Gentes, in the fourth Booke. Pecunia donat Anulos, (...) priora loca in spectaculis: Because in the Theaters and Amphitheaters, they sate in th^ places of Knights.
Plinie in his three and ^hirtieth Booke, the first and second Chapters, noateth this corruption, somewhat reformed by Authenticall Rules: Sed hodie De iure Anulor^^ Aureorum, at the Code, whereby following the ordonance of the Emperours Dioclesian and Maximian, the Enfranchised enioyed the place of Romaine Bourgesses, and to weare Rings of Gold. But yet debarred from the rights of Patronage, as it is said in the Law, Is qui ^us. D^od. Statius obseruing this corruption, spake very effectually to a Slaue, made Noble, and a Knight.

Mutauitque genus, laeuaequ^ ignobile ferrum
Exu^t, and celso natorum aequauit honore.

And before him, Petronius Arbiter, desciphering the riot and excesse of the Slaue Trimalcion. Habebat in minimo digito sinistrae manus, Anulum Grandem Subauratum, extremo vero articulo digiti sequentis minorem, vt mihi videbatur Totum Aureum, sed pl^ ferreis velut Stellis ferruminatum. He taxeth him, with deriuing from Slauery to Nobility; which the Ring of Gold declared: distinguished with small Stars of Iron, o^ the next finger to the little, on the left hand.
The Physi^i^n fingerAnd from thence we learne, that Rings of Gold are worne by Noble persons of the medicinall finger of the left hand, called by the Latines, Digitus Medicus, as the litttle finger, his neighbour, Auricularis. Aulus Gellius, in the tenth Booke and Chapter of his Attick-Nights (followed by the whole Schoole of Physitions) declareth, that a small and subtile Arterie (but not a Nerue, as Aulus Gellius saith) proceeded from the heart, to beate on this Physition finger. The motion of which Arter^, may be felt by touching the finger, as an Index or demonstration, of whatsoeuer i^ next to the Pulse, either in women in trauaile, or in weary and ouer-laboured persons; informing alwayes from time to time, when the heart beateth, or is offended.
The Physition finger neuer offended with the Gout.This finger on the left hand, is rarely afflicted with the Gout, for the sympathie and neighbourhood it hath with the heart (the first liuing and last dying) which con^rueth

the Gouty, vntill such time as the infection of corrupted humours, come to ^sperse themselues in the left crannies of the brest or stomacke, vnder which is the ^int of the heart, and then this Annulary finger becommeth Glandulous and swolne. ^or then, when vitall heate is quenched and wholly abated (as a light without oyle) ^r Lampe is extinguished, by the deuision of a whole part.
And the Canonists hold in the Glosse of the Chapter Foeminae the thirtieth, and ^e fift Question, that to this Physicall finger, a veine answereth, which taketh his ^urse and originall from the heart.
And this is the reason, why at Sacring the most Christian Monarches of France ^he onely solemne act which they doe in all their life) the Ring of Gold is put on ^e fourth finger of the left hand, in signe of a marriage that day, betweene them and ^e Kingdome. As the same is done to married wiues in the Church, with the Sil^er Rod, the marke of honor, and obedience vowed by her to her Husband. For such ^ings ought not to be giuen, or worne otherwise.


CHAP. VI. Of Ceremonies exercised and performed, in giuing Armes to Esquires, and bestowing the Order on Knights.
COncerning Esquires, without making any vnprofitable inquisition further off: they receiued appellation,Whence came the first naming an Esquire. as well of the Shields belonging to their Maisters (tearmed in French Escuts) and vsed in their quests and actions of Armes; as also of their Horses, whereof they had the charge and respect, aboue all things else.
It is also sufficiently knowne, that in the Salique Law, Stables for Horses were, and are still called Escuries, at the eighteenth title De Incendijs, and the third Paragraph. Si quis Su^em, cum Porcis; Scuriam cum Animalibus, vel Fenile incenderit, IID-Denar. qui faci^t Solidos LXII. culpabilis iudicetur, excepto capitali, and dilatura. The selfe same is in ^he fourth title of the Lawes of Bauaria, and in the complaint of the Archbishop of ^heims Hinemarus, against the Bishop of Laon, who carried the same name. Insuper and ^curiam ipsius interclusit, etc. In processe of time, the name of Esquire became com^on to such Gentlemen, as serued for Caruers at the Tables of Kings and Monarches ^f France, as likewise to the principall Officers of their houshold, and waiting in their Kitchin.
Vnder the estate of the auncient Gaules and Germaines,Obseruation among the anc^ent Gaules and Germaines. their Sonnes did not ap^eare in publique, vntill they were become tall youths, and of yeares capable* to fa^hion themselues for the managing of Armes. Liberos suos* nisi quum adoleuerint, vt mu^us Militiae sustinere possint, palam ad se adire non patiuntur; filiumque in pueri^i aetate, in ^ublico in conspectu Patris assistere, turpe ducunt. This we learne of Caesar, in his sixt ^ooke of the memories of the Gaules warre.
In this age of youthhood (commonly called Adolescencie) capable to learne what ^elonged to Armes:Such as was most in vse among the Princes of the Empire. those yong Gallants were brought to diets and publique Assem^lies, to learne some knowledge of the world, and to grow Courtly; And then it was, when they were made Esquires, by giuing them their first Armes, which ought not ^o be vnderstood of the Sword, because that was put into their hands, euen from their ^irth.
At these publique Assemblies, the Prince, the Father, or the neerest kinsman of the ^ong Gentleman there presented, deliuered report of his discent and Genealogie:The presentation of the yong Gentleman. with perswasion of vndoubted hope, that he would neuer wander or degenerate from ^he wayes, wherein his famous Ancestors had alwayes walked. Then was hee receiued as an Esquire, by giuing him the charge of the Lance, and of the Shield, be^onging to the Prince or Lord, that entertained him into his traine. This haue we learned of the Noble Historian Tacitus, in his Germania. In ipso consilio vel Principum,The ancient manner of creating an Esquire. vel Pater, vel Propinquus, Scuto, Frameaque Iuuenem Ornant. Thus you see the Ceremonies

obserued, in giuing the first Armes to a yong Esquire: which was (properly) a (...) of Adoption, made by the Prince, of these yong vpshooting plants, to immat^ic^ them, and giue them enroulement, among the Sonnes of the publique weale, whereof they began then to be made members: for, before these ceremonies, they were ^puted no other then hous-birds, or home-lings. Haec apud illos toga, hic primus (...) honos; ante hoc, domus pars videntur, mox Reipublicae.
Distinguishing of Esquires of Birth-right.In elder times (as yet to this day) Noblemen tooke the title, and the quality of Esquires, and carried their Fathers Armes, by distinction (as we haue already said) of the degrees of primogeniture, or birth-right: which yet neuerthelesse could not be permitted, before the said Esquires were married, and become Fathers of the Family. For yong Esquires could not beare Armes (at least paternall) if they were not knights. Well might they seale with the Armes of their Mothers, and then when they were Knighted, it was permitted them to take the paternall Armes, (according to the degree of birth) in their Escutcheon and Seale, engirt with the Order by them receiued.A prohibition concerning Esquires. But it was very carefully respected, that Esquires (were they married, or vnmarried) should haue their Spurres and Armes but siluered. Il n'appartenoit qu'aux Cheualiers d^en porter de Dorees. It belonged to none but Knights, to beare such as were Guilded.
Greeke Authors, as Possidonius, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and Atheneus, in the fourth Booke of his Dypn^sophystes, and the Tract De Coena Celtarum, maketh mention of the Gaulish Esquires; who attended diligently behinde the Knights their Maisters (so long as they were seated at the Table) with their Shields and Lances.
For, the Lance and Shield were the proper and naturall Armes, appertaining t^ a French Knight.The proper Armes of a French knight. And therefore they are called in their Capitularies, Arma Patri^* which Esquires carried alwaies after their Maisters, into whatsoeuer parts they were, and vpon what occasion, as namely.
To feasts and Banquets: the passage formerly alleadged of Atheneus, may serue for proofe.
To Benches of Iustice, called places of suites and controuersies; their owne Capitularies, third Booke and two and twentieth Chapter. Vt nullus ad Mallum, vel Placitum nisi Patria arma, idest, Scutum, and Lanceam portet.
Likewise to the Church. At the Councell of Magunce, and the seauenteenth Canon. Laicis vero qui apud nos sunt Arma Patria portare non prohibemus, quia antiquus (...) est ad nos vsque peruenit. We shall obserue this auncient Custome more amply in the Tract concerning the Order of the Starre.
Of these Esquires (whom the Latinists call Armigeros) Virgill hath a passage in the second booke of his Aeneidos.

Et Equorum Agitator Achillis.
Armiger Antomedon.

Tacitus witnesseth vnto vs, that they were appointed to follow in the seruice o^ Kings, Princes, and great Lords, to learne the training and profession of Armes, an^ to make application of them, as well for peace, as warre. And this was the reason* why he gaue them the title of Companions, or fellowes. Magna Comitum aunba^ quibus apud Principem suum locus, and Principum cui plurimi, and acerrimi Comites. Hac dignitatis, hae Vires, magno semper Electorum Iuuenum globo circumdari, in Pace decus, (...) Bello praesidium.
As we passe on in this discourse, we may remember, a word formerly spoken of which Latine Authors (traducing it from Strabo and Diodorus Siculus) haue interpreted by the name of Lance (a meere Gaulish word) for that of Framea, which they ^ay is Equiuocall, for all Armes both offensiue and defensiue, hurting farre off. And V^gill in the passage before alleadged, maketh the Gaules to be armed with Lance-g^ and long ^auelins, to hurle and dart out of their hands, as in the eight Booke of (...) Aeneidos.

Bina Aspina coruscant.
Gesa manu.

And it is well knowne, that the Gaules (in elder times) possessed a great part of

^talie, and all Insubria, at this instant called Lombardie, and tearmed Transalpine Gaule in regard of France) consequently the Mountaines of the Alpes, Alpina gesa, and Li^urina Scuta* which euermore haue beene taken for Armes of the Gaules, namely, ^he Lance and Shield. This is respectiuely obserued by Procopius, speaking of the wars in Italie, done by Bel^sarius, in the time of the Emperor Iustinian the Law-maker.The Sword is a weapon generall to all Souldiors.
But the word Framea, should not be vnderstood of the Sword, Armes generall to ^uery man of warre indifferently, albeit disguised with many diuers names, of a ^ucke* Horsemans-Sword, Blade, Cemitarie, Faucheon, Rapier, Flamberge: all which epithites notwithstanding, that of the Gaules and Germaines was properly (...) a Sword. The Interpreter of Diodorus Siculus, hath remarked this propriety; Pro^s^bus, Ferreas Spatas gerunt a dextro latere pendentes. In France, they that speake ^he language of Oc, doe yet tearme it Espade. And the Romaines* in their tongue, ^ame this weapon of Armes, Ensem, as in the second A^neidos.
Laterique Argiuum accommodat Ensem.
And the Armes of the long Pike or Speare, called by the Romaines
Pila minantia Pilis;
Was among the Gaules and Germaines The Lance: As the same Interpreter of Diodorus Siculus hath very well obserued; Iaculis bellant, quae illi Lanceas vocant. Beside which, as well the Horseman, as the Fantassine, had the Axe of Armes, common^y called the Battaile-Axe, which in the Historie of S. Gregorie of Tours, is called Francisque; And ^oard, in the Historie of the Church of Rheimes. In elder time also, the hundred Gentlemen of the Kings house, with their Battaile-Axes, carried the same kinde of Axe, represented by their Pentioners Polaxes.How the name of Cheualier tooke the first beginning.
The greatest care that any Knight had, was, to be continually furnished with a good Horse, which he tearmed Bon Cheuall, and thence it seemeth, that the name of Cheualier receiued Originall. And it is well knowne, that (at Rome) such men were called Cheual^ers. Qui Equo publico moerebant. For such Horses were maintained at the publique charge, in time of the Common-wealths first springing: And afterward, at the Knights owne expences, when their Reuenue valued foure hundred Sestertiaes, as we haue already said.
Cornelius Tacitus, speaking of Romaine Knights degrading,The degrading of Romaine knights and cast off by the Emperour Vitellius, for the murthering of his predecessour, writeth: that he tooke away Their Baudrickes and Horses. He saith moreouer, that the Horse of one of those dismounted Knights, running after his Maister, would not forsake him, till the Knight at one stroke with his Sword, slew the Horse; and afterward sheathing it in his own body, died betweene his Horses feete.
By this pittifull spectacle, and the passage formerly remarked from Curopalates, touching the Diademe; we vnderstand, that the Baudricke giuen to Knights, was called Cingulum Militare, and that the Romaine Emperours, or Lieutenants Generals of Armies and Prouinces, in honoring Captaines or Souldiors (respectiue for valiancie) with the Baudricke and Girdle, did first declare the prowesse of Knights in future hope, and afterward vsed the same kinde of formall proceeding before set downe, of words at the deliuery of Rings of Gold. Quando tu quidem, etc. Hoc te Bal^heo Dono.
The first Kings and Princes, being Christians, at giuing this golden Girdle,The first Christian order of making knights. kissed the new made Knight on the left cheeke, and vsed these words. In honor of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the blessed Holy Ghost, I make you a Knight. And then they receiue his hommage, the Oath of vassailage, and fidelity of the Knight, he being on his knees before them.
In the life of the Emperour Lewes the Debonnaire, and in the Monke Aimonius, his fift Booke and seauenteenth Chapter of his Historie of France, he saith, That the Emperour Charlemaigne, euen on the point of marching to Battaile, to vanquish and ouercome the Hungarians; made the said Lewes the Debonnaire (his Son) Knight, in the Towne of Reganesbourg, at this day called Ratisbonne, engirting him with the Baudrick* and the Sword of a Knight, giuing him also the Accollade, that is say, kissing him.
We haue tearmed it The Sword of a Knight, to declare,The Knights Sword differing from them of ordinary vse. that it was different from the ordenarie vse; for like as vpon solemn daies, for Ceremonies belo^ging to the Order of the Holy-Ghost, Instituted in the Augustines at Paris, by the mirror of Christian

Princes and Monarches Henry, third of the name, King of France and of Poland (of blessed memory) the Knights were all cloathed in white, their hose and pumpes white, and their Swords adorned with a Scabbard of white Veluet: euen so the Swords which the Knights wore, vnder the reignes of the first, second, and at the beginning of the third Ligne, vntill the reigne of the great King S. Lewes, were couered with fine white cloathe, curiously waxed, and the same Scabbards were all ouer-semed with Crosselets of Gold. As testifying thereby, that it appertained particularly to them, to fight for the faith of Iesus Christ, against the enemies of the Crosse. Wee learne this out of the Chronicle of the same Monke of S. Gall, in the life of the King and Emperor Charlemaigne.
Haec erat paratura antiquorum Militum Francorum, Calciamenta forinsecus aurata, corrigijs tricubitalibus insignata; fasciolae crurales vermiculatae; and subtus eas tibialia, ac coxali^ linea, quamuis ex eodem colore tamen artificiosissimo opere Variegata, superque, and fasciolas (...) modum intrinsecus, and extrinsecus, Curcis ante, and retro, longissimae illae corrigiae tendebant^r* Deinde Camisia glizzina; posthec Baltheus Spatae colligatus, quae Spata primo Vagina ^age^; secundo corio qualicunque; Tertio, Linteamine, Candidissimo cera lucidissima roborato, ita cingebatur, vt per mediu^ Cruciculis eminentibus, ad Peremptionem Gentilium demonstradam, auraretur. We shall hereafter obserue the particularities of this excellent passage.
These Swords for Knights were hallowed with plentie of Ceremonies, by the very chiefest Prelate that was then in the Court. Being laid vpon the Altar, the Prelate Officiant vseth these Prayers.
The manner of hallowing the Swords of Knights.EXaudi Domine, quae sumus preces nostras, and hunc gladium quo famulus tuus. N. accingi desiderat, Maiestatis tuae dextera benedicere dignare, quatenus defensio, atque protectio poss^ esse Ecclesiarum, Viduarum, Orphanorum, omniumque Deo seruientium, contra saeuitiam Paganorum, alijsque insidiantibus sit potior, terror, atque formido, per Christum Dominum nostrum, etc.
Heare Lord we beseech thee our Prayers, and this Sword, wherewith thy seruant N. desireth to be guirded and readily Armed (the right hand of thy Maiesty will vouchsafe to blesse. That it may serue for a defence and protection of thy Church, Widdowes, Orphanes, and all the Seruants of God, against the tyrannies of Pagans, and other deceiuers, seruing also as a terror and threatner of them. Through Iesus Christ our Lord, etc.
Duties to be performed by the Knights to be made.After that the Knight to be made, hath bathed the day before, watched all night in the Church, receiued his Creator (after confession first made) and taken the Oath, to protect and defend the Churches of God, Widdowes, and Orphanes from all wrong and violence, with promise to warre against (to his power) the Pagans and enemies of Iesus Christ: the Prelate deliuereth the Sword into his hand, with these words. Serue Christi, sis Miles in nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen.
Seruant of Iesus Christ, be a Knight, in the name of the Father, and Sonne, and Holy Ghost, Amen.
ACcipe hunc gladium tuum Dei benedictione Collatum, in quo per virtutem Spiritus Sancti resistere and eijcere valeas omnes inimicos tuos, and cunctos Sanctae Ecclesiae aduersari^^, atque protegere castra Dei, per auxilium inuictissimi triumphatoris Domini nostri Iesu Christi. Esto memor illius de quo Prophetauit Psalmista dicens. Accingere gladio tuo super femur ^^um potentissime. Vt in hoc per eundem, vim aequitatis exerceas, molem iniquitatis potenter destruas, and sanctam Dei Ecclesiam, eiusque fideles propugnes, ac protegas, nec minus in Fide falsos, quam Christiani nominis hostes execreris, and destruas, Viduas, and Pupillos clementer adiuues, atque defendas, desolata restaures; restaurata conserues; Vlciscaris iniusta* conf^rmes bene disposita; quatenus haec in agendo, Virtutum triumpho gloriosus, Iustitiaeque c^lt^ egregius, cum Mundi Saluatore, sine fine merearis ad Coelestia Gaudia peruenire. Qui c^ Patre, and Spiritu-Sancto viuit, and regnat Deus, per omnia sacula saeculorum. Amen.
Receiue this thy Sword, coupled or ioyned with Gods blessing, wherewith, by vertue of the Holy-Ghost, thou shalt preuaile, to resist and ouerthrow all thine enemies,

and all aduersaries of the holy Church, as also to protect the Armie of God, by the vnconquerable assistance of the Triumpher Iesus Christ our Lord: Guird thy Sword vpon thy strong thigh: That with it thou maist exercise the power of equity, destroy and ouerthrow the hopes of iniquities, and for Gods Church, and faithfull people thereto belonging, fight valiantly and defend them, and no lesse against them of False Faith, then the name of Christians, to repell the hostes of such enemies, and destroy them: Widdowes and Orphanes clemently to assist and defend, and restore the desolate, preseruing them that are deliuered. Thou shalt reuenge the wronged, confirme the well disposed; and in performing these things, by vertue hereof triumph gloriously, be a worthy patron of Iustice, and with the Worlds Redeemer and Sauiour, attaine to the heauenly ioyes without ending. Who with the Father and the Holy-Ghost liueth and reigneth God, world without end, Amen




Antiphona.
Confortare, and esto Vir, and obserua custodias Domini tui, vt ambules in vijs eius, and custodias cerimonias eius, praecepta eius, and testimonia, and iudicia, and quocunque te verteris, confirmet te Deus.


The Antiphonall.
Be of good courage, goe forth like a man, and obserue the ordenances of the Lord, that thou maist walke in his wayes, and keepe his commandements, precepts, testimonies and iudgements, and which way soeuer thou turnest thee, the Lord be with thee.


Oremus.
DEus qui prouidentia tua Coelestia simul, and terrena moderaris; propitiare famulo tuo. N. Militiae tuae sacris addicto; vt omnis hostium suorum, fortitudo, virtute gladij Spiritualis frangatur, ac te, pro illo pugnante, penitus conteratur. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, etc.


Let vs Pray.
God, who gouerneth both heauen and earth by thy prouidence, blesse and prosper thy seruant N. vndertaking thy sacred warfare; that all hostes of his enemies, by fortitude, and vertue of the Spirituall Sword, may be broken: And (thou, fighting for him) be deepely wounded: Thorow Iesus Christ our Lord, etc.




And to close vp the Ceremony, the Canticle is sung of the Sonnes of Corah,According to the vsual translation, it is the 45. Psalme. which is the foure and fortie Psalme, beginning; Eructauit cor meum verbum bonum, the eight verse whereof, is to be repeated three seuerall times.
Concerning the Oath, which the Knights make in receiuing the Order of knighthood; at all times, and in all places, it hath bin continually vniforme and alike. As we learne of that great splendor of the Church Saint Hierome, in his third Epistle, speaking of Nepotianus, Qui ad hoc habebat Cingulum; vt Viduis, Pupillis, Orphanis* Oppressis, Miserisque subueniret.
But the Ceremonies were diuers, according to customes obserued in the places. To some, Princes gaue the Kisse of Brotherhood, of Fauour, and of Loue,Ceremonies sundry, according to diuersity of places. Osculum Pacis, to new Knights. To others they gaue a boxe on the eare; as the Emperour Charlemaigne vsed to doe, a custome long time retained in France, as well as in Germany. Others were made Knights, by giuing them three blowes with the Sword flat-long, betweene the necke and shoulders: which is yet obserued, especially on the dayes of Battaile, before they proceede to handy strokes. And as yet also is in vse, with the Guardians of the holy Sepulcher of our Lord at Ierusalem,Knights of the Sepulcher. in conferring the Order of the Holy Sepulcher, to voyagers comming so farre, and requesting to haue it.
Petrus Blessensis writeth in his nintie and fourth Epistle, that in his time, Knights went and receiued their Swords from off the Altar: declaring thereby, that they were obedient Sonnes to the Church their Mother: for maintenance and defence whereof, they protested to make no spare of their blood, euen to the last drop thereof, and to accomplish whatsoeuer they stood bound to doe, by the Oath of Knighthood. Hodie Tyrones Enses suos recipiunt de Altari, vt profiteantur se filios Ecclesiae, atque

ad honorem Sacerdotij, ad tuitionem Pauperum ad vindictam Malefactorum, and Patria (...) rationem, gladium accepisse.
A custome obserued in France.And for making this protestation, of defending the Faith of Iesus Christ, such was the custome obserued in France; the Knights in hearing Masse, Tenoient leu^ Esp^^ nue in Pal, so long as the Gospell was in reading.
We haue formerly noated from the Monke of S. Gall, what was the equipage and ornament of Knights of France, vnder the first and second ligne of their Kings, here now you shall see the forme and practise obserued by the Romant of old Reynard, deuised and composed in the time of Philip le Bel, fourth of the name, King of France and of Nauarre, whose Court was better stored with Princes and Noblemen, then any other in those times. The Author feigneth in this Romant, that the Lyon, King of foure-footed Beasts (to whom, he giueth the name of Noble) determined to make his sonne Noblon Knight, vpon the day of his natiuity. The greater part of Antiquities were sought for, and deriued out of the most auncients Romants, as well in Prose as Verse, like Pearles out of the smoakie papers of Ennius. And because it appeareth much better in the old French tearmes (the Authors further meaning reserued to himselfe, as may be discerned by the lines fractions) then it can doe by traduction; I haue truely inserted the same, as it is in the Originall.

Premier^s ly vesty l' Auqueton
De desdain, and despit farcys . . . .
Apres ly vesty la chemise . . . . . . . . .
A pres ce ly Roys ly vesty
L' Aubert donnie, and puis aussy
De menacer vne Cuirie.
Apre ly a ly Rois vestie.
Cotte a Armer . . . . . . . . . . .
De Boban ly donna L'Escu
Et ly Hiaume de Conuoitise.
Ou il ot mainte pierre assise,
Saphis, Rubis and Camahiez.
Ly Roys a Renart appellez,
Et puis sj ly a commendez.
Noblon son fils L'Esperon destre
Chaussast Isangrain le senestre.
Ensemble tuit s'agenouilerent,
Noblon les Esperons chaucierent,
Messire Noble ne s'y feint.
A Noblon Branc d' Acier ly ceint.

Moreouer, we shall obserue other Ceremonies, vsed at the making of Knights, in the Tracts of the Orders of England, and of Spaine.
Nobility in three descents by Father and Mother.But before they may come to the honor of Knight-hood, and to receiue the Acollade, they must make proofe of their Noblenesse by three races at the least, as well on the Fathers side, as the Mothers. Otherwise, the man is not to be admitted, nor receiued, although he be ennobled by the Mothers side in sixe descents or races, because the wombe doth not ennoble.
Custome of sundry places in France.The old custome of Paris, Orleans, and of the Baronny is such, as if a man be not Noble from his Father; yet were he so by eighteene descents of stocke by the Mother: such a one being suffred to be made Knight. His Lord may cause his Spurres to be cut off vpon a dunghill.
The verball Processe in the auncient Custome of Meaux, importeth, that in the Palatinate Countie of Champaigne and Brie:The Man ennobleth, but not the Woman La Verge Ennoblit, and le Ventre affranchit. Which approueth, that the Woman cannot Ennoble, but the Husband onely: And so (consequently) that the sonnes descended of a father, being a yeoman, and of a mother a Gentlewoman, are not sensed and reputed to be noble.
And yet notwithstanding, the same verball Processe of the said custome of Meaux, imparteth this rule and Maxime, that the Compartitor, deriuing his principall meanes from the Rule of Right: it must needs be, that Partus sequitur ventrem; which is alwaies vnder^tood

of the same condition of the mother, be she free or seruile. So that in Champaine ^nd Brie, it is held, that the Woman doth Ennoble, and many (in the said two Prouinces) ^re not ennobled, but in regard of the mother. I haue neuer seene that Priuiledge, al^hough I haue made very diligent inquisition, in my being at Troies in Champaigne,Enobling by the mother. where that worthy Gentleman Seigneur Pithous could not fully resolue mee, which hee might haue done sooner then any other, being of the same Country. But the Lord of ^oinuille, Seneschall of Champaigne, in the life of Saint Lewis (vpon whose seruice hee ^ttended in his first voyage ouer the Seas) writeth, concerning himselfe: That he refused ^o accompany the said holy King S. Lewis in his second voyage; because (saith hee) that during his absence, his people had beene badly vsed by the Kings Officers. And in the ^aid voyage, he had lost twenty or thirty Knights of Champaine, all Banner-bearers; by which losse it ensued, that the greater part of the Nobilitie of Champaine were dead, or ^lse remained prisoners, in the two battailes which the said King S. Lewis lost at the Mas^ore, and at Rexill. The widdowes and their daughters were enforced to re-marry them^elues to Yeomen and Farmers, onely through defect of Noble persons.Men made honorable by their wiues. And thereupon, by some custome or priuiledge (which that place held as a Law) the Gentlewomen of Champaigne and Brie ennobled their husbands and kinred.
Philip de Bea^ Manoir, Bayliffe of Clermont in Beauuoysis,A testimony out of an ancient manuscript. in his Customary or Court-Rolle, which he alwaies kept by him fairely written, of Anno 1283. informeth ^s, that the Sonne of a Gentleman, and of a woman seruant held in slauery, was made a Knight by him to whom the said seruant belonged, being ignorant of his condition. His ^eruitude comming to knowledge, the Lord of the woman-slaue would haue sould the said sonne, alleadging, that he was made Knight by ignorance of his being a slaue borne. N^uerthelesse, fauour of freedome so farre preuailed, that hee continued a free-man and (...) Knight, because the Honour of Knighthood had enfranchised him, which his Lord and Master might doe, the fauour sufficiently couering the error. If any other but his Lord ^ad made him Knight, he had lost both Knighthood and freedome together; because he ^hat made him Knight, had not sufficient power to enfranchise him.
The King or Prince Soueraigne, and none other, by Grace and absolute power,A yeoma^ may be Knighted by fauour. may make him Knight that is Noble by the Mother. Hee may also make a yeoman Knight, ^ecause the Letters of Knighthood ennobleth the Yeoman, though hee be issued in ville^age, both by father and mother.
A man called Philip, sirnamed of Bourbon (by reason hee was borne in the said place) (...) Yeoman, had two sonnes: the Count of Flanders made one of them Knight, and the Count of Neuers did as much to the other. The two Counts were condemned in a^ercements to the King, by an Order set downe on the day of All-Saints, 1279. and at Pentecost also, 1280. And the two brethren each of them in a thousand pounds fine to ^he King, by a Decree ordered on S. Martins day, 1281. And yet notwithstanding, they ^emained Knights still, by grace and fauour which the King of France and Nauarre, Phi^ip le Bel, fourth of the name, afforded them.
The proofe of Nobilitie being made, or the dispensation of Yeomanrie obtained by ^race and fauour; the Esquire prepareth himselfe to receiue the Order of Knighthood,Preparatio^ to receiue the Order of Knighthood. watching the night before in the Church or Chappell, with deuout prayers and meditaions. When morning is come, He entreth into the Bath, to wash and make cleane his whole body; whereby he is giuen to know and vnderstand, that in all his following life^ime, he ought to be neat and cleane, as well of body as soule;What is vnderstood by bathing. honest in his manners and ^ehauiour of life, wholly disposed to embrace vertue, and to vse in all his actions, mode^tie, prouidence, and wisedome. But especially, and aboue all things, to keepe his word ^nuiolably, and his faith vnstained, which is called by the Orator in his booke De Officijs, The foundation of Iustice.
Fides alma, alta primis, and iusiurandum Iouis.
Because whosoeuer hath violated, or (but once) failed in his worde, by iests or lies; is ^orsworne before God, in whose presence he plighted his Faith, as the same Orator saith: Qui Fidem violat, is Iouem violat. And whosoeuer is a belier of his Faith, if he would be ^e^eued at another time, it behoueth him necessarily, that Aut nouos faciat Deos, aut Au^itores: Either to fordge new gods, or new Auditors: so saith Demosthenes, in his declaiming ^gainst Aeschines.
The Great Chamberlaine of France, in regard of his said Office, ought (among (...) things of like seruice) to furnish the Kings Court in Winter with straw, and in Som^^^ with Rushes, to keepe it cleane, and in handsome condition. To looke that the Ki^^ Haubert,Office of the High Chamberlaine. that is, his Cuirasse want no Buckles, nor tongues to those Buckles: to p^e the Bardes and Chanfreines for his horse: and to prepare the Bathes for new-made Knights. And in regard of discharging this duty, there belongeth to him, the Robes and Surco^s which the said new made Knights did weare, when they entred into those prepared Bathes: And the Cloake of euery Vassaile, doing Homage to the King.
After the Bath, the Knight to be made, was cloathed on his naked body, with a garment called a Gaubison, which was like to a womans kirtle quilted, otherwise tearmed Auqueton, and ouer that a shirt of silke or fine linnen cloth, which the Monke of S. G^ called Camisiam Glizzinam, ordinarily imbrodered with gold and silke at the skirts and corners. Vpon this shirt was put the Haubert, that was the Coat of Maile, reaching downe to the knees, and a Coller or necke peece of Leather about his necke, which the Romancer of Reynard meant by his rime;
De menacer vne Cuirie.
Ouer all was put the Coat of Armes, so named, in regard it was made with Lambea^a of Colours and Liueries of the Knight presented. Those Coats were in ancient Epitaphs and Paintings, figured in the fashion of skirted Cassocks, but short enough, like vnto the Archers of the Kings Guard, streaked and paled with his liueries. And such as they were of the Gaulish Nation in elder times, of whom Virgill speaketh.
Virgatis lucent Sagulis.
But at this present, the Coates of Armes are made short, after the fashion of the Ch^tres shirts, which are kept and worne vpon deuotion: and such are the Coats of Kings, Heralds and Pursuiuants of Armes in these daies.
The ancient fashion of French Knights Cloakes.But by the testimony of Antiquitie (as we haue already said) reuerend in her furrowed wrinkles, we learne from the Monke of S. Gall, that French Knights wore Cloakes large and deepe, which were called Cloakes of Honour, in the fashion of those for Kings and Dukes, being fastned vpon the right shoulder, and then turned vp on the left, so that they were long both before and behinde, and according to the ancient Romane square form^. The Monk of S. Gall continuing the habits of Ornament for French Knights, saith; Vl^mum habitus eorum erat Pallium Canum, vel Saphyrinum quadrangulum, duplex, sic form^tum vt cum imponeretur humeris, ante, and retro pedes tangeret, delateribus vero, vix ge^^^ contingeret.Co^pes or V^st ^e^^^p^n on other side. I haue seene in the Cappell of Dukes at Digeon in Bourgongne, the square Chasubles of Antiquitie, which were shewne me, with the Reliques wherwith the Churc^ is adorned.
This Cloake was double, Pallium duplex, because the Cape or Coller is called O^ M^nte^u^ ac^^^^^n; to Plautus. M^telet, as is plainely signified by the tearmes of the Monke of Saint Gall. He informeth^ of a garment, such as when the French fortified themselues in Gaule, vnder our Kings (...) the first line, perceiuing the Gaules to make vse in their seruice of Warre, of long skirt^ Cassocks, or sleeuelesse Iackets, varied into diuers colours or Liueries; they forsook th^^ great Cloakes, and garmented themselues answerable to the Gaules manner: euen as (...) new fashions and habits of nouelty are pleasing and affected, onely through the desire o^ change. King Charlemaigne well obseruing the discommodity which those long-skirt^ Cassocks or Mandilions, brought to the Horsemen of the ancient Gaules, reaching b^ halfe way downe their thighes (as Martiall saith,)
Dimidiasque nates Gallica Pallia tegit,
Like s^ort Cloakes with sleeues.According as the inhabitants in the Villages neere about Paris, with their Palleto^s (...) Cassocks, white or violet, such as they were described by the Monke: Charlemaigne orde^ned, that the French should resume into vse, the great and long Cloake, worne by th^ Swart-Rutters; and that the Frisons which then were in France, exercising the Trade (...) Taylers, who (like Millers, that out of one sacke of Corne take double toule) made th^ like benefit of one garments fashion. Obserue heere the very wordes of the Monke (...) Saint Gall: Sed vt mos est humani ingenij, cum inter Gallos Franci militantes, virgatis (...) Sagulis lucere conspicerent, nouitate gaudentes Antiquaem cons^etudinem dimiserunt, and (...) imitari coeperunt. Quod interim regidissimus Imperator idcirco non prohibuit, quia be^ rebus aptior videretur. Sed quam Frisones hac licentia abutentes, aduerteret, and bre^issi^ illa Palliola sicut prius maximae vendere comperisset, pracepit, vt nullu^ ab ^is, nifi gra^

^atissim^que illa l^ngissima Pallia consuetudinario pretio coemerat.
The fashion of this ancient Cloakes of Honor, are practised and in vse euen to this day,The ancient Cloakes in vse to this day. in the Orders of Knighthood* as wee perceiue by the great Cloake in the Order of the Holy Ghost, which is the Great Order of France, the most famous and venerable of all Christendome: the Mantelet, and the turning great Cloake, releuated with Charracters and Monogrammes of the King (Great Master and Founder of the Order, with the Lillie) according as heeretofore were the Cloakes of Honor,Cloaks worn by the Emperors and Consulls of Rome. worne by the Emperors and Con^ulls of Rome, formerly obserued in the Tract of Kings and Heralds of Armes; according to whose Coates, those were fashioned like, belonging to Kings, Princes, and Knights, made in forme round, yet square, more long both before and behinde, and more short at the shoulders.
The Knight to be made, being in such equipage as formerly hath beene described; was presented and conducted to the Prince, who caused him to haue guilt spurres put on, beginning with the right heele, and ending with the left. Then the Knight, and such as guided him, brought him on his knees before the Prince: who, after the Liedge Oath, taken on the holy Euangelists: guirded him with the Sword, and made him a Knight, in the name of the father, the sonne, and the Holy Ghost.
We haue tearmed it Liedge Oath, because that Oath of Knighthood being such,The reason why the Liege Oath is giuen in the Order of Knighthood. it bindeth him (as a Knight) to the Prince that gaue him the Order, to serue him toward and against all, Nemine dempto. And this is the reason, why Kings and Soueraigne Princes, be they naturall or protectors, ought not permit to Princes and Lords, which are their naturall vassailes, or vnder their protection, to erect or meddle with other Orders of Knighthood, except they declare to the protector, that they withdraw themselues from his protection. In the doing whereof, the goods which they enioy in the Estate of the Prince, Protector, are to be confiscated, in what manner soeuer they doe possesse them. Because to erect an Order or particular society, with any Oath whatsoeuer; setting any cloud or colour thereon, that may be giuen thereto: is to make a State within a State, a League and Rebellion against the Soueraigne, punishable with death.
Now concerning the Ceremonies formerly particularized, they are done in the times of Peace and leysure, in the Courts of Kings. For in the times of Warre, they are not so carefully obserued, as on the day of Battell, before they proceed to handy stroakes,Difference between Knights made in peace and in warre. when Esquires desire to be made Knights, to giue them the greater courage in well doing, and to be enterred as Knights, if they die in the fight. For the Prince or Generall of the Army then giueth them three stroakes, smitten flat-wise with the naked Sword on the backe, and pronouncing those words formerly related, without any other ceremonie. The like is done after the battell, to such as the Generall taketh knowledge of, for their valiant and worthy seruice, accordingly to recompence their valour: as King Charles the eight did at his returne from the kingdome of Naples, after the battell of Fornoue.
In the time of Charles the sixt, called the well-affected King, the Emperour Sigismond came to see him at Paris, and was lodged at the Pallace in the Chancerie:A History wel worth the obseruation. this happened in the yeare 1416. and the moneth of Marche. By permission of the King, hee came and sate in the Court of Parlament, on a day of Audience, when the cause was pleaded between the two Lords of Pesteill and Signell, they both pretending right to the Office of Steward for Beauquaire. In the contract of marriage of Lewis Duke of Aniou, King of Sicilie, with Ioland of Arragon; he is named Senescallus Nemausi, and Beliquadri.
By fauourable and friendly Letters, Signell was highly commended to the said Emperour, who hearing that Pesteill (to fortifie his right) alledged Signell to be vncapable of exercising and holding the Office of Stewardship;A Knight suddenly made by the Emperor Sigismond because (as yet) hee was not knighted: suddenly he caused him to be brought before him, saying; That hee had the power to make Knights. Then commanding a sword to be brought by one of his Gentlemen, and Signell being on his knees before him, he gaue him three blowes on his backe with the sword, and taking off one of his owne guilt spurs, caused it to be put on Signels heele, and guirded him with a Girdle, whereat hung a long knife, in stead of a sword. So he was made Knight by the Emperor Sigismond, not in any enterprize against the sacred Maiesty of the King of France, in his Royall Pallace (as all the ancient Ordonances and Charters of France doth specifie) but because the said Prince had power to make Knights in all places of Kingdomes and Seigneuries, belonging to other Kings and Princes,The Emperors power in other Princes Iu^^sdictions. according to the enstructions of the Iurisconsultes, who hold the Creation of Knights to

be an act lawfull, which is not restrained to any day, condition, or distinct place, but defined precisely.
Neuerthelesse, when (in the same yeare) the said Emperour, being in the City of Lyons,Another attempt of the Emperor impeached by the Kings Officers of Lyons. would haue exalted the Countie of Sauoy into a Duchie, and cloathed Amadis with the Ducall Cloake, setting the Cap of Honour on his head, after the fashion of Vicares of the Empire: The Kings Officers in Lyons caused him to dislodge thence, passing ouer the riuer of Rosne, and the Lands of France, to performe that act of an Emperor, on the lands belonging to the Sauoyan, if so it seemed good to him; for he could not exercise any such in the Kings Territories, such as are Lyonnois, Prouence, Bourgongne and Da^lphi^e. The King is Emperour in his kingdome, not relying temporally, but on God onely. For this cause Iohn Froissard obserueth, that at the entrance of Charles of Luxembourg Emperour, fourth of the name, and his sonne Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, and elected of the Romaines (which entrance was made in the City of Paris, Anno Dom. 1378. and at the gate of Saint Denis) King Charles the fift, surnamed the wise, put himselfe between them, affording the right hand to the Emperor, and the left to his sonne the King of Romanes, but King Charles himselfe was mounted but on a white Gelding, as shewing thereby, that he was Emperor in his owne Kingdome, and (there) such honor was due to him as could not be communicable to any other Soueraigne Prince, whatsoeuer he were.
Now, concerning the Girdle, wherewith the Emperour Sigismond caused the Seneschall Signell to be guirded, and whereat hung the long knife: this maketh vs to remember,Cingulum Militare of the ancient Romanes, and the B^ldricke of the old French that the Cingulum Militare of the auncient Romaines, and the Bauldricke of the olde French, were made of a large strong thong or strap of whit-leather, hauing the ends of pure gold, couered and fastned with nailes of the same mettall, (as wee haue already formerly said, and may haue occasion to speake of againe hereafter.) And to this Bauldricke or Militarie Girdle, the sword was made fast on the left side, and on the right a long Poniard or Warre-knife of fine steele, with three or foure squares on the blade, very keene and sharpe-pointed, (much like to the daggers of Scotland) which hung all along vpon the right thigh.
The Lord of Ioinuille, Steward of Champaigne, in the life of the great King S. Lewis, speaketh thus: I remember that I found there a Horsemans thicke quilted Cassocke, cut off from the owner, who was a Sarazin, which I tooke vp, and put the open part towards me, to make a Shield thereof, and it did me good seruice in such necessity, for otherwise I had beene slaine: and yet I was wounded in fiue parts of my body, and my horse in fifteene. Within a while after, there came to me one of the Burgesses of Ioinuille, who brought me a Banner of my Armes, and a great knife of Warre, which I haue yet still to shew.
The Poet Claudian armeth the Romane Knight with this knife, hanging (according to the French Prouerbe) at the girdle, ouer and beside the sword. In his second Panegyrick of Stil^^o:
Quin and Sydo^ias chlamides, and singula bullisAspera, gemmatasque togas.
And so he further proceedeth on.
The long dagger-like kniues, had three or foure cutting edges, and were after the Germane fashion. The first of them that was seene in France, was at the battell of Bouines, wonne by Philip Augustus, in the yeare 1215. on Sunday the 27. of Iuly, against the Emperor Otho; Iohn Without-land, King of England; Ferrand of Portugall, Count of Flanders,The bloudy Battell tought at ^ou^^e^ in An^^^^. in regard of his wife Ioane, eldest daughter to deceased Baldwin Count of Flanders, Emperor of Constantinople; Renaud de Dommartin, Count of Boulongne likewise by meanes of his wife; and Simon de Dommartin his brother (Comes Domini Martini, and not Dammartin) according to the testimony of Rigordus, a Monke of S. Denis in France, Physitian, Chronicler, and Chaplin to the said Philip Augustus, whom hee followed on the day of the said battaile. He saith: that the Almaignes and Dutch attending on Othe, all ran vpon the person of the King, who saw slaine before his eyes Stephen de Long-Champe, a braue, noble and most faithfull knight, by the blow of a knife, which he receiued into his head at the sight of his Caske or Helmet. For the enemy made vse of a kinde of weapon, admirable for fashion, and (before then) vnknowne: because they carried long kniues, thin and slender, yet formally made, hauing three edges, all cutting downe from the handle to the point, and vsed them in the stead of Swords.
Puguatur ergo ibi ab vtraque parte virtute admirabili, and cadunt multi. Ibique ante oculos Regis ipsius occiditur Stephanus de Longo-Campo, Miles probus, and Fide^ integra Cultello recepto in Capite per Ocularium Galeae. Hostes enim quodam Armorum genere vtebantur admirabili, and hactenus inaudito. Habebant enim Cultellos longos, graciles, tria quadrata, quolibet acumine indifferenter secantes, a cuspide, vsque ad Manubrium, quib. vtebantur pro Gladijs. Sed per Dei adiutorium, praeualuerunt gladij Fr^ncorum, and Virtus eorum indefessa. Namque repulerunt totum aciem Othonis, and peruener^nt vsque ad eum, adeo vt Petrus Malenicinus Miles, quidem plus Armis, quibus alios praecellebat, quam seculari prudentia pollens, ipsum Othonem per fraenum apprehenderet.
Ancient Romancers called this long knife of Warre Miserecorde, Mercy,The knife called the knife of mercy. because such Souldiers or Knights as were beaten downe and vanquished, beholding their enemy to graspe this knife in his hand ouer them, and ready to stab it into the sight of his Helmet, or into his shirt or Coat of Male, or (wanting them) into his Haubert, cried for Mercy, by desiring life. The Noble Romant of the Rose saith:
Thou that in Manhood art to good inclin'd,Take pittie, and let Mercy rule thy minde,When thou discouerest bleeding sighes and teares,Instead of Sword, and words of frightfull feares,Then Mercy in most maiesty appeares.Vndoubtedly, if Authors trueth rehearse,The rudest stones and Diamonds it will pierce:But let Warres knife be painted n'ere so faire,Yet both the point and edge too piercing are.
Such men as made profession of Armes, vsed to weare Swords,After the ma^ner of wearing Dudgeon daggers. and those Kniues of Warre, and some others, as well Citizens as Country-men, weare at their girdles those kniues of Warre: yet not behinde, as on their backes, but hanging downe on the thigh, like to the Baionets in Gascoigne: young lads vsed to weare them euen from their childhood, and those lads in Paris, as also else-where, were called Bachelers, as much to say, as ready (for yeares) to be Esquires or Souldiers. Young maidens likewise, apt for mariage, were tearmed Bachelettes, according as in Picardy they are called to this day.Mariage-able Maides. They haue yet in Paris a Country song or Roundelay, which is sung and danced by Maides and youths in Summer-time, on Festiuall dayes after supper, Dialogue-wise in questions and answeres.

Where then is the Bacheler?
Safe and sure, safe and sure,
Heere behold the Bacheler*
With goodly lookes, milde and demure.
A rich girdle, and faire knife,
He deserues a faire wife.

On the behalfe of Bachelers, and in honour of the worde or name, wee will conclude this Chapter for two remarkeable reasons. The first, because in the French Military discipline, there was such an Order obserued: that all the first ranke of honour,Knights Bannerets seco^ded by Knights Bachelers. Of the Knight Banneret. consisted of Knights Bannerets, followed by Knights Bachelers, and in the third place merched the Squires. The Knight Banneret was he who had so many Gentlemen his seruants at command, as he could raise a Banner, and make vp a company of Souldiers, to be maintained at his Table, and their wages paid out of his purse.
The Bacheler or lower Knight, was he,Of the Knight Bacheler. who had not seruants sufficient to leade to the Warre at his owne expences, but marched vnder the Banner of some other. And these degrees of Honor were knowne and distinguished by wages; in regard that the Knight Banneret had twenty Sols by the day, the Bacheler tenne, and the Squire had no more to dispend, but onely fiue.
Moreouer, it is obserued also, that the Knight had no other oath,Concerning the Oath of a Knight. but the faith of a Knight, as appeareth in the Letters Obligatory of Hugh Count of Saint Paul, of Guye, and of Iames his brethren, dated in the moneth of Aprill, An. 1289. for the Land of Auenes

in Henault: and the brethren were bound to King Philip le Bel, by the faith and oath of Loyall Knights.
Concerning that of Iohn de Grailly, Captall de Buch,The Captall de Buch. which is a Signeurall Principality in Guienne, abutting on the Ocean Sea, betweene Bourdeaux and Baionne, sometime peopled by a part of Bo^rbon men of Bourdeaux, acknowledged vnder the name of (...) Viuisci: And therefore this Signeury (appertaining to the Noble house of Candale) is called Testa, vel Caput Boiorum; in French, The Captalat de Buch. He was taken prisoner in warre, in the moneth of September, and in the yeare 1364. when he gaue his Seale vnto King Charles the fift, to keepe within the prison appointed for him. But if he chanced to breake it, he was to be held for false, periured, and a disloyall Knight, in belying and failing his owne faith. His Armes were also to be reuersed, and turned with the heeles vpward,The reward of perfidie in Knighthood. And as a man thus shamed and disgraced, to be so condemned in all the Princes Courts.
The like Oath made Iohn Duke of Bretaigne, to King Charles the sixt, by the agreement concluded betweene the King and him, the fifteenth day of Ianuary, in the yeere one thousand three hundred and fourescore, and the said Oath was dated the sixteenth day of Aprill, next following. All the examples hitherto alleaged, are taken out of the Court Registers.

The end of the first Booke.



THE INSTITVTION FOR THE SACRING AND CROWNING THE MOST CHRISTIAN KINGS OF FRANCE. AND Of the Originall, as also Ancient Antiquity of the French: The Excellency and Precedency of the Kings and Kingdomes of France, beyond all the rest of Christendome. The second Booke.

CHAP. I. Of the Ancient Originall of the French.
SAint Hierome, the Father of Learning, and cleare flame of the Church, who (for a very long time) made his abiding among the Gaules, and namely in the City of Treuers, at that time the Capitall City of the rest; in his Epistle Ad Ageruchiam, de Monogamia, describing their miserable condition, as he had good knowledge thereof, and beheld with his owne eyes, vnder the Empire of Arcadius in the East, and Honorius in the West, speaketh in this manner.

Innumerabiles, and ferocissimae Nationes vniuersas Gallias occuparunt. Quidquid inter Alpeis and Pyrenaeum est quod Oceano, and Rheno includitur. Qua^as, Vandalas, Sarmata, Alani, Gepides, Heruli, Saxones, Burgundiones, Alemanni, and O lugenda Respublica, hostes Pan^onij vastarunt. Maguntiacum nobilis quondam Ciuitas capta, atque subuersa est, and in Ecclesia multa hominum millia trucidata: Vangiones longa obsidione deleti, Remorum vrbs praepotens, Ambiani, Attrebates, extremique h^minum Morini, Tornacus, Nemete, Argentoratum translati in Germaniam, Aquitaniae, Nouem popularum, Lugdunensis, and Narbonensis Prouincia (praeter paucas vrbes) populata sunt cuncta.

An innumerable company of strange Nations,How the Gaules with seuerall Nations inuaded, became in miserable estatessauage and barbarous inuade the Gaules in generall, that is to say, their ancient extendure, comprised within the enclosure of the mountaines of the Alpes and Pyrenaans, and the great Riuer of Rhine. The Wallakians, the Polonians and Vandales, the Alans, Gepides, Herules, Saxons, Bourgongnons, Allemaignes, and (O poore deplorable condition of the Gaules) the Hungarians made a totall forraging of them.

Maguntia, a City sometime most famous and renowned, forcibly taken and sacked; the Citizens and Inhabitants massacred, euen in the Church. Wormes, with all the vtmost (...) thereof, made desolate by a cruell and long siege. The rich, strong, and potent City of (...), as also Amiens, Arras, the people of Picardy and re-conquered Countries, planted (...) the O^ shoares, Tourney, Spire, Strasbourg sacked and spoyled, and the people of them, branded with the names of prisoners and slaues, carried into Germany, and on the further side of the Rhine, with all their wealth and possessions, to serue as slaues to those cruell Nations, voyd of all pitty; by whom the Prouinces of Guienne, Gascoigne, Languedock, Lyonnois and Prouence (fewe of the Townes excepted) serued but for an Essay of their tyrannie.
At what time the Gaules came thus oppressed, and how.These barbarous Nations passed the Rhine, and threw themselues into Gaule, and in the yeere of Grace, foure hundred and sixe, about the ending of December; being incited thus to doe by the promises of Stilico the Vandale, who coueting to make his sonne Eutherius Emperour, was slaine with his Father, by the command of Honorius, in the yeere foure hundred and eight. So saith Orosius in his seuenth booke, and the eight and thirtieth chapter, and the two and twenty day of August.
God sent forth the arrowes of his wrath and fury, vpon the Romaine people, to reuenge the bloud of so many Martyrs, shedde on the face of the earth, during the persecutions excited wrongfully,The persecutions in the primitiue Church and without cause, against the Church then growing. As is obserued by the Spanish Priest Paulus Orozius (who was a Contemporane with those two great Pillers of the Church, Saint Ierome and Saint Augustine, to whom Orozius was a Scholler) in the seuenth booke, and two and twentieth Chapter of the Workemanship of the world. Soluuntur vndique, permissa Dei, ad hoc circumposita, relictaeq^e Gentes, laxatisque habenis in omnes Romanos fines inuehuntur. Germani Alpibus, Rhetia, i^taque Italia peruagata atque pe^etrata Rauennam vsque perueniunt. Alemanni Gallias peruagantes, etiam in Italiam transeunt. Grecia, Macedonia, Pontus, Asia, Gothorum inund^tione deletur. Nam Dacia trans Danubium in perpetuum aufertur. Quade, and Sarmata Pannonias depopulantur. Germani vlteriores abrasapotiuntur Hispania. Extant adhuc per diuersas Prouincias in magnarum Vrbium ruinis paruae, and pauperes aedes, signa miseriarum, and nominum iudicia seruantes, ex quibus nos quoque in Hispania Tarraconem nostram, ad consolationem miseriae recentis, ostendimus.

Behold the Allemaignes which forrage the Gaules. The Germanes hauing franchised the Alpes and Grisons, trauersed Italie, and rauaged all, so farre as Rauenna. The Gothes hauing laid open Scandinauia, ouer-ranne Greece (or Epyre) Pontus, and the people of Asia. Dacia is (for euer) subiected to the Romanes. Wallachia and Polonia, aduancing themselues into Countries, haue Cantonned themselues with Austria and Hungaria. The Germaines beyond the Elba, haue possessed themselues of Spaine. Mor^ouer at this present, as a marke and testimony of their courses, you may behould (heere and there) desert fieldes throughout the Prouinces of Spaine; the Cities and Townes sometime highly renowned, to haue now no more then the Name to haue sometimes bee^e^ and the soyle and seate thereof marked out with small Cottages, which beare their Names. Name^y the place of my birth,
The chief City of Tarrac^^ia.
poore Arragon, whereof remaineth now no more, in olde decayed houses, and ruined buildings, for all their comfort and consolation.

Those holy men formerly alleadged, liued about the yeere of mans saluation, foure hundred.
Saint Gregory Victor, Archbishop of Tours, the most ancient and faithfull of all the French Annalists, in his first booke, and two and thirtie chapter, informeth vs: That a King of the Almaignes, whom hee calleth Chrochus, came and forraged the Gaules (where he lost his life) vnder the Emperour Probus, in the yeere of Grace two hundred and fourescore.
The inundations and rauages of those Barbarous Nations, beganne altogether in the ninth yeere of the Empire of Galien; and of our Lord, two hundred sixtie three. Wherein (so saith Trebellius Pollio, the Romaine Historian, in the life of the said Emperour) there was a generall Pestilence throughout all the Prouinces of the Empire, with fearefull tremblings of the earth, and an vniuersall darkenesse, (more then Cimerian) which continued for many daies together. Great claps of Thunder (Ioue non Tonante) contrary to reason, and against all common rule. All

^finite number of houses, villages, and Cities, with their Inhabitants, swallowed (...), beside many thousands of people, dying with the meere feare and affrightment. ^iuers openings of the earth, filled with mortiferous stinking waters, and the Seas ^erflowing their bounds and limits prescribed, drowned the land, deuouring al^ with the Waters impetuous passage, whole Townes and Villages.
And in one and the same instant, Nations and People, before vtterly vnknowne, ^med desirous to displume the great Romaine Eagle, and conuert her into the ^rowe of Horace: Quasi coniuratione totius Mundi, concussis Orbis partibus, vndique ^llum extitit, so saith the same worthy Historian.
Wee haue seene the Deluge of people, that wasted Gaule in the time of Saint ^rome, following the course by him formerly set downe, after they had passed the ^ine.
In the yeere foure hundred and twelue, Honorius the ninth time, and the youn^r Theodosius the fifth time being Consulls; the Gothes forsaking Italie, vnder the ^onduct of Athaulphus, once more vanquished the Gaules. As Saint Prosper of A^itaine, and Sabaianus Bishop of Marseilles, (who liued at the same time) in the ^reatise which hee wrote of the iust iudgement and Prouidence of God, affirmeth (...) his third booke, and so forward.
Latinus Pacatus, in his Panegyricke to the Emperour Theodosius the yonger: Vnde ^ordiar nisia tuis, Gallia, malis? quae ex omnibus terris, quas illa pestis insiderat, haud in^ria tibi vendicas priuilegium miseriar^m. The Vandales, after they had forraged ^e lands at their arriuall, possessed for some time the Champaigne Countrey, and (...) this possession there remained no more of noate, but Vandalorum opera. Bour^ngne hath kept the name of her ancient possessours, euen to this day; and the ^andales quitting the place to the Bourgongnons, passed the Riuer of Loire, to pos^sse themselues of Aquitaine; from whence, both they and the Alans and Sweues ^ere expelled by the Visigothes of Italie, Conducted by Gisericus, (or Gensericus, ^cording to some Writers) to whom Honorius had giuen this rich Prouince (which ^ee could not keepe any longer) in the yeere of Grace foure hundred and eigh^ene.
By vertue of this donation, the Visigothes got the possession of Aquitaine, part ^hereof was called Gothia, and to this day Langue de Hoc, or of Goth. Accord^^g to others it was named Septimania, and Narbonnoise Gaule by our Ancients.
They chased from thence the Vandales, the Alans and Sweaues, who being vn^le (in a companie) to turne backe againe, shifted for themselues in Spaine. The ^andalls and Sweues, conducted by their Princes Gondericus or Gonthairus, and ^ensericus brethren, and sonnes of Modegisila: the Sweues by Hermenericus,Successe of the Barbarous nations in other Countries. and ^e Alans by Ataces; so that in the yeere foure hundred and ninteene, part of the ^andales and Sweues ouercame Galicia, and Castille the elder: the Alans had Por^gall and the Prouince of Carthagena.
The other Vandales and Silinges, held for their Lotte and partage, the Coun^ie Boeetita of Spaine, called (after their name) Vandalia, and thence forward, ^uen to this present) by change of a Letter, Andalousia the best Prouince of Spaine. ^ll these people, as well as the Gothes of Italy, and the Visigothes of Aquitaine, were ^fected with the Arrian Heresie.
But where are the French all this while,Concerning the French in these tempestuous times. while others make themselues so much ^oken of? Were they at this time vnknowne, or hidden, as Achilles in Homer ^as, handling the distaffe? Nothing so; for they were a long time renowned for ^aliancie and Prowesse, and held in reputation, to be the very hardiest people of Ger^anie.
And yet neuerthelesse, it is a Maxime constant and assured, that they were the ^st of them that passed into Gaule; not to take an Essay of it, as the rest had done,The French that went into Gaule. ^hose defects they noted; but to possesse themselues there in earnest, and to be^ome Masters of it by setling their Conquest there, without letting slip or loosing ^heir hold, following the Nature of the generous Lyon, which they bare for their ^rmes. For the French (as wee doe commonly see one nayle driueth out another) ^pelled from thence by force of Armes, all such others as had made possessision

of the places before them, as namely the Romanes, Vandales, the Alans, Swe^^, Bourgongnons and Visigothes, whom Gregorie of Tours, the ancient Annalist, named Gothes, without making any difference of them that held Italie (properly named Gothes) from the Visigothes of Gaule, who afterwards possessed themselues of Spaine.
The Authors purpose before he proceed any further in this discourse.Yet before I set downe their Conquests, I shall perhaps doe an acceptable worke (...) the Readers, to touch by the way, what was their Originall. And so much the rather, because many writers haue placed their first abiding in the Marishes of Moeotides, and b^^ded thereon Castles in Spaine, in the time of King Bamba, and the great Aunt Sic^^bria, Grandmother to a new people, abiding within the Circle of the Moone; making (...) new world, according to the opinion of some distempered Philosophers, destitute of iudgement and reason.
The opinion of some Historian^, whence they came.Some Historians make them to come from the Pannoniaes, for there are two at this day, the higher and the lower, which are the Kingdome of Hungaria, and the Arch-Duchie of Austria, and that they came from thence, to dwell vpon the bankes of Rhine first of all.
And so hauing past ouer that famous Riuer, they went into Thuringe, where they builded many Cities and Townes, ordaining to rule and gouerne ouer them, as also (...) conduct them in Warres, Kings and Dukes, distinguished and discerned from othe^ neighbouring Princes, by their long lockes and tufts of hayre; chosen and c^lled out of the principall families among them.
Saint Gregory Victor, Archbishop of Tours, in his second booke of the Historie of France (which shortly shall be seene of mine owne Translation) toucheth this opinion in the ninth Chapter. Tradunt multi eosdem (hee speaketh of the French) de Pann^^^ fuisse digressos, and primum Litora Rheni amnis incoluisse: dehinc transacto Rheno Thori^giam transmeasse, tbique iuxta Pagos, vel Ciuitates Reges Crinitos super se creanisse, (...) prima, and vt ita dicam nobiliori suorum familia. Hee reporteth nothing but this opinio^ of the ancient Originall of the French, whereunto neuerthelesse he trusteth not, for the reasons which wee shall relate more at large, when we come to the fifth chapter of this second booke.
He speaketh nothing at all of the Marishes of Moeotides; of the imaginary Sicambri^, nor of the cinders of Troy.
A second opinion of a Germane originalOthers doe maintaine, that the French had a Germane Originall: De Francorum O^gine, secundum Germanos lis esse data videtur, qui Francos Galliae Incolas rebus bello tog^que gestis Clarissimos sibi vendicant. So saith Adrianus Turnebus, in the fiue and twenti^^^ booke, and the seauen and thirty Chapter of his Anniuersaries. And hee addeth, it must necessarily be concluded, that they made one part of Germanie, as mingled and confesed among them, without making any band apart; because Tacitus and Ptolomie, whe^ exactly haue remarked the people and Nations of all Germany or Allemaigne, maketh no noate or mention at all of the French.
A third coniecture concerning Scandinauia.Others will haue them to be descended from Scandinauia, grounded on a pretende^ passage drawne out of Ptolomie, who describing this Peninsula, which Plinie the Naturalist in his fourth booke, calleth Clarissimam Scandinauiam magnitudinis incompertae, denominateth and specifieth amongst the Inhabitants thereof, some one kinde of people, bearing the name of Phiraisi, which they say to be depraued, changed and altered, i^ stead whereof (according vnto their iudgement) it should bee reade PH P A G G I, and pronounced Frangi, from whence (as it should seeme) should come the title and sirna^e of Franci.
A fourth discent out of Scythia.There be others beside, who from the same Ptolomie, and other Geographers, following his straine, will haue them to be descended from Scythia, and the Marshie Maeotide^, and by the name of Brenci, the B. changed to F. and so drawne in by the eares, to be made that of Franci.
A good rule, and aduise in doubtful casesNow, at all times, and as often as question is made of Etymologies, and the Originall of proper names and Appellatiues (a matter somewhat difficult and queazie) wee should not proceed to the correction of them, without certaine and apparant reasons, and supported by the testimony of Authors of good noate, with this obseuation of the same Ptolomie (which they doe alleadge) who speaking of Scandi^

(...) Scandinauia, otherwise called Scandia, Baltica or Basilia, auoucheth it to be inhabited (...) seauen seuerall kindes of people, which were the Gothes, Ostrogothes, Visigothes, Danes.Seauen seuerall kindes of people inhabiting Scandia. ^rataines, Rugians and Tanians. He speaketh no more of the French then of the Megari^^s; a common prouerbe vsed by the Greekes.
But the most ridiculous opinion, is of them, who would create them out of the mise^able ashes of great Troy, and of a supposed Francus or Francion, the pretended Sonne of ^ector, a Paladine in painting, yea, a precious Relique, carried throughout the world; (...) the end, that her desert Prouinces might be planted with so noble a Seede. Hunibauld, ^nd the Abbot Tritemius, Germaines: One Frier Annius of Viterbo, an Italian, the Com^enter on a false and supposed Berosus, the pretended Chaldean, and of one Manethon of ^hrygia, who neuer had being but in the world of the Moone (for the true Berosus a Chaldean, whom the learned Phylo a Iew, and Iosephus doe alleadge so often, neuer wrote ^ny thing of the ashes of Troy) Iohn Maire the Belgian, in his illustrations of Gaule; Ri^hard de Vessebourg; one Frier Noel Talepied, of the Gray Fryers Order; and of later date, ^ne Du Pre of Lyonnois, displayeth in the frontispice of his celebrated trauailes, the mans ^gly countenance. And the rest of the same ignorant temper,Fabulous writers of the Troyan Francus and the people comming of him. haue plunged themselues ^n the Gulfe of those lyes and fables, taking them for money of the best payment, main^aining; that the people which followed the fortune of this imagined Francus, were (of ^im) named Frenchmen. All these reporters of Fables and Sonnets, are resembled to ^he pretended God Iupiter, whom the French Poet in the first Booke of his Franciades, ^eigneth and figureth in painting, to saue the supposed Francus. They made a Phantasma, ^ike to the Iuglers of the Hostell de Bourgongne at Paris, making of Astianax, a Francus, like ^o Amphitrio in Plautus.
Homer, Prince of the Greeke Poets, giueth but one Sonne, called Astian^x, and surnamed Sca^ander, to the valiant Hector, and Andromache his wife, in the sixt Booke of his Illiades.
The Latine Poet calleth him nothing but Astianax, in the second Booke of his Ae^eidos.

Saepius Andromache ferre incomitata solebat
Ad Soceros, and Auo puerum Astianacta trahebat.

And like as those are meere Fables, of all the pretended Gods, and forged by the Greeks and Romaines:
Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat Apollo.Aequa Venus Teucris, Pallas iniqua fuit.
Reade Thucidides his preface, an Historian of approued integrity, and more likely to vnderstand the truth of those antiquities of Greece.
So are the Siedges of Troy the Great, and of Thebes with an hundred Gates:Fables meerely inuented by the Poets. And the voyage of the Argonautes, to conquer the Golden Fleece, the three most famous enterpises which the Poets euer feigned.
If Troy was, it neuer was taken, nor sacked after such manner, as Homer and Virgill haue feigned: According as it is proued by Dion Prussensis, in the booke which he wrote De Troia non capta.
Aeneas, Anthenor, and other supposed great Lords of Troy, pretended founders of Rome and other places, are imagined names of persons that neuer were, but in the minde and fantasie of Poets. The Cato of his age, Pybrac, made (to good purpose) the Queene of Carthage say, that the Latine Poet taxed her with immodestie, and her Aeneas with treason and perfidie.
I Rome, in me, ne're saw thy fugitiue Aeneas.
But leaue we these Fables, to whosoeuer liketh to be led by them.
The French Poet, in the place before alleadged (to the end wee may talke no more of diuinations) being desirous to encounter them on the name of the French, by the adoption and composure of two Gaulish words ioyned together, Phere-Encos, which signifieth Beare-Launce, saith that his Francus.

In signe of Valiance,
Was by his Souldiors named Bear-Lance,
Phere-Encos, a name of people conquered,Called Francuz by corrupted pronuntiation.
Afterward said Francuz, ill pronounced.

Among the Armes of the auncient French, ouer and beside the Launce, was the Battaile-Axe,

which they called Anchon, and moreouer, yet to this day, in many Pro^ of France,The Battaile-Axe a weapon vsed by the ancient French. it is tearmed an Achon, wherewith they serued themselues in warre, by thro^ing it a farre off at ioyning with the enemy, onely to discouer the man, and to cleaue (...) Shield. Because this Achon was darted with such violence, as it would cleaue the Shield, and compell the Maister thereof to hold down his arme, and being so discouered, as naked or vnarmed; it made way for the sooner surprizing of him. It seemeth, that this weapon was proper and perticuler to the French Souldior, as well him on foote, as on horsebacke. For this cause they called it Franciscus. Francisca, Securis oblonga, quam Franci librab^^ in Hostes. For the Horseman, beside his Shield and Francisca (Armes common, as wee haue said, to the Footeman) had also the Lance, which being broken, and seruing to no further effect: he laid hand on his Francisca, as we learne the vse of that weapon in the Archbishop of Tours, his second Booke and twentie seauenth Chapter of the History of France: and Floardus, in that History of the Church of Rheims, the first Booke, and the thirteenth Chapter. But returne we now againe to the French.
If they had bin descended from the Pannoniaes, which haue (from time to time) bin famous, and tooke part with Germanie: it is not to be doubted, but that the Noble writer Tacitus, who purposely tooke delight to be a Topographer; would haue obserued somewhat of them which caused the contradiction, and bringing to compromise, of the same Turnebus before alleadged, that the Ancestors of the French tooke Originall from Germanie. Whereas contrariwise, he deriueth their ancient Originall from the Gaules: Ge^tis nobilis praesertim, and gloriosa in Europa, Imperij maiestatem retinentis, Propaginem, and Sobolem, nostros nominauerim. And this he wrote not without cause (although there be some that take it against the haire) because it is a matter assured, th^t Germanie was peopled by the Gaules, and that the Allem signes, by such Colonies and plantations, were of the Romaines,Germanie peopled by the Gaules. baptised with the name of Ge^maines, Brethren of the Gaules, whom they res^mbled in corpulence of body, manners, and behauiour of life.
The Geographer Strabo, in the seauenth booke of his Geographie (whereon all the Historians and Geographers, the Greekes and Romaines moulded and fashioned th^ir workes, as on a good Originall and perfect exemplary) informeth vs, that Regionem trans Rhenum ad Ortum vergentem Germani colunt, nationem Gallicam paulisper imitantes, and seritatis abundantia, and proceritate corporum, and colore flauo: cum reliquis in rebus, and form^, and moribus, and viuendiritibus pares existant, quales Gallos diximus. Ideo Romani hoc illi^ nomen iure indidisse mihi videntur, per^nde ac eos Fratres (Romano sermone) Germani intelliguntur. But for the better vnderstanding of this passage, it behoueth vs to obserue the time, when Germanie was peopled by the Gaules.
At what time Germanie was peopled by the Gaules.About the yeare of the World, three thousand and three hundred; before the most blessed birth of the Sauiour of Mankinde sixe hundred and thirteene; at such time as Nabuchodonosor, King of the Assyrians, held the Iewes in slauerie; and that Tarquin the elder Commanded ouer the Romaines; were made two signale departures of the Gaules, to inhabite Greece, Italie, Allemaigne and Spaine: So saith the learned Antiquarie Claudius Fauchet, at the beginning of his Historie of France.
At that time reigned ouer the fertile Gaules Ambigat; a rich and puissant Prince, whose Court was ordenarily kept in the Towne of Bruges, according to the vulgar opinion (and as others say, at Viarion) so called by Caesar, and such as followed him, tearmed it Auaricum: the inhabitants and people of Berry; Auares, and Bituriges, and the Champaine grounds thereof, which some name Sologne, are tearmed of the same Caesar in his language, Campi Catalaunici, and in Me, one word Catalaunia.
The Nephews of Ambigat appointed to conquer n^w Count^^^.Ambigat, to discharge the Gaules, which swarmed then to an infinite number of people; made election of the Sonnes of his Sister, being his Nephewes, Sigouese and Belouese, to goe conquer new Prouinces, and gaue to each of them three hundred thousand men, with their Families. Belouese tooke his way to Italie, which he peopled, there building Townes and Villages, and all his conquest beyond the Mountaines of the Alpes,Trans-Alpine Gaule. was named Trans-Alpine Gaule, and is so still to this day. Hee pressed further on his fortune, and aduentured his conquests into Thrace, subduing Macedon and Greece,The Conquests of Belouese. as well the Isles, as the firme Land: as it is written by Strabo, Plutarch, Pa^sanias, Titus Liui^ and Iustine. This migration is not here any part of

our subiect, Fauchet tooke it to his taske, and worthily acquitted himselfe thereof: Now we will take our owne, that of Allemaigne or Germanie.
Sigonese had his troupes composed (as well as that of his Brother) of Sambres, cal^ed at this present Picads, of Artesians, Beauuoisins, Chartraines, Berruyers, Bretons,The composure of the troupes belonging to Sigouese, and their deuision. Aquitains, Sequanois, Suisses, Bourbonnois, Limosins, Tolosians, Seuenois, Rouergats, and other people, drawne from all the Prouinces of Gaule, and diuided into two troupes, for the better peopling of such Lands, as should fall to their lot and partage; whereunto also they gaue their names, conserued euen to this present day.
He had Almaigne or Germanie to his part, and hauing passed Rhine,Rhine the partition of the Gaules. which seperated the Gaules; in stead of the goodly plaines, and Champaine grounds of Ita^ie, he found himselfe to be in vnpleasing places of the Forrest Hercynia, which the Romaines called Syluam incompertae magnitudinis, and whereof no one knoweth the end. The people of Sigouese inhabited and made their abiding in the shades thereof, making glades (by little and little) for their commoditie.
The first that freed themselues of the Riuer, were the Sambres, the Artesians and Touresians formerly named, in regard of the Riuer of Sambre, called Sabis by Caesar, ^n his second and sixt Bookes of the Gaules warre. Ipse cum reliquis tribus legionibus ^d flumen abin (and not Schaldim) quod inslu^t in Mosam, extremasque Arduennae partes re constituit. For this Riuer, which they of the Ardennes called Sambre, hath her Spring in the said Forrest of Ardenne, on the confines of Vermandois, and of Henault, ^nd making diuers turnings and windings, commeth to laue the Towne of Namure, and afterward looseth her selfe in the Riuer of Meuxe. Fortunatus, the Bishop of Poi^tiers, rancketh among the Riuers of France, this Sabis of Caesar, called Sambre, which the said Fortunatus tearmeth Sabam, in his seauenth Booke, and fourth Poemme.
Isara, Sara, Chares, Schaldis, Saba, Somena, Sura.
This is that which Caesar calleth Sicambros, and Tacitus Sugambros, disguising thus ^uncient proper names, and Gaulish vocables in the Romaine desinence or ending, ^o make them the apter for their owne language. Which Caesar began with a purpo^ed deliberation, to the end, that (in time) the honor and glory of the Gaules Nation might be vtterly lost. A stratagem of Romaine malice, to hide the Gaules for euer, from the most rare secrets of their goodly pollicie,The mallice of the Romaines against the Gauls. with the antiquity of their Citties and Prouinces. Yet notwithstanding all this, in the end they found bright day light, and knowledge of their hainous and deadly enemies, namely, the writings of Caesar, of Titus Liutus, and others. After Caesar followed the Greekes, who, not to ^ide behinde, and not appeare inferiour to the Latines in spirit; meeting with what was written of remote and strange Nations, omitted not (though not tyed there^o) to change and disguise the same Latine names, inuented by Caesar,The Greekes following the Romaines in malice to the Gauls and such as followed him, by cloathing them alike in their Grecian garments. So that the Gaules had no meane paine and trauaile, to know their owne rights, in the writings of Stra^o, Diodorus Siculus, Dion, Ptolomie, and other Greeke Authors, as hardly as in them of the Latines. And this is that which made them trip and stumble so often, in the ^road way of the Itinerarium Cosmographicall of Aeticus; attributed vnaduisedly by the ignorant, to the Emperour Antoninus, and thought to be his.
Those people then, which by Iulius Caesar are called Sicambres, the first that passed ouer the Rhine; planted themselues also first on the borders and lands of Allemaigne,The first plantation beyond the Rhine. where they were then, when the same Caesar (to make himselfe knowne) crossed o^er that great Riuer. They peopled all the extendure of the Countrie, bounded on ^he one side of the side Riuer for one part, euen from the way where the Riuer of Lipp, in Latine Lippias, runneth to swallow it selfe in the Rhine, and remounting againe all along the Forrest Bacenis, bordereth the two Landsgraues territories of Hes^en and of Thuringe, the Dutchie of Saxonie, and the Marquisate of Brandenbourge, ^ecourbing it selfe round-wise, to returne and winne the coast of the Ocean Sea at Hambourg, continuing on so farre as to the Riuer of Rhine; Friezland being a dwelling of the Sambres, in one part of her bounds.
The most notable Riuers of this their abiding, which bathe and water it,The famous Riuers of the Sicambres abiding. at this present are named Lemss and the Vesere, heretofore called by Tacitus Amasias, Amasis,

Amasia and Visurgis by Strabo. And the name of the same extendure, was called Sicambria, but afterward Westphalia. In following time, the said Sicambrians remounted further into the Countrey, peopling there Franconia: which Gregorie of Tours, in the place before alleadged, calleth properly Franciam. Come we now to the numbring of the Gaules, which peopled Allemaigne.
The second company that passed the Rhine, were them of Sens, and where they made their plantation.The men of Sens, hauing (after the Sambres) passed the Riuer of Rhine; planted themselues neere to the other. These are they whom Caesar called Senones, and Suenos: Tacitus Semnones, and others Suiones. They inhabited that extendure of the Countrey, which reacheth from Hambourg, so farre as to Pomerania, all along the Ocean Sea, which of them was called Sueuica on the one side: along the Riuer of Elb, called Albis in Latine, coasting the Sicambres, and remounting by the other side, coasted the Riuer Odera, cutting by Bohemia, they mounted vp so farre as to Nuremberg; in such sort, that they had their quarter both within and without the Forrest Hercynia, on this side and beyong the Elb, euen to the Forrest Bacenis, called at this present of Turing. This extendure of the Country, is called by Caesar Senonia, soone after Sueuia, and vnto this instant Saxonia, and the inhabitants of them Sesnes, Seno^ and Saxons. In following time, and by example of the Sambres, they got more elbow-roome, reaching vp higher into the Countrey, and possessed themselues of places,How far they extended them selues af^erward. which Caesar calleth Noricos, and so farre as to the Mountaines of the Alpes called Alpes Noricae. This new intrusion into the Countrey, and whereof they had made seisure in the Norican Alpes, and round about them: was, of their name, called Senonia Noua; afterward Sueuia, and at this present Suaba, in Latine Sub Albis. Strabo, in the seauenth Booke of his Cosmographie, saith, Senones, Sueuorum na^ partim intra, partim extra syluam Hercyniam habitant. Sueuorum quidem gens ^plissima, a Rheno siquidem vsque ad Albim perueniunt. These are his owne words.
The plantations of the Senones and Beauuoisins.The Angeuins and Beauuoisins, planted themselues betweene the Senones and the Sweuian Sea, making vse of the Countrey now called Pomerania: in memory whereof, the Inhabitants of that Prouince are (euen to this day) named Andes, Andega^^, and Antij by Beatus Rhenanus vpon Tacitus.
The men of Languedoc.Betweene the Saxon and the Bohemian, the people of Languedoc made their stay* as also about Tolossa* but Caesar in his sixt Booke, calleth them Tectosages, holding them in esteeme and reputation, for their valiancie and iustice. Their Capitall Citie among the Gaules, where they receiued birth, retaineth the name of Tolosi Tectosagum, the Metropolitane Sea, and second Seate of Iustice, belonging to the most Christian Kings. And Caesar, when hee speaketh of them of Germanie, saith, that Fertilissima Germaniae loca, circum Hercyniam syluam Tectosages occuparunt, atque ibi ^sederunt: quae gens ad hoc vsque tempus his se continet sedibus, summamque habet Iustitia^ bellicae laudis opinionem. Schastian Munster, in the third Booke of his Cosmographie writeth: That the most part of the Countrey where the Tectosages dwelt, is at this present enclosed within the Duchie of Wittemberg, and watered with the Riuer of Necre, Necar. Tectosagum gens putatur Necri ripam accoluisse, quo loco adhuc arx vetu^ visitur, quae Tecktkensibus postea Comitibus, and Ducibus nomen dedit. Ea arx Teckt abijs^ Tectosagum Populis vulgo appellatur.
The plantation of the Seuenois.The Seuenois, dwelling in the Mountaines of Languedoc, peopled the Forrests and Mountaines, which are betweene Saxonie and the Sweuian Ocean, neere about Me^bourg. The inhabitants of this extention, are to this present called Gabal^, and G^liones, conformably to them of Geuaudan, the Cathedrall Church whereof is Me^^, called in Latine Mimatus, and her people Gabali, Gabalorum. The title of the Bishop thereof, being Episcopus Minatensis, Comes Gabalor^m.
The Bretons, whom Caesar calleth Armoricos Populos, fashioned at all times for Marine negotiations;The plantation of the Bretons. tooke for their partage the coasts of the Germaine Ocean, called Sueuian and Suiouicall by Tacitus, instead of Senonicall. Suionum hinc Ciuitates ips^ in Oceano, praeter viros, armaque Classibus valent. Ergo iam dextro Sueuici maris (...) Aestyorum gentes alluuntur, quibus ritus, habitusque Sueuerum, lingua Britannicae p^pior.
The peopling of Russia and Prussia.In the same steps, the men of Rouerge, and of Ouercy, whom Caesar tearmed R^nos, peopled Russia and Prussia, called in Latine Rutenia and Prutenia, and the

People of the said two Prouinces called Ruteni and Pruteni.
The Limosins peopled in like manner,The plantation of the Limosins. neere about the Germaine Ocean of Linosia, and of their name, the inhabitants there dwelling, haue beene from all times called (especially by Tacitus) Lemouices, and Lemouij, in stead of Liuonienses and Li^onij.
The Chartraines, named by Caesar Carnutes, made their dwelling neere to the Pan^oniaes, peopling Carnutia, with the great and lesser Carnia. Their first Colonie,The Chartraines and where they planted. by change of letters, was called Carinthia, Carnutia, and by Eusebius in his Chronologie, vnder the yeare of our Lord one hundred and fourescore, the inhabiters there are named Populi Carnutum. The two other haue retained their auncient appellation of Carnia, and of Carniola, or Carniolis: but returne we now to the Sicambres and Sueues.
On the right hand of them, betweene them and the bankes of Rhine,The plantation of the Heluetians. there the Heluetians planted themselues; at this instant called Swizzers, and in the Germaine language, the Confederates or Allies: who caused to be builded Scaffouse, Fribourg, and Rotuill, they dwelt sometimes in the Marquisate of Bada.
On the left hand of the same Sweues, the Bourbonnois lodged themselues, whom Caesar calleth Boios: And they planted themselues in that Prouince of Germanie,Plantation of the Bourbonnois in Bohemia. which ^peareth title of the Kingdome of Bohemia, whereunto they gaue their name, conser^ed euen to this present day.
The Berruieres peopled coniointly with the Bourbonnois, the Dutchie of Bauaria,What they were that planted with the Bourbonnois. by Caesar called Noricum, tearmed Bauaria, and Baiocaria, a Boijs, and Auaris Popul^s, with all the extention of the Countrey, contained vnder the name of Nori^um, Alpes Norica, and the inhabitants Noriques, called by Titus Liutus Bourbonnois: and these ex^ended from the Rhine, so farre as the passage to the Citie of Trent (which maketh ^he seperation of Germanie, and the Lands belonging to the State of Venice) and from ^hence so farre as Hungaria. Caesar in the first Booke of the Gaules warres, speaking of the Bourbonnois, writeth, that the Heluetians, which are the Swizzers, tooke as companions and associates Boios, qui trans Rhenum incoluerant, and in agrum Noricum transie^ant, Norciamque oppugnarant, receptes ad se socios sibi adsciscerant, to shew the auncient dwelling of the Gaules in Allemaigne, or Germanie.
And as for Hungaria, it was perticularly peopled by the Berruyers,Concerning the peopling of Hungaria and Morauia. who gaue it the ^ame of Auaria, changed afterward into that of Hungaria, the people being called Auares Populi, soone after Hunnes and Hungars. They peopled also Morauia, which ^are their name, and afterward the Pannoniaes, as much to say as the lower, which is ^he Hungaria, named Auaria (as we haue said) honored with the title of a Kingdome. And the higher, which is the Arch-Duchie of Austria, named Marche d' Austria by ^harlemaigne, after he had conquered it, as Auen^ine writeth in the fourth Booke of his History of Bauaria, more at large.
Of these troupes or Colonies of the Gaules in Germanie, Caesar, speaketh in the ^xt Booke of Bello Gallico, with these words worthy to be remarked. Ac fuit ante tempus ^um Galli Germanos virtute superarent, and vltro bella inferrant, ac propter hominum multitu^inem, agrique inopiam Trans Rhenum Colonias mitterent. Strabo saith as much in his ^ourth and seauenth Bookes of his Geographie.
And the learned Tacitus, in his Germania, deducing briefely that which Caesar set ^owne in larger manner, saith. Validiores olim Gallorum res fuisse* summus auctorum diuus ^lius tradit, eoque credibile est etiam Gallos in Germaniam Transgressos. Igitur inter Hercy^am syluam, Rhenumque and Moenum amnes Heluetij, Vlteriora Boij, Gallica Vtraque Gens ^uere. Manet adhuc Boiemi nomen, significatque loci veterem memoriam. The same Hi^orian, in another passage, saith. Leuissimus quisque Gallorum and inopia audax, dubia pos^ssionis solum occupauere.
And this is the reason, why the auncient Geographers comprehended vnder the ^ame of Celtes and Galates (that is to say the Gaules) the Allemaignes and Germaines. (...) like manner, the Genius of nature Aristotle, who liued three score and ten yeares ^efore Caesar, in the second Booke of his Meteores, writeth: That the great Riuer of ^anubius thwarted the Countrey of the Celtes, and yet notwithstanding, euery man ^oweth, that Dunoua watereth the most part of Germanie.
Diodorus Siculus, who liued (well-neere) at the same time as the Geographer Strabo

did, maketh mention, that Aristotle comprehended vnder the name of Cel^es, Gaules of Almaigne and Spaine, long before peopled by the same Gaules. In memory whereof, it retaineth the name of Celtiberia, from the Riuer of Ebro or Eberus, so farre as to the Pyren^ans, and the Kingdome of Portugall likewise, vpon the same subiect.
Dion anoth^r, Greeke Author, in the life of Augustus, speaking of the Conquests which Claudius Drusus Nero made in Allemaigne; called the Inhabitants Celtes. Drusus Tiberij srater missus contra Celtas qui trans Rhenum incolunt, captis rebus omnibus quae factae esse^ obuiam, vsque ad Albim Fluuium est progressus.
And Vibius Sequester, a Romane Historian, is of the same opinion, as the Authors before alleadged. For, vnder the name of Galates, he comprehendeth Allemaigne, wholly and intirely: in the Tract which he wrote of Riuers, Mountaines, and Nations subiected to the Romaine Empire, which he seemeth to haue borrowed from Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, who called all the extension of Germanie, comprized and enclosed within the Rhine, from beyond Danubius, and from beyond Scythia (which comprehend Poland, Moscouia, and Tartaria for the greater part) Galatiam Magnam, Great Gaule.
Wee will conclude this Chapter with two particularities of the great Riuer Rhine. The first,Two especiall obseruations concerning the Riuer Rhine. that it hath beene receiued from all times, to serue as a borne and limit of the Gaules and Germane. We haue one Tract of Caesars, in his fourth booke of the Gaules warres, of the answere which the Sicambres made to him. Populi Romani Imperium Rhenum s^^are. For then the Romans had ranged the Gaules vnder their obedience, and would subiugate Allemaigne, for which they neuer had any reason. While so many people thereof fought valiantly for their freedome, the Romanes many times triumphed in paintings, of such there as they had vanquished. Moreouer, that great Riuer was whole and int^e to the Gaules. And therefore the Poet Catullus, writing, Ad Furium and A^relium, said:
Siue trans altas gradietur Alpeis,Caesaris visens monimenta magni,Gallicum Rhenum, horribilis and vlti..... mosque Britannos.
The other particularitie, whereby Catullus called that great Gaulish Riuer, Rhenum Gallicum, is; for as much as the Iewes did serue their owne turne of bitter waters, thereby to approue the pudicity or chastity of their wiues, when they suspected them to be somewhat short heel'd,How the Iewes made triall of their wiues honesty as we learne from Iosephus and learned Philo the I^we: euen so in like manner, and for the same subiect, the Gaules serued their turne with the Riuer of Rhine. For they desiring to haue an assured proofe of the fidelity of their wiues, (as if there were place to try it by a Ballance or compromise) after they were layd in childe-bed, they took the tender young Infants and exposed them (starke naked) vpon the water of that violen^ Riuer.The like triall made by the Gaules. If they sunke, and were drowded therein, then they iudged them to be Bastards, fit for no other fortune, excluding their wiues from their houses, and seuerely punishing them for their incontinency: for they wholly had the power of life and death ouer them, according as Caesar writeth in the sixt booke of his Bello Gallico. On the contrary, if the Infants did swim, as borne vp vpon the Rhine, they acknowledged them to be legitimate, nourished and educated them carefully, as children of the family.
For this cause the Greeke Poet Poet Nonnus, in Dionysiacis, to good purpose called that great Riuer of Rhine (...), The Iudge and Reuenger of Marriage, soyled with the wiues immodesty, Matrimonij violati vindicem.
Iulian the Apostata obserueth the same noate, in his Epistle Ad Maximum, naming the Rhine the Essayer and Touch-stone of Chastity in the Gaulish women; the Plumm^ for sounding, and infallible proofe of their Legitimate children; (...). As much saith Galen (who by the saying of Plutarch) locke vp the schoole of Philosophy, in the Tract which hee wrote, De Sanitate tuenda: The Greeke Prouerbe.

(...).
(...).
Audaces rapido Celta nona pignora Rheno
Explorant.

And the Poet Claudian.
Et quos nascentes explorat gurgite Rhenus.


CHAP. II. Of the Migrations, remouings and passages of the Sicambres, and other people out of Germanie, into Gaule, and on the hither side of the Rhine.
IN the former discourse we haue made knowne, what people of Gaule peopled the waste Germanie. The Sambres, who are they (as we haue already said) which dwelt vpon the Riuer of Sabis, rested on the Riuer of Rhine,The Sicambres famous for their valiancie. and were they whom Caesar called Sicambri. These people, renowned for valiancie among the naturall Gaules, were present in the Armie of Ariouistus, King of the Germaines, when he would needes make head against Caesar, who commenced the conquest of the Gaules. They were they, who confronted the same Caesar, ^en by way of a brauado, he would shew himselfe to the Germaines, to succour (...) Inhabitants of Cologne on the Rhine: after hee had caused a Bridge to be ^ouided, whereof hee describeth the forme and fashion, in the fourth Booke (...) Bello Gallico.
This Bridge was built very neere to Cologne, which declareth, that the Sicambres,A Bridge built by Caesar neer to Cullen. ^d their neighbours the Sweues, possessed not onely the higher Germanie, but also ^reat part of the lower: for otherwise Caesar had (to small purpose) built that Bridge ^eere to Strasbourg, or to Spire, which are (at this day) face to face with the ^w Suaba. So that it behoued him necessarily, that those two neighbouring people, ^d which followed him alwayes in warre; should hold and possesse all the Coun^y, which marched to the Riuer of Elb (that is Albis) from whence they might make ^ir inuasions and courses, euen so farre as to the territorie of them of Cologne, ^ich Caesar calleth Vbiens, constrained to appeale for their aide and succour. And ^s is the reason why we haue formerly placed the Sambres, or Sicambres,The Sambres or Sicambres placed in Friezland. so farre ^nto Friez-Land, where the Riuers of Emss and of Vuezer, runne rouling and des^ding into the Ocean Sea. Sicambria (quae nunc Vuest-phalia dicitur) inter Rhenum, Ca^ Cheruscos, Bructeros, Langobardos extendebatur.
The ancient Sicambria, afterward called West-phalia,The scituation of the ancient Sicambria. had on the East side the Ri^ of Vezer (Visusurgis) for frontier: on the South, the Mountaines of the Landsgra^ of Hessen, which Ptolomie calleth Monte O^obios: on the West, the great Riuer of ^ine; and on the North-side Friezland, Holland, Vtrect and Trans-Isellana.
^t is a matter very remarkeable, that the French hauing embraced Christianity, at (...) Sacring of Clouis, which happened in the yeare fiue hundred,At what time the French receiued the Christian faith. and by their ex^ple, the very neerest prouinces of their obedience: yet notwithstanding, they of ^stphalia retained long time the Romaine Demonomanie, euen vntill such time Charlemaigne, being become a peacefull Lord ouer them: he established foure E^copall Churches, namely, Munstre, Osnabourg, Paderbrun, and Minde. And to ^pe in dutie of the Catholique Faith, the inhabitants of this Countrey (meruai^sly inclined to Idolatrie) he instituted a cruell Inquisition (by the modell and pat^e whereof* was the holy Office in Spaine prouided) or secret kinde of Iustice; ^h soueraigne power to punish Traitors, and periured persons to God, taken in Ido^ie, without hearing them speake: so that (without any noise) from euening to ^rning, the Idolaters were seene hanged, and fastened to Trees, without distincti^ of Noblemen from Peazants, poore from rich, because ordenarily, the greatest ^sons were hanged vp, whose authority might otherwise serue for a shelter to the ^aner sort, to doe ill. By which rigorous course, without forme or any figure of ^ice; the Westphalians were kept within the compasse of well doing. Those close

concealed Iudges were called Escheuins Scabini,Immediate seuere Iudges of life or death or as Sheriffes for execution suddenly. so say the Germaine Authors: a^ after them Pope Pius the second, in whose life time this bloody Inquisition came into force againe.
This ancient Sicambria, was (in following time) inhabited with diuers Nations. (...) there were the Teutons of Mela, whom Ptolomie calleth Teutones, placed on the ^ticke Sea,The old people of Allemaigne. and these men ioyned themselues to the Cimbrians, at such time as they entred among the Gaules, and were ouercome by Caius Marius in Prouence, neere (...) Arles Camargne plaine, called Campus Marius, of that great Romaine Captaine. These Teutons or Theutons, caused Teutoburgum to be built by the side of a goodly Forrest, famous by the buriall of the Romaines. Next followed the Busasteres (...) Ptolomie, whom Tacitus calleth Bructeros, who possessed the Diocesse of M^stre and neighbouring Countries: for there were both the great and less^ Bructeres.
Of other peoples passages to them.Then the Chamaues of Tacitus, Camani by Ptolomie, which are they of the Co^tie of the Mark.
The Augriuarians of Ptolomie, placed on the Vezer, that is the Dutchie of Augi^ euen to this day, and the Countie of Lippe, the Diocesse of Minde.
The Lombards, who afterward were regents in Italie, euen to the time of the grea^ Emperour Charlemaine.
The Delgumni^s of Ptolomie, and the Dulgibins of Tacitus: the markes of these tw^ last people doe shew themselues at Bardewich, and Dulmon, a Towne seated in the D^ocesse of Munstre.
Sometimes called Angels-Land.The Angles or Anglois, who gaue their name to Great Bretaigne, otherwise called England, whether they passed in the yeare foure hundred forty foure.
The Cha^ches, whom Ptolomie calleth Conchos, and the Poet Claudian Caicos.

. . . . . . . . Non indignante Caicos,
Pascat Belga p^cus.

They held the Diocesse of Breme, bordering on Friez-Land, and the Riuers (...) Vezer and of Emss, returning backe so farre as to the Cattes and Cherusques; whi^ are them of Heidelberg, and of the Landsgrauiat of Hessen, heretofore called Ca^ Agath^as a Greeke Author, addeth to them the Arboriches, called Arborichij, peopl^ neighbours to the Landsgrauiat of Hessen, which are said to be the Eiscfifdelois, a^ this present.
This noate of the auncient inhabitants of Sicambria, will serue to vnderstand t^ passages of Tacitus in his Germania, and in the first Booke of his Annales. Conciti (...) ^odo per haec Cherusci, sed and contermina gentes. Vnde maior Caesari metus, qui ne be^ mole vna ingrueret, Caecinam cum quadraginta Cohortibus Romanis distrahendo hosti, p^ Bructeros ad flumen Amisiam (that is the Emss) mitti^. Equitem Paedo Praefectus finib. F^siorum ducit, ipse impositas manibus quatuor Legiones per lacus vexit, simulque pedes, eq^ classis per praedictum amnem conuenere. Chansi, cum auxilia pollicerentur, in commilit^ asciti sunt. Bructeros sua vrenteis, expedita cum manu L. Stertinius missu Germanici f^ interque caedem, and praedam reperit vnde vigesimae Regionis Aquilam cum Varo amissam. ^ctum inde agmen ad vltimos Bructerorum, quantumque Amisiam, and Luppiam am^es (...) vastatum, haud procul Teutoburgensi saltu in quo reliquiae Vari, Legionumque insep^ cebantur.
Satisfaction concerning the Sicambrians, and their original.That which hath aboue bin said, in my iudgement, may suffice to make seene (...) knowne, both with the eye and finger, the auncient dwelling of the Sicambrians, (...) their true originall. Hereafter we shall see further, how they were transported (...) some part of them) into Holland vnder Augustus; then carried away from thence, ^der the Empire of Constantius (father to Constantine the Great) further off into G^ namely into Picardie, and Prouinces neighbouring on the Ocean Sea; whe^ they returned after the death of the said Constantius; how those of Westpha^ mounted higher into Allemaigne, to inhabite Franconia and Thuringe: from when^ (some yeares after) they repassed he Rhine, to descend (in good earnest and (...) fully) to possesse themselues of the Gaules.
Caesar hauing nothing aduanced his fortune, by passing the Rhine; his success^

^gustus performed some small matter more: yet his Lieutenant Varus, and some Le^ns, remained there for gages at Teautobourg, as we haue it remarked by Tacitus.Where Caesar left, his successor Augustus proceeded on, but to small aduantage. ^erius, Lieutenant to the said Augustus, partly by loue, and partly by force; trea^ some meanes of peace with the Sweues and Sicambrians, the very neerest to (...) Rhine: and made alliance with their King Maroboduus (King of the Sicambri^ and Sweues, from the time of Augustus) by the consent of whom,Maroboduus, King of the Sicambrians and Sweues. the Sicambri^ were caused to passe the Riuer of Rhine, and planted themselues betweene (...) armes thereof (of three, as some haue noated) where it disgorgeth it selfe ^o the Ocean Sea. This abiding of theirs, gaue a part to the said Sicambri^, traiected or ferried out of Germanie into Gaule, and to the vtmost confines ^reof, and it is acknowledged vnder the name of Holland, called by the Ro^ns Batauia, and the arme of Rhine, whereon it is seated; Vahalis, and at this present ^l; but by the Bishop of Auuergne, Sidonius Apollinaris (writing to the Emperor ^iorian) Vachalis.

Sic ripae duplicis tumore fracto
Detonsus Vachalim bibat Sicamber.

Of this migration, leauing the Countrey, and new Colonie of the Sicambrians, ^m beyond the Rhine, vpon the confines of the Gaules; the Geographer Strabo ^aketh in his fourth Booke, and elsewhere. Dion, in whom, for Cantabri, must (...) read Sicambri. Eutropius in his Breuiarie, mounted the account of these peo^ very high, to the number of foure hundred thousand men. Tacitus, in the se^nd Booke of his Annales, maketh Tiberius speake thus. Sic Sicambros in deditio^n acceptos, sic Sueuos, Regemque Maroboduum pace obstrictum. And Suetonius, in ^e life of Augustus: Sueuos, and Sicambros dedentes se in Galliam traduxit, and in proxi^ agris Rheni collocauit. Horace in his fourth Booke, Ode 14.

Te caede gaudentes Sicambri,
Compositis venerantur armis.

And these are the very same, whereof Martiall speaketh, who liued vnder the ^ell Domitian.
Crinibus in nodiam tortis venere Sicambri.
Expeditions by one and the same meanes, and all in one traine their other migra^ns; vntill their assured dwelling in Gaule.


CHAP. III. Other Migrations or shifting of places, of the Sicambrians into Gaule and Germanie.
WE haue in our precedent Chapter declared,Colonies of the Sicambrians transplanted into Holland. how Tiberius placed and transported Colonies of the Sicambrians into Holland, betweene the arme of Rhine, where it rowleth into the Ocean by three mouthes (for indeede it hath so many, howsoeuer those Auncients tooke knowledge but of two) according to the testimonies of Poets; as Claudian in his first Booke De Laudibus Stilonicis.

Impiger a primo descendent fluminis ortu
Ad Bisidos tractus, and iuncta paludibus ora
Fulmineum perstringit iter.

Sidonius Apolinaris, in the place before alleadged.
Sic ripae duplicis tumore fracto.
And in the Panegyricke, spoken by him to the Emperour Auitus.


. . . . . . . Et flauis in pocula fracte Sicambris
Rhene tumens)

The transmigration from Westphalia into Holland.But this transmigration from Westphalia into Holland, is not to be vnder^ of all the Sicambrians in generall, but onely a part or company of them. T^ did not (for this present occasion) forsake their auncient Sicambria, which (...) possessed vntill such time, as they made assurance for themselues in Gaule, in (...) declining of the Romaine Empire. That bright burning Lampe of the Ch^ Saint Hierome, who had long time studied at Treuers, then Capitall Citie of (...) Gaules, and who (in his owne person) had seene Marcomir and Sunnon, Kings (...) France, Grandfathers to King Pharamond (for Saint Hierome passed out of this (...) into a better, in the yeare foure hundred and twenty, being aged fourescore (...) thirteene yeares, in the holy Citie of Bethelem) describeth thus their dwell^ (such as it was in his time) in the life of the good Hermet Saint Hilari^^, ^ter Saxones, and Alemannos, gens non tam lata, (quam valida) apud Historicos G^mania, nunc vero Francia vocatur. For (as we shall say elsewhere) the Romaines call^ Allemaigne in generall,All Allemaign in generall called Germania by the Romains Germania. But after that the inhabitants thereof leagu^ themselues in two troupes, as namely the Sicambrians vnder the name of French and the Sueues, vnder the name of Allemaignes: then Germanie were (by the sa^ meanes) deuided into two lots and partages, seperated the one from the other b^ the Riuer of Elb. Afterward, from thence, so farre as to the vtmost confines (...) the Alpes,The higher Germ^nie called Allemaign Sclauonia and Carinthia, with all that great extendure of the Countrey called sometimes the Higher Germanie, was called Allemaigne, by a new na^ of League, and commonly Suaba, or Suenia. And then, from hitherward t^ Elb, so farre as to the shoare of the Germaine Sea, and to the swallowing of Rhi^ into the Oceans mouth: all that circumference (acknowledged vnder the name (...) the lower Germanie, or simply Germany, as Saint Hierome saith) was called France^ by generall name of the league,The lower Germanie called Franch. of all the people thereof; so that perticularly Westphalia was the dwelling of the Sicambrian French, seated betweene the Ses^ or Saxons, and the Sueues or High-Allemaignes.
Sidonius Apollinaris, who liued in the time of King Meroueus, and was sent (...) an Ambassage to him, by the Romaine Emperours, to moue an agreement disciphereth this auncient dwelling of the French, by the Floods and ^uers of Vaal, of Viadeer, of the V. and of the Elb, writing to Cosse^s^ a man of a singuler good aduise, and whom hee reputed (for integritie of life capable, to settle some appointment with this generous Nation, and warli^ French.

Tu Vidrum, and Vachalini, Visurgim, Albim
Francorum, and penitissmas paludes
Intrares, venerantibus Sicambris,
Solis moribus inter arma cutus.

The same dwelling of theirs was assured, so saith Agathias the Greeke Auth^ (who had Souldier-like serued vnder the Emperour Iustinian, and liued in (...) time of Great Clouis, King of France, his Sonnes) as well in Westphalia, (...) beyond, and on this side the Rhine, in the Duchies of Cleues and Gulich, (...) Countie of Zutphen, where they extended themselues into Gaule on the one sid^ and on this side the Rhine into Thuringe, and also into Franconia, saith this Auth^ in his first Booke of the Gothes warres.
Constantius, Father of Constantine the Great.It is a case most certaine, that Constantius, the Father of Constantine the Gr^ was sent Lieutenant Generall into Gaule, to represse the maritime incursyo^ which the French (setled in Holland) made on the shoares of the Oce^ Sea: from whence ioyntly with the Sesnes or Saxons their neighbours, they d^bled euery way the Sea-coasts of the Romaine Empire. To checke these proc^dings of theirs, he transported out of Holland the shrewdest and hardest kinde of p^ple, further vp into Gaule: thus we are instructed by the Panegyricke of Em^

^an spoken to the said Constantius, whom hee commended, for hauing retaken ^logne on the Sea; ouerthrowne Alectus, successour to Carausius; and the ^ench, who shouldered them in England, and swept the coastes of the Nor^andie Sea, Picardie, Flanders and Holland, from the rouing and Piracies of ^e French, whom hee had rid the Countrey of, and transported to Beauuois ^^ie^s, to Langres and Troyes, Per Victorias tuas, Constanti Caesar inuicte, quid^id infrequens Ambiano, and Bellouaco, and Triquassino solo, Lingonicoque restabat; ^baro cultore reuirescit Which hee meaneth of the French, dispersed into ^ese Prouinces, emptied of their auncient Inhabitants, by the spoyles of strange ^ations in Gaule. The same Rhethoritian, in another Panegyricke, informeth (...), that the same Emperour surprized some French, euen within their owne ^arishes, whom hee transported into Gaule, as well as those out of Holland. ^uid loquar rursus intimas Franciae nationes non ad iam his locis, quae olim Romani in^serant; sed a proprijs ex origine sua sedibus, atque ab vltimis Barbariae littoribus ^ulsas, vt in desertis Galliae regionibus collocatae, etiam pacem Romani Imperij cultu iuua^nt, and arma dilectu.
But these people thus traiected into Gaule, made their stay there for no long time; ^r being of a generous and martiall spirit, and such as made sale of their liues ra^er for fight, then to consume them in the rust of ease and sloath: And as Claudi^ saith, speaking of them;
Illi terribiles, quibus otia vendere semperMos erat, and foeda requiem mercede pacisci.
No sooner heard they the death of the Emperour Constantius, but they returned ^gaine into Holland, where they recommenced their Pyraticall kinde of life, and ^ought valiantly against Constantine the Great, and his Sonnes, as well by Sea, as ^n firme Land, so say the Panegyristes, because the French Nation encreased to in^nite numbers of people. By meanes whereof, they made their extendure daily, ^oth beyond, and on this side the Rhine, and namely into the lower Germanie, ^here they peopled the Prouince, which of their name (euen to this day) is cal^ed Franconia. Sigibert in his Chronicle, nameth this peopling,Franconia bearing name of the French. to be in the yeare ^f Grace, three hundred twenty fiue. Franci, Sicambria egressi considere secus Rhe^um in oppidis Germaniae But it is a question, whether he speaketh of their Colo^ies in Franconia, or of them which they sent on the hither side of the Rhine, into ^he Duchies of Cleues, Gueldres and Gulich, which they held then, when they pos^essed themselues of the Gaules.
For the Germaine Authors agree together, that in the yeare of Grace,The generall opinion of Germaine Authors. three hun^red twenty sixe, the Soraues (who were they of Thuringe) being hurried by the ^ueues, who (by Droit de Bien-Seance) became possessed very suddenly, of one part ^f the Lands belonging to them of Bauaria, where they had planted a new Colo^ie of the Suabes: were constrained (to conserue the rest of their deuision) to call to ^heir aide and succour the Sicambrians, renowned for valiancie, vnder the name ^f the French; to serue as a bulwarke and strong wall betweene them and the ^ueues, who made themselues knowne by the name of Allemaignes, as wee said ^efore.
These French then departed out of their Sicambria,The departure of the French out of their Sicambria. to the number of three hun^red and fourescore thousand men, with their Families; and went to plant them^elues in the Lands of the Soraues, where formerly had made their abode the ^sipetes and Tenchteres. Cum inter Sorabos (so say the Germaine Authors) and con^nes eorum Sueuos, perptuum esset dissiduum,The people of Wirizbourg in Franconia. conuocatos ex inferiori Germania Si^ambros, illos collocarunt in pago Herbipolensi, qui mediarent inter ipsos Thuringos, atque ^ueuos.
The same Authours (for the Romaine Historians speake nothing of these ^migrations) expresse moreouer, saying that Franco^es primum habitauerunt iux^a Rhenum in inferiore Germania, in his regionibus quae hodie Vuestphalia, and ^risia, appellataque est ab eis regio illa Sicambria, sicut, and Sicambri sunt

sunt appellati. Contigit autem sub Anno Domini Trecentessimo Viges^^o Sex^^, (...) ringi and Sueui multa haberent dissidia, and pralia continua qua propter Franci (...) ^gis vocati, quasi murus constituti fuerunt inter eos, atque Sueuos. Thus you see (...) they say in this case.
In this place to set downe the Topohraphies of thir plantation, and Colonie, (...) the Paralels of them, which are renowned to this day, with those beside wh^ the French wan passage: the narration (in my iudgement) would be too trouble^some, and it may be discerned in Munster, who tooke it to his taske. Wee (...) onely say, that this Franconia is gently watered with the Riuers of Moein, of ^berne, where Neccar in part, and Saltz make a supplement: which serueth aptly (...) this discourse, because that the French, those I meane which dwelt in the very highes^ part of Franconia, and of Westphalia, were named by the Historians of Rome, Franci Antiuarij,Franci Salici, a name giuen them by the Romaines. and Ampsiuarij, and those people which bordered on the Riuer (...) (called Salts by the Allemaignes) were by the same Romaines named Franci Sa^ and by abridgement Salij, of the verbe Salire, that is to say, Saulier, to be agile quicke and nimble of foote, to leape and mount well, a quality most notably ^quisite, for such as dwell in watrie and marshie places, except they helpe themselue^ with Stilts. So that it differeth nothing from the purpose, that those people of the French, who (at all times) inhabited neere to the Rhine, and within the marishes, which the Riuer procureth by her ouer-flowings, in the auncient S^cambria,A notable Riuer in Germanie. as well beyond, as on this side the great Riuer, with them that are planted there on the Sala (whereof we now speake) should not for their agility (as iustly they might haue bin and were) named and called Salians by the Romaines; who were alwayes wont (and the same is common to other Nations) to obserue each one peticularly, by his proper habitude and custome. For example. Such of the French, as were dwellers on the great course of the Riuer, were called Nageurs, Swimmers, and they of the Marshes Saulteurs, Leapers, and so of other Nations. Perticularities familiarly obserued by Sidonius Appollinaris.

....... Tibi vincitur illis,
Cursu Herulus, Chamus iaculis, Francusque natatu,
Sauro mato clypeo, Salius pede, falce Gelonus.

So that it was a nicke name giuen to the French, in regard of their naturall disposition and dwelling, as (yet to this day) their enemies tearme them French Toades. From whence grew the Fabe, that their auncient Kings carried such creatures (...) their Armes. And this shall serue to shew, that from the time of Ammianus Marcellinus, who serued Souldierlike in Gaule, vnder the impious Iulian the Apostate; the French were surnamed Salians (Quos consuetudo Salios, vocitauit, obserueth this Author) saying, that (by custome in one word) the French were surnamed commonly, Salians.
Betweene the Cities of Bamberge, and of Nuremberge, is a great Mountaine, couered with high Pines, from whence it tooke the name of Fichtelbourge: in it is the sourse of foure Riuers,Foure noated Riuers. commended in Germanie, to wit, the Moein, the Nab, the Ego and the Sala.
This last Riuer tooke name of the Bourgade (neighbour to the place of her nomination,Seine, Queene of the Riuers in France. which (is called Sala) as (without paragon) the Queene of Riuers in France, that is Seine, tooke name of a small Village, named Saint Seine: aboue which, (...) Wood on the left hand, this Riuer hath her spring. Saint Seine is an Abbey (...) the order of Saint Benedict, about fiue miles from Diion, betweene Chanc^ (...) the Vale of Suzon, a most dangerous passage.
Strabo touching in his passage along (concerning the Riuers of Germanie) ^ticularly that of Sala, saith. Bisurgis and Luppias amnes in vnum ad Amasiam ((...) calleth it Amisiam) defer^ntur stad^, per Bructeros minores (as we haue already (...) the Bructeres, otherwise tearmed Busacteres, were diuided in twaine, the ^er and the lower, these last neere to Friex-land, and the other neere (...) and of Brunswicke) labens. Est and Salas flu^ius, inter quem, and Rhe^ (...)

(...) Drusus Germanicus belligeraret, domitis hostibus, Victor opetijt. These are the Ri^s of the Vesere, of Lepp, Emss, and Saltz. Emss and the Vesere doe ouerthwart West-^alia, the first dwelling of the French.
The Saltz hath his course from East to West, and engrossing eight other small ^uolets; maketh it selfe nauigable, vntill it looseth it selfe in the Moein,By others it is called Moenis called in ^ine Mogonus and Moganus. It giueth name to the Hamlet or the Hamlet to it. (...) much I dare say, that like as the Seille which laueth and sprinkleth the great ^wne and Citie of Mentz, was heretofore called Salia by Fortunatus, Bishop of ^ictiers, in his third Booke, and twelfth Poem, in regard of some Well or Spring (...) Salt, which was neere vnto it, as he saith in his seauenth Booke;
Seu qui Mettim adit de sale nomen habens.
Euen in the same manner, the Village and the Riuer of Sala in Franconia, tooke ^t appellation A Sale: because that neere vnto them there were (in former times) ^epe Wels, the water whereof was apt to make Salt in great abundance, and but ve^ few of fresh water. As we see the same exercised at Salins, in the Countie of ^urgongne; and at Salies, in the Pyrenian Mountaines, in the Countie of Co^enges, the Diocesse of Couzerans, from whence stremeth the Riuer of Salat, which ^th watereth and crosseth Saint Girons, passeth vnder the Bridge of Saint Lize (in ^tine Lizerius) the Cathedrall of Cozerans, betweene Prat and Taurignan, to Salies:Garumna, parting Coltica from Aquitania. (...) called of a Well, the water whereof maketh Salt, and so to Saint Iulian, vnder ^ich the Salt runneth, and looseth it selfe in the Riuer of Garon^e, at a place na^ed La Fourche.
The Noble Historian Tacitus telleth vs, that the Hermondures and Cherusques* (...) Marcomans and the Cattes, made strong warre among themselues, which of them ^uld be Maister of that place, called Sala, in regard of the Salines, or Salt-pits, ^hereof (yet to this day) Springs and Wels are to be seene, neere to the Towne of ^ala, the aspiration added, and pronounced for an S. on the Riuer of Sal (which ^leth in the Moein, in the Towne of Gemonde, after it hath made the separati^ of Misnia, and of the Landsgrauate of Thuringe) Sometime there had bin ^o Villages, whereof the old ruines are yet to be seene,A Citie by Albis in Germanie. the one called the higher ^la, and the other the lower. The higher was remarkeable, by a Castle of plea^e, builded by Charlemaine, for the recreation of Hunting at Autonne. It is sweet^ seated on the Moein, and so thence on the Sal,King Charlemaigne delighted greatly in Hunting. and to this Castle hee would send ^e Ambassabours comming from strange Princes, and tooke his delight to hunt ^ere, in the months of September and October, and thence forward to the night (...) Saint Martin in winter. At the comming from this Castle was a goodly Forrest ^led Saltz Forto, a limbe of the Forrest of Bouchone (Bichona Sylua) branching ^om the Hercynia: commodities which made this place very pleasing to the Em^erours Charlemaine, and Lewis the Debonnaire.


CHAP. IV. At what time the Sicambrians and Sweues, tooke the names of French and Germaines.
THE People most potent and renowned of all other in Allemaigne or Germanie,The Sicambrians and Sweues contiduall warriours with the Romaines. and which euermore (without ceasing) warred with the Romaines; were alwayes the Sicambrians, and the Sweues: these latter dwelling in the higher Allemaigne (as we haue formerly said) and the other in the lower. Sueui in superiori, and Sicambri in inferiori Germania sedes suas habuere, the one being deuided from the other by the Riuer of Albis. The Romaines were a very long time, without any knowledge of the people beyond this Al^, yea, and not so much as seeing them, or their glittering Armes; this Riuer hauing

serued as a Borne, and limitation of their conquests. Strabo in the fourth B^ of his Geographie, saith Sicambri fluuiali regioni (of Rhine) toti supereminent, s^ Germani alteri, quos Sueuos appellant. And in his seauenth Booke, speaking of (...) Sicambrians, thus. Cogniti sunt qui ab exitu Rheni, vsque ad Albini initium capi^* quibus Celeberrimi sunt Sicambri.
The Sweu^s and Sicambrian^ sworn^ enemie^ to the Romaines.So that the Romaine Historians neuer speake of the Sueues, but when the Sicambrians marched along with them in Field, to keepe them company. Both of the^ were coniured enemies to the Romaines, banded against these people in hate, onely to oppresse, and bring them into seruitude and slauery. And this neere neighbouring (...) theirs, caused them to be wholly conforme in their fashions and manner of life, as (...) of a mutuall will, to conserue their libertie, and expulse the Romaines out of the plenteous Gaules, and to become Masters of them themselues, as Tacitus telleth (...) in his Germania. Eadem causa semper Germanis transcendendi in Gallias, mutand^ s^dis amor, vt relictis paludibus (this he meaneth of the Sicambrians) and solitudi^ suis (of the Sueues) foecundissimum Galliarum solum possiderent.
The Sicambrians were obserued by their yellow haire, tressed and knit in cordo^ like to Loue knots, with Ribbands. So saith Martiall.
Crinibus in nodum tortis venere Sicambri
And Claudian.

Ante ducem nostrum Flauam sparsere Sicambri
Caesariem.

Againe, in the third Panegyrick of Stilico, he saith.

Haec Alemannorum spolijs Australibus, Illo,
Ditior exuuis Illinc Flauente Sicambri
Caesaria.

Then Sidonius Apollinaris saith.

Et Flauis in pocula fracte Sicambris
Rhene ^umens.

The Sueues, as the same Tacitus saith. Insigne gentis obliquare crinem, nod^que s^stringere.
Lucane in the second of his Pharsalia.

Fundit ab extremo Flauos Aquilone Sueuos
Albis.

And Claudian in his first Booke
Arduus, and Flauis signabat iura Sueuis.
The true Originall of the Gaules.Which declareth and confirmeth that which we haue formerly said. That these People were the Originall of the Gaules, because their butt and aime wholly tended, to regaine That Gaule, from whence they departed. For it is a constant case, by the testimonie of Ammianus Marcellinus, that the Gaules had their Beards and hair^ yellow like Gold, tressed and knit in cordons. The Latine Poet in his eight Aenei^, speaking of the Gaules Colonie passing into Italie (and which rased Rome) vnder the reigne of Ambigat, saith.

Galli per dumos aderant, aciesque tenebant
Defensi tenebris, and dono noctis opacae,
Aurea Caesaries ollis, and Aurea vestis.

Caesaries, that is, their long lockes of haire, and yellow as Gold, and Beard of the same colour,A Captaine withou^ a Beard, called Inuestis. which he called Vestem Auream: because that a Captaine without a Beard, was tearmed Inuestis. So doth Seruius Atheneus tell vs, in his Dypnos^p^istes De Caena Celtarum: And Claudian in his second Booke In Eutropium.

....... Tum Flaua repexo,
Gallia crin^ fer^x, reuinctaque crine decoro.

But come we to the names of Allemaignes and French.
Concerning the name of French.Some there are, who would deriue the name of French from these Latine wo^ (for excellence) Feritas, Ferocitas, and from thence Feroces, and Franci of Fer^ci^a^e D^* grounding (at aduenture) on the passage of Strabo, purposely reported before* of the Gauls Colonies planted in Germanie. Nationem Gallicam imitantes, and Feritatis a^^antia,

proceritate corporum, and colore Flauo. And in truth Ammianus Marcellinus de^cribeth the man and woman Gaule, to be white of flesh, with broad shoulders, gold-^ellow of haire, being so tall and strong of body and stature, that the Romans standing by them, seemed as if they were but dwarfes and Pigmeies, falling (by chance) out of ^heir sleeues. Heereupon it was, that the Gaulish women made a mockery of them, ^s dwarfes and diminitiues of men; so saith Caesar in his Bello Gallico. But aboue all, ^hey were of a dreadfull countenance, and affrighting, as Marcellinus saith in his fourth ^ooke. So that the Sicambrians, of the Gaules Originall, are called by Horace (descri^ing the praises of the Emperour Augustus) Feroces, and fleshed with bloud, caede gau^entes.

Te non pauentis funera Galliae,
Direque tellus audit Iberiae.
Te Caede gaudentes Sicambri
Compositis venerantur armis.

And in the second Ode of the same booke, to the sonne of Marcus Antonius.

Cancines maiore, Poeta, plectro
Caesarem, quandoque trahet Feroces
Per sacrum cliuum, merita decorus
Fronde Sicambros.

Isidore, with all his Etymologies, would haue much adoe, to draw by the lock^s, Francois, out of this Latine word Ferocia.
For, concerning the remitting the Tribute by the Emperour Valentinian; that is ^ut a meere gullery, and a grosse ignorance; as wee shall see heereafter, by the date ^f time.
Other Authors, of more sublime and eleuated ingenuity, deseruing immortall praise ^or their great Reading, teach vs; that the French haue beene famous (by that name) ^rom the time of the Oratour Cicero, that is to say,The honorable Antiquity of the French. from the times of Caesar and Au^ustus, all along. For these braue spirits say, that Cicero speaking of them in the sixth ^pistle of his fourteenth booke, Ad Titum Pomponium Atticum, and calling them by ^heir name: Balbus meliora de Gallia XXI. die literas habebat. Germanos illasque Nati^es re audita de Caesare, Legatos misisse ad Aurelium, qui est Praepositus ab Hircio, se, quod ^peratum esset facturos. All went well hitherto, and heere followeth the pursuit of ^uers sound Huntsmen, in quest of finding forth the Frenche.
Redeo ad Theos, Bessos, Sueuos, Francones, hos tu existimas confidere se illa habituros ^antibus nobis, in quibus plus virtutis putarunt, quam experti sunt? Thus you see the ^ext depraued, wherewith so boldly they vnder-prop their saying:A false ground to build vpo^. but behold now ^e natiue and corrected impression.
Redeo ad te. Bessos, Scaeuas, Francones, etc. Those Doctors should haue taught (...), by one and the same meanes, in what place of the Geography of Strabo,Strabo abused by these Allegations. wee shall ^de the notes of these new-ly named people, Theos, Bessos. Who perceiueth not by ^e reading of that long sixth Epistle, that this clause Redeo ad te, Bessos, Scaeuas, etc. ^not meant apparantly of the people of Allemaigne? For, tell me (I pray you) to ^hat purpose did he cut off the thred of his discourse, by thrusting in that of the vn^ppy funerals to the Romanes, of Iulius Caesar reduced into ashes? Leaue these idle ^ts to such as loue them, and come we to the truth.
The Sicambrians hauing (by their valiancie) wonne the aduantage,This is verified by good and probable Authors. and the com^and ouer the rest of the people in the lower Germanie, as they had it from the time (...) Strabo; made among one part of them, a Hanse, that is to say, a League and Societie: ^or this opinion, I subscribe to the deceased M. Iohn du Tillet, whose memorialls are ^e markes of his painefull labours, and who might well say (without enuy) for his ^eat and diligent examinations in such cases
Auia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius anteTrita solo.
We may learne by him, that the people of the higher Germany, called themselues ^lemans: the word Aleman being composed of two dictions Germanicall,The interpretation of the word Aleman as name^ of Al, which signifieth All, and Man, Homo, Alman. All-man, or else Allerley-Mans, ^en of diuers Countries, vnited and ioyned together; as Agathias writeth, in his first

booke of the Gothes History. And so saith Du Tillet, that the people of the higher Germanie, were called Alemans, of the name of the League which they made together* In imitation of the Sicambrians of the lower Germany, who were the first that leag^ themselues with other of their Germane neighbours, to maintaine together their l^berty against the Romanes.
They tooke a new name to auoyd al enuy among them.These people being thus leagued with one accord, (to take away all enuy among them) took a new name, and (by a good presage) answerable to the desire which they had to make themselues famous by Armes, and to make the people free, Free People* without bending vnder the yoake of the Romane Empire: called themselues hee^vpon Frein-Hans^n,The company of Freemen. which signifieth in the Germane tongue, The Company of Free-Men, and of these two words (by Syneresis) it is made but one, Fransen, which signifieth More then a Man. So saith Iornandes, in his Gothish history, that the Gothes called their chiefe Leaders in Warre Hansen, Demy gods, and more then Men: as if they would say; that their Captaine, he alone had the strength of all a Company.
The like was obserued in certaine Aleman townes, assembled into one Company, to Trafficke and Merchandise with one common purse: they had many exemptions, by name of the Hanse Teutonique,Hanse Teutonique, the company of Aleman. that is to say, The Company of Alemans.
Of this name of Hanse, there remaineth the memory of certaine rights, granted by the first Kings, to the Prouosts of Merchants, and Sheriffes of Paris. I haue seene and read the Charter of the Hanse, granted to the Inhabitants of Mante, by Philip Augustus, concerning his rights of the Hanse, and this is the Tenure.
A Patent gra^ted to the Hanse of MantePHilippus, Dei gratia Francorum Rex. Notum sit omnibus, quod homines nostri de Medunta habent ab antiquo omnes Hansas Meduntae, tam de Villa, quam de aqua, s^ proprias, pro seruitio quos nobis faciunt, and antecessoribus nostris fecerunt, scilicet quod adiuuant ad onerandum, and exonerandum nostras machinas infra Meduntam, and quod reddunt Propraesec^urae quinque denarios de singulis Hansis aquae. Pro hoc vero seruitio and redditu, and quia eas ab antiquo habuerunt, concedimus in perpetuum vniuersitati ho^num nostrorum Meduntae omnes Hansas tam aquae, quam Villae, sicut hactenus habuerunt. Quod vt firmum, etc. Actum Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Primo, Regni V^simo Tertio.
The names of Alemans and French vnknowne to Caesar, Strabo, Tacitus and other Romane writers. When the Sicambrians were knowne by the name of Frenche.These names of Aleman, and Frenche, hauing succeeded in place of them of Germanes, Sweues, and Sicambrians; were vnknowne to Caesar and Strabo, who liued (well-neere) at one time; to Tacitus and other Historians and Geographers, vntill the declining of the Romane Empire. Thus you see the times, when the names of Franc^ and Alemans, began to be obserued by the Romane Historians.
The Sicambrians appeared vnder the name of French, during the Empire of Galie^, sonne and Associate to Valerian, who going to warre with the Persians; was bet^ai^ by his Lieutenant Generall Macrinus, to the Persian King Sapores, who lockt him (...) in a Cadge, where he ended his life. This surpris^ll happened in the eight yeere (...) their Empire, and in the yeere of Grace 262.
The yeere after, to wit, two hundred sixty and three, that Macrinus, or Macri^nus caused himselfe to be proclaimed Emperour by the Souldiers of his Army. T^ like did Aureolus in Sclauonia:Sixe Emperors aduancing their selues together. Valens in Achaia: Piso in Thessalia: Aemilia^^s (...) Aegypt, and Posthumus in Gaule. In briefe, at this time was the reigne and Empi^ of the thirty Tyrants.
Against this Posthumus, Galien sent an Armie, thrust into rout and confusion b^ the French, waged by the said Posthumus; who by their aide and fauour, maintain^ himselfe (some time) in his vsurpation. For from thence forward, the French were ^nowned in valiancie, aboue all the people of Germany.
Galiens vanity and fol^y notwithstanding his foyle.Now although Galien was vanquished, yet neuerthelesse, at the solemnity of th^ tenth yeere of his Empire, which was in the yeere of Grace, two hundred sixtie an^ foure, he made a muster and appearance of the Romane people in diuers troupes, (...) consisting and composed of two hundred men, whom he had clothed after the fashi^ of French, Persians, Gothes, Polonians, and other strange Nations, euen as if he become home with victory, whereto he neuer enclined, or made any proffer.
And for this he was mocked by the Romanes, who very well knew the contrarie: saith the Romane Historian Trebellius Pollio, in the life of the said Emperour.
Thus came the Sicambrians to be knowne, vnder the name of French, the yeere of ^e, two hundred sixty three, and by thesame name are noted by Trebellius Pollio, first of the Romane Historians, that maketh mention of the French.
Which caused this to be written by the learned Genebrard, Archbishop of Aix in ^uence, in the third booke of his Chronologie. Gallenus aduersus Posthumum, qui ^m a^nis iam Imperatorium nomen obtinebat in Gallia, exercitum mittit, and Fran^ Rheni accolas sibi adiungit: Atque hic primum Francorum mentio in Romanis ^is.
There was a later speaking of the Alemanes, and onely in the time of the Emperor ^bus, who reigned in the yeere of Grace, two hundred fourescore and fiue, and o^threw some troupes of the Almaines, by the report of Vopiscus, whereupon Gene^rd spake so. Hic primum Alemannerum sit mentio.
So that it remaineth constant, by the testimony of the alleadged Authors before, ^d by that of Asinius Quadratus, a Romane Historian, alleadged by Agathias, in the (...) booke of the Gothes warres: That those people of the higher Germany, were called ^mans, and them of the lower, French; who somtimes extended their dwelling vnto the ^thes of Rhine. For the Germanes dwelt (in former times) between the Riuers of Moein, ^he Rhine, and of Danubie, ioyning to the Martian Forrest, Countries and Prouin^ which at this present the Sweues possesse, comprehended vnder the name of Ale^ines.
So we may plainely perceiue, that the French obtained not this name by payment ^maginary tolles or tribute, whereat they were tallied by the Emperour Valentinian (...) first (as ignorants haue written) because that Emperour began not to reigne vntill but the yeere of Grace, 364. And the French were knowne for Warriours,Confession of the Antiquity of the French by the Roman writers. euen (...) the Romane Historians themselues, an hundred yeeres before, to wit, from the ^ere two hundred sixty three. Let vs now suruay summarily, their Military exploits ^d actions, since they tooke the name of the French Company, vntill the Conquest (...) the Gaules.


CHAP. V. The Military Exploits and Actions of the Frenche, before the Conquest of the Gaules.
THE French, vnder the name of Sicambrians, did daily make warre vpon the Romanes, and on the Gaulish Townes of their obedience, being on this side of the Rhine, and namely on them of Cologne, from the time of Caesar, as wee haue already said. So that to succour the Inhabitants of that City, the Romane Emperours were constrained,Strong Garrisons still kept by the Roma^s, to succor Cullen. continually to keepe strong Garrisons there, according to the report of Tacitus. Vlpius Traianus caused it to be peopled with olde Legions of Romans, to keep it in Guard, and hinder their courses.

Vlpius inde venit, quo formidata Sicambris
Agrippina fuit.

So saith Sidonins Apollinaris, in the Panegyricke spoken to the Emperour Auitus Father in law.
But it proued a quite contrary case, after that they were assembled vnder the name (...) French; for then they made themselues knowne (for valiancie) to the Romanes, (...) by Sea and Land. In the time of the Emperour Claudius, successour to Galien, ^y made themselues famous for actions on the Sea, aboue all other Nations; be^se for making shippes and sayling, they were the onely Maisters, according as it is ^erued by Sidonius Apollinarius, in the same Panegyricke.


Prorumpit Francus, cecidit cito secta bipenni,
Hercynia in liutres, and Rhenum texuit aluo.

The French absolute Lords and Masters of the Seas.In the time (I say) of that Emperor Claudius, they began to vndertake a formal (...) of trafficke and merchandizing, of Roauing and Pyrating on the Sea, wherof they became absolute Lords and Maisters. But not contented with those booties gotten to the West Ocean of Germanie, and on the Coasts of Flanders, where the Romanes (though not safely enough) conserued their Empire and domination: the French performed as much on the Seas of Gaule and Spaine, so much their stomacks boyled to feede on Warre.
In the yeere of Grace, two hundred threescore and ten, they being associated with the Saxons, or Sesnes their neighbours, aduentured to run and proceed on in their fortune:Notable Piracies committed by the French on the Seas. so that sweeping the Seas before them, they pillaged all the Romane Vessells, found on the Ocean. So saith a Panegyrist of that time. Franci praeter caeteros truces, quorum vis, cum ad bellum effecuesceret, vltra ipsum Oceanum aestu furoris euecti, Hisp^niarum oras etiam armis infestas habebant.
Eight yeeres after, to wit, in the yeere of Grace, two hundred threescore and eighteene, the second of the Empire of Probus, they robbed againe all the coasts of Gaule, afflicted by land with the courses and rauages of Chrocus, and of his Alemans, barred vp beyond the Necar and Elb, as it is written by Vopiscus.
In the yeere of Grace, two hundred fourescore and two, the sixt of the reigne of the same Emperour Probus, his Lieutenants tooke some French Foists, separated by a stormy Tempest from their consorts. The Romaines tied the French men to a chaine, to make a Triumph of them through the Cities of Asia. Those men, howbeit very few in number, hauing met (by chance) with some Barkes of passage; got possession of them,The name of the French much feated in many places. and made themselues so dreaded by their great boldnesse, that at the very fame of their valour, and expertnesse in occasions on the Seas; the whole Nauall Armie of the Emperour Probus, durst not meddle with them, but (constrainedly) fled to a place of retreat, sauing themselues by the helpe of a prosperous winde. So that this meere handfull of the French, hauing gotten roome and liberty, coursed at ease and their owne pleasure, the Sea called Mare Maiore, robbed all the Isles and Coasts of Greece, from Asia and Affrica, without meeting any person that dared to oppose them.
They tooke landing in the Isle of Sicilie, sacked Saragossa, a famous and most wealthy Citie,Saragossa that famous and rich City ransacked by the French. the very chiefe of all the Isle; disburdened the Ships Anchored in the Ports and Hauens thereof, and (laden with vnspeakeable booties) returned homeward free, and passed the strait of Hercules, at this day called Gibraltar, recouering the great Ocean Sea, and their Marishes of Holland, and of Westphalia.
Wee learned this admirable aduenture, from the Greeke Historian Sozimus, and and from the Panegyrist Eumenius, in his declamation spoken to the Emperour Maximinianus. Recursabat in animos illa sub diuo Probo, and Paucorum ex Francis captiuoru^ incredibilis audacia, and indigna felicitas, qui a Ponto correptis manibus Graciana Asi^^que populati, and impune plerisque Lybia littoribus appulsi, ipsas postremo naualib. quond^ Victorijs nobiles reperant Syracusas, and immenso itinere peruecti, Oceanum, qua terra^ rupit, intrauerunt, atque ita euentu temeritatis ostenderant, nihil esse clausum pira^ desperationi, quo nauigijs pateret accessus. And after that time, the French continued their Sea robberies, in as ample manner as before.
Caurausius Lieu^e^ant to Dioclesian, sent against the French.So that in the yeare of Grace, two hundred fourescore and fiue, the Frenche and Saxons, vnited and knit in amity together; againe appeared on the Ocean Sea, making themselues Masters thereof. In such manner, as to impeach their courses, Dioclesian, in the second yeere of his Empire, was forced to prepare and rigge forth a Fleet, the conduct whereof he gaue to one of his Lieutenants, named Carausius, who found that he met with his match; in plaine tearmes, men that neither feared him nor his forces; because they forbare not to robbe still on the Coasts of Flanders, Picardy, Normandie and Bretaigne, then called the coasts of Armorica, and the Morini. Caura^sius was constrained to fall to agreement with them, and feeding them fat with mony tooke them for his good friends and neighbours.
Afterward he made good proofe of their valour in Warre, and employed them in

his seruice so profitably, that making them his brest-plate of defence, hee proclaimed himselfe Emperor, got the possession of Great Bretaigne (afterward called England) and of the coast Armorica of the Gaules; as wee vnderstand out of Eutropius, in the ninth booke of his Breuiarie: Post hac etiam tempora Carausius, cum apud Bononiam (Bullen on the Sea) per tractum Belgicae, and Armorica mare pacandum accepisset, quod Franci, and Saxones infestabant, a Maximiniano iussus occidi, purpuram sumpsit, and Bretannias occupauit.
Dioclesian, more furiously incensed against them, then before, tooke for his Sonne in Law Constantius, first of that name, to whom he gaue the charge and gouernement of the Gaules, in the yeere of Grace, two hundred fourescore and twelue, or thirteene.Constantius sent by Dioclesian against the French. This man, as we haue elsewhere said) pared the nailes of the French, as well of them that tooke part with Carausius, and of his Successor (who maintained himselfe for the space of ten yeeres in the vsurpation, onely by the French Armes) as those of Holland, with whom were ioyned some of the Sesnes; which by the said Constantius were thence dislodged, and placed elsewhere: as saith the sixt Panegyricke. Purgauit Batauiam hoste aduenca. He transplanted out of Holland diuers troupes of the French (who were most factious, and could best skill of Nauall affaires) into the firme Land of the Gaules, Picardy, Champaigne, and Bourgongne, and others into fields desert of inhabitants, seated on the lands of Treuers and Tourney, by command from the Emperour Maximianus, proclaimed Caesar by Dioclesian. Tuo? Maximiniane Augustae natu, Neruiorum, and Treuirorum arma iacentia laetus post liminio restitutus, and receptus in leges Francus excoluit. Vt loca deserta quae ipsi depraedando vastauerat, culta redderet seruiendo.
The same Panegyrist, declaring the praises of the two Caesars, saith: O Kalenda Martiae, sicut olim annorum voluentium, ita nunc aeternorum auspices Imperatorum. Partho vltra Tigrim redacto. Dacia restituta: porrectis vsque ad Danubij caput Germaniae, Retiaeque limitibus, destinata Batauiae Britanniaeque vindicta, etc. So that the French remained quiet and safe enough, and without remoouing by Sea; vntill the death of Constantius, which happened in England, in the yeere of Grace, three hundred and sixe.
As for the French on firme land, they trauersed and passed the Rhine, to forrage the Gaules. Aurelian (who was Emperour soone after) hauing his Garrison at Maguntia, with the troupes whereof he was Tribune: came and tooke tardie seuen hundred of their troupe, detaining three hundred of them prisoners.
Afterward, when he was possessed of the Empire, he preuailed once more against another band of them, whom he made Captiues, and led them Captiues to Rome,Aurelia^ ouercunning for the French, in taking troups of them. to serue as an Ornament in his Triumphe, with a song in his owne praise; the burden whereof (after Ballad manner) declared: That he had ouercome a thousand French, a thousand Sarmates or Polonians, and other Nations, easie to be vanquished in painting. So it is deliuered by Flauius Vopiscus, in the life of Aurelianus.
But so soone as the winde brought tidings to the French of the death of Constantius; they presently entred into the Field. But his sonne Constantine (who was surnamed The Great, for his glorious actions, and namely for embracing the Catholique Religion, forsaking Idolatry) he hindred them from their bad courses. He marched himselfe in person against them with a puissant Armie, quickly laying a great part of them to sleep,Constantine the great marched in person against the French with his Armie. and tooke prisoner Ascaricke, King of the Frenche, with Ragaze his brother, whom he sent to Rome, where they serued as pastime to the people, and for food to Lyons in their sports. The Panegyricke of Nazarius informeth vs, that this discomfiture of the French, was at the beginning and entring into the Empire, of Constantine the Great; who pardoned the rest, tooke their chiefe Commanders to his seruice; and (among other) a valiant Captaine, named Bonicius, who performed incredible exploits against Licinius; so saith Ammianus Marcellinus, in his fifteenth booke.
Vnder the same Constantine, the French went againe into the Field, hauing vnderstood that hee was busied against Maxiutius, who beeing vanquished, they returned into their Marishes, where they did keepe themselues quiet, vntill after his death.
Constantius, the eldest sonne of Constantine, being possessed in the Empire of the

East;Constantius, eldest sonne of Constantine the great. they fell againe to their former disorder, and repassed the Rhine to forradge the Gaules. Constantius had little reason to meddle with them, for the sixt Panegyricke declareth, that this Nation made themselues vnconquerable. Francum trucem s^la carne ferina distentum, qui vitam pro victus sui vtilitate contemnat, Quantae Molis si^ Superare vel capere? And which was worse, the French, expelled the Country by his grandfather Constantius, into Champaigne and Bourgongne; returned into Holland, at the same time as other French (their companions) hauing set free the Rhine, ca^e likewise to neastle themselues in Holland: Diuersae Francorum Gentes Batauiam inn^serunt: So saith the Panegyrist. To hold them in (as it were with a bridle) Constantius was glad to send his Nephew Iulian the Apostata, to gouerne the Gaules, in the name of his Brother the Emperor Valens: to whose lot and partage Gaule was falne, by the death of Constantine the Great his father.
Valens vexed them with mighty warres, during the peace of two yeeres; namely, the fourth and fifth of his Empire: yet neuerthelesse with diuersitie of euents, one while speeding well,The proceedings of the Emperor Valens with the French. and then againe worse, according to the lotte of Armes, and fortune ineuitably following warre. So that losing any longer patience with them; of enemies they became his friends, making peace and alliance with them, in the yeare of his second Consulship, and of Grace, three hundred forty two. Hee chose a good number of the most valiant among them, wherewith hee filled his Romane Legions, and they serued him beneficially; for he left the French Salians, enioying the possession of Toxiandria. These men were they whom Iulian the Apostata much turmoyled (by the saying of Ammianus) contrary to the intention notwithstanding of his Vnkles Constantius and Valens, who so long as they liued, kept peace with the French, of whom the Court of Constantius was filled: for the same Ammianus Marcellinus, speaking of them in the forenamed fifteenth booke, hath these words: Francorum ea tempestate multitudo in Palatio florebat, and that was for their faithfulnesse. For he obserueth a Tribune of the Emperors horsemen, named Laniogazus; a French-man by originall, who was so loyall and faithfull to Constans, as hee onely followed and assisted him to the death, which hee also hindered in one Siluianus, vpon his rebelling against Constantius, who would haue done it in the yeare of Grace, three hundred fiftie and fiue.
Concerning Toxiandria, otherwise named Taxandria, it was a great village, planted in the midst of the Marishes or Fennes, to make all approches thereto the more difficult,The chiefe and stro^gest dwelling of the French, was in ^enny grounds. chiefely to them of Tongres in the second Germanie, betweene the confines of Liege and Brabant, whereof there may be yet seene the ancient trackes at the place called Tessendorlo, vpon the confines of the said Liege, very neere to Diest in Brabant: from which places, the Saints Lambert and Hubert expelled Idolatry, and planted there the true Religion of Iesus Christ.
These Emperors hauing then long time kept peace with the French, it was broken by a course and rauage,The peace of the French broken by the Alemans. which the Alemans made vpon Gaule, all along the Rhine, where they possessed themselues of forty townes, in the yeare of Grace, three hundred fiftie and foure; in regard that the French were suspected to haue their hand in the businesse, as it is written by Sozimus and Ammianus Marcellinus, in his seauen and twentieth booke. Gallicanos tractus Franci, and Saxones ijsdem confines quo quisque erumper^ potuit terra vel mari, praedis acerbis, incendijsque, and captiuorum funeribus violab^^t. For these were the Galleries and ordinary walkes into the Gaules, because ouer and beside Taxandria, they had Holland on this side the Rhine, and other lands elswhere: So saith the Panegyrist of those times. Multa Francorum millia Batauiam, aliaque loc^ cis Rhenum inuaserant. And another Terram Batauiam, vicinaque loca a diuersis Fr^^corum Regibus occupatam.
Cullen take^ by the French fro^ the Romans.Most certaine is it, that in the yeare three hundred fifty and fiue, the French surprized from the Romanes the City of Cologne, seated on the Riuer of Rhine, which they pilled, sacked, and ruined. So that to make head against them, the Emperor Constantius proclaimed as Caesar his Nephew Iulian (surnamed the Apostata) and sent him to command ouer the Gaules (as wee haue already said) in the yeere of Grace three hundred fiftie and sixe.Cullen recovered from the French. At which time the Apostata being assisted with a potent Armie, recouered from the French the City of Cologne, and made Peace, to the honor

of the Empire) with the Kings of France, who had sought to compasse it by their Ambassadors: so saith the Panegyrist, and Ammianus Marcellinus, in his 27. booke.
But in the yeere following, three hundred fifty seuen, the French perceiuing the Apostata gone vp farre in warre against the Alemanes,Another aduenture of the French to their own detrime^t who had robbed those Townes vpon the Rhine; once more they made a rode forth into Gaule, to get what first shold come to their fingring. The Apostata returning with victory from the Alemanes, came with a fierce and hot assault vpon these boote-halers, whereof hee hewed a great number in peeces, and besieged others 3. moneths together in a Castle, whereof they got possession on the Meuze, compelling them (by famine) to yeeld themselues to his discretion. In the Sommer following, 358. hauing once more set his Army on foote to goe against the Alemans, he tooke his way through the Countrey of Tongres, and so strongly besieged Toxandria; as the French Inhabitants were inforced to yeelde themselues vpon composition. So that they left the Gaules and Toxandria,Toxandria besieged by the Apostata. and repassed beyond the Rhine, into their ancient dwelling: so it is affirmed by Ammianus Marcellinus, in his 17. booke. Quibus paratis petit primos omnium Francos, eos videlicet quos cons^etudo Salios vocitauit, ausos olim in Romano solo apud Toxandriam locum, habitacula sibi figere praelicenter.
There is a plaine appearance, that this peace was of no long continuance, and that the French (lickerishly longing after such rich booties, as they had caried out of abounding Gaule) could not restraine themselues from passing thither. For the same Ammianus Marcellinus writeth in his 20. book, that the Apostata, hauing alwaies a flea in his eare, and a wary watchfull eye, surprized a troope of French, assembled at a feast and mariage of one of their Princes; carried away the Bride, made hauock of the company, mangling diuers of them in peeces. A Towne taken, and the Triumph Straw: A blow for a blow, with small aduantage. For the French quickly made way to reuenge themselues,Reuenge wrought by the French in despight of Iulian the Apostata. putting the people to fire and sword, all along the coast of Rhine, to the no meane cost and harme of the Townes and Villages belonging to the Romane Empire; and in contempt of Iulian the Apostata, who in the yeere 360. (like a perfidious Traytor to God and his Prince, though answerable to the nature of hereticall Apostats) hauing caused himselfe to be proclaimed Emperor by his Armies; would, for his last peece of seruice (as the same Marcellinus telleth vs in his 20. booke) worke wonders, and giue such a gird to the French, as should remaine for remembrance of him.
Hee mustred then together all his Armie,The silent stealth of Iulian on the French in their Fennes. passed freely and silently the Riuer of Rhine, and surprized the French in the strength of their Marishes, where (vntill that time) the Romanes durst neuer aduenture to passe. The first they met withall, were the Antuarians, meaning those French both before, and at the passage of Rhine, all of them being put to the sword. Among whom were Theomir (son of Richimer, Kings of France) for so the Westphalians and their round engirting neighbors called them, and Ascila his mother. Hee had a great number of prisoners beside, with very rich spoyles, and compelled the rest to beg their peace of him, which he granted to them: Prouided, that they should afterward refraine from forraging, and committing any more robberies in Gaule. S. Gregory of Tours toucheth this sharpe checke of theirs, in his second booke and ninth chapter of the history of France. In Consularibus legimus Theodomerem Regem Francorum, Filium Richemeris quondam Regis, and Ascilam matrem ^ius gladio interfectas. This stormy tempest kept the French to strict tearms of peace, during the reignes of the Apostata, and also of Iouinian as Valentinian, first of that name, with whom Macrianus King of the Alemans made a treaty of peace, in the 11.Macrianus K. of the Almans yeere of his Empire, and of Grace 374. This Macrianus couetously affecting to forradge France, was taken and slaine by Mellobaudes, King of the French, as we learne by Ammianus Marcellinus in his 30. booke. It is apparant that the Alemanes and French entred into contention, about the bounds and limits of their lands, making shrewd attempts one vpon the other, as ordinarily it hapneth betweene two potent Princes.
For, vpon the same subiect, the Saxons issued forth the bounds of the Ocean Sea, vexing the French for passage through their lands, to fall violently vpon the Gaules. But the French (as Paulus Orozius the Spaniard informeth vs, and Iohn the Deacon of Aquileia) welcommed them with such sharpe entertainment, as they were not willing to meddle any more with them.
And from thence (as it seemeth) sprang the sourse and originall of the immortall wars between the French, Almanes, and Saxons, who (in the end) met with their ma^ches, and were ouer mastered by the French.
Now, the Emperour Valentinian the first, being dead in the yeere of Grace 375. Gracian his sonne acknowledging the good offices, done by the King of the Frenche, Mellobas or Mellobaudes, to his father and him: created him Great Master of his Pallace,(...) advancement of Mello^u^s by the ^peror Gratian. and Consull with him, in the yeare 377. And in the yeere after, hee made him Lieutenant Generall on the coast of the Rhine, to hinder the courses and passages of the Alemans, who in the yeere three hundred threescore and eighteene, and the third of his Empire, came with a puissant Army to besiege the Towne of Strasbourg* Mellobandes and the French fought with the Alemans so successiuely, that thirty thousand of them lay slaine in the field. And from that time forward, Gratian held the French in such account, only for their valiancie; as he filled his Regiments with them, whereof likewise he gaue the conduct and command to French Captaines, saith Marcellinus in his thirtieth booke, with further addition of their braue behauiour.
This King Mellobaudes, (by some tearmed Merobaudes) soone after brought into credit with Gratian,Ricomer, a valiant French Prince, in fauour with Gratian. a valiant French Prince, named Ricomer, to whom hee gaue command of the Armie, which he sent as succour into Thrace (spoyled by the Gothes) to his Vncle the Emperour Valens. But the courses of the Aleman Nations, by their robberies in Gaule, imported such remedie, that Gratian sent Ricomer to guard the frontiers of the Rhine, in quality of a Duke, as much to say, as Lieutenant Generall of the Empire, in absence of the King Mellobaudes, which as wee haue already said, vanquished neere to Strasbourg, those whom Ammianus Marcellinus, in his 31. book, calleth Barbaros Letienses, making vp the body of an Armie of threescore and ten thousand men. This ouerthrow happened in the yeere of Grace 378. And the Bourdelo^ Poet Ausonius (sometime schoolemaster to the Emperor Gratian, who had made him Consull with Olybrius, in the yeere 379.) testifieth (speaking of his said Consulship) that this great Victory ensued from the French and Sweues, ioyned together in fauour of the Romanes.

Iane, veni, nouus anneueni, renouate veni Sol.
Hostibus adomitis, qua Francia mixta Sueuis
Certat ad obsequium, Latys vt militet armis.

And afterward hee sheweth vs, what enemies waged Armes against the Romane Empire,Enemies against the Roman Empire. all issuing forth of Pannonia and from Scythia, to wit, the Gothes, who were possessed of Thrace, the Hunnes, Quades, Gepides, Alanes, Vandales and other.

Qua vaga Sauromates sibi iunxerat agmina Chunis,
Quaque Getis socijs Histrum insultabat Alanis, etc.

Heere may be obserued, whether the French tooke their Origine, or no, from the Pannoniaes, or the Marshie Moeotides, to come make their ^lanking and abiding on the Rhine. And S. Gregory of Tours, noting the Descent of all these strange Nations, and the Countries of their Originall and birth; would haue done as much of the French Nation, if they had beene any other (originally) but Gaules or Germanes.
Something wee learne from the Bishop of Auuergne Sidonius Apollinaris, and an admirable doctrine in mine opinion: for in the Panegyricke of the Emperour ^^^rian, he remarketh the flood of those strange Nations.

Basterna, Sue^us,
Pannonus, Neurus, Chunus, Geta, Dacus, Alanus,
Bellonothus, Rugus, Burgundio, Vesus, Alites,
Bisalta, Ostrogothus, Procuites, Sarmata, Moschus.

He maketh no mention at all of the French, whom hee calleth otherwise Sicam^^ans; for hee knew them to be of the Gaulish Nation, inhabiting long time on the bankes of Rhine, and that they were knowne by the name of French, almost two hundred yeeres before Maiorian.
The prouident respect of the Emperor Gratian, for the Empire of the West.Now the Emperor Gratian, presaging that this swelling deluge of Nations before named, would make a confusion in the Romane Empire, and labour to vnplume the Eagle: hee named for Caesar and Successour to the Empire of the West Theodosius the Great, in the said yeere of Grace, three hundred threescore and ninteene, sending

him against the Gothes into Thrace. And Gratian himselfe went into Gaule, to impeach the Alemans from robbing and spoyling, where hee vanquished them in a ranged battell. So writeth Sozimenus, in his 7. booke, and 4. chapter: Sub hoc tempus Gratianus Alemannis Galatas Occidentales (that is to say in Gaule, at this present named France) adhuc infestantibus, bellum intulit, illosque deuicit.
Gratian hauing proclaimed Theodosius Caesar; he gaue him the conduct of the succor which he led to the Emperor Valens his Vnkle, who was burned aliue in a Cottage of straw by the Gothes, that then made hauocke and spoyle in the East, and against whom (as the Greeke Authors affirme) Theodosius obtained a famous Victory, the same yere as he was proclaimed Caesar; or, according to other, in the yeere 380. Claudian speaking of this Victorie, in the fourth Consulship of Honorius, sonne to the said Theodosius the Great, wrote thus:
Nulla relicta foret Romani nominis vmbra,Ni pater ille tuis iamiam ruitura subissetPondera, turbatamque ratem, certaque leuassetNaufragium commune manu.
And the honor thereof was attributed vnto the French troupes, conducted by two braue Captaines of the same Nation, named Bautonius and Arbogastes, whom the Emperor Gratian gaue as Councellers and handy helpes to Theodosius, and he made very profitable vse of their worthy seruice, in all his great and glorious enterprises.
In the yeere of Grace, 383. Mellobaudes or Merobaudes, King of the French, being made Consull the second time,Flauius Clemens Maximus Gouernor of great Britain. (with Flauius Saturninus) the Gouernour of Great Bretaigne, called Flauius Clemens Maximus; proclaimed himselfe Emperour, and passed into Gaule, to establish the seat of his vsurped Empire, in the City of Treuers, which Ammianus Marcellinus calleth Clarum domicilium Principum, because that in those times, it was the capitall City of the Gaules, etc.
This Maximus was a Natiue of great Bretaigne, issued of very meane birth, but what wanted that way, he made good appearance of in Arms; and the better to couer his vsurpation, hee tearmed himselfe a neere kinsman to Theodosius the Great, by the Empresse Saint Helena, mother to the Emperour Constantine the Great. So thus vnder this couerture, he got possession of the Gaules and Spaine, where (as some said) he was borne. Gratian offended to be thus betrayed by his Romane Souldiers in Gaule, in Spaine, and in Great Bretaigne; called to his ayde the Hunnes and the Alanes, to send them against Maximus, to fight with him both by Sea and Land. Whereat the Souldiers of his Guard waxing angry, the good Emperor Gratian was miserably murdered in the City of Lyons, and by his owne people, who forsooke him,The good Emperor Gratian cruel murdered by his owne followers. leaning to one of the Captaines, named Andragathias, belonging to the Tyrant Maximus. S. Hierome bemoaned the violent death of this good Prince, hapning in August the said yere, 383. Gratianus ab exercitu suo proditus, and ab obuijs vrbibus non receptus, ludibrio hosti fuit, cruentaeque manus vestigia parietes tui, Lugdune testantur. So speaketh that great light of the Church in his third Epistle. In briefe, Maximus so proceeded on, that the same yere he procured to be slaine Mellobaudes King of the French, then Consull,Mellobaudes King of the French slaine. and making his abode at Maguntia, with a valiant Captaine, called Balion, Lieutenant of the Horse to Gratian in Gaule, which Prouince they manfully defended against Maximus. The same yeere also, Theodosius proclaimed his eldest sonne Arcadius, Augustus, and his successor in the Empire of the East, albeit he was then but 8. yeeres of age.
But why in the passage of this discourse, do I not set down one especiall note,An excellent President for Princes. wonderfully remarkable for Princes, in a chiefe quality belonging to them? It is reported by Socrates, in his fift booke and tenth chapter, and by Sozimen, in his 7. booke and 12 chapter. Theodosius hauing written to the Emperor Gratian some few months before his death, earnestly intreated him to send him a man of singular Piety, only to instruct his children. Seeking for a man of that worthy quality, and hauing found him,The care of Princes for their childrens education. he sent him to Constantinople: for Gratian had entreated Pope Damasus (a man famous for sanctity of life, both before, and long after his death) to send him a Decon of the Roman Church, named Arsenius, a man of signall probitie, and great learning. When this man was come to Constantinople, Thedosius deliuered his sonnes into his charge, saying:

That thence forward, hee should be the father of his sonnes, much rather then himselfe. Euen as if hee would haue said, that such as informe the soules of young children i^ vertue, are their true fathers indeed, and more then they that gaue them but their bodies. Theodosius going (on a day) into the Schoole where his sonnes were taught, saw Arsenius standing, reading the lesson to the Emperour Arcadius sitting in his Throne. He grew offended against Arsenius, and reprooued him, as not knowing what belonged to his charge; in standing, and suffering his Scholler to sit. Arsen^^^ excused himselfe by the honour which was due to the Emperour, before whom it was vnbeseeming for him to sit, and the Prince to stand. Immediately Theodosius took the Empires notes of honour from his Sonne Arcadius, and caused him to descend from his Throne, wherein hee seated Arsenius, and held his sonne bare-headed before his Master, speaking this notable sentence: My Sonnes shall be worthy to succeed in the Empire,This age affords few such Father^ and Masters. at such time as they haue knowledge and learning, maried and coupled with Grace and Piety. He was none of those ignorant Princes, which held a sottish beliefe; That if one can read, it is sufficient for a Gentleman.
The death of Gratian, and of his most confident friends, hapning in such manner as you haue heard, and by the trecheries of the Tyrant Maximus; Theodosius sent the two worthiest Captaines which he had, Bautonius and Arbogastes, to succour the Emperor Valentinian the yonger,Bautonius and Arbogalies chief Captain. to Thec. l sius. who remained ordinarily at Millaine; against whom Maximu^ was desirous to marche, to possesse himselfe of Italie. This was in the yeere 385. the tenth of the Empire of Valentinian, and seuenth of Theodosius: at which time, the Emperor Arcadius, and this Bautonius the French Captaine were chosen Consuls at Rome, the one residing at Constantinople, and the other in the City of Millaine. This is the same Bautonius, of whom S Augustine made the Panegyricke, before the Emperor Valentinian, as such time as he came to Millaine; for so himselfe testifieth, writing against Petis^ian in his third booke, and 25 chapter: Cum ego Mediolanum ante Bautonem Co^sulem venerim, etque Consuli Kalendis Ianuarijs laudem in tanto conuentu conspectuque hominum pro mea tunc Rhetorica professione recitarem, etc.
As for the other Captaine Arbogastes, hee was sent with his French troupes into Gaule, to fight with Maximus; who to frustrate the intention of Arbogastes, and vtterly disappoint his endeuour: in the same yeere made a counterfeit peace with the Emperours,The politicke craft of the tyrant Maximus Theodosius and Valentinian. So that in the yeere; 86, E^odius (made Prefect of the Gaules Praetorium, by this Tyrant Maximus) was created Consull with Honorius, the second sonne of Theodosius, being then in the Cradle, and aged fourteene moneths onely; for so we are instructed by Claudian,
. . . . . . . . . Inter cunabula ConsulProueheris signans posito modo nomine Fastos,Donatur que ti^^ qui te produxer at annus.
Genebaudes the sonne to Mell^b^u^es made King of the French.By the death of Meliobaudes, his sonne Genebaudes was chosen King of the French, who continued the fidelity of his father with the Emperour Valentinian the younger: neere about whom was the Consull Bautonius (Count of the Domestickes, that is to say, Great Master of the houshold to Valentinian) who by intelligence with the new King of the French, secretly made offers to the Tyrant Maximus, to assist him with a great number of the French, to possesse him of Italy, according as hee had resolued. But the cunning plot was disclosed, and found to be a politique deuise to intrap Maximus, and rid the world of him; as we learne by that great Doctor of the Church Saint Ambrose, Ambassador from Valentinian to the said Maximus, in his 25. Epistle, sent from Treuers to Millaine, to the said Emperor Valentinian, in the yere 387. and wherein he defendeth the practises wrought by the said Bautonius against Maximus. Et q^^d mirum si hoc Bauto fecisset Trans-Rhenanus genere, cum tuminiteris Imperio Romano B^rbarorum auxilia, and turma translimitanas? Maximus pursuing his purpose, passed into Italie, and ransacked the Cities thereof. Valentinian and his mother Iustina, sauing themselues by Sea, fledde to Thessalonica, to the Emperour Theodosius, who to fu^nish himselfe with the charges and expences, fitte and sufficient to re-seat them in their dominion: made a new imposition to be leuied on them of Antioch, that had rebelled against him, and of a populary outrage, which admitteth no matter of sence or reason (and then which can be no worse) they beate downe the Statues of Brasse of the

Emperour Theodosius, and of his first wife Aelia Flaccilla, mother to the Emperours Arcadius and Honorius.
This folly was sharpely reuenged on the Authors thereof,The fruits of Popular furye and disturbance and to the intire ruine of the Citie: but by the mercy and clemencie of Theodosius, who committed this vengeance wholly to God. So that at the tidings of pardo^, the Inhabitants of the city, as men risen againe from death to life, testified the notes of their ioy, by venerable antiquity; as Sozomen obserueth, in his seuenth booke and three and twenty chapter. Forum Coronantes, Lucernas Accendentes, Et Lectos ante Officinas Componentes, and tanquam nuper Ciuitate nata, festum agentes. In more yonger daies, and before the furious league, in An. 1588. in Paris hath beene seene on festiuall daies and recreations; tables set for suppers at the doores of houses and shops in the streets, with generall reioysing: but ciuill warres caused the whole losse of those ancient customes.
Maximus being possessed of Italie, and knowing that Theodosius leuied a powerfull Armie to meet and fight with him, prouided his best meanes for entertaining him,Prouision of the tyrant Maximus, to encounter Theodosius. gathering (from all parts) his troops of men, and made Anrdagathius his Admirall, to keepe the Ionian Sea in his power, if Theodosius should make his passage that way.
The Colonell of his Armie by land, was his brother Marcellinus, to guard the bywaies and passages of Italie. And he himselfe with his troups (euermore victorious) tooke the guardance of the Pannoniaes, to winne way before Theodosius, if hee should take that course, as indeed he did.
Theodosius finding Maximus encamped before Siscia (a City of the higher Pannonia) gaue him battell, and won the victory.Maximus foyled by the Emperor Theodosius. Maximus fled for safety into Aquileia but being brauely pursued, the City was so narrowly besieged, that his owne Souldiers (reuolting from him) seized on his person, and cloathing him in Imperiall garments, fast bound and manacled, deliuered him to the Emperour Theodosius. Hee being a milde and mercifull Prince, would haue beene gracious to him*Maximus the tyrants death. but the Souldiers of his guard plucking him violently from him, cut off his head, the sixt of the Calends of September, three hundred fourescore and eight, then being Consuls the Emperour Theodosius the second time, with Cynegius.
We learne the end and Catastrophe of this Tyrant Maximus from Sozimus, in the fourth booke of his histories, and from the Panegyricke of Latinus Pacatus. Rapitur ab oculis Theodosij Maximus, et nequid licere posset Clementiae, inter innumeras manus fertur ad mortem. Theodosius likewise ouerthrew the Armie by land, conducted by Marcellinus and the Admirall Andragathius, hauing receiued tidings of his Masters death; first of all leapt headlong into the Sea, and so was drowned.
These newes being reported in Gaule,Victors death last sonne to Maximus. the Count Arbogastes (by pollicie) tooke out of his mothers armes the last sonne of Maximus, named Victor, whom he put to death. And thus (in a moment) Gaule, Spaine, England, Italie, and all that belonged to the Empire of the West, was deliuered vp to the lawfull Emperor, and that of the East sufficiently secured. So saith the same Latinus Pacatus, a most famous Oratour, and a Gaule by nation, in his Panegyricke spoken to the Emperour Theodosius, in the Citie of Rome on the day of his Triumph, in the moneth of August, 389. But returne we to the French.
Sigibert writeth in his Chronicle, vnder the yere 387. that the French put to flight and to the edge of the sword, neere to the City of Treuers, Quintinus and Heraclius Lieutenants to Maximus the Tyrant, during the time of his absence in Italie (so hee would haue it to be credited) because some other report this ouerthrow to be in the yeere fourescore and eight, in stead of seauen. Franci Quintinum and Heraclium Romanorum Duces cum omnibus pene suis iuxta Treuerim delent.
This passage being cut ouer-short, is interpreted more at large by S. Gregory Victor, Archbishop of Tours, in the second booke of his History of France, and the ninth chapter, according to the testimony of Sulpitius Alexander, and in these words.
The Tyrant Maximus, hauing lost all hope of enioying any longer his authority, shut vp himselfe in the City of Aquileia, like a man bereft of all spirit and iudgement.
In the time of this Emperor, the French vnder the conduct of their Dukes (Claudian calleth them Kings) Genebaudes, Marcomir, and Suno, enfranchising the bounds and limits of their ancient dwelling, impetuously (first of all) inuaded Germany, where

after they had slaine an vnspeakeable number of the Inhabitants, and pilled the richest townes thereof,The French (...) Germa^^.Nannius and Quint^nus, Commander^ of the (...). they gaue shrewd affrightments to the City of Cologne. The newes of their proceeding being reported in the Cities of Treuers, Nannius and Quintinus, both Commanders of the Horsemen, and vnto whom the Tyrant Maximus had comitted the charge of his son, as also the gouernment of the Gaules, hauing brought their forc^ into the field, came to succour Cologne. But the French laden with most rich spoyles, passed backe againe ouer the Riuer of Rhine, hauing left good troupes of theirs on the Romanes lands, resolued to pursue their former purpose, and to make h^^^cke of all.A g^ ^ber of French ^e by the Romane. But it fell out otherwise, for the Romanes followed them in the Rere, and hauing ouertaken them in the Charboniere Forrest, gaue them the check-mate, and slew a great number of them.
The Romane-animated and exalted with courage, sate in Councell and deliberation, whether it were better to crosse the Rhine or no, and by that means enter into France Nannius being a wise and politique Captaine, could not allow of this aduise, alleadging for his reasons, that there were euident appearances of the Frenchmens fore-cast, b^ing all prepared to welcome the Romanes, of whom (vndoubtedly) they would winne the aduantage, in regard they were the stronger on their owne grounds.
Quintin^^ quite contrary in (...) to Nannius.This opinion was nothing pleasing to his companion Quintinus, and them that followed his directions: so that Nannius hauing made his retreat to Maguntia, Quintinus with his Armie went and encamp^d neere to the Castle of Nuz, and afterward passed the Rhine. At the second lodging vpon this passage, Quintinus and his followers found themselues to be among great Villages, and numbers of Cottages or Coats, yet without any inhabitants.A notable (...) of the French ^o be^ the Romanes. For the French, appearing to be fearfull of the Romans, and meerely driuen to flye before them, intended to intrap them; and therefore (purposely) left those Cottages and Townes as forsaken, withdrawing themselues into the thick^st parts of their Woods, the great wayes and passages whereof, they had bound fast with the spreading branches of Trees, knitting them intricately on strong knot^ one within another.
A silly reuenge t^ken by the Romanes.The Rom^n^s in a fond and foolish reuenge, set all the Villages and Cottages on fire (onely in meere despight, because they found no victualls in them) in signe of Trophies and Triumphes of straw, remaining all that night with their Armour on, and yet not discouering any person.
Abou^ the breake of day, conducted by their Colonell Quintinus, they entered beating into the Woods, where they continued hem'd in till no one day, misled in all the p^ths and passages, with infinite toyle and trauell they found meanes to free themselues of the combined branches, but yet met with worse fortune: and as the vulgar Prouerbe is,The Romanes v^nat^ in the^ pro^ion. fell out of a feauer, into a disease of farre greater danger. For at issuing forth of the Forrest, they came into the wide open fieldes, which were all Marishes, both at the entrance, and all sides about them.
The French had purposely hidden themselues within the woods, onely to draw the Romanes into those myery fields of trembling earth, and full of Bogges and Quagmires, wherein the Romanes were much pestered. Now appeared the French-men on the tops of trees, which serued them as so many exalted Towers and Turrets, for discouery of an enemy before he draw neere. At them they let flie their darts and arrowes embalmed in venemous hearbs (for it was a custome of the Frenche, to impoyson their darts and arrowes,The French ^ed po^^oned darts wh^rewith they greatly annoyed the Romans as it is noted in the Salique Law, the first Paragraphe, at the Title de Vulner^bus) with Lead. And like vnto a thicke darke Clowd, which breaketh into hayle and stormie raine; euen so it chanced to the poore Romanes, or rather much worse; for such as the arrowes fell vpon, the skinne being but pierced, it fes^ered immediately, and they died rauing by violence of the poyson. By this meanes the French (who knew the best and warrantable grounds) assembled in great numbers, engirting the Romane Armie, and made a most terrible slaughter of them.
The first rankes of Horse were ingulfed in the Bogges, both men and horses, and the beasts that carried charge and luggage,The miserable perple^ity of the Romanes were so deepely swallowed in the myres, ^s no meanes serued for drawing them out, as likewise the rest that followed their steps were subiect to the like successe.
As for the foot Souldiers, they being more agile and light then them on horseback,

although they were bemudded and soyled with the filth of the moist fields: yet (with some difficultie) they got thence, and escaped into those Woods, from whence they issued in the morning, there hiding themselues among the bushes till night came (which hath neither shame nor feare) and so were sheltered by fauour thereof, in the best manner they could deuise, or as was possible for them.
The whole Armie being thus confused, and the rankes in disorder for to saue themselues: it need not be demanded, if the French (being in safetie) were well reuenged for the Charboniere Forrest, and no great good market of their enemies. For Heraclius, maister of the Campe du Regiment, and of the Legion of the Iouinians, and all them that had command in the Armie, remained there dead; and such as saued themselues from this dayes misfortunes, were but a very small number. You heare what is auouched by Sulpitius Alexander, in the third Booke of his Historie.
In the fourth booke he speaketh of the death of Victor, the last or yongest sonne of the Tyran^ Maximus. At that time, in the place and sted of Nannius and Quintinus, were subrogated two other Captaines, named Carietto and Surius,Three distinctions concerning Germanie. who (with their Armies encamped themselues face to face with France, vpon the confines of Germanie. It must be vnderstood of the first Germanie, which is on this side the Rhine, and not of Allemaigne, beyond the Elb, nor of that Germanie afterward call^d Franconia.
He saith afterward, that as the French intruded themselues againe into Germanie (doubtlesse the first) they brought away thence an vnspeakeable bootie. And Arbogastes, being vnwilling to endure these brauadoes, which was nothing else but Griefe to the vanquished, and Dishonor to the Romaines:The Councell giuen by Arbogaste^ to the Emperour Valentinian. councelled his Emperour Valentinian the yonger, to chastise the French, and make them pay the penaltie of their passed transgressions, except they would readily deliuer (and in all haste) what they had stolne and carried away before, from the Lands of the Romaines, and surrender vp into his hands, the principall Commanders of their people, who had massacred the Captaines and Romaine Legions, to take vengeance on them, for the broken and violated peace. This last course vpon the limits of Rhine, made by the French, in the time of those new Captaines Carietto and Surius, chanced in the yeare of Grace, three hundred fourescore and nine, and the ouerthrow of Quintinus, and the Legions established for guarding the Rhines frontiers, was in three hundred fourescore and eight, and not fourescore and seauen, as Sigibert obserued.
To know the reason, why Arbogastes, a Frenchman by Nation (so saith Auentinus, the brother of Marcomir and Sunon, sonnes to Genebaudes) incited the Emperour Valentinian his Maister, against the French:Guesses are no good grounds to build on for any true Historian. these are close and concealed Letters from vs, and whatsoeuer thereof can be said, meere guesses and coniectures, wherewith a faithfull Historian ought not to be charged. Very certaine it is, that Valentinian neuer would haue the French for his enemies, who had loyally conserued the Romaine alliance, vnder their Kings Mellobaudes and Genebaudes, so lately deceased, and to whom succeeded his sonnes Marcomir and Sunon, not crediting the councell of Arbogastes. Onely he came to visite the Gaules, and the frontiers of Rhine, whereon he had speech and conference with the Kings Marcomir and Sunon, who renewed the auncient alliance, giuing hostages on both sides for assurance thereof, sworne on either part in the yeare three hundred fourescore and ten.
Arbogastes offended at this alliance, made without his aduise and counsaile;Arbogastes conspired against his Maister the Emperour, and his owne Nation of the French. thenceforward studied reuenge, as well against the Emperour his Maister, as them of his owne Nation. So that (notwithstanding the peace, and the hostages giuen) he resolued to make warre vpon the French. And so soone as Valentinian (who had spent the winter in the Citie of Treuers, after the peace made) had taken his way towards Lyonnois, in the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and eleuen, and that the Traytour Arbogastus had shut vp his Maister in the Citie of Vienna, vnder sure and sufficient guard: he came with a part of his Romaine Legions to Cologne, euen in the hart of winter, to the end he might suddenly rush into France. Imagining

this to be the aptest season, to giue a gird to the French, and taking them at vnawares, he should speede the better, by ransacking their Townes, and conuerting them into ashes: all meanes of succour being denied them, for seeking shelter in their woods, in regard there were no leaues or branches (as then) on the Trees.
The Bructeres were first s^t vpon by Arbogastes.Hauing then assembled the body of his Armie, presently he passed the Rhine, and for his first attempt, aduentured on the Bructeres (as being neerest to the Rhine, reducing into cinders the Towne of Aetia, as then peopled with the Chamanes; making spoyle and waste all thereabout, without meeting any person to offer resistance. Onely he saw appeare the King of the French, Marcomir, with his French Antuarians, and some number of the Chattes, (we haue formerly noated the moderne names of all those Nations) on the top of the Mountaines; but so farre off, as he could not receiue any harme by them. This is that which Sulpitius Alexander deliuereth in the fourth Booke of his Historie.
S. Paulinus, in the life of that great splendour of the Church S. Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, pursueth the rest of this passage, concerning the Count Arbogastes, saying. At the beginning Arbogastes, in his first attempt, was ill welcomed by the French, of whom yet in the end he had the victory: After which, hauing had conference with the Kings Marcomir and Sunon (for Paulinus giueth them the name of Kings) there was peace and alliance made againe betweene them, solemnely sworne on either part. Now it happened, that Arbogastes, at a magnificent Banquet, conferring with the Kings Marcomir, Sunon, and the chiefest Lords of the French, he was questioned by Marcomir, if he had any knowledge of Saint Ambros^.The words of ^ing Marcomer to Arbogastes. He replying, that he knew him, and was familiar with him. It is not then to be wondred at (said Marcomir to him) if all things succeede with thee, so well as thou canst wish, hauing the grace and fauour of so Holy a man, who could say to the Sunne: Stand still, and by and by it stood still. These are the very words of S, Paulinus.
Per idem tempus Arbogastes Comes aduersus gentem suam, hoc est Francorum, Bellum parauit, atque pugnando, non paruam multitudinem manu fudit, cum residuis vero pacem firmauit. Sed cum in conuiuio a Regibus gentis suae interrogaretur, Vtrum sciret Ambrosium, and respondisset nosce se virum, and diligi ab eo atque frequenter cum illo conuocari solitum, audiuit: Ideo vincis omnes, qui ab illo viro diligeris, qui dicit Soli, sta, and stat. The French, although they then were Pagans and Idolaters; attributed neuerthelesse the good fortune of Arbogastes, to the knowledge which he had with Saint Ambrose, whose sanctity of life they much admired.
The reason why S. Ambrose loued Arbogastes.And that which moued him to affect Arbogastes, was the perfections that he acknowledged to be in him, euen such as Suidas hath noated on the name of this Captaine. Arbogastes Francus, robore corporis, and asperitate animi flammae similis, proximus a B^utone, in hoc fuit const^ns, and exquisita modestia* and odium irreconciliabile a^^ritiae, etc. Arbogastes, a French man by Nation, in strength of body, and in viuaci^ie (...) spirit, like vnto a flame of fire, held the second ranke and dignity of Honor, next vnto Count Bantonius. He was constant and couragious, of singuler modestie, a mortall enemie, and vtterly vnreconcileable, to the pestilent vice of auarice, so that he made no spu^ of any thing to his Soldiours. And this was the reason, why the Emperour Theod^sius thought him meete and necessary, to be neere the person of Valentinian, to ioyne the grauity of his manners, and carriage of life, with his owne, and fashion them with his yong yeares, to make him a Prince perfect and compleate, when he should become an aged man; but he neuer attained thereto.
Because Arbogastes, hauing all the necessary vertues, remarkeable in a worthy Captaine, and had won the praise and honor to be such a man* he suffered himselfe to be led by idle opinions, and surprized with ambition, of attaining (one day) to the Empire. So saith Sulpitius Alexander, in his fourth Book. For he began to trouble the calme quietnesse of the Estate in Gaule, hauing procured the Emperour his Maister Valentinian,Arbogastes groweth amb^tious against his Master the ^mperor Valent^^ian. to be lockt vp in his Pallace at Vienna (in Daulphine) and brought him to such tearmes, and desperate condition, as to be depriued of the Empire. For the charges of the warres being in the hands of the Romaine Legiona, and all Offices (as well of peace as warre) giuen by Arbogastes, and as himselfe pleased; Valentini^^ was onely Emperour in name, but his Constable in effect. And the whole Sta^^

being at his command: of all them that had taken the Oath of fidelity to the Emperour, there was not one that durst shew himselfe familiar and friendly, or obedient to whatsoeuer he commanded. Nullus ex omnibus Sacramentis militiae obstrictis reperiebatur qui familiari Principis sermoni, aut iussis obsequi auderet. These are the words of Sulpitius Alexander.
So that the person of the Emperour, and all the occasions of the Empire, remaining in the power of Count Arbogastes: it was very easie for him to cut off his Soueraigne, as Sozimus saith in his fourth Booke, and in these tearmes.
Arbogastes, hauing the whole power ouer the Romaine Horsemen, for which he was most conuenient, in regard of his experience in actions of Warre, and being an vtter enemy to Couetousnesse: attained to such supreame authority, that he carried himselfe very saucily in speeches, and wholly vnsufferable to the Emperour, whom he would taunt and censure in his meanest actions, appointing quite contrary to whatsoeuer he commanded. Which Valentinian being vnable to endure, grew displeased many times against him; but without aduantage, because Arbogastes had all the Romaine Armie on his side. Vpon a day, as the Emperour sate in his Throne, he beheld Arbogastes passing by before him, whose boldnesse and vnreuerent behauiour, he being no longer able to suffer: as he went by, he thrust into his hand a countermand, whereby he tooke from him the charge and dignity of Constable, and of Colonell of the Romaine Legions. Arbogastes hauing read the countermand,A subiect ouerbold and saucie with his Soueraigne.rent it in pieces, and trampled it vnderneath his feete, saying to the Emperour: That hee did not hold any of those Offices of him, and therefore he could not take them from him. From that day forward, false reports being carried betweene them, each of them stood vpon his Guard; but the stronger still fell to Arbogastes. Who caused the Emperour to be strangled, and afterward fastened his body to a libbit, as if he had bin the hangman of himselfe. So writeth that excellent Father of knowledge and learning Saint Hierome, in his Third Epistle. Adolescens Valentinianus, and bene puer, post fugam, post exilia, post recuperatum multo sanguine Imperium, haud procul ab Vrbe, mortis Fraternae conscia, (for of two Brothers the eldest was slaine at Lyons, and the yonger at Vienna) necatus est, and cadauer exanime suspendio infamatum. And this caused many Historians to write, that this Emperour was strangled by himselfe, impatient of the rude and intollerable wrongs, which he sustained by his Constable Arbogastes.
And especially Sigibert, who setteth downe the vntimely death of that yong Emperour, of great hope, and very peaceable nature (as Saint Ambrose writeth in the Funerall Oration for this Prince) in the yeate three hundred fourescore and sixteene. Valentinianus Imperator nimia austeritate Arbogastes Magistri militum ad vitae taedium perductus, laqueo vitam finiuit. An errour in the circumstance of his death, and also in the date of time: because he dyed in the yeare of Grace, three hundred fourescore and twelue, the day before the Eeue of Pentecost, in the Consulship of the Emperour Arcadius (for the second time) and of Ruffinus, according to the Consularie Fasts.
Arbogastes, to couer his villanie, aduanced (by little and little) to the Empire, a certaine man named Eugenius, to reigne in effect, but as his substitute to vse command. Eugenius auxilio Arbogastis tyrannisat; So speaketh Sigibert, pursuing the end of Valentian. Adding withall, that in the yeare three hundred fourescore and seauenteene, the Emperour Theodosius the Great, exterminated both these Tyrants, and dyed immediately after. Theodosius Eugenium, and Arbogastenin Bello perimit, and ipse non multo post obijt. Post quem filij eius Arcadius and Honorius, imperant annis tredecim.
Claudian enstructeth vs, that this Eugenius was one of the Houshold of Count Arbogastes, in the Panegyricke for the third Consulship of the Emperour Honorius.

Proh! crimen Superum, longi proh dedecus aeui:
Barbarus Hesperias exul possederat oras,
Sceptraque deiecto dederat Romana clienti.

And at the fourth Consulship of the same Honorius.
Hinc sibi Germanus famulum delegarat exul.
These men to maintaine themselues in their tyrannie, and sound the secrets of the Emperour Theodosius the Great, sent Ambassadours to him: but he kept them some time,The singular wisedome of the Emperour Theodosius. without admitting them audience, and onely shewed them a muster of his potent Armie, and would not giue them any other answere. Arbogastes and his fellow Tyrant issuing forth of Millaine, to hinder the Emperour Theodosius from passing the Alpes, who marched in person to the warre, hauing vnder him Stilic^, husband to his Niece Serena, and other great Commanders in warre: when they arriued at those Mountaines, and being not so strong as the enemy; Theodosius prepared himselfe to Prayer, by the example of Moyses, and God gaue him the victory (famous for the Miracles described by Claudian) albeit he was an Idolater. As we reade in the Panagyricke, for the third Consulship of the Emperor Honorius, where speaking of the victory giuen to Theodosius, he saith
O nimiam dilecte Deo, cui fundit ab antrisAolus armatas hyemes, cui militat aether,Et coniurati veniunt ad Classica venti.
The Tyrant Eugenius was brought bound fast and mannacled, to Theodosius, who pronounced the sentence of death vpon him, But as for Arbogastes, hauing bin two whole dayes in flight, full of furie, rage and despaire; he slew himselfe with his owne Sword and Ponyard, as is verified by Claudian in the place before alleadged.

At ferus inuentor scelerum traiecerat altum
Non vno mucrone latus, duplexque tepebat
Ensis, and vltrices in se conuerterat iras.

A plaine contradi^tion of Sigibert,This victory happened in September, the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and foureteene and not seauenteene as Sigibert saith) then being Consuls the Emperors Arcadius for the third time, and Honorius the second time.
Before this Battaile, the tyrant Eugenius (by the counsell of Arbogastes) would haue made the French afraid, but obserue what Sulpitius Alexander saith. Eugenius hauing prepared his Armie, resolued to crosse the Rhine, to the end, to make a muster or shew of such forces, as he had at his command of barbarous Nations, as the A^^mans and French, to whom the Kings were at all times allied, and confederates together: but he did not make his passage.
The quiet continuance of the French.So the French continued in quietnesse, after the alliance and peace, which the Count Arbogastes made with them, till after the death of the Emperor Theodosius the Great, happening at Millaine, the sixteenth of the Calends of February, the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and fifteene, in the Consulship of the two Brethren Olybrius and Prebinus.
The Empires of the East and West deuided betweene the two Sonnes of Theo^^sius.Theodosius left the Empire of the East to his eldest Sonne Arcadius; hauing from the yeare fourescore and eleuen, inuested in that of the West, his yongest sonne H^norius. In whose tender time of yeares, the Alemans and French began againe to moue and stirre: euen as all mischances happen to such Kingdomes, as haue children to be their Kings, for then it is, when euery one will be fishing in troubled waters. Vae Regno cuius Rex puer est, and Principes mane comedunt. So saith the diuine wisedome. In this manner was the Empire of the East troubled, and by the factious deuises of Ruffinus, to whom Theodosius (going against the Tyrant Eugenius) had giuen the gouernment of the East Empire, and of his two Sonnes. And the subiect of his discontentment, ensued from this, that Theodosius had preferred Stilico with him; as we learne of Claudian, his second Booke In Ruffinum.

Iamque tuis, Stilico, Romana potentia curis
Et rerum commissus apex, tibi credita fratrum
Vtraque maiestas, gemminaeque exercitus aulae.
Ruffinus (neque enim patiuntur saeua quietem
Crimina, pollutaeque negant arescere fauces)
Infandis iterum terras accendere bellis
Inchoat, and solito pacem turbare tumultu.

And also by another occasion, that, as a signe and noate of especiall fauour, Theodosius had caused the daughter of the said Stilico (named Maria) and of Serena, daugh^er to the Brother of the said Theodosius, to be affianced to his yongest Sonne, and he ^o wed her, so soone as he should come to the age of foureteene yeares, as he did in the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and eighteene, in September. The said Honorius being Consull the fourth time, with Eutichianus, as Claudian informeth vs, ^s well in the Panegyricke of the said Consulship, as the Epithalamium for the said Honorius; who in the yeare before named, and in the said moneth of September entred into the foureteenth yeare of his age.
So soone as the newes were certainely knowne, concerning the death of Great Theodosius; as suddenly were the Alemans and French in the Field, to repasse the Rhine, and seeke their further fortune in Gaule. To stay their forwardnesse, Honorius the Emperour of the East (who, as we haue already said, had Africa, Italie,The large partition of the Fasterne Emperour Honorius. Spaine, England and Gaule in partage) presently sent away Stilico, who in the same yeare three hundred fourescore and fifteene, reassured the frontiers of Rhine, which he viewed and visited from the very originall and spring thereof (and which beginneth within the very high Alpes, neere to the Episcopall Citie of the Grisons, called Curia Rhetorum, issuing forth of a Mountaine named Adula by Strabo) so farre as to the Ocean, so saith Claudian in the Panegyricke for the third Consulship of Honorius, happening in the yeare three hundred fourescore and sixteene, hauing for companion his brother Arcadius, Consull the fourth time. In the which voyage, he saith, that the Kings of the Alemans and French, came and did him honour, laying downe their Armes, to the end they might haue peace with him. This was the first militarie expedition of Stilico, against the Nations (enemies to the Romaine Empire) in the West, exalting themselues as foes to his Maister Honorius.The first voyage of Si^ilico against mutinous Nations in the West. According to the testimonie of the Poet Claudian, who noateth that voyage with these perticularities.

Hunc tamen in primis populos lenire feroces,
Et Rhenum pacare iubes: Volat ille citatis
Vectus equis: nullaque latus slipante caterua,
Aspera nubiferas qua Rhetia porrigit Alpes,
Pergit, and hostiles (tanta est fiducia) ripas
Incomitatus adit, totum properare per amnem.

So that this first voyage of Count Stilico, was but to take knowledge of the enemy, whose designes he wisely preuented, as alwayes it behoueth a valiant Leader in warre to doe. For without the attendants of an Armie,The very presence of Stilico dreadfull to his enemies. which neuer walketh but by counted steps; Stilico, with his presence onely, secured the frontiers of the Rhine, and gaue the Alemans and French Kings, sufficient breathing to embrace peace, thereby to salue them anew, by comming themselues to moue it on this side the Rhine.

--Segnique verenter
Ostendisse mora transuecti lintribus amnem.

And againe.

Attonitos Reges humili ceruicae videres
Ante ducem nostrum: Flauam sparsere Sicambri
Caesariem, pauidosque orantes murmure Franci
Procubuere solo: iuratur Honorius absens:
Imploratque tuum supplex, Alemannia, nomen.

And disciphering the Aleman people, which performed homage to him, he saith
Basternae venere truces, venit accola syluaeBruchterus Herciniae, latisque paludibus exitCymbrus, and ingentes Albim liquere Cherusci;
The Ostrogothes possessed themselues of Prouinces belonging to the Romaine Empire.This thorne taken thus forth of Honorius his foote, Stilico with his Armie passed into Greece, to fight against the Ostrogothes; who, by intelligence from the Count Ruffinus, were seised on prouinces subiected to the Romaine Empire. Also by other intelligence from the same Ruffinus, the two Constables, Gaines of the East, and Stilico of the West, were constrained to leaue the businesse, without doing any thing, which cost the life of Ruffinus: who to vsurpe the Easterne Empire, had formerly raised vnknowne people, inhabiting vnder the North climate, in the Marishes of Meotides, and in Pannonia, as Claudian saith in his first Booke.

Iam gentes, Istrum mouet, Scythiamque receptat
Auxilio: traditque suas hostilibus armis
Relliquias: mixtis descendit Sarmata Dacis,
Et qui cornipedes in pocula vulnerat audax
Massagetes; patriumque bibens Maetium Alanus.
Membraque qui ferro gaudet pinxisse Gelonus,
Ruffino collecta manus.

Ruffinus slaine by the Roman Armie* neere to GonstantinopleBut Ruffinus liued not to enioy all these match-makings of his treacheries; because he was slaine neere to Constantinople (the fift of the Calends of December, in the yeare three hundred fourescore and fifteene) by the Romaine Army, which he had delaied and hindred from fighting.
Now, in the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and eighteene, Honorius being Consull the fourth time, with Eutychianus: the Gouernour of Aff^^ce, named Gildonus, caused himselfe to be proclamed Emperour, he reuolting from Honorius;Gildonus proclaimed himselfe Emperor. who forthwith sent Stilico against him, and who, after some encounters, taught him to vnderstand reason. Claudian describing this warre of Affrica, saith:
Post domitas Arctos alio prorumpit ab axeTempestas: and ne qua tuis intacta trophaeisPars foret, Australis sonuit tuba. Mouerat omnesMaurorum Gildo populos.
But this new vpstart Traytour, was paid with coyne of the same stampe, as is onely currant and due to such, as are fellons and Traytours to their Prince. For he seeking to saue himselfe by Sea,Gildonus st^angled himselfe in Sicilie. the windes proued so contrary to him; as, after their impetuous seruice, in driuing on, and returning him backe againe, o^ of one tempest into another: he landed in Sicilie, where he hanged himselfe, fearing to fall into his enemies hands, who afterward cut off his head, as it is auouched by Claudian.

Agnouitque nouos absens Arethusa triumphos,
Gildonis sensit teste cruore necem.

During this warre in Affrica, which tooke an indifferent long continuance; the French in the absence of Count Stilico,The titles of honor giuen to Stilico. Constable and Colonell of the Romaine Armie (for he was knowne by these titles of honor and preheminence: Stilico, vir Illustrissimus, Magister Equitum, and Peditum, Comes Domesticorum, and Trib^^^ Praeterianorum) began to vndertake their wandrings againe, for passing the Rhine, and robbing the Gaules, as they did vnder the conduct of their King Marcom^. So that at returne from the Affricane warre, Stilico was constrained to refresh his Armie some few dayes in Italie, and afterward tooke his way towards Gaule; where he fought with the Alemans, conioyned with the French, and gaue them

a great ouerthrow; in the Ides of Iune, the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and nineteene, Manlius Theodorus bing then Consull.Stilico, ouerthroweth the Alemans and French. For the Consularie Fastes beare no name, of an abhominable Eunuch, named Flauius Eutropius, strangled for his vile extorting concussions: As Claudian obserueth in the Panegyricke, spoken to the said Consull Theodorus.
Stilico passed the Rhine, still pursuing on his Conquest, and at the retraite of the Alemans and French: he entrapped Marcomir, King of the French,Stilico tooke prisoner Marcomir King of the French. whom he made his war-prisoner, and then so boldly followed on the troupes of the French, that he compelled the rest to pleade for agreement, and desire peace with such conditions, as should be pleasing to the vanquisher. Stilico ordered his victory, by command from the Emperour Honorius his Sonne in lawe; made peace with them, imposing for Tribute on the French, that he knew them good Souldiours, and a certaine number must be taken from among them, to serue in the Romaine Armies; with expresse charge, to liue thenceforward in quietnesse, without making any foradgings on the Rhines frontiers. According to that which Claudian saith:
-- Cum forte decorusCum Stilicone, Gener, pacem implorantibus vltroGermanis responsa dabat, legesque ChaicisArduus, and slauis signabat iura Sueuis.His tribuit leges, his obside foedera sancitIndicto, bellorum alios transcribit in vsus,Militet vt nostris detonsa Sicambria signis?
In two words he expresseth the Alemans, by the name of Sweues; and the French by that of the Sicambrians, as we haue related already.
Stilico hauing left good Garrisons, for defending the Rhines frontiers,Stilico leadeth Marcomir prisoner. and receiued the hostages: tooke his way to Millaine, leading along with him Marcomir, King of the French, whom he sent prisoner to Sienna in Italie, where he ended his ^fe. So soone as he was departed thence, King Sunno, brother to Marcomir, and his Successour; would needes make head againe, as endeauouring to recouer his Bro^her, taking (by way of reprisall) certaine Townes of the Romans.Sunno, brother to Marcomir, slaine by the French. But he was slaine by the French themselues, who would keepe the peace sworne to the Romans, and thereby) made meanes for recouery of their King. The end of these two Brethren Kings, is liuely described by Claudians.

Regia Romanus disquirit crimina carcer;
Marcomirus, Sunnoque docent, quorum alter Etruscum
Pertulit exilium: quum se promitteret alter
Exulis vltorem, iacuit mucrone suorum.
Res auidi conscire nouas odioque furentes
Pacis and ingenio scelerumque cupidine Fratres.

And, after their deaths, the French were seauenteene yeares without any Kings, ^eing then gouerned by Dukes onely.
After the second voyage of Stilico, both Alemagne and French were (for a time) ^o encreased and tranquile; as, without any damage, a man might trauaile thorow ^hem, as Claudian saith. The Rhine, being (before) furious, and and swarming with armed ^roupes; was become like an vnhorned Stagge.

-- Rhenumque minacem
Cornibus infractis adeo mitescere cogis
Vt Salius iam rura colat, flexosque Sicambri
In falcem curuent gladios.

It seemed, that they had vtterly forsaken the actions of warre, to vndertake the ^ickle and Scith, addicting themselues to husbandry. For they of the first and se^ond Germany, freely passed the Rhine with their Flockes and Heards; to let them ^oe feede at the Mountaines of France and Alemagne.


-- Geminasque viator
Cum videat ripas, quae sit Romana requirat,
Vt iam trans fluuium, non indignante Chaico,
Pascat Belga pecus, mediumque ingressa per Albim,
Gallica Francorum montes armenta pererrent.

The same Poet in the Epithalamium of the Empresse Marie, wife to the Emperour Honorius, and daughter to Count Stilico, telleth her; that Thence-forward, she might walke thorow Alemagne and France, without any euill encounter.

-- Iam Rhenus, and Albis
Seruiet, in medios ibis, Regina Sicambros.

The Empire of the West being thus calme and tranquile, Stilico, who had neuet bin Consul: was chosen the first day of the Serculare yeare foure hundred, with Aurelianus. Claudian, in the second Panegyricke, spoken to the said Stilico, maketh Rome to speake in this manner.

Qui mihi Germanos solus, Francosque subegit
Cur nondum legitur Fastis?

Because he sought to make the Westerne Empire in peaceable condition.

--Nullus Boreae metus: omnis and Austri
Ora silet: cecidit maurus Germania cessit:
Et Ianum pax alta ligat, te Consule.

But this peace (not long after) was molested by the pactises and factions of the same Stilico, to make Euch^rius his Sonne Emperour, and played at spoile-King with Honorius.
Stilico, conspireth against Honorius his Lord.For, hauing bin created Consull (the second time) with Anthemius, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred and fiue: he practised with strange Nations, and namely the Gothes, then holding Greece and part of Thrace, that they should come thundring into Italie: As afterward they did, vnder conduct of their King Alaricus. In the meane while (on the other side) the Alans, Scythians and Vandales, with the Burgongnons and other Nations of the North, prepared themselues, to goe take their share of the Gaules, neuer to part thence: which they did, onely to please Stilico, a Vandale by Nation.
Alaricus, King of the Gothes inuadeth Italy by the meanes of Stilico.Alaricus comming into Italie, by practise and intelligence with him, in the yeare foure hundred and sixe: Stilico, that he might giue freer passage to the Northerne Nations; leueied the companies which guarded the Rhines frontiers, and caused them to come into Italie, as Claudian saith.

Agmina quin etiam Flauis obiecta Sicambris
Quaeque domant Cattos, immansuetosque Cheruscos
Huc omnes vertere minas, tutumque remotis
Excubijs Rhenum solo terrore reliquit.

Now during the time that Alaricus tooke and sacked Rome, making himselfe rich with the spoyles thereof, and all his Armie (this surprizall happened the ninth of the Calends of September, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred and ten, Var^^^ being then alone Consull of the East, created by the Emperour Arcadius, for ^^norius did nothing in the West,Goarus and Respendialus Kings of Alemagne. but expected what should become of the Siedge of Rome^ the two Kings of Alemagne, Goarus and Respendialus, coueted to passe the Rhine, to infest Gaule with their Armies. But he first ranked himselfe on the side of Honorius (Stilico and his Sonne Eucherius, conuinced both of fellonie and treason, were slaine by the Romaine Armie, in the yeare foure hundred and eight) the other King, named Respendialus, was constrained to make his retreat, and to forsake the frontiers of the Rhine.
The death of Stilico and his Son EucheriusIn the yeare foure hundred and ten, the Vandales would plant themselues i^ Gaule, and in passing on the way, forradged the Lands of the French: but because they could winne passage no where else, they were well beaten in three or foure encounters. And in one of them, their King Godegisilus was shine in the field, with twenty thousand of his people, perishing by the edge of the Swords of the French. So that the Vandales had bin quite foyled, if the Alanes (who came in the time of greatest neede) had not brought succour, and passed the

Riuer of Rhine with the same company. Thus are we enstructed by the Historian Renatus Profuturus Frigeridus, and reported by S. Gregory of Tours.
The yeare foure hundred and eleuen, vnder the Consulship of the Emperour of the East Theodosius the yonger, the fourth time (without any Consull in the West, being ouerwhelmed with miseries) a man named Constantine, of a simple Souldiour,Constantine a silly Souldior made Emperour. ^s he was no more, being exalted Emperor by the Garrisons of England (at such time as Alaricus desquieted Italie) sought also make himselfe Maister of Italie, as he ^ad already done of the Gaules, England and Spaine: the Regencie of which Prouince hee had giuen to his Sonne Constantius, whom hee had likewise proclaimed his Companion in the Empire: So saith Sozomenus in his ninth Booke.
Constantius being come from Spaine, where he left his wife,Constantius the sonne of Constantine gouerning in Spain. and all his furni^ure at Sarragossa (the Capitall Citie of Arragon) and for his Lieutenant one named Gerontius: hee went to parlee with his Father at Arles in Prouence, vpon the sub^ect for his voyage into Italie. Both of them agreed in one opinion, and percei^ing, that in Italie none would stirre against them: Constantine gaue himselfe ^o all dissolute courses of life, and aduised his Sonne, to returne backe againe into Spaine, hauing to guide and conuoye him, taken certaine troupes of well appoin^ed Souldiours, to make way before him, while as yet he remained with his Fa^her. He receiued newes from Spaine, that Gerontius had caused to be proclaimed Emperour, one (named Maximus) of his most intimate and endeared friends,One vsurpes ri^eth in Armes against another. who kept his Imperiall seate at Tarragona in Catalogna, and prepared a potent Armie composed of strange Nations) for his descent into Gaule, going desperately onward, ^o besiedge Constantine in Arles, and his Sonne at Vienna.
The Tyrants Father and Sonne, being thus summoned to the Trompets sound; ^peedily dispatched away Edolegus or Edobeccus, a Duke of the French, into Alemagne ^nd France, to deriue succour from those Nations.
But during these entercourses, another Captaine,A third Captaine sent from the Emperour Honorius. belonging to the Emperour Honorius (Father of Valentinian, who was third Emperour of that name) and his Lieutenant Decimus Rusticus, Maister of the Offices, and conductors of a puissant Armie, consisting of French and Alemanes (that of the French, was led by two of ^heir Dukes, called Marcomir and Ingomer, Brethten) descended from Italie in^o Gaule, and went to besiedge the Tyrant Constantine within the Citie of Arles, before which Gerontius had already held some moneths siege. But constrained to raise it, by the Armie of Honorius, which droue the other into disorder: hee made his retraite in all haste towards Spaine, where hee was ^laine by his owne Souldiours, who held him in contempt, by reason of his flight.
While the Siedge of Arles proceeded on, Constantius was aduertised, that Edobeccus Duke of the French (so Frigeridus calleth him, and Sozomenus, from whom we deriue this Narration more amply, yea and perticularly, then that which Frige^idus saith) approched neere, with great supply of succour of the Alemans and French, ^o raise the siedge: Constantius resolued to cut off this succour by the way, and therefore passed the Rhosne, to surprise the fore-goers, ambuscading in a wood part of his ^eople, conducted by Vlphilas his Grand Prouost, as also the French Dukes Ingomer and Marcomir. Duke Edobeccus being (for his part) desirous to fight, hauing past the ^roupes of Vlphilas, without perceiuing them: came to handy-blowes with Duke Constantius, the encounter waxing very hot. Then Vlphilas with his Horsemen, came ^o charge vpon this fresh reply, setting on them in the rere, which troubled the ranks, ^ome whereof fairely fled, and the rest yeelded to Constantius. But as for the chiefe Leader Edobeccus, well mounted as he was, he retired to a Gentleman, named E^dicius, whom he accounted to be his friend, by hauing (formerly) done him many great courtesies: but he in barbarous vnthankfulnes, smote off his head, which he brought ^o the said Constantius, from whom he expected some great recompence. Constantius ^ooke the head, and said vnto him, In the Emperours name I giue thee thankes:A noate of abhominable ingratitude, and worthily rewarded. But presently he dismissed him from his Campe, saying; That he would not haue it sulli^ed, with the company of a man so traiterous, and perfidious.
After this ouerthrow, Constantius returned to the Siege of Arles, sending to the besieged Tyrant, the head of Edobeccus. Constantine seeing all comfort fled from him, despoiled himselfe of all his Imperiall habits, and fled into a Church, where he was admitted to be a Priest.Arles is deliuered to Constantius on the Emperors behalfe. They of the Citie, hauing capitulated for themselues; opened their Gates to Constantius: who reduced the Prouince into the power and obedience of the Emperour his Maister, in whose name he placed the Gouerno^^, and then returned into Italie; sending before him the tyrant Constantine, and his other Sonne Iulian, to be presented to the Emperour Honorius. But they were slaine by the way, and their heads cut off vpon the Riuer of Mince, so saith Frigeri^^^, Sozomenus onely writeth, that they were put to death, without any notice of the place.Difference betweene Authors. And the Spanish Priest Paulus Orozius addeth thereto, that the Tyrant Constantine had taken out of a Cloyster, his eldest Sonne Constantius (where he had long time bin a professed Monk) to make him his companion in the Empire. And that God suffred the Father and Son (being both ordained Priests) thus to be slaine and massacred; because they preferred earthly Empire, before that which is heauenly.
An infinite number of tyrants perishing in one and the same yeare.So in the same time, and about the said yeare foure hundred and eleuen, an infinite number of Tyrants were cut off by violent deaths: As namely Constantine and his yongest sonne in Italie; Constantins and Maximus in Spaine; Iouinus and Sebastianus; Iouinus his Brother also in Italie; Sarus and others in England and in Gaule.
These troubles and garboiles thus moued in the Easterne Empire, gaue occasion to the French,Marcomir and Pharamond being Dukes of the French. vnder the conduct of their Dukes Marcomir and Pharamond, to aduenture an attempt on the Gaules Lands, by passing the Riuer of Rhine, to steale priuily for surprizing the great Citie of Treuers (now the second time) as we learne by S. Gregrory of Tours, in his second Booke of the History of France, and ninth Chapter. Hiisdem drebus Praefectus Tyrannorum decimus Rusticus Agroetius ex Prim^cerio Notariorum Iouini (he was deceiued, because he tooke part with Iouinus after the Siege of Arles multique Nobiles apud Aruernos capti a Ducibus Honorianis, and cradeliter interempti sunt. Treuerorum Ciuitas a Francis direpta, incensaque est Sec^nd^ Irruptione. Some Historians doe account this second enterprise, in the yeare foure hundred and foureteene, and referre the first to the yeare three hundred fourescore and seauen, at such time as the Romaine Captaines Heraclius and Quintinus were ouerthrowne by the French neere to Treuers, as Sigibert telleth vs in these words Franci Quintinum, and Heraclium Romanorum Duces cum omnibus pene suis iuxta Treuerim delent.
Here you perceiue what we haue obserued of the French, from the time as they made themselues knowne vnder ^he name of the Hanse: the learned may supply where I faile. And yet notwithstanding, the chiefe Commanders of this Company, euermore kept their auncient name of Sicambrians, not onely to the time of the Emperour Honorius (as we haue noated by the Verses of Claudian) and of V^lentinian the third: but also very long time after, to wit, vnder Meroueus, so the Bishop of Auuergne informeth vs.

Francorum and penitissimas paludes
Intrares, venerantibus Sicambris.

Vnder Clouis their first Christian King, at whose Baptisme and Sacring, S. Re^g^us spake these words.

Mitis depone colla Sicamber,
Incende quod adorasti, adora quid incendisti.

So we learne by Floardus in the Historie of Reims, and (before him) by S. Gregory of Tours.
Clotharius the first King of al France.And vnder the yongest Sonne of the same King Clouis, called Charibert, or A^bert, King of Paris, sonne to Clotharius, first King of all France; Son to the said King Clouis. Fortunatus Bishop of Poictiers, saith, that he was descended of the auncient stocke of the Francs-Sicambrians, whom S. Gregory of Tours, in his second Book and ninth Chapter, calleth for honor, Primum, and Nobiliorem familiam Crinitorum Reg^^ Fortunatus, in the fourth Poem of his sixt Booke, speaking of Charibert, saith
Cum sis proginitus Clara de gente Sicamber,Floret in eloquia lingua Latina tuo.



CHAP. VI. Of King Pharanond: And likewise concerning the Salique Lawe.
WE haue heretofore seene, how the French were gouerned by their Kings, vntill the yeare of Grace three hundred three score and nineteene: to verifie the saying of the noble Romaine Historian Tacitus, speaking of the people as well of the higher, as lower Germanie. Semper apud vos Bella, Regesque fuere, donec in ius nostrum consederetis. Which will serue to contradict such, as (in meere ignorance) haue written, that Pharamond, was the first King of the French, and haue supposed falsities vnder fabulous names, inuented at mens pleasures, to be deriued out of Dauids Psalmes, Og, Bazan Regem.
Marcomir (Cousin to the last Kings Marcomir and Sunon, issued and descended from Richimer, brother to King Merobaudes) iustly afflicted,Elsewhere called Mellobaudes. because those of his Nation rendered themselues mercenarie to the Romaines, alwayes weakening them by one meanes or other; instead of composing a body together, and forming it into an assured estate on the Gaulish Lands, vsurped by the Romaine Emperor (as Nations further off from them, made apparant by their example) declared to the French (being assembled in the open fields, to hold their estates according to their auncient custome) these or the like speeches.
That it was a shame, or rather a misfortune, which serued as their ruine,The effect of the Oration made by Marcomir to the French. that in the warres with the Romaines; the chiefe and principall persons among them, tooke contrary parts, either to cut their owne throates, or to perish by the Romaines Armes. Witnesse whereof was Ebodichus, traiterously massacred by his hoste Ecdicius, and Duke Ingomer, his owne brother, slaine at the Siege of Arles. It was therefore most expedient, to liue no longer in such confusion: but rather to conspire altogether, to the end for creating a King among them, to whom at all times they should sweare intire obedience, and that vnder his conduct, they might possesse themselues of the rich abounding Gaules, whereto their predecessours had (from time to time) aspired, and for their attaining thereto, had so often times crossed the Riuer of Rhine, all ending their liues (by a glorious death) in an enterprise so honorable; in regard they had now such a time, wherein their ancient enemies, the Romans, knew no longer of what wood to make themselues Arrowes, or which way to be of any certainty.
This councell being allowed for good, all with one voyce and consent,The election of Pharamond to be King of the French. elected and named for their King, the Sonne of the said Duke Marcomir, and who fought vnder his Father in resistance of the Romaines, which made him famous for valour and height of courage. He called himselfe Pharamond, which signifieth in the Germaine tongue; A true Prince, and one that keepeth his word: Vertues which made him preferrable before all others, and caused him to be exalted and carried on a Shield (according to the manner of the French) three seuerall times about the whole assembly. Varamundus impositus Scuto, more Gentis, and succolentium humeris vibratus Rex Francorum eligitur. All the Nations of the French Hanse,The Nations of the French Hanse. hauing sworne firmely obedience and fidelity to him (vpon their Armes) conformed themselues according to the custome obserued by the ancients of the French.
But in this place (before wee passe any further) I would gladly roote vp that false opinion, conceiued by too many, and make it apparantly knowne;The French had Kings long time before Pharamond. that long time before this Pharamond: the French had bin gouerned by Kings, famous for vallancie in the Romaine Histories.
I make not any account at all, of Princes spoken of by such as are ignorant in the French Historie, deriuing them from the ashes of old Troy. I abhorre and condemne Poeticall fictions, when they shall be vsed for the foundation and beginning of a History, wherin the horosc^pe and natiuitie of Princes of noate, should haue no other

guide or direction, but only truth it selfe, testified by such Authours, as couch nothing in their writings, but what they haue seene with their eyes, and not led by heare-say.
In like manner, I detest such as by the selfe-same ignorance, burne day-light with a bead roll of Kings, reported vnder fabulous names, inuented vpon pleasure; as Tritenius hath done,What care and respect ought to be in a faithfull historian. after Hunibald the Lyer, the Belgian Maire, and those of his ranke: I onely honour and esteeme them, that are credibly obserued by the Romane Histories, since the time as the Sicambrians (the famous Ancestors of the French) made themselues dreadfull to the Romanes, vnder the name of French-men, according as the Sueues vnder that of Alemans.
Full well I know that the Romane Geographers Strabo, Tacitus, Suetonius, and diuers other Authors,The dignity and maiesty of History. famous for learning, and especially in Histories, which is (to speake properly) the Register of Immortality, and Mirror of the worlds inconstancy; haue made notable mention of Maroboduus, King of the Sicambrians and Marcomans, acknowledged by Augustus Caesar. But then to remarke the Kings his Successours; the quest is obscure, and drowned in the Sea of eternall obliuion. And therefore we purpose to speake of none, but such as wee haue light of, by testimony of our enemies the Romanes themselues, in their Histories and Poesies. Now; among those certaine and assured Kings, which ought to precede Pharamond, I obserue the first to be;
1. Ascaricus, who commanded ouer the French, in the time of Constantine called the Great. The Panegyricke of Nazarius, made and pronounced to the said Constantine, enstructeth vs: that the said Ascaricus, King of the French, and the Prince Ragazus, or Radagazus his Brother, were vanquished and ouerthrowne in a foughten battell, by the said Constantine at the beginning of his Empire. As much saith Ammianus Marcellinus, Secretary to Iulian the Apostata, in his 15. booke. After Ascaricus and Ragazus, succeeded their Cousine.
2. Richimer, King of the French, Father to King
3. Theodomir, surprized and defeated by Iulian the Apostata, who sent him prisoner to Rome, with the Queene Ascila his mother; as we learne by the Historiographers, Ammianus Marcellinus, Renatus Frigeridus, and S. Gregory of Tours, the most ancient French Annalist, in his second booke and ninth chapter of the History of France. Theodomir left two sonnes,
Mellobaudes and Richimer, ^. of the name, Father to Marcomir and Ingomer,
Dukes of the French.
4. Mellobaudes, King of the French, in the time of the Emperour Valentinian the first, who knowing the Valour of the said Mellobaudes, sought his friendship, and made him Consull of Rome with him, in the yeere of Grace, 368. as Ammianus Marcellinus affirmeth in the 31. booke of his history. After Mellobaudes succeeded in the French Kingdome his Sonne.
5. Gonebaudes, King of the French in the time of the Emperour Valentinian the yonger, according as it is witnessed by that bright splendor of the Church, S. Ambros^ Bishop of Millaine, in his 25. Epistle. The said Genebaudes left two sonnes,
6
Marciomir and Sunon.
Both of them Kings of the French, in the time of the Emperor Valentinian the yonger, as it is obserued by S. Paulinus, describing the life of S. Ambrose. These two brethren seeking to continue the purpose of their Predecessors, Kings Ascaricus, Rich^^^ and Theodomir, to possesse themselues of the Gaules: were vanquished by the Lieutenant Generall of the Romane Emperour Stilico. Marcomir was confined to Si^^ in Thuscanie, and Sunon slaine some few yeeres after by the faction of the Romanes: As it is recorded by Claudian, in the Panegyricke and Tract De Laudibus Stilico^^.
By the death of these two last Kings, there was Interregnum or vacancie of Gouernment 17. yeeres, during which time, the French were conducted and ruled by their Princes and Dukes of the line Royall.
Marcomir And Ingomer.
Brethren, sonnes to Richimer, second of the name, brother to the King Meollbaudes. They were Souldiors in pay to Honorius, Emperour of the East, in fauour of whom they were present with a powerfull Armie, composed of the French, at the siege of the Towne of Arles in Prouence, against the Tyrants Constantine and his Sonnes, taken prisoners at the surprisall thereof, As we finde written by Sozomenus, and S. Gregorie of Tours in their Histories. Marcomir (eldest Brother of Ingomer, was Father to
7 Pharamond.
Seauenth (and not first) King of the French, elected in the open field of Wirtzpourg, the first day of May, foure hundred and seauenteene, as Sigibert writeth in his Chronicle: And in the Diet or generall Parlement of the French there assembled; then being Consuls of Rome, the Emperour Honorius the eleuenth time, and Constantius (of whom we haue so often made mention in the end of the precedent Chapter) the second time.
From this King Pharamond, the Monarches of France deriue their originall; and of them, they make the most Illustrious houses of Christendome to be descended.
Concerning the eleuation of this Pharamond, as King; the Preface of the Salique Lawe speaketh in this manner. Marcomiris quoque dedit hoc Consilium Francis, and elegerunt Pharamundum ipsius Filium, and eleuauerunt in Regem super se Crinitum.
William the Breton, in the first Booke of his Philippides; that is to say, the life of King Philip Augustus, called the Conqueror, and Gods-gift, saith
Aqua Francigenae progressi cum PharamundoMarcomirigena, quem iam genitor suus illisIn regem dederat.
The same Poet, Physition in ordenary to King Phillip Augustus, and a Monke of S. Denis, the stately Mausolus or buriall place of the French Kings, speaking concerning the changing the name of Gaule, into that of French, saith:
Et sic terra fuit Francorum nomina dictaFrancia, cuius erat antiquum Gallia nomenIn qua Regali Pharamundus primus honore,Exclusis penitus Romanis sulsit.
The Reigne of Pharamond was foureteene yeares, for he dyed (according to the learned Onuphrius, and other Authors before him) in the yeare of Grace, foure hundred and thirtie: then being Consuls of Rome, the Emperour Theodosius the second, for the thirteenth time, and Valentinian, third of the name, the third time.
His ordenary abiding was at the Castle of Disparch, on the frontiers of Thu^inge (where the Lands-Grauiat of Hessenis) as we learne by S. Gregorie of Tours, in the second Booke of the Historie of France, and the ninth Chapter. But not in Toxandria, that is to say, the confines of Liege and Brabant, as some haue imagined, who would change the Text of S. Gregorie of Tours: In termin Thoringorum, by setting downe, In termino Throngrorum. For Pharamond, and Clodion his sonne, neuer had their setled dwelling, in any other part, but in Thoringe or Thuringe. And the place of their buriall, on the top of the Mountaine called Franckenburge (as one would say, the French-mens Mount, neere to the Forrest Boucone,The Mount of the French. planted iustly betweene Franconia, Hessen and Thoringe) where the Kings of the French, Merobaudes, Ingomer, Marcomir, Pharamond and Clodion his son, and Successors had their buriall.
In the yeare of Grace foure hundred twenty two, during the Consulship of the Emperours Honorius the thirteenth time, and Theodosius the tenth time: Bonifacius, Count of Affrica (as much to say as Gouernour) a braue and valiant

Captaine, vpon some discontentment, reported by Saint Prosper of Aquitaine in his Chronicle, forsooke the part of the Emperor Honorius, and made himselfe Master of Affrica, to the great hurt of the Easterne Empire, continually troubled by the death of the Emperour Honorius, hapning the eighteenth of the Calends of September, foure hundred twenty three,Iohn the Notarie or Secretary attained to the Empire. in the Consulship of Marinianus, and Ascleopidorus. Immediately after whom, one named Ioannes, Notary and Secretary to said Honorius, possessed himselfe of the Empire, and held it vnto the yeere following; when hee was ouercome by Ardaburius, Lieutenant to the Emperour Theodosius, and Valentinian the third made Emperor of the East.
During these Commotions in Italie and Affrica, Pharamond resolued to get possession of one part of the Gaules, the very neerest to the hither side of the Rhine. And thereupon,Pharamond inuaded one part of the Gaules. in the said yeere foure hundred twenty and two, hee sent a puissant Armie to that part of the Rhine, forraging round about the Cities of Treuers, Maguntia, and possessing themselues of Tongres, with other neighbouring places, wherein he planted good Garrisons of Naturall French-men, to inhabit there, as they did; for the better fauouring of such as should passe after them, and for further pursuit of the Conquest.
It is also recorded in the Romane Histories, that in the yeere of Grace foure hundred twenty foure, then being Consuls the Emperors Theodosius of the East the eleuenth time, and Valentinian of the West: there was some agreement and Treatie of peace,A treaty of peace between the Emperour and Pharam^nd betweene the said Emperour Valentinian the third, and King Pharamond; to whom Valentinian voluntarily acquitted what he had conquered (by the sword) of the Romanes lands, sparing some Territories of his owne in Italie.
Pharamond had quiet enioying of the said conquered Lands, and gaue way to no one for them,Aetius a famous generall of the Roma^s. vntill the yeere of Grace, foure hundred twenty eight, in the Consulship of Taurus and Foelix, in which yeere Count Aetius (sent to defend the Gaules) surprized the French in a Towne called Helena, being at a wedding, sleying some part of them, forcing the rest to flight, and carried away the new married wife, with her furniture.
We haue formerly obserued, the like act done by Iulian the Apostata. Aetius afterward recouered from the French, what they possessed on the hither side of the Rhine, as we learne by S. Prosper of Aquitaine in his Chronicle, where hee saith. Pars Galliarum propinqua Rheno, quam Franci possidendam acceperant, Aetij Comitis armis recepta est. As much saith Cassiodorus, and the Bishop of Auuergne, Sidonius Apollinaris, in the Panegyricke spoken to Maiorian, noting this surprizall made by the Count Actius, and these are his owne words:
Pugnastis pariter Francis, qua Clodio patentesAt rebatum terras peruaserat, hic coeuntesClaudebant angusta vias, arcuque subactumVicum Helenam, flumenque simul subtramite longoArcus suppositis trabibus transmiserat agger.
And then followeth,
. . . . . . . Fors ripae colle propinquoCarbaricus resonabat Hymen, Scythicisque ChoreisNubebat Flauo similis nouanupta Marito.
Now, in the yeere of Grace, foure hundred twenty fiue (wee will no longer count the History of France by the Romane Consulls, which serue but as markes and date of the yeeres) the French began not to be pollicied by any new Lawes,No new Laws ordained among the French, but their own old. as if they had formerly liued altogether in Barbarisme: but reformed their owne ancient constitutions newly, and put them into better order, by command of their King Pharamond, a iust Prince and good Iusticer.
From all Antiquitie, the principall charges, as well of Peace as Warre, of Iustice and Armes, were held in France by Noblemen onely, without any calling of the Yeomen, or Common kinde of people: as retaining this ancient custome from the Gaules their Ancestors, among whom, Plebs pene seruorum habebatur loc^, quae per se

nihil audebat, and nulli adhibeatur confilio, as Caesar saith in the sixt booke of his Bello Gallice. And after King Clouis became a Christian, in the Parlements of France held two seuerall times in the yeere; the^^ entred none but the Prelates and Nobles, who likewise had their Prelatures. No speech was made of the third estate, till after the Nobilitie had preferred Ignorance with Vertue, and made a Trophie of it.
Wherefore, to collect the ancient Lawes of the French into one Code; Pharamond gaue order to foure principall Lords of Franconia, Vuisogast, Bodogast, Sologast,The ancient French Lawes collected into one Code. and Vuidogast, Superintendents of Iustice. These men met together three sundry daies of Parliament, in the Seigneuries whereof they bare the names, as Solohaim, Bodohaim, and Vuidohaini, and couched them downe in writing, in the auncient Germaine language.
Pharamond did nothing, but added the 6. Paragraphe, at the Title of Aleudes,Paragraphs of the Salique Law. or Franchise, which is the threescore and second of the Salique Law, according whereto, the successions of the Fiefs and Franc-Aleu d' or High Iurisdiction, held without homage, fealty, fine, or seruice, were ruled. And heere you may see the Paragraphs of this Title.
1. The Frenchman (Homo Francus) chancing to dye without an Heyre masle, the Father and Mother suruiuing, shall succeed in the Seigneury which he held.
2. If the Father and Mother are deceased before, and the defunct hath brothers and sisters left; the Brothers shall succeed in the said Seigneuries.
3. And where there are no Brethren at all, the Sisters by the Fathers-side shall inherit them.
4. And in defect of them, those by the Mothers-side.
5. And if there be neither Sisters by Father nor Mother, nor Brothers by Father nor Mother, at the day of the Franc-Mans death; the feodale succession shall belong to the very neerest kinsman of the Fathers side.
6. But concerning lands conquered by the French Saliens, and wonne with the Sword: Women cannot succed in the totall, nor in the meanest part or portion of them; but they shall intirely appertaine to the masles, and from Lance to Lance, without falling vnto the Distaffe.

De Terra vero Salica Nulla Portio Haereditatas Mulieri Veniat: Sed ad Virilem Sexum Tota Terrae Hareditas Perueniat.

Thus you see the fundamentall Law of the Kingdome of France, the most:The Salique Law admits no women to the Crowne. famous of Christendome; which admitteth none but Masles to the Crowne thereof; it excludeth women, and the Masles descending of them.
But for better vnderstanding the subiect of this Ordinance, and what is meant by the Salique Land: it behoueth to know, that Pharamond hauing begun the Conquest of the Gaules; to animate further the courage of his people, and for a firme continuance, would needs appoint, that those lands should be in Franc-Aleud,Lands of freehold, and without controule. or Free Iurisdiction (a tearme which is yet to this day in vse of that Antiquity, Franc orum Allodium) that is to say; they were held by the Cheualiers of that Conquest in full exemption, as relying vpon God onely, and their swords.
And forasmuch as among the Nations of the French Hanse, the French Saliens were the aptest to Armes, and most ready in seruices for their Kings: To honor them, Pharamond ordained, that all that which they had won in Gaule, should be named Salique Land. Imitating the Romanes in this point, according as in many other,Salique Land so named of the French Salians. among whom, the lands conquered from their enemies, were distributed, parted, and diuided to the Souldiours of the old Bands, and others, who were present at the Conquest of them, and so appointed as their recompences.
Tacitus in his Germania, calleth Decumates agros, Lands vsed by the Gaules beyond the Rhine, and the large Danubius. Those Lands of nouell Conquests, being Frontiers and Limitrophing on enemies, were consequently subiect to courses and robberies, and which smelt (according as we vse to say) first of all the Canons powder, and therefore were left to the naturall inhabitants of those places, by the War-like Conquerors, to till and husband them, at the charge of Champart or Field-rent. And in this regard they were called Agri Decumates, of the tithe which they payed as a dutie,Agri Decumates, turned Fields. to the Lord of the soyle, and of the Fee.
Such Lands neuer fell to the Distaffe, but alway from Lance to Lance, Nunquam a Lancea tranfibat ad fusum. Nay moreouer, if the male of the Lords of Conquest were vncapable to make profession of Armes; by right of reuersion, those Lands returned to the Prince, who cythet kept them, or else inuested some other in them, by right of kissing his hand onely, or as his Liege-man.
This is that which Lampridius obserueth in the life of his Emperor Alexander. Sola quae de hostibus capta sunt, Limitaneis Ducibus, atque militibus donauit, ita vt haered^^ essent, si haeredes militarent, nec vnquam ad priuatos peruenirent. Ad didit his animalia, and seruos vt possent colere quod acceperant.
And Precopius, in his first booke of the Vandales Warres, writeth that Gisericus being gone out of Spaine into Affrica, and hauing conquered a part thereof; diuided it betweene his two sonnes, Honoricus and Gensonius: Theodatus his yongest sonne being deceased without children. And as for the best Lands, Houses, and Cattell, hauing taken them from the vanquished Affricans; hee made partage and deuision of them to the Captaines that had borne him company ouer the Seas. So that those Lands (saith this Author) did afterward beare name of the partage, and of the lotte of the Vandales, (...):The Lot or portion of the Vandales. Sortes Vandalorum. And so the lands conquered from the Romane Empire by the Ostrogothes of Italie, and Wisigothes of Spaine, are tearmed in their Lawes, Sortes Gothicae, and by way of Brauado to the vanquished, Sortes Romana.
So by the example of Procopius, and other Historians of ancient knowledge, the Alemans which haue written of the French Monarchie; baptised with the name of Decimes Saliques,Decimes Saliques, the Cou^try so named of Conquest. all that extendure of the Countrey conquered by the Kings thereof, as well from the bankes of the Rhine, as on this side, and beyond the Alpes and Pyreneans.
Women then, by the ancient Law of the French Salians, as also the Ribarols, the very neerest to the Rhine; succeeded (by defect of Heyres masles) in the Fiefs or Fees seated as well in Franconia, wonne without striking one blow (as we haue already said before) as in Sicambria. But in those of Conquest, they had nothing to meddle with them:Women vncapable to inherit Lands of Conquest. and the reason is, because they are not capable of taking vp the Gadge of Batell, to beare a Banner, and to march vnder it, for the command of men; to whom they ought to be obedient, by order of nature, as also right Diuine and humane.
It hath beene practised at all times, among the Nations of greatest fame, that women neuer had any command. Eumonius, King of Sparta dying, left his kingdome to his Sonne Polydectes, who deceased also without heyres masle liuing, onely hee had two daughters, so that (by right) his brother Lycurgus came to the kingdome. He vnderstood within a while after, that the widdow to his brother was great with childe, and being deliuered of a sonne named Charilaus,The truly noble minde of Licurgus. which signifieth Ioy of the people; hee caused him to be acknowledged for King, giuing him the Gouernment, and the Regencie to his Mother, setting the Crowne vpon his head.
The Empire of the Romanes was neuer held, or commanded by Women. Aristotle, the Genius of Nature, in the second book of his Politiques, and ninth Chapter, telleth vs: That there were some People valiant and couragious, gouerned and commanded by women, Qui sexum in Imperijs minime discerunt (as Tacitus speaketh for them of Great Britaigne:) But he excepteth the Gaules, vnder whom hee comprehended the people of Alemane, generally acknowledged by the appellation of Celtes, (...). They reiected the command of women, (...)* A^ Celtas non imperari a Mulieribus, saith the same Aristotle elswhere: and here obserue out of his Politicks before alleadged. (...).
It cannot otherwise happen in such a politique gouernment, where wealth and all the blessings of Fortune cannot be in any request; and principally, if men be subiected to the Empire and command of Women, as there be too many worthy and warlike Nations that are, the Celtes excepted, etc.
The Sacred Lillies of France neuer stouped to the Distaffe. To that blessed Monarchie may be appropriated (by good and iust cause) the saying of the diuine Wisedome in Saint Mathew:Mat 6.26. Considerate Lilia agri quomodo crescunt; Non Laborant: (...)

Ne^t. The Lillies of the French field cannot be gathered by a Strangers hand, none but the Princes of the Bloud may haue any power ouer them.
The Salique Law, sole foundation of the Kingdome, excludeth daughters,The Salique Law sole foundation of the Kingdome. consequently strange Princes which marry with them: And so Lilia non laborant externorum Principum dominatione. They spinne not, they neuer fall to distaues; The daughters are onely to be seene, and the children descendants of them, can make no pretence by them.
And to shew those mens impertinencie, who haue written, that the Salique Law is meerely imaginarie, and not aboue one ancient Author hath made any note thereof;Obiection^ against the Salique Law. as being onely forged by the French, in fauour of King Philip de Valois, sixt of the name, after the death of King Philip le Long his Cosen, against King Edward of England, before which time, this pretended Salique Law was neuer in practise: It will be approued, that it hath beene many times in vse, vnder the Kings of the first line, as well for generall successe of the Crowne of France, as for that of the French Nobilitie in perticular. And therefore it may be very easily knowne,Proued vnder the Kings of the first ligne. that according to the Salique Law, daughters may and ought to succeed (for default of heyres male) in the Seigneuries and Knights fees comming by descent, as heyre-loomes, that is to say,Lands made hereditary from the Father and Grandfather. Purchases or Proprieties from the father and grandfather, and such is the generall custome of the Kingdome.
But according to the exception specified in the Salique Law, as being the fundamentall conseruatrix thereof; they cannot succeed in all, nor in part of the inheritances and demeanes of the sacred Crowne of France: then consequently, by extreame ignorance in the rights thereto belonging (as wee shall more at large shew in the fourth booke) the Counties of Flanders and Artois, and other of the same nature,Appertaining to the Crown of France. being great Fiefes or inheritances of France; ought not to passe, or be from the Lance to the Distaffe, and so (to no purpose) the generall custome of Fiefes be preferred to particulars, which is the Law Salique, and so be trampled on, to the detriment of the Kingdome.
S. Gregory of Tours sheweth vs, that the daughters of Kings of the first line, were excluded from their succession, although deceasing without heyres masles, and their Paternall kindred preferred before them.
The King of Paris Childebert, first of the name, (sonne to the great King Clouis,Childebert King of Paris. who caused the Church of Paris to be builded) had two daughters, Chrodesinda and Chrosberga, by his wife Vulthrogotha; and dying without heyres masle, the said daughters succeeded not in the Kingdom of Paris, but their Vnkle by the Fathers side, King Clotharius, first of the name.
Charibert,Charibert King of Paris. otherwise called Aribert (of whom the Bishop of Poictiers had sung high praises, while he was of great expectation and hope) King of Paris, sonne to the said Clotharius the first; deceasing without heyres masles, left three daughters: Nige^rida, married to the King of Denmarke, Berthefleda and Chradielda. The married, and the two other daughters inherited not any part or portion of the heiredome of their Father; which was partaged or diuided by their paternall Vnkles, Sigibert King of Austrasia, and Chilpericke King of Soissons.
Guntran King of Bourgongne, another sonne to the said Clotharius the first,Guntran King of Bourgo^gne had but one only daughrer, called Clotielda, whom he married richly, as well in goods as ^euenues of his owne purchasing: but yet she had nothing of his Kingdome, and her ^ather in his life time, adopted for his sonne and successor in his kingdome of Orleans, his paternall Nephew Childebert, King of Austrasia. He had not any apparance at all, why he should depriue his onely daughter of his Kingdome, if the Law thereof had not beene his hinderance.
Agathias a Greeke author, who liued in the time of the first Kings forenamed, wri^eth in his first bookes of the Gothes warres; that Thibauld the onely sonne to Theo^ebert King of Austrasia, (his seate Royall was at Mentz) succeeded in the said Kingdome, albeit he was very yong in yeeres, and vnder the charge of a Schoole-master. And that the custome of the French was such, as the Kingdome was alwaies held by ^he masles, succeeding one after another, as well in the direct line as collaterall, for the ^tter exclusion of women.
Succession in the second line of Kings, from Father to Son.Vnder the second line, the Kings succeeded from father to Son, without any changing: but onely vnder Charles the simple, for the yonger gouernment of whom, Eudes of Anioa, his Tutor and Cousin by the Fathers side, prime Prince of the bloud of France, was exalted and sacred King, with consent of the generall Estates of the kingdome. Against this Sac^ing, Baldwin the yonger, Count of Flanders opposed himself, pretending that the Crowne appertained to him, in right of his mother Madam Iudith of France, Aunt to the said Charles the Simple. By finall sentence of the said Estates, Bauldwin was debouted in his opposition,Bauldwin Count of Flanders defeated in his purpose. and payed with such money; That according to the Salique Lawe (fundamentall of the Kingdome) the Crowne of France neuer tooke knowledge of women, nor the descendants of them capable to weare it. So, according to the resolution of the States, Eudes was Sacred and Crowned at Sens, by Gaultier, Archbishop of the place.

The Lillies of the sacred Field of France, cannot be gathered by a Strangers hand.

Succession in the third ligne beginning with Hugh Capet.Hugh Capet, first King of the third Ligne reigning happily euen to this present: by another decree of the generall Estates of France, assembled at Noyon, was preferred before Charles, Duke of Lorraine, Sonne and Brother to the Kings of France. Because he the said Charles was a stranger to France, and became a coniured enemy to the Kingdome, the rest and quiet whereof hee had many times troubled, taking part with the King of Alemaigne, capitall enemy to the French, and so the said Charles was published vncapable of entertaining the Crowne. On the contrary side, Hugh Capet and his Predecessours, Princes of the blood of France, issued of the same stocke as the Emperour Charlemaigne was, he being in all occurrences, exposed to the perils and hazards of war, for maintaining the Order of the Lillie.
The continuance of the Salique law in the third ligne of Kings.Vnder the third ligne, the Salique Law was carefully kept. King Lewis Hutin, tenth of the name, King of France and of Nauarre, first of the name, left but one daughter, Madam Ioane of France, in her owne right Queene of Nauarre, and Countesse D'E^reux, in regard of her husband. The Duke of Bourgogne his Vnckle, contested against Philip le Long, that the Crowne of France belonged to the said Ioane, and not vnto le Long. At whose Sacring and Coronation, the said Duke of Bourgongne was an opposite, and Madame Agnes of France, daughter to the King S. Lewis, wife to Robert second Duke of Bourgongne, Grand-parents of the said Ioane. By sentence of the Generall Estates, pronounced by Messire Pierre d' Arablay, Cardinall and Chancellor of France, the said Dukes of Bourgongne, and Madame Agnes were frustrated in their opposition, and intercepted by their appeale, from the sacring of the said le Long, conformably to the Law of the Kingdome.
Successor Imperij Francorum Masculus es^o.
The Text of the law for succession.A Verse sometime painted in Letters of Gold, at the feete of the Image of King Phillip de Valois, in the Pallace at Paris.
Charles le Bel, Brother and succor to the said le Long, being dead, left but one daughter, borne after her Fathers death, Madam Blanch, of France. After the death of the said Charles, his Cousine Philip de Valois came to the Crowne of France, whereto the Princes of the Blood are called, be they an hundred degrees off. Against him rose Edward King of England, third of the name, who pretended right to the Crowne of France, and Regencie of the Kingdome, while Queene Ioane, Widow to the said Charles le Bel, went great with childe, and then his preferrence to the Crowne, if she should be deliuered of a daughter: as it happened two moneths after, by the Posthumus Blanche.Edward King of England the 3. claimed the Crowne of France. For the English King alleadged, that he was Nephew to the three last Kings, dying without heires masle, sonne to Madam Isabell of France, sister to the said Kings, and thereby to be preferred before Phillip de Valois, who was but a Co^sine to the deceassed, and further off in degree, then he was.
Notwithstanding all whatsoeuer his Ambassodours could alleadge and say; the Estates Generall of France (iudging according to the Salique Law) adiudged the Crown to Phillip de Valois, sixt and last of the name, who with his wife Iane, daughter to Robert, second of the name, Duke of Bourgongne, was Sacred and Crowned at Rheims, by William de Trie, Archbishop there, in the yeare of Grace 1328. on Trinitie Sunday. Their entrance into Paris was more magnificent, then any that formerly

had beene seene: So saith Froissard, where the curious Reader may more at large ^e acquainted with the whole Order and Ceremonies.
And thus was this cause adiudged, according to the Salique Law, and custome of the ^ingdome, as it is written by the Emperour Charles, fourth of the name, and in the hitory of his life. Eodem Anno (the first day of February 1327. the yeeres then began ^t the first day of Aprill, with this distinction, before or after Easter.) Obijt Carolus ^rancorum Rex, relicta vxore praegnante, quae filiam peperit. Et cum de consuetudine Reg^i Filiae non succedant, prouectus est Philippus Filius Socere mei in Regem Franciae, quia ^^pinquior haeres erat in linea masculina. But there is a fault in these words, Filius So^ri mei, because of all the daughters to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois Father to the said Philip de Valois King) which were nine in number, there was not ^ny one of them married to the said Charles of Bohemia, Emperor. Contrariwise, the ^ldest sonne to the said Philip de Valois, named Iohn King of France, in the life time of ^is Father, had espoused Bonna of Bohemia, daughter to the said Charles fourth Empe^our. So that the said King Philip de Valois was brother in Law, according to the or^inary form of speaking, and King Iohn his sonne, sonne in Law to the said Emperor;A mistake in the Emperor^ writing corrected. therefore in stead of Filius Soceri mei, we should read Pater Generi mei.
Otho Bishop of Frisinghen, issued from the illustrious house of the first Marquesses ^f Austria writeth: that the French did alwaies liue according to the Salique Lawe, ^eing the foundation of their Monarchie.
Albert of Strasbourg, saith in his Chronicle, Francia a nulio habetur in feudum, and ^ullus ei per Lineam Foemineam succedit. Thus you see examples of three Royall lines, ^nd testimonies of Authors liuing in the third: now see the second.
The donation made to the Church of Basile by the Emperor Charlemaigne. Insu^er in Honica duos mansos, and dimidium praeter Salicam Terram de nostra propria manu (...) suam manum, vt iustum est, percepit. Hee gaue the choyce and option to the Lom^ards, to be gouerned by their owne Lawes, or according to the Salique.
The Emperor Lewis the Meeke, or Debonnaire, reduced the Sol of French money, ^o twelue Denieres, because vntill his reigne it consisted of forty Deniers, whereof we ^aue already spoken in the third booke of the Emperors Capitularies at the 30. Title. ^mnia debita, quae ad partem Regis solui debent, Solidis duodecim denariorum soluantur, ^xcepta Freda, quae in Lege Salica conscripta est, illa eodem solido, quo ceterae compositiones ^lui debent, componatur.
In the fourth booke of the Capitularies ordained by the Emperours, Lewis the De^onnaire, and his Sonne Lotharius, at the Title De solutione and compositione, mention is made of the Salique Law. Vt omnes solutio, atque compositio, quae in Lege Salica conti^eturinter Francos, per duodecim denariorum solidus componatur, excepto vbi contentio ^tra Saxones and Frisiones exorta fuerit, ibi volumus, vt quadraginta denariorum quan^itatem solidus habeat, quem vel Saxo, vel Frisio ad partem Salici Franci cum eo ligantis ^luere debet.
Hinchmarus, Archbishop of Rheims, who liued in the times of these Kings and ^mperors, Lewis the Debonnaire, Charls the Bauld, and Lewis the Stammerer, in the book which he wrote concerning the life of S. Rhemigius, speaketh thus: In testamento a Be^to Rhemigio condito Lector attendat, quia solidorum quantitas numero quadraginta de^ariorum computatur, sicut tunc solidi habebantur, and in Francorum Lege Salica contina^ur. Et generaliter insolutione vsque ad tempora Caroli perdurauit, velut in eius capitulis ^ontinetur. Behold most certaine and assured testimonies of the Salique Law, vnder Kings of the second Ligne: now let vs mount and ascend vp to the first.
Clouis the first Christian King, hauing driuen on his Conquests of the Gaules, so ^arre as the Pyrenean Mountains on the one side, and iustly to the Rhine on the other;The Salique Law traduced out of the high Germane language into Latine. ^aused the ancient Salique Law, to be translated out of high Dutch, into the Latine ^ongue, to the end that it be vnderstood as well of the Romanes and other Nations, (...) of the French. And that the said Law might be baptized from the name of Barba^ous people, such as were the Bourgongnons, Alans, Sueues, Vuisigothes and Vandals ^nhabiting the Gaules. Hauing thus conuerted the Salique Law inro Latine, Clouis ^dded thereto many Titles; for order to the said Nations, being obedient to him, and ^uing after the Salique Law.
King Clouis added (...) titles to the Salique Law.At the 49. Title, that is to say, of things stollen; known and conueyed to a third heade he prescribed a practick rule, how a man should gouerne himselfe in such a businesse.
Si quis qui Lege Salica viuit, seruum aut ancillam, cabellum, vel bouem, sen iumentum, seu quamlibet rem suam sub alterius potestate agnouerit mittat eam in tertiam manu^, and ille apud quem agnoscitur debet adrahamire (to make oath, and pledge faith, whether he had the thing ill taken, by exchange, or buying) and si intra Ligerim; aut Carbonari^ syluam (that is,Example by this of his add^tion. (...) th^ft and robbery. the Country of Flanders, and places round neighbouring) amb^ m^net, and qui agnoscit, et apud quem agnosciter, in Noctes quadraginta Placitum faciant, (all delayes or prolongings of Iustice, as well in Gaule as Germanie, are granted and counted by nights, and not by daies) and in ipso placito quanticumque fuerint, qui rem itertiatam (put into a third hand those moueables, as to him tearmed a Guardian, and to sequester for the fruits of contentious benefices) vendiderint, aut cambiauerint (by exchange) aut fortasse in solutionem dederint, omnes intra placitum istum commoneantur (assigned and summoned) vt vnusquisque cum negotiatoribus suis alter alterum admoneat. Si quis vero commonitus fuerit, and aliqua Sunnis (exoine) eum non detinuerint, and ad placitum venire distulerit, tunc ille qui cum eo negotiauit habeat tres testes, quod enuntiasset vt ad placitum venire debuisset, and alios tres testes similiter habeat, quod cum eo publice negotiasset: hoc si ficere exiu^t se de Latrocinio; ille autem qui admonitus non venerit, s^per quem tes^es iurauerint, erit Latro illius qui res suas agnoscit, and ei secundum Legem ipsas componat, and insuper pretium reddat qui cumeo negotiauit. Ita omnia vbi suus H^mallus (the place and dwelling of Iustice) super quem res primitus agnita fuerit, aut interita, fieri debent. Quod si trans Ligerim, aut Carbonariam manet ille apud quem res agnoscitur in Noctibus LXXX Lex ista custodiatur. There needeth a delay or respit of three moneths, for such as dwell beyond the Loire, or the Forrest Charbonniere.
For Homicids and Men-killers.At the Title of Homicides of Noblemen, which is the 43. Si quis ingenuus Fr^^cum, aut hominem Barbarum occiderit qui Lege Salica viuit, etc.
For Sureties called b^ their Creditors.At the Title of Sureties (which is that of fooles) the 52. the Creditor causing the caution and Surety to be called, whom the Law tearmeth Gasachionem, the demand is thus: Rogo te, Iudex, vt hominem illum Gasachionem meum qui mihi fidem fecit de debit^ tali denominato secundu^ Legem Salicam mihi inde eum adstringas: wherto the Iudge shal^ answer: Ego Gasachiu^ tuu^ illum in hoc mallo, secundu^ qd. Lex Salica habet tibi adstring^.
For borrowers and to restorersAt the 45. title, which is of things borrowed, and not rendred backe againe: the stile for calling the debtour to Iustice is thus: Quia res meas noluisti reddere quas tibi praestiti, in hoc eas tene Nocte Proxima (the assignation on the morrow) secundum quod Lex Salica continet, etc. For it is a matter to be obserued, that the stile of actions of Seizure, Acquitting, Renunciation, Acceptation; Possession, Nouell disseisin, and whatsoeuer is to bee done in I^stice, was vnderstandingly expressed by the Salique Law, with reasonable delayes or prolongings. Each Style or tearme hauing the proper and significant Epithite; which Clouis, Charlemaigne, Lewis the Debonnaire, and Charles the Bauld, and other Kings haue in their Capitularies, left in the high Dutcher Germaine tongue, as elsewhere wee haue said, without permitting any paraphrase by Latine circumlocution.Significant Epithite^ in the Sal^^ue Law. There are an infinitie of proofes in words naturally French, (beside them rehearsed in the former alleadged passages) as Vueregildum, Fine or Amercement; Alode, Franc-Aleud, Eriliz or Herischlith, Host abandonne, and an hundred more beside. Marculphus in the reigne of Dagobert (Restorer and Founder of S. Denys in France) had bin Audiencer in the Chancery of France very long time. After the death of the said Dagobert, Clouis second of the name his sonne, succeeded him, who obtained (by his earnest entreaty, with the pursuit and solicitings of the said Marc^phus) of S. Landry, then Bishop of Paris, an exemption of the said Abbey of S. Denys, for him and his successors Bishops of Paris, which exemption continueth to this very day. Marculphus in his aged daies, became a Religious man in the same Monastery, and reduced into writing, the Stile and manner of iudiciall proceedings (which he dedicated to the said Bishop of Paris S. Landry) concerning the Chancery of France, which was vsed in his time) according to the Salique Law.(...) of P^. King Dagobert, first of that name^, died in the yeere of Grace 545, the fift of Ianuary; and Clouis the second his son 6^2* So that (answerable to S. Gregory of Tours) this Marculphus is one of their most ancient Authors. This is the same man.
At the manner of weddings, N. filius N. puellulam ingeniam, nomine N. illius filiam

per Solidum, and Denarium, Secundum Legem Salicam in portione paterna cum sratrib. tuis filijs meis minime potes accedere There may bee alleadged numberlesse passages, drawne forth of the ancient Formularies, as also the Capitularies of Charlemaigne, and his Successors the Kings of France; which we let slip in silence, to returne to our discourse of King Pharamond. And tell you, that after King Clouis had embraced Christianity, and conquered France, so farre as to the Pyrenean Mountaines:The Salique Law ruled the French, Romans, and other Strangers in Gaule. hee caused to be couched in Latine the said Salique Law, adding therunto, what seemed best to rule as well the French as the Romanes, and other strangers dwelling in Gaule. So that in his time the said Salique Law comprehended from the first title, which is of Adiournements, to the account of threescore and eighteene: his sonne Childebert the first King of Paris, added titles after threescore and eighteene, so farre as to fourescore and foure. Clotharius King of Soissons, in imitation of Childebert his brother, added some titles; where ended the Salique Law, deuided into three bookes, according to the three Kings, Clouis, Childebert, and Clotharius. Charlemaigne in like manner added titles to them: De homicidijs Clericorum: De causis admonendis, etc. In the frontispeece whereof is this Prologue: Haec sunt capitula quae gloriosissimus Carolus in Lege Salica, mittere praecepit. Now we come againe to Pharamond.
To whom are giuen diuers Armes. Some, Couppe de Gueulles a l' Aigle d'Or,Diuersitie of Armes, as diuersly giuen to King Pharamond. and d'Azur a Lyon rampant d'Or, deschirant de ses Armes de derriere la teste de ceste Aigle. Which is a deuise and no Armes, to shew that the French began to vnplume the poore Romane Eagle, by the conquest of the Gaules.
Others affirme, that Il portoit des Gueulles a trois Corones, ou Diademes d'Or. Or according to Paulus Aemilius, D'Argent a trois Diademes, and Corones de Gueulles. As willing thereby to signifie, that hee had three sundry Kingdomes and Prouinces: as namely, Franconia, Westphalia, and Holland on this side of the Rhine.
Others say, D'Azure a la Pauillee, on Lys Iaune de Maraiz: To note the ancient dwelling of the olde French, in the Fennes and Marishes of Westphalia,The Rhine had many horned nookes or corner^. and among the horned nookes of Rhine. Armes properly emblazoned, and answerable to the nature of the water, which remaining still and quiet, receiueth so but one colour Celestiall, and like the Marish Lilly which is yellow, and not white. And in all these Armes, Deuices, or Blazons; euery man may abound in his owne sense, and discourse after his manner; for in matters of such ancient note, there cannot be assured any certaintie, speaking like to the Shepheard in Virgill.
Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.
But in mine owne iudgement, I hold that opinion least warrantable, of the Wallons and other Strangers, who emblazon these ancient Armes of Pharamond, D'Or ou de ^aune a trois Crapaux de Sable, ou de Synople. And thence would deriue their flouting nick-name of French Toades, as figuring thereby the first dwelling of the ancient French, in the Fennes and Marishes so often before named.French Toads an abusiue nick-name giuen to the French by the Wallons. For by an innumerable company of Authors of note, which I haue read in my lifetime; I could neuer finde one onely man to instruct me, that Pharamond should beare such a wicked beast in his Arms. And euen to this instant day, in most part of the Prouinces of France, it serues ^or a detestable iniury, fit to be inflicted on none, but a man full of all wickednes and in^amie. In Gascoigne, Languedock, Guienne, and elswhere, they tearme it Grapault.
I haue seene neere to Bourdeaux, in the Abbey of S. Sorin, a remarkeable Tombe of Stone exalted vpon foure small Pillers aboue the ground. And yet neuerthelesse,Things verified by the Authors owne view. ^t is full of water at the changes of the Moones, and the pretended Horne or Bugle of ^owland, which he wore and died withall at Ronceuaux, like to the figure of a Toade. Two other also of the same cunning performance, in the Priory of S. Seuerine, on the ^ill of Gascoigne. And on one of the gates of the towne of Bayonne, towards S. Iohn ^e Luz, there is an Escutcheon charged with three things like Toads; which I iustifie ^elongs to the Lord of Hilliere, Gouernour of one of those two Castles, being the Key of France: and neuer were they intended for Toads, but only floure de Luces, wickedly made by the Painter and Caruer. For without wandring any further then to Poissy, in one of the Parish Churches of our Lady, you may behold at the 4 corners, the likenes of Toads; and yet notwithstanding they are floure de Luces, so ill done, as nothing can be worse, and sauor of their pure Antiquity: for my self, I think it a matter hard to be wel

made,A difficult thing to form truely a floure de Luce, but by a French man. and represent a Floure de Luce minikinly trussed, but by an excellent Pai^^er, a Frenchman borne, and ingenuous spirit. For a Germane, an Englishman, Spaniard and Italian, can neuer winne honor in proportioning it truly. The Germanes make it double, that is to say, a double floure in point and chiefe. Italians make it with shoo^ and Si^ns, after a new fashion. In briefe, each stranger fashioneth it according to his forme, and so disguiseth it, that if this diuine flowre were not knowne in all parts and angles of this h^bitable world, there would be need of Painters and Sculptures to imitate the ancient Authors in the noble Science of painting: who by the saying of Pliny in the thirty fiue booke of his naturall history, and the second chapter, hauing begun to draw by the lines, traced on such shadowes as the Sunne yeelded; and not vnderstanding any other cunning, were enforced (that their workmanship might be known) to write vnderneath; this is a man, this is a horse, and this is an Oxe.


CHAP, VII. Of King Clodion, Sirnamed with the long Haire
AFter Pharamond, succeeded his onely sonne Clodion, Cloion, or Clogion (for all these three names are attributed to him) sir-named the Hairy; because, as some say, he brought vp an ancient ordinance of wearing long haire, to distinguish the French, as well from the Romanes,(...) people by (...). as other strange Nations, which as then ranne rauaging through the Prouinces of the Romane Empire. Others are of opinion, that hee made restriction of ^his long haire, tressed and cordonned after the Anticke practise of all times by the Francs-Sicambrians; onely to Princes of the bloud Royall, issued from his Grandfather Marcomir, and Ingomer his brother, to the end that they might appeare ^boue the French.
There are in the History of Saint Gregory of Tours a great number of examples, how the Princes of the bloud might be knowne, by their haire tressed, and bound after a d^fferent f^shion. But in generall, all the French had a custome to weare long locks of haire; and therefore in the Authors of the Romane history, they are indifferently called Crinigeros; and in their owne Lawes, Crinitos and Crinosos. In the ordinance of King Ch^ldebert, made at the Pallace of Attigny in Champaigne, dated the Calends of M^y, touching incestuous alliances and marriages; it is said. Cognouit haec vna cum Leudis nostris, vt nullus De Crinosis incestum vsum sibi societ coniugio, hoc est, ne fratris sui vxorem; n^c vxoris suae sororem; n^c vxorem patris sui; aut parentis ^^sangume^ Si quis vxorem patris acceperit, mortem incurrat. De praeteritis vero incesti contunctionibus, per praedictionem Episcoporum i^ssimus emendari. Qui vero Episcopos^^ nol^erit audire, and excommunicatus fuerit, perennem condemnationem apud Deum sus^^neat, and de Palatio nostro sit omnino extraneus, and omnes facultates suae legitimis per^ntant.
The Gaules ^ed to weare l^ng haire.It is a case beyond contradiction, that the Gaules were wont to weare long haire, tressed and bound vp with Ribands of gold; and that their Colonies, as well of Allemaigne as of Greece and Italie, obserued carefully that ancient custome, remarked by Homer in the tenth booke of his Illiades: and by Pliny in his three and thirtieth booke and first chapter. Est quidem apud eundem Homerum Virorum crinibus auram implex^^. And Lucran writeth in his Carracon, that among the Egyptians, the sonnes of Noble men wore their haire tressed and bound vp behinde, with ribands and tissues of gol^ and siluer, and sometimes of silke. But the Gaules by being subiugated to the Romanes, forsooke this ancient custom, eretained by the Francs-Sicambrians constantly.
It was in like vse with the Kings of the first line, and some of the second, who bou^d with ribands of gold and silke,(...) as well their head-haire, as their beards, which the Kings of the first, second, and third line wore long, vntill King Lewis the yong, seuenth of the name, who caused his haire to be cut, in regard of a certaine admonition giuen him by Petrus Lombardus, Bishop of Paris, whose Sepulture is to be seene in the

Church of S. Marcellus at Paris. Long haire, dangling downe so farre as the shoulders, continued vntill the time of King Francis the first, who hauing beene hurt with a fire-brand which fell vpon his head, caused his haire to be shorne,King Francis the first, his head broken by a fire-bra^d that hee might the sooner bee cured; but suffered his beard to grow on still, which was cut quite away from Lewis the seuenths time. And according to the example of King Francis, they did then weare their head-haire cut short, and their beards long.
For commonly the Subiest doth conformeHis fashions, as he sees his Princes worne.
But returne wee to Clodian.
He began to reigne in the yeere of Grace, foure hundred and thirty, and his reigne continued eighteene yeeres, as Sigibertus saith: Clodius filius Pharamond Regis Rex Crinitus Regnat super Francos Annis decem and octo.
In the second yeere of his reigne, hee conquered Thoringe, the yeere foure hundred thirty and one, according to the same Sigibert, in these tearmes: Clodius Thoringiam inuadit, and in Dispargo Castello Thoringorum aliquandiu habitauit, where he died. His Father Pharamond began the Conquest in his life time, and had established his dwelling in the Castle of Dispargo, as we haue formerly said.
In the yere 445. the same Author affirmeth (concerning King Clodion) that he sent spies to discouer the Romans condition in the Towne of Cambray. Immediately following after them, he crossed the great Riuer of Rhine, chased the Romanes from the frontires thereof, and ouerthrew them in a ranged Battell, to their great discomfiture; he besieged and tooke Cambray by strength, and afterward Tournay, crossing all the Forrest Charboniere, so farre as into Artois, and the Riuer of Somme. Clodius Rex Francorum missis Explora^orible Dispargo Castello vsque ad vrbem Cameracum transijt Rhenum, and potrito multo Romanorum populo citra Rhenum vsque Ligerim Fluuium habitantium, Carbonariam Syluam ingressus vrbem Tornacum obtinuit, and inde vsque ad vr^bem Cameracum properauit, vbi pauco tempore residens, Romanos si quos ibi inuenit, pere^it; and exinde ad Somenam Fluuium perueniens, omnia occupauit.
The Romanes held then all that extendure of the Countrey,What a spacious compasse of the Country the Roma^s held. which is from the frontiers of Rhine so farre as to the Riuer of Loire. They assembled all their Armie into a maine great body, couering this spaciousnesse of ground, to hinder the passage of Clodion. But they were driuen to flight, with a great slaughter of them, which gaue him the meanes to possesse the Countries of the Charboniere Forrest, which comprehended then Tournay, Valentiennes, Monts and Cambray, pursuing still his purposed point, through the spacious fields of Artois; as Sidonius Apollinaris reporteth in the passage of the precedent Chapter.

-- Quo Cloio patentes
Attrebatum terras peruaserat.

And went so farre as to the Riuer of Somme, which Sigebert calleth Somenam, by ^mituting the Bishop of Poictiers: Fortunatus in the fourth Poem of his seuenth book, speaking of the Riuers of France;
Isara, Sara, Chares, Scaldis, Saba, Somena, Sura:
She is also called Sum^na and Somena, taking her sourse neere to the Fountaines of L'Escauld, enlarging her selfe and swelling at Vermandois, from whence it maketh passage to S. Quintines, to Peronne, Amiens, Abbe-ville and S. Vallery, beneath which Somme runneth, and falleth impetuously into the lap of the Ocean Sea. Such then were the bounds of Clodions Conquests, according to the testimony of S. Gregorie of Tours, in his second booke and ninth chapter of the history of France; where he further informeth vs, that when Clodion attempted his Conquests, the Romanes enioyed from the forrest Charboniere, iust to the riuer of Loire; beyond which, the Gothes (you must vnderstand the Vuisigothes) held Gaule so farre as to the Pyrenean mountains, and that those people were tainted with the false doctrin of wicked Arrius, when the Bourgongnors (sectators of the same heresie) domineered beyond the Riuer of Rh^sne, neere to the City of Lyons. The same Historian Sigebert and others do not set downe, that Clodion aduanced his Conquest any further then vnto the Riuer of Somme, although Functius and some other French Annalists haue written, that ^ee made himselfe master of the City of Maguntla, and that of Amiens, a City ^eretofore built on the Riuer of Somme, by the Romane Emperours Antoninus

the debonnaire, and his Sonne Aurelius, and by them called Somona brina, in reg^^ of the said Riuer, an appellation which was said to be changed into that of Am^^^^, Ambianus, ab Ambitu fluminum. But beit howsoeuer, most certaine it is, that the said Clodion conquered the Cambreses,The honorable conquests of King Clo^ion, and how farre they extended. Tourneses, A^tois, Henaulte, and the Citie of Cologne, surnamed by the Romaines Agripina. Whereof his Sonnes, and their descendants had the possession, and entitled themselues Kings, vnto the reigne of Clouis, the first Christian King, who exterminated them, re-uniting to the Crowne of France, the Lands which he possessed, as is recorded by S. Gregory of Tours, in the end of his second Booke of the Historie of France.
Clodion hauing reigned twenty yeares, or eighteene, according to some writers; dyed in the Castle of Disparch in Thuringe, and was carried to Franquemburge in Franconia, and laid in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors. He left three masle children, Ragnachaire,The death of Clodion, and election of Meroueus. Regnauld, and Adalberon. But being ouer yong in yeares, to conserue the conquest of their Father, and maintaine by power of Armes that yong rising Monarchie: the French elected for their King, the first Prince of the blood, called Meroueus, neere kinseman to the deceased King Clodion; because he was the sonne of Richomer, son of Ingomer, brother to Marcomir, father of Pharamond, and so by consequent, Cousine Germaine to Clodion, of whose Sonnes hee was Tutour.
Saint Gregorie of Tours affirmeth, in his second Booke and ninth Chapter; that the said Meroueus was issued of the Blood Royall, and a very neere kinseman to the said King Clodion.
Sigibert (to small purpose in mine opinion) maketh him his sonne, saying, that in the yeare foure hundred fortie eight, this Meroueus, Filius Clodij super Fran^^ regnat annis decem, a quo nimis vtili Rege Franci Merouingi cognominati sunt. And in truth, the Kings which held the Kingdome vnto Pepin le Bref (Authour of the Kings of the second Ligne, called the Carlouingians) descended from Father and Sonne to the said Meroueus: And therefore they called the ligne of their Kings, after this Meroueus, the Merouingians.


CHAP. VIII. Of King Meroueus.
THE Bishop of Auuergne, Sidonius Apolinaris, in the Panegyricke spoken to the Emperour Maiorian, obseruing the miserable condition of the Gaules, vpon the declining of the Romaine Empire, when so many Tyrants possess^^ themselues of their Gouernements, by the titles of Emperours (as we haue before declared and that in such confusion, they knew not who was their certaine Lord maket^ the poore Romaine Eagle to speake in this manner.

--mea gallia rerum
Ignoratur adhuc Dominus, ignoraque seruit.

And shewing by what meanes the French possessed themselues thereof begi^ning their Conquest in the Panegyricke of the Emperour Auitus his Father in law he saith.
Francus Germanum primum, Belgamque secundum Sternebat.
Enstructing vs, that they began it by the frontiers of the Rhine, and continued it in the possession of Belgicke Gaule, which Caesar alloweth for the third part of the rich and abounding Gaules: And that the Romans after the Conquest of the^ (by the same Caesar) parted and deuided it into many Gouernments, narrow (...) and deuisions.
For, concerning Belgicke Gaule, they deuided in twaine,The deuision of Belgicke Gaule. the first and second In Belgicam primam, and Belgicam secundam.
The first had within her enclosures, Mediomatrices, Leucos, and Viri Dunenses,The containdure of the first. and huius erat caput and Metropolis Treueris: then of Mentz, Toul and Verdum, of which the Towne and Citie of Treuers was the Metropolitane.
The second had vnder her iurisdiction, Suessiones, Catalaunos, Camaracos, Neruiot,Iurisdictions of the second. Morinos, Attrebates, Ambianos, Bellouacos, and Nouiomagenses, quorum erat Metropolis Durocortorum Remorum; Those of Soissons, Ch^alons, Tournay, Terouence, Arras, Amiens, Beauuais, and Noyon; of which people, the strong Citie of Rheims was the Capitall.
The same Belgicke Gaule was moreouer deuided by the same Romaines, into the first and second Germanies.
The first, which they called the higher, comprehended Argentoratum,High Germanie. Maguntiacum, Nemetes, Vangiones, ceterasque Rheno sinitimas Regiones: Strasbourg, Magunce, Spire, Wormes, and other Townes planted on the banckes of Rhine.
The second and lower Germanie, had within her iurisdiction, Tongros, Neruios,The containdure of the lower Germanie, and the deuisions therof. Morinos, Maritimosque Morinorum Populos, Quorum Metropolis erat Agripina Colonia. Those of Tongres, who were no longer of Tournay of Terouenne (raced during the warres of King Fraunces the first, and the Emperour Charles the fift) and the people dwelling on the shoares of the Ocean Sea, the Capitall Towne of this second Germanie, being the Citie of Cologne of the Rhine. This may suffice to vnderstand the passage of the Bishop of Auuergne, formerly reported, concerning the Conquest made by the French: But returne we now backe to Meroueus.
The valiancie of this Prince, and the robberies of the Hunnes; compelled the Emperours of the East to accord with him, concerning the Prouinces conquered by the deceased King Clodion, with charge of assistance. For in the time of these proceedings, and the yeare of Grace foure hundred fiftie and one, Attila,The proceedings of cruell A^tila with his armed forces. King of the Hunnes, assisted with the Kings of the Ostrogothes, Valamer de Ardaricke, of the Gepides, and other Nations of the North, departed from Hungaria with a mightie Armie, which consisted of seauen or fiue hundred thousand men, wherewith he ^auaged Treuers and Strasbourg. And on Easter eauen, being entred stoutly into the Citie of Mentz: after he had pilled and ransacked it, he consumed it into ashes, putting to the edge of the Sword the Inhabitants thereof; massacring inhumainely the Priests at the Altar. From Mentz, like to an impetuous Torrent, cruell Attila went and sacked the Citie of Rhemes, passing wholly ouerthwart from thence to ^he towne of Troyes, without doing any harme thereto; but admiring the sanctitie of life led by S. Lupus, Bishop thereof, and forraging the rest of Belgicke Gaule;Paris preserued from the tyrants cruelty miraculously. ^ame to Paris, miraculously preserued by the deuout prayers of the holy Virgin S. Geneuiesue, Patronesse of the Parisians.
From thence he went tempestuously on to Orleans, which he besiedged, and pressed so hardly, that it was euen at the next doore to destruction; but for the religious intercessions of S. Aignanus the Bishop, according as other Cities and Townes were, which he had desolated. But in a sudden moment of time, comfort appea^ed, brought by A^tius the Patritiah, accompanied with Theudo, King of the ^othes, and his Sonne Thorismond, who caused Attila to discampe, pursuing him to the fields of Mauriac, from whence (on either side) they departed, to prepare ^or fight, as it is declared by S. Gregory of Tours, ^n the second Booke of his History of France, and the seauenth Chapter.
Where further he giueth vs to vnderstand, that Aeteus, succoured with the French whom first of all he nameth) and the Gothes, ^ought with Attila; who seeing his Armie in confusion, in a good houre shifted for his owne safetie: there perishing ^n the day of Battaile (as well on the one side, as other) an hundred and fourescore ^housand men. Among whom was the King of the Vuisigothes, called by Sigibert, (...) hierry.
Aetius well satisfied with winning the victory, left Attila to his flight, and to vn^ester himselfe of the French, and the Gothes; gaue them apprehension of their peoples reuolt, saying to Thorismond, That it behoued him to make speedily for

his owne Countrey, as fearing least his yonger brother, hearing the tidings of his Fathers death; should possesse himselfe of the Kingdome. Ideo cum velocitate discessit, quasi anticipaturus fratrem, and prior patris cathedram adepturus. Simili and Fran^rum Regem dolo fugauit. So the Patrician being alone; rifled (at ease) all Attil^es Campe, returning to Rome heaped with honor, and richly laden with the spoyles which he had conquered. Thus you see what S. Gregory of Tours saith, concerning the battaile won against Attila, King of the Hunnes. As for the place where it was fought, some say, that it was neere to the Citie of Tolosa in Lauragais. Others say, it was by the Towne of Chaalons in Champaigne, called Catalaunum, on the Plaine whereof is to be seene an Oratorie and Chappell, erected, to serue as a remembance thereof. Others affirme it at Chaalon in Bourgongne, a Bishoprick, and no Peeredome, named Cabillonum. Difficulties grounded on the passage of Sigebert; Conserto Praelio in Campis Cathalaunicis pugnatum ad diremptionem noctis.
Cassiodorus,, speaking of this Battaile, fought in the yeare of Grace foure hundred fiftie and one, in the Consulship of the Emperour Marcian, and of Adelphius, saith. Romani, Aetio duce, Gothis Auxiliaribus, contra Attilam in Campis Cathalaunicis pugnauerunt qui virtute Gothorum superatus accessit. This Authour giueth all the praise and honor of this Battaile to the Gothes (without any speech of the French) in fauour of the Ostrogothes King of Italie, to whom he was a Courtier. And yet notwithstanding S. Gregory of Tours, who was not any long time from this battaile, obserueth perticularly, that the French came to the succour of the Romaines. And all Historians doe agree, that King Meroueus, and Childericke his Sonne, with their French, conducted and made the right wing of the Armie belonging to Aetius.
Saint Gregory of Tours noteth perticularly the place where the said Battaile was fought. Liberata obtentu beati Antistitis (Aniani) Ciuitate (Aurelia) Attilam fugant, qui Mauriacum Campum adiens, se praecingit ad bellum. That the field of Battaile was called Mauriac, or Saint Maurice, I cannot directly say whether (at this day) there is any place so named, or still retaineth the same, betweene Orleans and Bourges: but in mine owne opinion, I thinke, that the battaile was fought on the Plaine and field of Cologne, properly called Campa Catalaunici. For which there is a great deale more apparance and likelihood, then at Chaalons in Champaigne, and neere to Tolosa.The Armie of Aetius raised the siedge at Orleans. For it cannot be credible, that the Armie of Aetius, suffising to raise the siedge of Orleans by cruell Attila; would giue him leasure to winne an hundred miles of ground, as there is from Orleans to Tolosa, and (at his owne pleasure) to spoyle the Lands which the Vuisigothes held from the Riuer of Loire, so farre as to the Pyrenean Mountaines, as we haue said, according to the testimonie of Saint Gregory of Tours. It must be thought, that two such puissant Armies, could not be any long time without comming to handy-blowes, in the neere neighbouring fields of Orleans, which was the victors prize and Trophee. To small purpose then did the Patrician. Aetius, after he had won the Battaile, aduise Thorismond, to retire in all haste to Tolosa, for preuention of his Brother; if the Battaile had bin fought neere to Tolosa.
And lesse likelihood of trueth is there in their saying, who would haue it in the field neere to Chaalons;The consent of all ancient Authors concerning Attila after the Battaile. seeing all the auncient Authors doe agree, that Attila, being halfe broken after the battaile won from him: speedily returned the same way as he came in Champaigne, trauersing part of the Duchie of Bourgongne (then a Kingdome, where he trampled on the Bourgongnes bellies, and slew their King Gaudich^, who would haue hindered his passage) to win Italie, which he rauaged soone after.
Priscus Panytes an Ambassador sent to Attila from the Emperour Theodosius.Priscus Panytes, a Greeke Author, and who was Secretarie to Theodosius the yonger, Emperour of the East, hee repotteth (better then any other Historian) the perticularities of the spoyles made in the Westerne Empire, by cruell Attila, hauing bin sent Ambassador to him by the said Emperor Theodosius, as himselfe writeth.
Attila being resolued to forradge the Westerne Empire Valentinian quickly leuied an Armie, wherof he made his Lieutenant General ^^itois, an A^erguas by natition, a Senatour of Rome, and Prefect of the Gaules Pret^rium (who afterward

was Emperour of the West) to follow and to fight with Attila. who had his Armie composed of diuers people, specified by the said Panytes, and drawne out of his relations, by the Bishop of Auuergne, in the Panegericke spoken of the said Auitus: who after he left the charge of Prefect to the Gaules, returned home to his Countrey house.

Iam praefecturae perfunctus culmine, tandem
Se dederat ruri, nunquam tamen otia, nunquam
Desidia imbellis; studiumque and cura quieto
Armorum semper: subito eum rupta tumultu
Barbaries totas in te transfuderat Arctos,
Gallia, Pugnacem Rugum comitante Gelono,
Gepida trux sequitur: Scotum Burgundio, cogit,
Chunus, Bellonotus, Neurus, Bastarna, Toringus,
Bructerus Vluosa quem vel Nicer abluit vnda,
Et iam terrificis diffuderat Attila turmis
In campos se Belga tuos.

He placeth in this band the Thoringians and Bructeres, people of Alemagne,Fiue hundred thousand men in the Armie of Attila. inhabiting on the slimie Riuer of Necar. Attila with his Armie, consisting of fiue hundred thousand men, had already rauaged Alemagne and Franconia, pilled Tongres, and raced it from the top to the bottome, and burnt Treuers, without finding any soule to resist against him. At that time Merrueus betooke himselfe to guard the Gaules, and therefore prepared a great number of vessels in the Forrest of Hercynia: So say Panytes, and the Bishop of Auuegne.

Prorumpit Francus, cecidit cito secta bipenni
Hercynia in lintres, and Rhenum texuit alno,
Ibant Pellitae post Classica Romula Turmae.

It is generally knowne, that the Romaine Historians called the Kings of France Reges Pellitos; because it pleased them to weare Garments richly Furred, yea,The Kings of France vsed to weare rich Furres in their garments. preciously with Furres of Ermines, Letices, Menuuaire, the Sable Martin, and the Starrie Genettes. Already had Belgicke Gaule serued as the Theater, whereon Attila made presentation of his bloody Tragedies, putting all to fire and sword: hauing sacked the Citie of Rheims, died red with the blood of the chiefest Inhabitants, and of their Bishop holy Nicasius, and of his sister Eutropia. As much hee would haue done to the Citie of Troyes, if the Prelate thereof had not with-held the blow: to goe and discharge his rage and barbarous furie on the Citie of Orleans, inuested with his whole Armie, and to be made desolate.Earnest prayer hath asswaged the violent furie of bloody tyrants. But the good Bishop of S. Aignanus remedied the extremity, by his feruent prayers to God, for the conseruation of his little flocke: as also the sudden succour of Actius, whom he went to seeke, so far as the Towne of Arles in Prouince.
His part being so secured, the King of the French, Meroueus, and Theodrricke of the Vuisigothes, in this common cause, and each one to conserue his Conquest: tooke part with the Romaines, although they had bin sollicited to ioyne with Attila, who thought himselfe sure enough of their Armes. So saith Priscus Panytes.
Freculphus, Bishop of Lysieux writeth in his Chronogtaphie, that at the siedge of Orleans, the Patrician Aetius, and the Kings of France and Aquitaine, Meroueus with his sonne Childericke; Theodoricke and Thorismond his sonne, gaue so rough a charge on the Armie of Attila, a braue and expert Captaine: that he iudged (at the first blow of proofe) he could not stay long without fight. Which made him resolue vpon the Battaile, and which was hotly deliuered him, without any more vaine marching In Campis Catalaunicis.
Auitus, contrary to the attempt of Attila, wonne Meroueus, King of the French,The French ioyne willingly with the Emperours forces. to his side; acquitting to him (in name of the Emperour Valentinian) that which his

Predecessour Clodion had made conquest of, belonging to the Romaine Empire, on this side the Rhine.
He preuailed in the like manner with the King of the Vuisigothes, Thierrie or Theodoricke, whose seate Royall was then at Tolosa; which the Bishop of Auuergne, in the Panegyricke of the said Auitus. calleth (for honor sake) Palladiam Tolosam.
Palladiam implicitis manibus subiere Tolosam.
He needed not any great discourse, to annimate him in so doing, because (as the Spanish Historians say) cruell Attila had bin incited and perswaded to come thundring on the Gaules, to exterminate (principally) the Kingdome of the Vuisigothes of Aquitaine: by the King of the Vandales in Spaine Gensericus, father to Hunericus.Gensericus King of the Vandales in Spaine. Who hauing taken to wife one of the daughters to the said Theodoricke the Vuisigoth; vnder couler and suspition, that she would haue giuen him poyson: caused her nose to be cut off, and so deformed, sent her to King Theodoricke her Father; who beside had interest to preserue Aquitaine, which the Romaine Emperours had giuen to his Predecessours, when they could no longer keepe it themselues.
A contrary opinion where that bloody Battaile was sought.The same Spanish Historians say, that this memorable battaile against Attila, was fought in the fields of Maroch; without specifying where the fields of the said Maroch are. And moreouer, beside them which dyed on that bloody day, the night before, Meroue^^s with his French, had giuen a Camisado to the quarter of the Gepides, wherein more then fourescore and ten thousand men were slaine in the place. Thus you see what hath bin written by diuers Historians, Greekes, Romans, Spaniards and French, concerning this Battaile against stout Attila. Now to Meroueus againe.
Valentinian, third of the name, so wrought in his youth (fearing least Aetius should aspire to the Empire) that he put him to death, without subiect or any occasion whatsoeuer. And the same Valentinian (sometime after) being in A Field neere Rome by Tibet for the vse of all manly exercises. Campus Martius, seated on his Throane, and making an Oration to the Romaine people; Scylla, the caruing Squire to the said Aetius, stealing behinde him; stoutly kild him. So saith Saint Gregory of Tours, in the second Booke and eight Chapter of his French Historie.
Procopius in the first Booke of the Vandales Historie, describeth these sad accidents more perticularly. Affirming, that the death of Aetius happened by the contriuing of Maximus a Romaine Senatour, descended of the race of the tyrant Maximus, whom the Emperour Theodosius the elder caused to dye, as we haue before related. This Maximus had a wife, peerelesse for beauty and modesty, of whom Valentinian became so strongly enamoured:
That he lou'd her a thousand times more deere,Then his owne life, or ought else n're so neere.
Where Vertue is constant, all assaults are impertinent.But all his passions and fiery flames, hardened the yee of her faire and chaste resolution: when he perceiuing, that his loue suites and searches proued vaine and of no effect, determined to compasse his desire by a diuellish inuention. He sent for Maximus, to play with him at the Dice for a certaine summe of Gold, and Maximus loosing, set his gold Ring as a pledge to Valentinian. And hauing lost it too, Valentinian compassed the meanes, to send it (as a token to the wife of Maximus, in her hu^bands name commanding her speedily, to come visite the Empresse Eudoxis. She knowing the token, and crediting the messenger; readily obeyed, and came to the Pallace, where she was receiued by the Court Bawdes (ready to all euill, vnprofitable for goodnesse,Nothing more detestable then such Court di^els. the plague and vtter ruine of Princes) who seeming as if they conducted her to the Empresses quarter, to salute her: brought her to Valentinian, where, by the meanes of his incarnate deuils, he compassed his pleasure by force and violence, like vnto another Tarquine,
This Christian Lucrece, being returned home to her house, sat downe and bemoaned her misery, with vehement detestation of her husband, whom she thought had bin ouer-prodigall of his and her honour. And making her sad complaint to

him, Maximus was so affronted with horror and shame (being a man of high courage and spirit) that he immediately vowed to be reuenged.The difference between truely Noble, and base borne natures. For hardly can men of vnderstanding resolue (with the least patience whatsoeuer) to endure Acteons title. But there are some, that being banquerout of honor; will willingly claw the head with their owne nailes, at the base name of a Cuckolde; to deriue benefit thereby, or else to cloude their owne weakenesse.
Maximus pondering on the reuenge of his wiues honor, soyled by the lubricitie of Valentinian (Princes, learne by other mens examples, to bridle and ouer-rule your vngouerned appetites) gaue Valentinian aduise, to put to death the Patrician Actius: because it was whispered in his eares, that he would vsurpe the Empire of the West, and (to that end) had intelligence with barbarous Nations. Valentinian, a yong Prince, followed the counsell of this Achitophell, without making proofe of his fidelity, or the vnfaithfulnesse of Actius, who neuer had conspired against him. He slew him with his owne hand, so saith Cassiodorus in his Chronicle, the yeare foure hundred fiftie and foure; the said Aetius being Consull of Rome (created by Valentinian) with Studius, named by Marcian Emperor of the East.
In this manner Valentinian, bad councelled (like to another Rehoboam) by putting Aetius to death; did cut off his owne right hand from the left. Cassiadorus, in the place before alleadged, saith Aetius Patricius, in Palatio manu Valentiniani Imperatoris extinctus est. The Bishoppe of Auuergne, detesting the Authour of this murder, said:
Aetium placidus mactauit semiuir amens.
With him was slaine the learned Bo^tius, Praefectus Praetorium of Rome (of whose workes we haue a good part, and some Hymmes in Latine of Elpis his wife, which are sung in the Church to this present day.) Aetius, some short while before his death, had practised the ending of Attila, like vnto that of Holophernes; for he being gorged with wine and foode, and sleeping in his bed; was slaine with a knife,Attila slain by in his bed by a woman. by the hand of a woman, that should haue lien with him. So (at one time) happened the death of Valentinian, and totall ruine of the West Empire.
Marcellinus Comes writeth in his Chronicle, that the death of Aetius was the losse of the West Kingdome, in these tearmes. Aetius Patricius, magna Occidentalis Imperij Salus, and Regis quondam Attilae terror, a Valentiniano Imperatore cum Boetio amico in Palatio trucidatur, atque cum ipso Hesperium cecidit Regnum, nec hactenus valuit releuari.
For in the yeare of Grace, foure hundred fiftie fiue, Valentinian being Consull for the eight and last time (with Anthemius) was slaine, by the meanes of Maximus; whose wife dyed with conceit of griefe, in regard she had bin so monstrously dishonored, which by Froissard and Monstrelet is tearmed Deflowred. Her death happened in the said yeare fiftie fiue, the sixteenth of the Calends of Aprill. Marcellinus Comes, and Cassiodorus writeth thus. Valentinianus Imperator Occiditur in Campo Martio ab amicis Aetij, dolo maximi per Oscilan and Transtilam Aetij Satellites, iam percusso Heraclio Spadone,
Valentinian, being thus slaine, Maximus possessed himselfe of the Empire, and tooke to wife Eudoxia, the widdow of Valentinian; creating as Constable and Colonell of his Infanterie, the Praefect of the Gaules Praetorium Auitus. As wee leame by the Bishop of Auuergne, in his Panegyricke spoken to the same Auitus.

-- Sed perdita cernens
Terrarum spatia Princeps iam Maximus, vnum
Quod fuit in rebus Peditum, Equitumque Magistrum
Te sibi, Auite legit,

And he gaue him charge to worke a peace, firmely set downe for confirmation of the Lands, already conquered on the Romaine Empire by stranger Nations: Which he did, acquitting himselfe worthily in his charge, as well to Meroueus, King of the French, as to them of the Bourgongnons and Vuisigothes.
Maximus, being cleare-sighted outwardly, for maintaining himselfe in the Empire;

was yet starke blinde to himselfe, so saith Procopius. For he could not containe his tongue,The malice of a woman is implacable. but one night reuealed his maine secret to his wife Eudoxia, concerning his practises, and compassing the death of Valentinian. His wife arising from him about the breake of day, disposed her selfe to be reuenged on him, and wrought such meanes; that she sent some trustie friends of hers into Affrica, to Gensericus, King of the Vandales, offering him the Empire of the West, if he would come speedily, and reuenge the death of her husband Valentinian.
Presently he set saile for Italie, and got possession of Rome without any resistance. Maximus was surprized vnawares, and beaten downe with blowes of stones, wherewith he was mangled in pieces, as being no way able to helpe himselfe. According as the Bishop of Auuergne writeth, in his Epistle Ad Serranum, the second Booke.
And afterward, as a remarkeable lesson to well aduised Princes, neuer to serue their owne turne with strange succour, vnder colour of taking reuenge: which (ordenarily) teareth the eyes out of the bodies and mindes, of them that seeke after such assistance. For Gensericus robbed and burned Rome, carrying her into Affrica, that called him to her helpe, with her two daughters Eudoxia and Placida; as also the Treasure of the Westerne Emperors. So saith Procopius in his second Booke of the Vandale^ warres.
Thirtie dayes after the death of the Tyrant Maximus, the Legions of Gaule exalted Auitus to the Empire: whereof he had the enioying, vntill the yeare after foure hundred fiftie sixe, hauing reigned but ten moneths and eight dayes: and then constrained for his disordered life^ to renounce the Empire, as he did at Placentia. As is written by S. Gregory of Tours, in his Historie of France, the second Booke and eleauenth Chapter. After his death, the Empire was vacant ten moneths and fifteene dayes; next whom succeeded Maiorian.
Now, while these tumults continued in the West Empire, Meroueus sat not with his hands benummed, or armes crosse-foulded: for, taking his owne aduantage, and occasion by the fore-locke, he possessed himselfe of all that extendure of the Countrey, which is betweene the Riuers of Somme and Seine, and especially of the Citie of Paris.Meroueus the first King that made Gaule a Kingdome. So that he was the first of the French Kings, that boldly affirmed Gaule to be a Kingdome, which happened (according to the Romaine Histories) in the yeare of Grace foure hundred fiftie sixe, Ioannes and Varanes being Consuls. The said Meroueus, to preserue the memories of the Kings his Predecessours, and his owne: ordained, that all that which they had subdued from the Rhine, so farre as to the Riuer of Seine, and that which afterward he wonne in Gaule, should be called France.The first entitling of France. He dyed in the yeare of Grace foure hundred fiftie nine, hauing reigned ten yeares, and had his buriall at Cambraye.


CHAP. IX. Of Childericke, Sonne and Successour to King Meroueus,
HE had for his Successour, his Sonne Childericke, a generous Prince, and of great hope in his Fathers life time. William the Breton, speaking of Clodion saith.

-- At ille
Regia decedens Meroueo Sceptra reliquit,
Is Childericum genuit,
Ille Clodouei Regis Pater extitit.

But so soone as he saw himselfe absolutely seated in his Throne Royall, and to command with full power: he caused the French to loose their good hope conceiued of him; by abusing wiues and Maides, which appeared liking to him, drowning

himselfe in all vices and lubricities.A notorious sinne, when Kings grow forgetfull of their royall dignity. Whereat the French being iustly offended; rebelled against him, and pursued him to death. Which caused him to leaue France, and withdraw (for his owne safety) to the King of Thuringe his kinsman, named Bissinus, with whom he remained eight whole yeares. This retreate of his happened (according to the supputation of Sigibert) in the yeare of Grace foure hundred threescore and one; the third yeare of his reigne. He had a faithfull Councellour (an vnspeakeable treasure for a Prince) named Widomarus, who oftentimes had blamed his licentious life, which guided him to vtter ruine;Faithful Councellours are Iewels about Princes. by whose discreete aduise, he gaue way awhile to the Frenchmens furie, with assured promise of working his peace, so soone as occasion did offer it selfe. And for assurance of his returne into France, the wise Councellour deuided a Crowne of Gold betweene them, which serued as a token to that effect. So saith S. Gregory of Tours in his History of France, the second Booke and the twelfth Chapter.
During this time the French, being vsed to liue at all times vnder gouernment of Kings, elected a Romaine Senator ouer them, named Count Gillonus, as much to say, as Gouernor of the Soissons, and of some other Townes, which the Romans yet held in Belgicke Gaule, and so farre as to the Riuer of Loire, as formerly hath bin reported to vs by S. Gregory of Tours. This Gillonus had bin made Maister of the Horse, and Gouernour of the Gaules by the Emperour Maiorian,Count Gyles, by some Authors of credit and he seeing himselfe exalted to this Royall dignitie; laboured the fauour and friendship of the Vuisigothes Kings, to maintaine himselfe therein, if the French should chance to change, as they did afterward. For many of their principall persons, were depriued of their liues by his politique practises; others despoyled of their goods, and all of any command, the Vuisigothes onely being preferred: to whom Count Gillonus had giuen Narbona in Septimania, which at this instant time is called Languedocke.
Widomarus taking hold on this discontentment of theirs;The loyall dealing of a true harted Councellor. wunne the loue of the French on the behalfe of his Prince, and (with one consent) they accepted him againe to be their King: So that the halfe Crowne was sent him, to serue as an assured testimony, that his peace was firmely made with them.
Childericke returned into France, resolued on his better behauiour, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred sixtie and nine. Cum Egidius iusto grauius Francos opprimeyet (saith Sigibert) perpendens Vuidomarus eosdem Francos Poenitere super eiecto Hilderico, reuocat eum clam misso diuisi aurei signo, egitque vt eiecto Egidio, ille restitueretur in regno.
While his eight yeares continuance was with Bissinus, King of Thuringe; he had wonne the amorous fauour of Queene Bassina (whereof was discerned no outward appearance, or that this Woman, depriued of his presence, was become extraordinarily affectionate towards him) and in such violent manner; that she forsooke her husband, and went into France to her guest Childericke. Who pressing her to tell him, what had induced her to leaue the King her husband; she made him this answere. That she was compelled thereto, by a certaine foreknowledge which she had of his valour, aboue all the Princes of his age, and that she complained not of her crossing the Sea, to seeke such a worthy man as he, who had not his equall in the world. And therefore, meerely moued by her owne good opinion of him, she had passed the Rhine, and made so long a voyage, onely to dwell with him. Which Childericke accepted, making her his wife, and in this marriage he had Clouis his onely Sonne, and two daughters, Albofleda and Lanthilda. The Histories of Germanie doe report, that this Bassina had experience in the Art of Diuination, and to foretell matters to come: Shewing to the King her husband Childericke those Kings that naturally should descend of him. Which serued as a subiect to the Prince of French Poets, to feigne this Nigromancie in the fourth Booke of his Fran^iades,
Childericke purposing to recouer his Kingdome, leuyed a potent Armie to make seizure of Gillonus, who kept himselfe sometime in his vsurpation, by assistance of the Vuisigothes, and vntill the yeare foure hundred threescore and fifteene. Then Childericke ouercame him in a ranged Battaile, with such a discomfiture of his

men; as he could hardly get forth of the presse* and gaue So^ssons, where he kept himselfe, without stirring any more all the rest of his life. Franci post ^andalos, and Alanos, post Gothos, and Hunnos incessunt Galli^^, non vt habeant aeas direption, sed or fibi sint habitation^ perpetuae, qui capta Colonia Agrippina, and Fugato Egideo Duce ^ello, multo Romanorum occidunt; so Silgebert telleth vs. Childericke making good vse of his victory, vn-nested the Romans from the Citie of Cologne: which he gaue for his good seruice) to his Cosine Sigibert, second sonne to ^agn^caire, sonne to King Clodion, in the title of the Crowne.
The Imperiall Citie of Treuers (...) from Count GillonusAnd afterward, hee conquered from the same Gillonus: the Imperiall Citie of Treuers, so many times wonne and reconquered by the French and Romaines, that it was the aime and but of either strange Nation, to make open sacke and spoyle thereof. This Conquest happened in the yeare of Grace foure hundred threescore and sixeteene, according to the testimonie of the same Sigibert, who but toucheth it in his passage along, thus, Franci Treuerim Ciuitatem super Mosellam capiunt.
Childericke being become Maister of the Realme of France, so farre as to the Riuer of Seine (some few Townes excepted) went and besiedged the Citie of Paris, renowned in the time of Iulius Caesar, and the well affected abiding of Iulian the Apostata, exalted to be Emperour therein. The Inhabitants whereof, who feared the furie of an Idolatrous Prince and Pagan, and seeing it at the point of surprizing,Childericke a Pagan and no Christian Prince. and their goods put to spoyle and pillage: had no other recourse b^ to Saint Geneu^sue the Virgin, acceptable in Gods grace from her tender youth, endued wi^h singular beauty of body, but much more glorious in the endowments of minde; issued forth for safetie of the people and Citie, shee being the tutelarie Patronesse thereof, and obtained of Childericke a peaceable entrance, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred threescore and eighteene, as is affirmed by Suryus, in the first Tombe of his Saints Historie, according to Saint Fregory of Tours in the Tract which he wrote De Gloria Confessorum, Chapter fourescore and eleauen. Childer^c^ Rex Francorum, tamet si non esset Christiana Religione initiatus, Virginem hanc sanctissimam singulari veneratione prosecutus est. Nam cum aloquando quosdam reos capitis pertinaci animi sententia decreuisset occidere, ne Sanctae Geneuofae precibus plecti posset e^ misericordiam, ex Vrbe egressus, iussit portas occludi. At vbi S. Geneuofae renuntiatumes^, Regem eos necandi gratia extra Oppidumi processise; mox illis veniam precatura, and festi^^ abijt. Atque adueniente illa ad portas obseratas, confestim ei stupefactis, custodibus, quo si ad quoddam iubentis imperium, reseratae sunt; sicque coeptum carpens iter, vbi ad Regem peruenit, ne miseri illa capite plectentur, obtinuit. Ita illi iam iamque perituri, a praesentiss^^^ mortis discrimine sunt liberati. Occurrences which daily continued, by the feruent prayers of that holy Virgin, vpon the most pressing necessities of the Realme of France and Paris her capitall Citie.
Childericke made vse of (...) of his good fortune.Childericke in further pursuite of his fortune, possessed himselfe of the Towne of Sens, and the whole extendure of the Countrey, which reacheth frrm Paris along the Riuer of Seine, and remounting so farre as to them of Marna and Yon^s, in turning to Orleans, a faire and strong Citie, seated on the Riuer or mouth of Loire, of which it receiued name. Ex Ligere quippe sibi congruo flumine agnomen habet inditum, diciturque Aureliana, quasi Ore Ligeriana, eo videlicet quod in ore e^sdem fluminis ripa sit constituta, non vt quidam minus cauti existimant, ab Aureliam Augusto, quasi eam ipse aedificauerit, sic vocatam, quin potius ab amne, vt diximus, quod rectius veriusque illi congruit. This we learne from the Monke of Clugnye, Gl^^^rus Rodolphus, in his History of France, the second Booke and fift Chapter. They likewise are deceiued, which beleeue Orleans to be the Genabium of Caesar: because it is Gien vpon Loire, a Towne whereof one Subbrub retaineth (yet to this day) the surname of Genabium.
This Citie was wonne by the said Childericke, from a Romaine Captaine, named Paulus, who being not able to defend it; made his retreate to the Towne of Angiers, whereof he was likewise Gouernour. As we are enstructed by Saint Gregory of Tours, in his second Booke and eighteene Chapter: Childericus Aureli^^s pugnas egit. Which happened in the yeare of Grace foure hundred and

fourescore, at which time a Saxon Captaine, named by Gregory of Tours Odouaricus, departed from his Countrey of Saxonie into Alemaigne, with a fleete of his followers, being Shipt vpon the Ocean Sea (pursuing the fortune of others of that Nation, who in short time after became possessours of Great Britaigne) and made their entrance by the mouth of Loire, forradging the Prouince of Aniou, and the Towne of Angiers. Odouaricus, cum Saxonibus Andegauos venit. So saith Saint Gregory of Tours, in his second Booke and eighteene Chapter; and possessed himselfe of those Isles, which make on the Riuer of Loire, and of the Villages belonging thereto, from Angiers, so farre as Orleans.
Childericke, being vnwilling to endure,King Childerick pursueth after Odouaricus. that these new-commers should paire his nailes, or haue any pertaking with him: departing from the Citie of Orleans, followed in the pursuite of Odouaricus, against whom Gillonus, Gouernor of Soissons, had sent succour to Count Paulus, Gouernour of Angiers. But in the heate of these proceedings, Gillonus being dead at Soissons, left there (as his Successour) his Sonne Syagrius, so that the expected succour wanted feete to come. By which meanes, Odouaricus and his followers made hauocke at their pleasure, all about the Towne of Angiers, compelling Count Paulus, and those of the Villages of the Riuer of Loire, to send him hostages. This was done in the yeare of Grace foure hundred fourescore and one.
The yeare foure hundred fourescore and two,The Romaines shut vp in Gaul yeelde to ^oine themselues with King Childericke. Count Paule requested assistance of King Childericke, against the said Odouaricus and his Sesnes. For the Romaines being detained and shut vp in Gaule, without hope of seeing Italie any more: betooke themselues to ioyne with King Childericke, a Prince very valiant and generous, who receiued them into his protection and safeguard, permitting them to liue, habite themselues, and gouerne according to the Romaine manner, perseuering in the Orthodoxall Religion, so saith Procopius, in his first Booke of the Gothes warres. And that which moued the Romaine Legions, to surrender themselues rather to Childericke, then to the Bourgongnons and Vuisigothes, was, because they iudged the rule of Childericke more milde and sweete (although he was an Idolater and Pagan) then that of the Bourgongnons and Vuisigothes, who were infected with the Heresie of detestable Arrius, no beast being more cruell and bloody, then an Heretique against a Catholique; for their Dominion was tyrannicall, and not to be endured.No beastmore tyrannous, then an Heretique against a Catholique This also was the occasion, that the same Romaines, whose dwelling was vnder controule of the said Vuisigothes and Bourgongnons, coueted nothing more, then to change their Maisters, and liue vnder the French. S. Gregory of Tours in his Historie of France, the second Booke and three and thirtieth Chapter, hath a Tract very remarkeable, following in these words.

Interea cum iam terror Francorum resonaret in his partibus, and Omnes eos Amore Desiderabili cuperent Regnare, Sanctus Aprunculus Lingonicae Ciuitatis Episcopus, apud Burgundiones coepit suspectus. Cumque odium de die in diem cresceret, iussum est vt clam gladio feriretur. Quo ad eum perlato nuncio, nocte a Castro Diuionensi per murum dimissus, Aruernos aduenit, etc.

Saluianus, Bishop of Marseilles in Prouence, in his fift Booke De Vero Iudicio,The Romans liuing among the Gaules. informeth vs, that the Romaines among the Gaules, affected rather to put themselues into the protection, and be in subiection to the French, then to their owne Gouernours. (This worthy man liued in the time of Meroueus, and of his Sonne Childericke.) Because, saith hee, each Romaine Gouernour, would fley off the skinnes of his owne Nation, and eate them to the very bones. Franci hoc scelus nesciunt. Itaque illic Romanorum omnium votum est, ne vnquam eos ne^esse sit in ius transire Romanorum; vna and consentiens illic Romanae phalangis oratio, vt liceat eis vitam quam agunt agere cum Barbaris. Hinc accidit vt ad Francos potius, quam ad Gothos, Hunnos, Burgundiones, Sueuos, vel Vandalos, quos omnes Gallias inuadentes A^iana haeresis comitabatur, Gallorum Audia se conuerterint, quod Catholicis populis tutior ^edes esset apud Gentiles, licet verae Religionis ignaros, quam hereticos Catholicae Religionis ^uersores, atque persecutores. This Tract is very remarkeable, wheteof I my

selfe haue seene the practise at Mont-pellier, Nismes, Niort, Rochelle, and other Pow^es of the Kingdome.
(...)And the same Saluianus obseruing the bountie of the French, and what singuler affection they extended to their guests, against whom they neuer knew what it was, to vse treason or perfidious dealing (which couered their imperfection, of being ouer-ready in speaking, or too much, and so, by consequent, very subiect to lying, as the Scripture saith: In multiloquio non desunt vanitas, atque mendacium.) This learned Bishop, making paralels of other strange Nations, with that of the French, saith, there was not any nation of the world more detestable, then that of A^frica; in his seauenth Booke of the Iudgements of God. Paganae ac ferin^ Ge^tes and si hab^ant specialiter male propria, non sunt tamen in his omni execratione digna. Gethorum gens perfida, sed pudicae: Alanorum impudica, sed minus perfida: Franci mendaces, sed Hospitales: Saxones crudelitate efferi, sed castitare ^^n^randa: Omnes quippe gentes habent sicut peculiaria mala, ita etiam quaedam bona. In Af^is pene omnibus insunt omnia mala: inhumani, impuri, ebriosi, falsissimi, fraudulentissimi, cupidissimi, perfidissimi, and obscoenis libidinum omnium impuritati, and blasphemijs addictissimi.
If then the Nation of the French was beloued, and desired of the Orthodoxe Romaines and Gaules, although they were ingulphed at that time, euen in the depth and hell of Paganisme, honouring (as their Gods) Forrests, Riuers, Birds, Beasts and Idoles, f^br^ckt according to the representation of elementary bodies, and offering Sacrifice^ to them (as S. Oregory of Tours informeth vs in his Historie of France, the second Booke and tenth Chapter: by farre greater reason were they then, when they embra^ed the Faith of Iesus Christ.
Ch^ldericke thus followed by the French, and the Romaine Legions being also vnde^ his obedience; pursued the Saxons conducted by Odouaricus, whom he ouertooke neere to Saumur as I haue red in an auncient Manuscript Chronicle, at S. Bertrand de C^^enges, in the hands of a learned Diuine of that Church, named Sart^r) and made a terrible slaughter of them: not onely on firme Land, but likewise in the Isles belonging to the Riuer of Loire, being couered ouer with dead bodies. So that the Saxon Od^uaricus appeared no more in Gaule; but the Isles which hee had vsurped, remained onely to the French: As it is noted by S. Gregory of Tours in his Historie of France, the second Booke and nineteenth Chapter. His itaque ges^as inter ^rancos and Saxon^s Bellum gestum ^^l. Sed Saxones terga vertentes, multes de s^^s, Rom^^is insequentibus, gladio relique^e. Insul^ eorum, cum multo populo inter ^mpt^ a Francis c^pt^e, atque s^^^^rse sunt. Child^ricke possessed himselfe of the Citie of Angiers, ouer Count Paulus, whom he c^^sed to be slaine, because (contrary to his promise) he had fauoured the Saxon Odouaricus, whom he brought into the Citie of Ang^ers. And in this surprizall, the Bishops Pallace was burued, as we learne by the said Gregory of Tours. ^^mente Od^uarico Andegauos, Childericus Rex s^qu^nti dic^adue^^^, interempt^^ue Paulo Comite, Ciuitatem obtinuit. Magno ea (...) incendio domus Eccl^siae concremata est. This action before named, was performed by Childericke in the yeare of Grace foure hundred fourescore and one.
And in the same yeare, Odouaricus, King of Italie (another beside the Saxon^ admiring the valiancie of Childericke, King of the French; required alliance and confederacie with him. And both of them ioyning their Armies together, they expelled the Almans out of Italie, where they would haue Cantonned, so s^^^h S. Gregory of Tours. Odouaricus cum Childerice f^edus inijt, Alemannosque q^ p^^t^m Italiae per^^ser^nt, sub^ugurunt
(...)For the better vnderstanding of this passage, it is to be obserued, ^^at at this time, the Westerne Empire tooke her fall; Italie changing her Maister, as well as Ga^le* England and Spaine. For after Maiorian, Emperour of the rest of the West (who ^^igned but foure yeares, foure moneths, and two dayes) Ricemerus, a Go^^e by (...), Constable and Colonell of the Romaine Legions, who had exalted the said Mai^rian to the Imperiall Throne: enstalled (in his place) Vale^^ (...), who reigned vnder the title of Emperour, from the twentieth day of No^ember, (...) hundred threescore and one, vntill the yeare foure hundred

threescore and fiue, the fifteenth day of August, when Ricemerus the Patrician,A maker and vn-maker of Kings as himselfe pleased. or Maire of the Pallace of the West Empire, who made and vn-made Emperors according to his owne minde: dispatched him also out of the world, as formerly he had done the said Maiorian.
Leo, Emperour of the East, by vsing his power, made his Patrician Anthemius Emperour of the West, and crowned him in the Citie of Rome two yeares after, to wit, in the yeare foure hundred threescore and seauen, the twelfth day of Aprill. And by the fauour of Leo,Authenius slaine in battaile by R^cemerus. the said Anthemius held the Empire tenne yeares, and some few moneths. At the end whereof the Patrician Ricemerus (who had made him his Sonne in law) sent him packing also after the rest: he being slaine in a foughten Battaile, which Ricemecus gaue to his Sonne in Law, the tenth day of Iuly, foure hundred threescore and twelue.
And by this Victory, Ricemerus confirmed Emperour of the West, a certaine man named Olybrius; who reigned but three moneths, because of the death of Ricemerus, whose Nephew, called Gondibar, in the moneth of Aprill,The death of Ricemerus. the yeare following, established for Emperour, one named Flauius Glycerius; who enioyed the Empire but thirteene moneths, being expelled from it by one called Orestes, who enthroned therein a Fauourite of his, named Iulius Nepos, who reigned foureteene moneths, and then was deposed from that slitting dignitie,The West Empire a very vncertaine place of dignity. the seauen and twentieth day of September, in the yeare foure hundred threescore and fifteene. And in his sted, the same Orestes (the first day of Nouember, the same yeare) exalted to be Emperour his owne Sonne, named Momillus, he being very yong in yeares. So that the Romaines (in mockerie of the said Orestes and his Sonne) gaue him the surname of Augustulus, as much to say, as the childish Emperour, whose reigne lasted but tenne moneths. Which time being expired, this Odouaricus (who sought the friendship of Childericke) with a powerfull Armie, composed of Herules of his Nation, and of Ostrogothes (by abreuiation Gothes, without any other addition) fought with, and vanquished Orestes, killing him in the field, the three and twentieth day of August,Orestes slain in the field by Odouaricus. in the yeare of Grace foure hundred threescore and sixeteene. A very remarkeable date, for then ended the Empire of the Romaines in the West;The ending of the Romaines Empire in the West. the said Odouaricus hauing abolished the title of Emperor, imposed on himselfe the name of King of Italie, whereof he was the first King.
Within some short while after this voyage of Italie,The death of King Childerick King Childericke dyed (hauing reigned foure and twenty yeares) in the yeare of Grace foure hundred fourescore and foure. Being buried (according to some ancient Latine Chronicles, which I haue red) vpon the Mount of Paris, vsually called Mont-Martre, neere to the Temple of Mars.


CHAP, X. Of Great Clouis, who was the first Christian King of the French.
CLouis, by the death of Childericke his Father, succeeded him in the Realme of France, at the age of fifteene yeares.The excellent deserts of Prince Clouis. A Prince, and worthy successour to his Father, and euen giuen by God (as it were) to exalt the French Monarchie, aboue all the Kingdomes rising in the Empire of the West, and ro subdue (vnder his command) both one and other,
In the fiftie yeare of his reigne,Syagrius Gouernor of Soissons, and enemy to Childericke and his Son Clouis. and the yeare of Grace foure hundred fourescore and nine, hee determined to exterminate Syagrius of Soissons. Gillonus his Father and he were maintained in possession of Soissonnois, and the neighbouring Prouinces, against Childericke and Clouis, vntill this instant time, by the succour and protection of

the Bourgongnons (who at that time domineered in Gaule, in all that extendure of the Countrey, which at this day is called the Dutchie and Countrie of Bourgongne) with the Kings whereof, this yong Syagrius had contracted such habitude and frequencie; that although he was a Romaine by originall and birth, enstructed from his yongest yeares in good Letters, and especially the readings of Cicero and Virgill, to vnderstand eloquence and Romaine Poesie (in both of which his great Vnckle Syagrius,Syagrius the ^a^ous Consull of Rome. the ordenary Consull of Rome, had so excelled, as to preserue the memorie of him, they erected his Statue of Brasse) yet neuerthelesse, as misprising the Romaine tongue; hee addicted himselfe wholly to the Germaine, such as the Bourgongnons there spake, and wherein he was so expert, that hee pronounced it better then the Alemans themselues, so that they stood in feare of faltring before him. And to doe him the greater honour, they named him the Solon, and Interpreter of their Lawes, whereat the Bishoppe of Auuergne made a mockerie. Aestimari minima potest, quanto mihi, ceterisque sit risui, quot^es audio, quod te praesente formidet facere linguae suae Barbarus barbarismum. Adstupet tibi Epistolas interpretanti curua Germanorum senectus, and neg^tijs mutu^s arbitrum te disceptatoremque desumit. Nouus Burgundionum Solon in legibus disserendis, nouus Emphion in citharis, sed tricordibus temperandis, amaris, frequentaris, expeteris, oblectes, adhiberis, eligeris, decernis, audiris. And in the end, shewing the folly of such giddie-headed Courtiers, as affect rather to imitate,A disease wherewith the world ^ath b^^ and is (...) ^uch ^^fected and counterfeit the gests and speech of strange Nations, then to follow their owne, seruing (by those meanes) for tales and laughter to euery one; hee councelleth him to forsake that vicious humour. Restat vt custod^as hoc temperamentum, vt ista tibi lingua teneatur, ne ridearis, illa exerceatur, vt rideas.
Clouis hauing proclaimed warre against the said Syagrius, went to meete with him on the Plaines of Soissons, accompanied with the King of Cambray Ragnacaire, Sonne to Ragnacairae, the eldest Sonne to Clodion, King of France, and, without contesting or bargaining vpon bare words; fell to handy-blowes, with such aduantage to the part of Clouis, that hee wonne the victory, famous by the taking of Soissons, and slight of the Romaine Syagrius, who thinking hee had assured Bourgongne for his safe retreate;The victory of King Clouis against the Roman Syagrius. was expulsed thence by King Gondebauld, who feared to incurre the enmitie of Clouis, a youthfull Prince, wholly addicted to warre and courage. So that he was constrained to shelter himselfe in the Court of Alaricus, King of the Vuisigothes, at Tolosa, to whom Clouis in all haste sent his most faithfull Counceller Aurelianus, to say boldly from him: that either hee must deliuer him his enemy, or else prepare for warre. Alaricus greatly dreading the French, and doubting least hee should haue to deale with them sooner then hee would; as it was the ordinary custome of the Gothes, to liue alwayes in distrust and feare, (so saith Saint Gregory of of Tours) according to the nature of Heretiques, sleeping with open eyes, and attentiue eares: He deliuered Syagrius (bound hands and feete) to the Ambassadour of Clouis, who within a short while after, and without making any rumour thereof, (...) the world of him. And so by his death, the Romans had no longer any command, place,The end of the Roman^ command in (...). or retreate in all Gaule.
Hic finis fatorum Romuli?
During this first warre of Clouis: there were many Churches robbed and spoyled by the French (as yet Idolaters and Pagans as well as their King.) Among others, they robbed one, wherein there was a Cuppe or Challice, of great and admirable worth, with the Casket and Ornaments thereto belonging. The Bishop of the place, sent certaine of his Clergie men to the King, with humble e^treatie, that he would be pleased, to restore the Vessels and Ornaments of his Church, or,Spoyles won in war s^ared among the Souldi^rs. at the least, that great Cup or Challice. The King commanded the said Messengers, tv follow him so far as Soissons, at which place, all the spoyles and booties won in war, were to be shared and diuided among the Souldiors; and there (very willingly)

he would deliuer them the Cup they demanded, if it happened to his lot and partage. Being come to Soisons, the whole bootie was laid in a heape together, and the King made his request to the troopes of Horsemen, in these tearmes: I pray you, O my braue and generous Warre-fellowes, that by way of right, and, as out of share, you would giue me this Cup (pointing to that which the Bishop had sent to request of him.) Immediately, the men of best iudgement in the company, returned him this answere. All the bootie heere, and all our goods are yours, euen as iustly as our liues (Most excellent King, full of all glorie) dispose at your good pleasure of all that is heere before you; for it appertaineth not to vs, to doe any thing contrary to your Will. At these words, one in the troupe; enuious, mutinous, rash, and full of spleene,The best companies are not free fro^ one or other degenerate minde among them. cried out in a foolish brauerie (lifting vp a Battell-Axe which he held in his hand, and letting it fall rudely on the Cup) and out-facing the King, replied: You shall haue nothing heere, except by lot and partage it fall to your share. All there present, standing as confounded with amazement, at the affronted impudence of this Gallant: the King endured the offence patiently, and taking the Cup vp, being bruised and battered as it was, deliuered it to the Bishops deputies, awaiting fit time and opportunity, to make him know and feele what iustly belonged to his ouer-bold behauiour.
At the yeeres end, the King made a generall Muster of his Horse-troupes in the field of Mars, to see in what condition they were accoustred. Going himself in person through all the rankes and quarters of his troups; he came at last to him that had so rashly offended the yeere before. How happens this? quoth he, Is this fit furniture for a Horse man? There is not any man in the Army so much out of order,R^sh and saucie rudenesse very royally recompenced. nor so badly armed as thou art: for this Lance of thine is not worth any thing; thy sword is rusty in thy scabberd, and this Battell-axe fit for no imployment. And as he spake the words, he raised vp the Battell-axe, and let it ^all so heauily on his head, that he pashed it in peeces, a iust payment in his owne coyne, saying. So didst thou at Soissons the yeere past, vpon the Cuppe which was freely giuen me. The miserable wretch lying there dead, and iustly punished for his boldnesse: it serued as a lesson to the heads of Regiments, and a meet example for due obedience and honour to Princes, and after this was done, he dismissed his Armie.
This act of Iustice, and punishment so exemplarly made, raised great hope in the Religious Catholikes: that God would (one day) open the eyes of this great Prince,Good beginnings are no meane encoura^ements to vertuous mindes. and let him vnderstand the vnprofitable seruice of his false gods, by breaking them in pieces, and giuing true worship to Iesus Christ. According as it came to passe 9. yeres after; when making profession of the Orthodoxall Religion, hee repaired his former offences committed during his Paganisme, in robbing and burning Churches, rebuilded by his command, and richly endowed. Particularly that of Rheimes, which he stored with Riches, exquisite Ornaments, endowments and great Signeuries: as it is declared in the History of the Church at Rheimes, composed by Hincmarus the Archbishop, and Floardus the Arch-Priest thereof.
Particularly (I say) hee enriched that Church, in fauour of Saint Rhemigius, whom hee affected with a fatherly loue, heaping honour and wealth vpon him, because hee made him know the way to saluation, Baptizing and Sacring him.
For that Cup before remembred, Clouis gaue one of Siluer to the fore-said Saint Rhemigius, as hee wrote himselfe in his Testament. Aliud Argentum Vas decem librarum, quod mihi saepe nominatus Dominus, illustrisque memoriae Hluduicus Rex (quem vt praedixi) de Sacro Baptismi sonte suscepi donare dignatus est, vt de eo facerem, quod ipse voluissem: tibi Haeredi meae Ecclesiae supra memoratae iubeo thuribulum, and Imaginatum Calicem fabricari, and Epigrammata quae Lauduni (Laon in Laonnois, where Saint Rhemigius erected the Cathedrall Church) in argenteo ipse dictaui, in hoc quoque inscribi volo, quod per me faciam, si habuero spatium vitae.
Clouis hauing made his first essay and attempt, against Syagrius; at the instant request of his Mother,Clouis conquered Bissinus K. of Thuringe. who much desired to reuenge her selfe on the King of Thuringe Bissinus, for blazing euill Rumors abroad of her: hee vnderrooke the Warre of Thuringe, wherein he had the victory, making the Kingdome Tributary, and subiect to the Crowne of France, commanding the people there, to bee afterward gouerned and ordered according the Salique Law.
This hapned in the yeere of Grace, foure hundred fourescore and fourteene, and the tenth of his reigne.
Three yeeres after, he re-conquered that which his Father had wonne on the Ri^er of Loire, and after laid a long siege to the Castle of Meleun, a place then thought to be impregnable, which he gaue as a gift, and the whole Prouince about it, to his Loyall Counceller Aurelianus. For he the same yeere (ro wit, fourescore and seuenteene) had managed the marriage of King Clouis his Master, with Clotilda, the Princesse of Bourgongne.
The race of the Kings of Bourgongne from Athana^^cus the ^yrant.Of the blood and race of Athanaricus, a King cruell and bloudy against Christians, was borne Gondencus, King of Bourgongne, who had foure sonnes, to wit, Gondebauld, Godegisillus, Chilpericus, and Godomarus. Gondebauld the eldest sonne, slew his Brother Chilpericus, and threw his Wife into the Riuer of Rosne or Rhene, with a great stone about h^r necke, and there shee was drowned. Chilpericus left two daughters, the eldest whereof being named Mucurna, was by Gombauld made a religious professed Nunne: and as for the youngest called Crothilda, hee kept her neere vnto himselfe.
Aurelianus, who oftentimes went and came into Bourgongne for his Master, hauing seene the young Princesse, endued with exquisite beauty of body, and so (consequently) of the soule,The fairest bodies doe vsually contain the fairest soules. (for, according to the testimony of Diuine Plato, within the fairest bodies doe ordinarily dwell the fairest soules) made such report of her to his master, that he resolued to make demand for her of the King of Bourgongne, as accorly Aurelianus did. Gombauld durst not vse any deniall; but hauing affianced her, after the ancient custome of the French, he brought her into the City of Soissons, where the marriage was solemnized with all magnificence. So simply speaketh S Gregory of Tours, in his second booke and eight and twenty chapter; without specifying what was the ancient custome of Marriages obserued by the Gaules and French.
Fredegarus the Scholasticke, in his History of France, obserueth the same particulerly, by this notable passage: Clodoucus Legatos ad Gondobaldum dirigit, petens o^ Chrotilde neptem suam ei in coniugium sociandam traderet. Quod ille denegare metuens, and sperans amicitiam cum Clodoueo inire, eam daturum spopondit Legati offerentes Solido, and Denario, vt Mos erat Francorum, eam partibus Clodouei desponsant.
Maides thus bought with the price of one Sol and one Denier (the ancient custome whereof is yet still retained at Paris, on the wedding day, to giue to the wife thirteene peeces of gold or of siluer, or a thirteene penny-peece at the least) is in the Salique Law called in the old French Language, that is to say, High Dutch, Druchies: At the fourteenth title De Rapt, or rauishment of maides, the tenth Paragraphe. Si quis puellam, quae Druchte (desponsata) ducitur ad maritum, in via adsalierit, and cum ipsa violenter Moechatus fuerit, VIIII. Denarios: qui faciunt solidos C C. culpabilis in^catur.
This Sol, and this Denier of siluer, was giuen to the Father of the Maide, to the Vncle, or to her neerest Kinsman, to shew that she was bought. And to the end that she should not expect to command her husband, but to obey him, and to doe him seruice.Reasons yeelded, why the husband bought his wife. Because, that by the meanes of this buying, it was publiquely vnderstood, th^ the husband had power of her, both in life and death, as wee shall heereafter declare more at large.
Moreouer, euen to this day in Turkie, as well as in the East, as also the East and We^^ Indies, he that hath most daughters, doth enrich himselfe by them.
Widdows also to be boght in their second marriages.In like manner, in the Salique Law, Widdowes comming to bee ioyned againe i^ second marriage; he that was willing to espouse her, should enter bond and couena^^, to pay vnto her neerest Kinsman, a certaine summe of Deniers, which she called R^pus in the Thiosle Language* that is to say, three Sols and one Denier of siluer. Si (...) Homo moriens Viduam dimiserit, and eam quis in coniugium voluerit accipere, antequam eam accipiat Tunginus vel Centenurius Mallum iudicent, and in ipso mallo Scut^m habire debent, and tres homines causas tres demandare; and tunc ille qui viduam accipere v^lt, (...) tribus testibus, qui adprobare debent, Tres Solidos Aeque Pensantes, and Denarium Haber^ Debet, and hoc facto, si eis conuenit, Viduam accipiat.
At the second Paragraphe of the same fortie sixe Title De Reippis, hee that espoused

the Widdow, without paying this price, should pay to the neerest kinsman of the partie deceased, the Amercement specified in the Law. Si vero ista non fecerit, and sic eam acceperit illi cui Reippus debetur IID. qui faciunt Solidos LXII. culpabilis iudicetur.
At the third. Si autem quae superius diximus, omnia secundum Legem impleuerit, and Tres Solidos and Denarium ille cui Reippus detur acceperit, tunc cam legittime accipiat. And this arrerage of dutie, appertained to the Parents of the deceased, from degree to degree, euen to the sixt knee, Vsque ad sextum genuculum, as the Law it selfe speaketh. And for want of kinred in the said sixt degree, this Reippus belonged, and was payed to the Kings Houshold or Exchecquer; or to the Lord Feodall and Fee-farmer, and the Amercement before specified. Si autem nullus nisi post sextum genuculum proximus fuerit, in Fiscum ipse Reippus, vel causa quae inde orta fuerit, colligatur.
The forme and stile of Contracts and marriage of the Ancient French, was prescribed and taught vnto vs, by the Monke of S. Denys Marculphus. N. filius. N. puellam ingenuam nomine. N. illius. N. filiam, Per Solidum and Denarium Secundum Legem Salicam, and antiquam consuetudinem desponsauit.
Now the reason why more Ceremonies were vsed at the marriages of Widdows, then of maides, was: because the French (very seldome and rarely) ioyned againe in second marriages; for they abhorred Bigamie, and plurality of Wiues:The French hated B^gamy or second marriage. So wee are instructed by the Noble Romane Historian Tacitus, in the Tract which he wrote, De moribus Germanorum. Second marriage being alwaies exempted, especially on the Womans side, as branded with the crime of impudicity, or of lubricitie. Melius quidem adhuc eae Ciuitatis (saith Tacitus) in quibus Tantum Virgines Nubunt, and cum spe, votoque vxoris semel transigitur. Sic vnum accipiunt maritum quomodo vnum corpus, vnamque vitam, ne vlla cogitatio vltra, ne longior cupiditas, ne tanquam maritum, sed tanquam matrimonium ame^t. The whole desire and ambition of maids, was,The renowne of Maides to be but once married. to be but once maried. She receiued her husband, to liue the rest of her life with him, as one and the same bodie, and one and the same life. Her thoughts had no further expectation (after the death of her Spouse) to combine againe a second marriage. She had her heart, and the eyes of her body and minde, onely fixed vpon her houshold affaires, and nurtriture of her children: Sua quemque mater vberibus alit, nec ancillis, aut nutricibus delegantur. They tooke as great delight, in nursing their children with their owne milke, as bringing them into the world.
It was of this people that the great Tertullian spake: Monogamia apud Ethnicos summo inhonore est, and insolentibus, and inauspicijs prior est Vniuirae locus, and ipsa Flaminia non nisi vniuira est. And to keepe the perpetuall fire in Rome (introduced by Numa Pompilius, in imitation of the Persians and Iewes) they tooke none for Vestalls, but such as were borne of Father and Mother no B^g^mi^s. Tacitus at the end of his second Annales, speaking of the daughter to Domitius Pollio, preferreth her before the rest: Non ob aliud, quam mater eius in eodem coniugio manebat, because she had neuer consented to a second marriage.
And although it was the ordinary custome among the wiues of the French, to haue their armes discouered, and their breasts (as white as snow) bare, as Ammianus Marcellinus saith, which rather prouoketh desire to women in an vntemperate man, then otherwise: yet so it was, that euery man contented himselfe, without changing his owne fruite-basket; for Tacitus saith: Singulis vxoribus contenti sunt. Also this was the reason, why the husband serued as a mirror and example to his wife, for making her modest.
And therefore so few Adul^eries were noated among the French: Paucissima in tam numerosa gente adulteria. And if the Husband tooke his Wife in the fault; he himselfe, without any respect of her extraction, wealth, or age, acted his owne reuenge,Concerning a wife taken in the act of adultery, and her punishment. and without any hinderance of the world. And hee that was most mercifull, satisfied himselfe (hauing taken his Wife in the act) with shauing of her haire, and then stripping her naked in the presence of her kindred and friends, thrust her forth of his dores, and (in that manner) made her to walke about the City, that is to say, whipping her with rods, in sight of all the neighbours. Accisis crinibus nudatam coram propinquis expellit domo maritus, ac per omnem vicum verbere agit: publicatae enim pudicitiae nulla

venia,The very words alleadged by Cornel^^s Tacitus. non forma, non aetate, non opibus marituminuenerit. Maides that had once made forfeit of their honor, and suffered the Cat to be ouer-freely familiar with the cheese, could neuer make their part good, were she neuer so gilded with gold, or graced with the excellency of beauty. Nemo enim illic vitia ridebat, nec corrumpere, and corr^pi saculum vocabatur, saith Tacitus: It was not so then, as now in these times, when Riches is preferred before a Maid, (how infamous soeuer, or deriued from a Mother, that her life hath beene talked of) with her vertue and good manners. And what excuse serueth for all this? Why, thus goes the World.
Caesar speaking of the Marriages of the Ancient Gaules, setteth downe this in his sixt booke, De Bello Gallico. That men laid downe in a masse or heape, so much mony as they receiued in marriage with their wiues; that the profit of the summe should be reserued, and remaine to the suruiuer of the two people married. Viri quantas pecunias ab vxoribus dotis nomine acceperunt, tantas ex suis bonis aestimatione facta cum d^tibus communicant: huius omnis pecuniae coniunctim ratio habetur, fructusque seruantur: Vter eorum vita superarit, ad eum pars vtriusque cum fructibus superiorum tempor^^ peruenit.
The husband had equall power of his wiues life and death.Moreouer, that the Husband had equall power of the life and death of his Wife, as ouer their children. So that the Husband chancing to dye, vpon the least suspition to be had of his death so suddenly happening; the Parents and Kindred of the defunct, might put his widdow to the racke and torture, euen as if shee had beene a simple seruant. And if they discerned in her any euill demeanour, after shee had endured all kindes of punishments and tortures, they would commit her to be burned aliue. Vni in vxores sicut in liberos, vitae, necisque potestatem habent. Et cum pater familias illustriore loco natus discessit, eius propinqui conueniunt, and de morte, si res in suspicionem venit, de vxoribus in seruilem modum quaestionem habent, and si compertum est, igni, atque omnibus tormentis excruciatas interficiunt.
The case not so among the French* as it was with the Gaules.Concerning this which Caesar wrote of the Gaules, it was not common to the French for the Maides portion and dowry set apart, with the profit: for in the case of first dying, it appertained to the Husband, or the Wife, because they gouerned themselues both after one manner. The husband pre-deceasing, might by his Testament or donation, among deeds of gift; giue and leaue to his wife the third part of his goods, gotten in the time of their marriage.
The Monke of Saint Denys Marculphus, in his Formularie of Law pleadings, saith: Quod pariter stante coniugio adquisiuimus, praedicta Coniux nostra tertiam partem habeat. The Author of the prosecution or supply of S. Gregory of Tours, in his fourescore and fift chapter, speaking of the Treasure of Dagobert, saith: Humbertus Pontifex vrbis Coloniae, and Pippinus Maior-domus cum aliquibus primatibus Austriae a Sigoberto directi villam Compendium (Compaigne) vsque perueniunt, ibique thesaurus Dagoberti, iubent Nanthilde, and Clodouco inslantia A^ganis Maioris-domus praesentatur, and aqu^ lance diuiditur: Tertiam tamen Partem de Qua Dagobertus Adquisierat, Nanthildis Regina Recepit.
The good houswiues portion.This third part is called in the French Capitularies, Pars conlaborationes, the part of labourage or good huswiferie of the wife, in the time of her marriage. In the fourth booke and ninth Title, the Ordenance speaketh thus. Volumus, vt vxores defunctorum post obit^m Maritorum Tertiam Partem Conlaborationis, quam simul in beneficio conlaborarunt, accipiant, and de his rebus, quas is qui illud beneficium habuit, aliunde adduxit, vel comparauit, vel ei ab amicis suis collatum est, has volumus tam ad Orphan^s defu^ctorum, quam ad vxores eorum pertinere. So that by this Ordinance, the third part should extend to the gettings and winnings, and Deeds of gift executed in the donors life-time; and by reason of death, the Testamentary Legacies, howbeit, before, vnder the first Ligne of the French Kings, this third part did not extend but onely to the moueables, and not at all to the immoueables. But returne we now to the ancient Ceremonies of marriages.
Marriages anciently contracted in the seuerall ma^ners.The buying of Wiues was in practise, not onely in strange Nations, but (by degrees) among the Romanes; for it is generally knowne, that the Ciuilians obserue Marriages to be formerly contracted in three seuerall kindes; two wherof were common with the French, Vsu, Confarreatione, and Emptione. The last was the most excellent

and solemne, for the ancient Pagans beleeued, that the gods and goddesses vsed the same, in contracting Alliance and Mariage together. Horatius.
Teque sibi generum Thetis emat omnibus vndis.
As for the other Ceremonie (the third was not done to this purpose) to speake plainely, was true Concubinage; which yet concluded in marriage at the last,Concubinage or keeping a harlot. after long vse and familiarity, which men then had with women for some space of time, maintaining them at bed and boord, as we vse to say.

To lodge together, eat and drinke,
Is meerely marriage, as I thinke.

But especially if they had any issue, which by marriage were legitimate.Of Marriage termed Vsage. That manner of marriage by vsage, and tearmed Vsus by the Ciuill Lawyers; was practised by the ancient French (as yet it is to this day) and designed of them by this phrase of speaking Nubere ad Morganaticam. Mention is made thereof in the second booke, De Feudes, at the nine and twentieth Title: De Filijs natis ex Matrimonio ad Morganaticam contracto. It was deriued from the ancient Salique Law,Morganaticall, Matrimonie. saith the Text at the same Title. Yet notwithstanding, I neuer read it in the Salique Law, but rather in the A Law agreeing with the Salique, both in substance and date. Ripuarie (which was the ancient forme of proceeding before Pharamond) at the nine and thirtieth title, and in that of the Alemans, the sixe and fiftieth title. And this name of Morganatica, is deriued of Morgangheba, mentioned in the said Ripuarie Law.
This was the gift to buy pinnes withall, which the husband gaue to his wife, the morrow morning after the Nuptialls, as the price of her Virginity, and remembrance of their combined Alliance.
So Saint Gregory of Toures noteth in the ninth booke of his History, in the treaty betweene the Kings of France, Gonthran and Childebert the second. That the saide Kings gaue to their Spouses certaine Townes and Villages, to buy them pinnes and other pleasures, on the morrow morning after their wedding. De Ciuitatibus vero, hoc est, Burdegala, Lemouica, Cadurco, Benarno and Begarra, quas Gailesuindam Germanam dominae Bruncchildis, tam in dote, quam in Morganegiba, hoc est, matutinali dono, in Franciam venientem, certum est adquisisse.
There is not any Nation in the world,All Nations obserue some ceremony in contracting marriage. how barbarous or badly gouerned soeuer it be, but hath some Ceremony or other in contracting marriage. The people of the West Indies haue their chiefe Priests, whom they call Papas, and they, after diuers Orisons and Prayers, according to their manner, take a corner of the Cloake or Mantle of the future Spouse, and tie or fasten it to a corner of the Brides Vaile; to let them vnderstand, that they are conioynd together by the bond of marriage. So writeth Iosephus Acosta, in his naturall history of the West Indies.
Those of the East Indies, and of China, are amply described by Hieronymus Ozorius; and other Portugall discouerers of those people. And of further date by Iean Huges de Linscot, Hollander, and Francis Pyrard de Laual, a Frenchman; whereof Aimonius the Monke setteth downe the particularities, in his History of France, the first booke and third chapter.
Saint Gregory of Tours telleth vs in his second booke,The Christian speeches of Q. Chrotilda to her vnbeleeuing husband Clouis. and nine and twentieth chapter, that Clouis had by his second wife Chrotilda, a sonne, the first borne, and shee desiring to haue him baptized in the Church, catechized her husband in this manner: The Gods which you worship, are but Gods of straw, who can neither doe seruice to themselues, nor to any other: For they are eyther hewne out of wood, cut out of stone, or made of Mettall, and the names which you impose on them, are of mortall persons, that neuer were Gods. As one called Saturne, who saued himselfe with his Father (that did eate his owne chilhren) for feare they should be chased out of their dignity. Another named Iupiter, what was he but a most infamous man, the lewdest of all that could be lewd? Addicted wholly to Sodomie, Incest, and Whoredome; without abstaining from the knowledge of his own sister, making his vaunt in the Poets, that she was his sister and his wife.


Ast ego quae diaum incedo Regina, Iouisque
Et Soror, and Coniux.


What power haue your pretended Gods Mars and Mercury? They were rather Deuils, Sorcerers, and Magitians, then any diuine persons. Good Sir, then abcure all that Carauan of Deuills, and beleeue in him, who by his word alone created Heauen and Earth, the Sea and all that is in them, which (before that Word) had still his being or subsistance. It is he only who made that great Eye of the world, the Sunne to shine, and fixed in the Heauen Clowdes of Diamonds, those glorious twinkling Starres which giue lustre to the night. Hee filled the Waters with Fishes sweetly swimming, and stored the Earth with millions of creatures, as also the Ayre with Fowles, in number numberlesse. By the very turning of his eye, are the fields diapred with floures, and made golden coloured with Haruests, the trees laden with fruits, and the Vines dangled with blacke clusters of grapes. He fabrickt and made all man-kinde, and by his bountifull hand all creatures are nourished and maintained; yea hee hath communicated himselfe to Man, and heaped on him all fauours and blessings.

The vnchristian answere made by King Clouis to his Queene.To these and the like holy remonstrances, Clouis did long time lend a deafe care, and persisting in his fond beleefe, answered his wife: That all things were created by the command of his gods, and as for hers, hee was without power, and was not begotten of the gods seede.
Chrotilda neuertheless^ persisting in the Catholike faith, vsed the like good Counsell to her husband daily, concluding to haue her first-borne sonne Christened in the Church of the Orthodoxe Christians. She commanded the Church to be most richly hung with Tapistries, euen the best that could be had, to the end, that exterior ceremonies might induce King Clouis to beleeue; but all exhortations preuailed not with him.Ingomer the first sonne of King Clouis died a Christian. The sonne was baptized, and named Ingomer; but it came to passe that he died, being as yet In Albis; and in those daies when the Catochumenes were clothed in white. Immediately was Clouis vp in Armes against his Wife, reproaching her God with impuisance, and that questionlesse) the child had liued, if it had not beene vowed and consecrated to her God, whereas now it died by being baptized.
The Queene tooke all patiently, yeelding thankes to God, the omnipotent Creator of all things, that he had beene so gracious to her, to place the first fruits of her womb in his heauenly kingdome, for which shee did not a little reioyce, and so much the rather, because shee well knew, that yong infants dying in the state of Innocencie, are Angels before God.
Chlodomer the (...) christened (...) of King Clouis.The yeere following, she was deliuered of another sonne, who at the Sacrament of Baptisme, was named Chlodomer, (Agathias the Greeke Author, who liued in the time when Clouis had his children, saith, that the eldest of them was named Childebert) who falling likewise sicke, Clouis (according to his former) reputed it as dead already. It can happen quoth he to his wife) no otherwise with this childe, then it did with the other: for it being baptized in the name of your Iesus Christ, without all doubt it must needs dye. But the Queene was so earnest in prayers, sighes and teares to God, that the childe recouered health: whereupon she ceased not night and day, her continued exhortations to her husband* to forsake his false gods, and take knowledge of the true God. But she could not preuaile, Clouis continued obstinate in his wrong beleefe, vntill a certain time afterward, when, being troubled with affliction, he made his recourse to that God which his wife adored, and which followeth in this manner.
In the yeere of Grace, foure hundred fourescore and nineteene, Adalaricus King of Suaba, and Adalagerion, King of Bauaria, ioyned their powers together, stomacking (very greeuously) the aduancement of the French in Gaule, determining to withstand any further proceedings,The History of the (...) king Clo^ from (...). and to make a Conquest of their parts. Being come into the field with a mighty power, they passed the Rhine, putting to sacke and slaughter all the Territories of Cologne, (the King whereof was called Sigebert, who was made lame of one leg, on the day of Tolbiac) and had his recourse vnto Clouis his neerest kinsman, as wee haue formerly said, who presently went to giue him ayde and assistance.
The Kings of the Alemanes and Clouis met to fight a furious and bloudy battell,

in the place called Tolbiac, in the same Territory of Cologne, and neer to the Rhine.The furious and bloudy battell fought at Tolbiac, neere to the Rhine. At the first meeting and ioyning, the two Armies fought with equall aduantage: but the Alemans being the farre greater number, the French side began to dishearten, and fall into disorder; with a great slaughter of them. Clouis then called to memory, the God which his wife Chrotilda serued, and in his greatest distresse, lifting vp his eyes to heauen (though they were full of teares, and his heart aking with griefe) suddenly he entred into this prayer.




The Prayer of King Clouis, vttered in his greatest extremity.
IEsus Christ, who my Wife Chrotilda auoucheth to be the Sonne of the liuing God,A Note well worthy the obseruation. and (as she saith) hath all power of giuing ayde and succour to the afflicted, and victory to all such as put their whole trust in thee: From the depth of my soule, I implore thy fauour, and the glory of thy support. With protestation, that if it be thy pleasure to giue me the honour of this battell, and the day against mine enemies, whereby I shall know in this need and extremitie whereto they haue brought me, the power and assistance, which all the people that worship thee, confesse to be in thee: I will henceforth beleeue in thee, and cause my selfe to be baptized in thy name. For I haue called vpon mine owne Gods, who are both dumbe and deafe, and I finde by proofe, that they are very farre off from mee, immooueable, and without vigour, to succour such as haue affiance in them. And therfore I shape my course to thee, O Lord Iesus Christ, with firme purpose to abiure those Idolls; deliuer mee therefore from this dangerous passage.




His Prayer being ended (saith S Gregory of Tours) the Alemanes began to bee swallowed in among the French, being reuiued againe with fresh forces, who pursuing the point, slew the two Kings their enemies in the field: so that the remainder of the Armie, casting downe their Armes, yeelded themselues to Clouis. And after that day, the Alemans were reduced vnder the Lawes and obedience of the Kings of France, without any means of recouery, or making a distinct part to themselues. So say Beatus Rhenanus, and his Countrymen, in their histories of Alemaign, and Ioannes Auentinus, who describeth the particularities of this memorable day, in his Annales of Bauaria.
Clouis ouer-heaped with victory, returning home into Gaule; made discourse at large to his Wife, of the extremity whereunto hee was brought; the hazard of his owne and peoples liues, being vpon the point of flight: and that by calling on the name of Iesus Christ, the honour and renowne of the victorie remained vnto him.
At these good tidings, the Queene sent for secretly into the Court, S. Rhemigius, then Bishop of the City of Rheims, to instruct the King in the Christian Faith.Clouis yeelded faintly to become a Christian. Clouis willingly granted thereunto for himselfe, but yet drew backe from embracing it without dissembling: because the French were wholly Idolaters, and could hardly like changing from their Idolatry. Libenter te, sanctissime Pater, audiam, (said Clouis to S. Rhemigius) sed restat vnum, quod Populus qui me sequitur, non patitur ^elinquere Deos suos: sed vado, and loquor eis iuxta verbum tuum. Clouis hauing made an Oration to his Armie, for giuing them the first taste of knowing the only God, whose power had granted the desire of Clouis: the people with one voyce began al to cry; We renounce our mortall gods (O most mighty and milde King) and are resolued to adore and follow the onely and immortall God,The peoples general renou^cing Idolatry. whose goodnesse S. Rhemigius hath preached to you.
This being reported to the Bishop, as one ouercome with vnspeakeable ioy and gladnes, hee caused the Font of Baptisme to be prepared, adorned the streets and places of passage to the Church, with rich and costly hangings. Within the Church,The Bishops preparation for the Baptisme. it was beautified with fine white cloathes, bathing tubs, and such other vessels as serue for Baptism; beside Incense and exquisite perfumes, and such store of illumined waxe lights, as made the Church looke bright like the Sunne, and so filled with sweete Odours, that such as entred thereinto, were rapt with admiration, as imagining themselues transported into the ioyes of Paradise.
The King marching along first of all, required the holy Bishop to giue him Baptisme, and so presented himselfe at the Font; euen like a new Constantine, being fully resolued,The Kings coming to the Font. to cast off the olde leprous skinne of his Idolatry, and take a new one, by washing and bathing himselfe in the true Riuer of Iordane, and so hee entred the Font in pompe, and greatnesse of courage. But S. Rhemigius gaue him this precept.

Mitis depone cella Sicamber,
Adora quod incendisti, incende quod adorasti;

The Bishops words to the King.Embrace the Faith of Iesus Christ in all humilitie; Adore that which heeretofore thou hast burned, and burne that which thou hast formerly adored. The King hauing confessed one Almighty God in Trinitie, was baptized in the Name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost; being annointed with Sacred Oyle, and the signe of the Crosse.
Of them that were baptized after the King.After the King, more then three thousand men of his Armie were then baptized. Albofleda his sister was also baptized, who presently after passed out of this life into a better. His other sister Lanthilda, infected with the detestable Heresie of Arri^ (as then the Bourgongnons and Vuisigothes were) was likewise re-baptized, after she had confessed the equality of the Sonne and holy Ghost with the Father.
Thus you see what as yet we haue obserued, of the Sacring and Baptism of King Clouis, which hapned on Easter euen, beginning the Secular yeere fiue hundred: according to the ancient Annalist, S. Gregory of Tours, in his History of France, the second booke, and one and thirty chapter.
In further pursuing the life of this great Prince, he telleth vs, that the Kings of Bourgongne, Gombauld and Godegisilus, brethren, held that extendure of the Countrey,The two brethren Kings of Bourgongne. which lieth about Rhosne, and beyond Saosne, Rhone and Soane, and the Prouince of Marseilles, which is the maine Prouince. These Kings, as well as their people and subiects were infected with the impious heresie of Arrius. These two Brethren being in contention, and at strife each with other, Godegisilus finding himselfe to be the weakest, and vnderstanding the victories of King Clouis; sent his Ambassadors secretly, to require his assistance, and to call his brother King Gombauld, to an equall partition of the lands betweene them, or else to deriue such annuall tribute from them both, as hee should please to impose vpon them. Clouis took hold of the offer, and forthwith raised a potent Armie, which instantly marched into Bourgongne.Clouis taketh aduantage of the two brothers differe^ce, but (...) proued traitor to the other. Gombauld seeing an Army entred on his land, made recourse to his brother Godegisillus, intreating his strong troups to assist him, knowing nothing of the treaty betweene him and Clouis. He had very goodly promises of succor and supply, while Clouis proceeded stoutly on in his purpose. These three Princes being in field, and comming neere to the Castle of Dijon; Clouis gaue offer of battell to Gombauld, who presently accepted it, thinking to be seconded by his brother. They fought vpon the Riuer of Ousche, and Godegisillus being ioyned with Clouis, God knowes what a slaughter was made in the Army of Gombauld; the most of them were hewn in peeces, and himselfe forced to flight towards the Riuer of Rhosne, and seek for safety in Auignion. This battell was fought in the yeere of Grace 501.
Afterward, Godegisilus went to make his entrance in triumph at Vienna (in Daulphine) as if he had been peaceable possessor of his brothers kingdom,Godegisilus (...) of King Clouis. whom Clouis in the meane while) pursued, and besieged him in Auignion, only to rid the world of him; because he had promise of the half of his kingdom, lying neerest to France.
Gombauld apprehending the issue, both of this siege, and likewise his life, detesting the treason of his brother laboured to draw Clouis to partake with him: which hee did by meanes of mediation, and aduise of his faithfull Counseller, named Aredi^s, who,(...) Master. to bring his enterprise to full effect, went and yeelded himselfe to the seruice of Clouis feigning (purposely) to be come from Auignion, and had left there Gombauld who by his speeches) wanted both succor and friends. This Aredius, hauing insinuated himselfe into the good liking of Clouis, by such faire parts as made him acceptable, began (on a day) to discourse on the siege, which seemed to grow irkesome to Clouis. And taking Occasion by the fore-top, for doing good seruice to his Maister, he gaue him counsell to stand no longer wilfully vpon the Siege, which might (...) respite of time, then he had reason to afford; in regard of the potent Castl^, and strength of the wals.
He thought it fitter for him, to attempt another course,Successe of sieges are doubtful, when they last ouer-long and try whether Gombauld would speake French or no, and yeeld himselfe tributarie to King Clouis: who allowing the motion to be good, sent the same Aredius to his Prince Gombauld, who agreeing vpon an annuall tribute, satisfied and contented Clouis for his warre-charges, giuing him assurance for keeping his promise afterward faithfully.
Gombauld hauing taken breath a while, refused to pay the tribute to Clouis,Gombauld breakes promise with Clouis, and besiegeth his brother Godegisilus and bringing an Armie secretly into the field, went directly to Vienna, to infest his brother Godegisilus. The siege drawing on in length, and the Prince fearing to be famished, sent forth all vnprofitable mouthes, and the vnseruiceable baser people: Among whom was the Conduit-maker of the Citie, who had charge of the water-pipes, and their courses of passage. This man, offended to bee thus thrust out among the rascalitie: prouided and made meanes for Gombauld, that he should enter into the Citie, onely by those water-conueyances; as hee did,Necessary members in a City are not rashly to be excluded. this Fontenier seruing as his guide and conduct. At a Conduit head hee made way for him and his Armie, and so passing along couertly vnder the ground, suddenly arose with such aduantage, that he surprized Godegisilus, who had taken refuge with his Arrian Bishop in their Synagogue, and there they both were beaten downe. The French which were in Garrison at Vienna, kept themselues strongly within a Tower: but being narrowly pressed, yeelded vpon safety of their liues, Gombauld sending them in exile to Tolosa, the abiding of Alaricus, King of the Vuisigothes. The Senators of Bourgongne were all put to the sword, for taking part with Godegisilus, whose kingdome and Seigneuries the said Gombauld possessed, and that is it which properly is called Bourgongne. This Gombauld was author of the Bourgongnons Law,The Law Gombette, so named of Gombauld. called by his name (to this present) Gombette, very neere to that of the Romanes, whom he highly fauoured. There is therein a Title of Duells and Combats, and other proofes by fire, water, and the crosse: against which, the Archbishop of Lyons, named Agobardus or Agobo, wrote a remarkeable Treatise, inserted amongst his other workes (at this day to be seene) by the deceased Papyrius Massonus.
Alaricus, King of the Vuisigothes, perceiuing that Clouis in greatnesse increased daily: desired to make him his friend, and sent his Ambassadors to him, to mediate an enter-view betweene them, for contracting brotherly league and alliance together. The place of enterview was made choise of, in an Iland belonging to the Riuer of Loire, neere to the Towne of Amboise, in the Diocesse of Tours.A League of Peace between the two kings, Clouis and Alaricus. There the two Kings met, conuersed and dined together, and hauing afterward contracted peace betweene them; each returned home to his Kingdome. This enterview happened in the yeere of Grace, fiue hundred and sixe, according to the supputation of Sigibert.
This Alliance was but of slender continuance; because Clouis, perceiuing that Alaricus had sought it for feare of the French (euery where victorious,Clouis sendeth defiance to Alaricus. and to make no more Warre on him) then any friendly amitie indeede: sent to defie, and proclaime Warre against him; except he would forsake Aquitaine, and all that he possessed in Gaule, which could not obey two Maisters, nor two Sunnes to shine vpon them. Alaricus then made his abiding at Poictiers, and Clouis hauing his Armie ready for the fight, marched strait to Poctiers, trauersing ouer Tourraine, where (on paine of death) hee prohibited the taking of any thing from Churches, and sanctified places in the City and territory of Tours, in memorable reuerence of S. Martin, the second Apostle of the French, to whom he sent Offerings, and receiued assured hope by diuine Soothsayers, of winning victory against the Vuisigothes, so saith S. Gregory of Tours. Hincmarus writeth in the life of Saint Rhemigius, that Clouis, before he went to fight with the Vuisigothes, came and receiued the fatherly benediction of Rhemigius, and vndoubted hope to returne with victory, as also a Bottle of Wine, which lasted so long as the Warre endured, to his no little admiration. As he would haue passed the Riuer of Vienna with his Armie, he could by no possible meanes finde any Foord; which yet in the night-time was strangely shewne him. For he hauing spent the whole night in prayer; euen at the point of day, a goodly Hinde stood before him, and entring into the Riuer, serued as guide to him and the whole Armie, which passed ouer without encombrance:
Clouis camped neere to Poictiers.Clouis encamping in the night time neere to Poyctiers, a flame and piller of fire was seene issuing from forth the Church of S. Hillarie, and lighting directly vpon the Campe: which serued as an assured presage, that the hand of heauen was his Lanthorne and guide, to haue the vpper hand and victory ouer those Arrian heretiques.
The two Armies ioyned in the new-shorne fields, within fiue miles of Poictiers, at a place called Vogledim, the French making fiercely vpon the Vuisigothes, shewed good experience of their valour: and the enemies constrained to flie confusedlie;The Visigoths vanquished, and Alaricus slain by Clouis. Alaricus was met by Clouis, who slew him with his owne hand, enioying the intire victory with the head of his enemy, and the whole Campe, with the spoyles thereof, which he carried with him to his Kingdome.
The particularities of this famous battell, were the death of Alaricus, slaine by the hand of the chiefe of the contrary part; which the Romans expressed in these tearmes of Optima Spolia.The memorable occurrences of that notable battell. Clouis had vnder his Coronet fighting with him, his Cousin Chlodericus, Sonne to the King of Cologne Sigebert the Lame, who performed wonders in the battell of Tolbiac. After the death of Alaricus, two of his followers sought to reuenge it on Clouis, purposing to haue his life likewise, by piercing their Launces thorough both his sides. But such was the goodnesse of his Cuirace, that it withstood the stroakes, and his horse being full of courage, carried him speedily out of the crowd. The most part of the Senators and Noblemen of Auuergne, conducted by Apollinaris, Gouernour of the Country, were put to the edge of the sword.
The bastard sonne of Alaricus proclaimed himselfe King.Gesilicus, the bastard sonne of Alaricus, seeing his father slaine in the field, immediately fledde, and sauing himselfe in Narbona, was there proclaimed King, whereof he held the title foure yeere, or thereabout.
Clouis making good vse of his victory, sent his sonne Theodoricke to possesse himselfe of Auuergne,Theodoricke, sonne to King Clouis. Albigeois, Rouergne, and the neighbouring Countries. Also to besiege Carcossona, where the forces of the Ostrogothes King of Italie, named Theodoricke too, were, but hee dislodged them thence. In the meane while, Clouis wonne Gascoigne and Guienne, but chiefly Bourdeaux; whence he caused to be brought from Tolosa (the capitall City belonging to the Kings of the Vuisigothes) the treasures of Alaricus and his predecessors. Afterward hee went and besieged Angoulesme,The Kings of the Vuisigoths their chiefe Citie. the walls whereof (euen miraculously as it were) fell at the sight of the Banner of France. And so this Prince, couered ouer with Lawrells of Victory and Triumph, came to yeeld thankes to God in the City of Tours, vpon the Tombe of S. Martin. This battell of Vogledim was fought in the yeere of Grace, 507. but by some, 509. in the 25. yeare of King Clouis his reigne.
While hee soiourned in the City of Toures (this is recorded in the yeare fiue hundred and eight) the Emperor of the East, named Anastasius (a coniured enemy to the Ostrogothes and Vuisigothes) hearing tidings of the Victory won by Clouis; sent his Ambassadors to him, to congratulate his happy successe, with presents and rich ornaments,Anastasius Emperour of the ^as^, sendeth Ambassadors to Clouis. which the Romane Emperors vsed to send and giue to victorious Princes.
The passage in Saint Gregory of Tours, is corrupted through ignorance, concerning the Title of Patrician and Consull, in regard that of Patrician, was inferior in honour to that of Consull: And in the Consulary Fasts, the name of Clouis is neuer read, in quality of a Consull ordenary, or extraordinary, as it remaineth to be obserued.
Clouis entertained the Ambassadors of Anastasius with Triumphes in the Church of S. Martin at Tours,The royall entertainment of the ^mperors Ambassadors. cloathing himselfe with the Ornaments sent him, and wearing on his head a rich Crown of gold, sumptuously adorned with precious stones, such as the publique seruant of the Common-wealth weareth, when he entreth triumphally into the City of Rome.
In this manner he set forward from the Pallace of S. Martin, mounted on a goodly Courser, vnto the great Church of the City, giuing largesse to the people all the way, in bountifull summes of gold and siluer, which hee threw abroad with his owne hands, in signe of Royaltie and reioycing.
Within a while after, Clouis remoued to Paris, which he made the capitall City in the Kingdome of France: so saith S. Gregory of Tours, in his second booke, and 38. chapter. Egressus autem a Turonis Parisios venit, Ibique Cathedram Regni Constituit. He builded his Pallace on the Mount of Paris, vpon the olde foundation whereof was erected the Abbey house of S. Geneuiefue; which Pallace was adioyned thereto by Clouis and his Queene Chrotilda, at the instant request of S. Geneuiefue (which Virgin liued aboue fourescore yeeres, and had seene the reignes of Meroueus, Childericke and Clouis) of most royall constructure, with a goodly Church (called by Gregorie of Tours Bisilicam) in memory of S. Peter and Paule, the chiefe of the Apostles, where the foresaid Virgin had sometime erected a Chappell and Oratory, which Dionisius Areopagita (remaining then at Paris) had dedicated to the Apostles his Masters, and there vsually hee exercised his deuotions, and S. Geneuiefue chose her buriall to be there, rather then in any other place.
Now, there is euident appearance,The reaso^ why Clouis made his choise of Paris, rather then any other Citie. that Clouis elected Paris for the Capitall City of his kingdome, rather then Tours, Orleans, Rheimes, or Soissons, where formerly he had made his abiding: because, ouer and beside the commodity of sixteene Riuers, which by diuers passages came to bury themselues in the great Riuer of Seine, and made Paris to abound with all benefits, for the maintaining of so great a people: This City stood in the nauell or middle of his Monarchie, for he enioyed (in full possession) from Paris, so farre as to the Pyrenean Mountaines, holding Poictou, Aniou, Aquitaine, part of Larg^edock, Albigeois, Quercy, Roue^ge,The large exte^ d^^e of the lands belonging to Clouis. Auuergne, the Forrests of Beauieulois, with Lyons, and all that appertained to the Kingdome of Bourgongne, beyond the Riuer of Rhosne, and on this side Saosne.
On the North side he held the two Belgiaes, so farre as to the Riuer of Rhine, and beyond that in Alemaigne, all the said Country of Suaba, Alsatia,Or Halsatia. and the most part of Swetia; whereof, next and after the battell of Tolbiac, hee made a State, in Title of the Duchie of Alemaign, ordaining for Gouernor of the whole body, a Duke, and Countes in each other Country. All the great Realme of Bauaria was likewise vnder the Soueraignty of France; for after the death of Adalagerion (happening at Tolbiac) Clouis gaue this State to the Sonne of the said King,Bauaria vnder the soueraignty of France. named Theodon, with the Title of Duke only as also charge and condition, to hold it in Fiefe and Liege homage to the Crowne of France, without any other addition at all, of Honour.
The greatnesse of King Clouis his Conquests, may be knowne by the partition which he made to his foure sonnes after his death,How Clouis diuided his kingdome to his foure sons. diuiding his kingdom into foure equall portions. A qua Lance, saith Gregorie of Tours, in his third booke and first chapter. Childebert, as eldest of his legitimate children, had to his lot and partage by preference, the City of Paris. Clodomire, Orleans: Clothaire, Soissons, as Capitall Cities of their Kingdomes; comprehending the whole extendure from Seine to the Pyrenean Mountaines, and part of Belgicke Gaule. As for Thierry, eldest sonne to Clouis (but by his Concubine before marriage) hee had that of Mentz, the Kingdome whereof contained the Duchie of Alemaigne beyond the Rhine, and some places on the hither side, with the homage of Bauaria. This Realm was called Austrasia. This Thierry or Theodoricke returned from chasing the Vuisigothes out of Languedock, when Clouis established his royall seat at Paris;The kingdom of Austrasia. till then, Clouis had the commendation of a valiant and iust Prince, sought to by strange Princes for friendship, and feared of his neighbours. But when he saw himselfe at rest and repose; hee soyled his renowne and reputation with such a foule staine of oyle: as all the Machiauelists and historians,In what manner Clouis lost his fame and reputation. that sought to conceale it from publique shame, could not deuise to wipe it out. For, to enlarge his greatnesse further vpon his his own kinred, he caused them to be slaine and massacred one after another; without leauing any one of them aliue, that could concerne him in kindred. He began with the descendants of Clodion, the sonne of Pharamond.
We haue formerly obserued, that Sigebert, tearmed the Lame, one of them that was King of Cologne; whose sonne was named Chlodericke, who fought valiantly on the day at Vogledim: Clouis sent secretly some of his familiars to the said Chloderick, to stir him on in contriuing the death of his father, who had (as we vse

to say) one foote already in the graue,A son instructed by Clouis to murder his owne father, which within a while after he did offering him the meanes, and his friendship for supporting him in his fathers kingdome.
The Prince being desirous to reigne, resolued to doe it, as hee did immediately after: for Sigibert being on a day gone forth of the Citie of Cologne, and past ouer the Rhine, to hunt in the forrest Boucane: As he reposed himselfe after dinner in his Tent or Pauillion, Childericke most inhumanely massacred him. So soone as he sent newes of his Fathers death to Clouis, he also entreated him to send some of his trustiest followers, to take such portion of the defuncts treasures, as should stand with his owne liking, which accordingly he did. As Chlodericke shewed the deputies from Clouis, the precious moueables of his father one after another; he brought them to a great Chest: In this Chest (quoth hee) my Father hoorded vp his gold and siluer.A ^^st (...) for him that would kill his father. And as hee stouped his head into the chest, to ransacke it to the very bottome, one of Clouis his followers (who had the watch-word giuen him) gaue him such a stroke with an axe on the head, as made his braines to flye about the roome, and he lay sprawling on the ground.
Clo^is being aduertised of his death, went in all possible haste to Cologne, where he caused the people to be assembled, and like a hungry Lion, couered with the Foxes skinne, made before them this goodly Oration.




The Oration of King Clouis, spoken to the people of Cologne.
LIsten to mee good people. As I was rowed for my delight vpon the Riuer of Escauld, Chlodericke, sonne to my Cousin Sigibert your King, perswaded his Father, that I was desirous to haue him kill him. Which hee hauing fully setled in his braine, ouer-ruled him to part out of Cologne, and she for safety into the Forrest Boucone, where the said Chlodericke murdered his father. And hee himselfe, vainely shewing his Treasures to idle companion,As Pilate was in washing his hands. was deseruedly slaine in the same place. Of both which murders I sweare to you, that I (...) altogether innocent. For can it be possible, that I should haue so cruell and fellon^ous a courage, as to shed the bloud of my neerest kindred? There is not any likelihood or appearance. But seeing it hath thus come to passe, I would aduise you (if so it might stand with your liking) to choose me for your Prince, and commit your selues into my safeguard and protection.




The men of Cologne being quickly contented, accepted him as their King, crying with shouts of ioy, and clapping of their hands, Vine le Roy; exalting him vpon a shield, and carrying him three times about the whole assembly: So saith S. Gregorie of ^ours. (...) plaudentes tam palinis, quam vocibus, eum Clypeo euectum s^per se Regem constituunt. And so Clouis became enriched with the riches and kingdome of Sigibert.
With whom he caused to keep company, Chararick or Ararick King of Haynauls, another kinsman of his. He called to mind, that when hee won the battell against Syagrius,Ararick king of Haynault (...) to C^^uis. King of Soissons, he had requested the ayd of his Cosin Ararick, who indeede came with his Armie; but he kept himselfe aloofe off, doing nothing, like a Neuter, attending who should haue the better of the day, to ioyne then with him, and require his friendship. And as neutrall people are alwaies reputed and held to be enemies and traitors, according to the common saying; Qui pro me non est, co^tra me est: So Clouis, keeping a choake-Peare in his pocket for this Prince, came and besieged him, and hauing so narrowly constrained him, that both hee and his sonne yeelded to his mercy,How Clouis ^eal^ with Ararick and his sonne. with safety of their liues: he caused them to be bound and mana^led, their haires shauen off, (because they ware them long, like Princes of the bloud of France appointing Ararick to be a Priest, and his sonne a Deacon. And as Ararick grieued and complained of his hard fortune, his sonne, plucking himselfe by the small-increasing locks of his head, comforted him in this manner. These tender twigs of a tree yet fresh and greene, will not die alltogether, but spring againe as formerly they did:(...) Oh would God were so well pleased, that the author of this our disgrace might as soone be quite cut off.
These words being reported to Clouis, he sent them solemne threatnings: and

soone after) putting them both to death, possessed himselfe of their Kindome, and what treasures else they had beside.
Ragnacaire, King of Cambraye, had couragiously assisted him against the same Syagrius the Romaine, King of Soissons, Sonne and Successour to Gillonus, as Saint Gregory of Tours speaketh in his second Booke, the twenty seauenth Chapter. Super Syagrium Romanorum Regem Clodoueus cum Ragnacario parente suo, quia and ipse Regnum tenebat, veniens, campum pugnae praeparari deposcit. This Ragnacaire was a very deboshed Prince, and so infected with whoredome, that he would make no spare of his very neerest kinswomen. He had for his principall minnion and Councellour,Ragnacaire and h^s Pander Pharao. a famous Pander and Bawde, named Pharao, on whom he bestowed all whatsoeuer was giuen to him; commonly vsing to say, This is for me, and my Pharao. Which animated the French Subiects of his Kingdome against him, whereof Clouis being aduertised, and liking well their discontentment, he wrought so with the chiefest of them, that hee would deliuer him their King, giuing them a certaine number of Weapons, Armours, Bauldrickes and Girdles for Knights, of pure Gold, but Clouis made them of guilded Brasse, and so sent them to them,Ragnacaire bought and sold by his owne Lords. marching on his Armie in the meane while, to besiedge Cambraye. Now, as Ragnacaire sent to discouer the forces of Clouis; those men themselues, that had made marchandise of him, when hee desired to know the enemies number and condition: they payed him with his owne ordenarie words; They are not enow for you, and for your Pharao.
Vpon this contempt of his enemy, accompanied with his Brother Richarius, Ragnacaire went to meete wiih Clouis: who as speedily droue his Armie into disorder, and he thinking to withdraw out of the presse, was taken by his owne people,Both the Broth^rs d^m^^rd bound to Clouis. with Richarius his Brother, and both of them (being bound hands and feete) were so presented to Clouis, who conuerting his speech to Ragnacaire, vsed these words. Why hast thou bin such a base and contemptible villaine, to shame our Race, and suffer thy selfe to be taken, bound and manacled, as in this case thou art brought before me?The death of Ragna^^ire and his Brother Richarius. Thou shouldst rather haue torne thy selfe in pieces. And, as he spake these words, he cleft his head in twaine with an Axe. As much he did to his Brother, reproching him, because he had giuen him no better assistance; but permitted him (as also himselfe) to be so basely bound, like to a thiefe and malefactor.
After the death of these two Brethren, the Merchants and sellers of their liues, hauing discouered how well they were recompenced, and with a false kinde of paiment: made their complaint to Clouis, who returned them this answere.The answere of King Clouis to the sellers of their Lord and Maister. Such men as haue basely betraied their Lord and Prince, deserue to haue no better paiment, Well may they content themselues, that they haue their owne liues saued, onely by my goodnesse and clemency: whereas contrariwise, they should iustly be tortured with torments and corrections, as a due recompence to their villanie and treason. And thus, by the death of these two Brethren his Cousines, he possessed himselfe of their Treasures and Seigneuries, both of the Cambresis, and them of Artois, with other places vnder their obeysance.
These two before named, had yet another Brother named Ricomer, to whom, for his faithfull seruices and succours, against Odouaricus and his Sesnes or Saxons,Of Ricomer, Brother to Ragnacaire and Ri^harius. Childericke, Father to Clouis, had giuen the gouernment of Mans: Clouis caused him to be slaine, and enioyed all his possessions. As much did he to other Kings and great Lords, who were the neerest in kinred to him; as Saint Gregory of Tours telleth vs in these tearmes. Interfecit and alios multos Reges, and Parentes suos primos, de quibus zelum habebat ne ei Regnum auferrent, and ita Regnum suum per totas Gallias dilatauit. This passage giueth vs clearely to vnderstand, that he sought wholly to exterminate the race of Clodion, before whose Children, Meroueus, Grandfather to Clouis, was preferred in the arising Kingdome of Gaule. And declareth the ignorance of Richard of Vassebourg, and an infinite number of false Historians, who deriue the very greatest houses of Europe from the descent and ligne of Clodion, to giue them the greater aduantage of Precedency and honor (meerely imaginary,The errour of diuers Authors and Historians. and set downe in painting) aboue the Monarches of the Lillie, and to bring their naturall and ^egitimate possession, within compasse of compromise; it being continually

perpetuated from twelue hundred yeares hitherto, without any let or intermission.
O^ An^bert (...) Sena^o^ and (...) Originall.Herein likewise may be seene their impertinency, who for more honoring the Kings of the second and third Ligne, descended from Ansbert, called the Romaine Senatour (albeit a Gaule borne by Nation, and a great Lord in Austrasia, which is Lorraine) doe fetch his birth and originall from the said King Clodion: feigning his transport from thence to Rome, where he was made a Senatour, to auoide the furie of Clouis, wholly bent to the totall ruine of his collaterall kinred. Being also vtterly ignorant, that in those times, Rome had not any Emperours, and that both it, and all Italie, were subiected vnder the command and Seigneurie of the Arrian Ostrogothes, and of their King Theodoricke. They knew not, that this Ansbert (howsoeuer named the Senatour) was a naturall Gaule, as we haue already said* and so shall doe elsewhere, and no Romaine: And that the whole power of the Romaines in Gaule,Pro^ed to be a Ga^le borne and no Romaine. was quite quenched by Clouis, according as wee haue formerly obserued.
Clouis, to make yet a further discouery, whether he had any more kinred or no; being one day in good company, and feigning to complaine for the death of them, who had bin dispatcht out of the world by himselfe;The d^ssembling ^plain^ of King Clouis. spake thus. Vnhappy man (quoth he) as I am, to be thus left alone, like vnto a poore Pilgrime among Strangers. I haue not one kinsman left to helpe me, if any disaster of Fortune, or whatsoeuer else inconuenience should happen vnto me. But he spake not this, saith S. Gregory of Tours, as grieuing that he had bin the death of his kinred: but rather in mallice and deceit, to try if any more remained aliue, that he might likewise be rid of them* Hoc non de merte Parentum condolens; sed dolo dicebat, si forte potuisset adhuc aliquem reperire, vt interficeret.
And to shew the Iustice Diuine falling vpon him, hee dyed in the floure of his age, being not fiue and forty yeares old, fiue yeares after the Battaile of Vogledim. He reigned but thirty yeares, departing out of this life into another, the yeare of Grace fiue hundred and foureteene: an hundred and twelue yeares after the death of Saint Martin,The death of King Clouis, in the very floure of his time. which happened the sixeteenth yeare after the Councell held at Treuers, the eight of the Empire of Arcadius and Honorius. Whereupon it is to be noated, that the Gaules began their yeare on the night of Saint Martin in winter (an Antiquitie obserued to this instant, in the Courts of Parlement in France) accounting the Reigne of their Kings, from the death of the said Saint Martin of Tours. Clouis was buried in the Church builded by himselfe on the Mount of Paris, now dedicated to Saint Geneuiefue. And Chrotilda passed the yeares of her widdowhood at Tours, seruing in the Church of Saint Marti^, and comming to Paris oftentimes. In the yeare fiue hundred and twelue, according to the testimony of Sigibert, Clouis caused the first Councell of Orleans to be held, to bring the French Church againe into her luster and splendour.
We haue bin enforced to continue the Originall of the French, so farre as to the end of the life and Reigne of Clouis, for the better clearing of our History, which (vntill his time) was wonderfully intricated: there being very few Historians, that would take any paines,The Conclusion of the Originall of France. to make an exact enquirie; as accounting that for coine of the best allaye, which they receiued from Hunibauld, Trithemius, and other reporters of Fables and Lies. Come we now to the Sacring and Baptisme of King Clouis, and to the holy Bottle or Viole.



CHAP. XI. Of the Miracle of the Holy Bottle or Viole, and other things happening at the Sacring of King Clouis. Of the Armes and Banner of France; And that of S. Denis in France. Of curing the disease called the Kings Euill. And of the Kings Regall Prerogatiue.
THere are some French Historians, who haue passed ouer with silence, many perticularities of the French History:Matters omitted by diuers Historians. As those of the Holy Bottle; the Banners of France, and of S. Denis, and curing the disease of the Kings Euill, reserued onely to the Kings of France. Or else they haue put them to compromise, or doubtfully called them in question, because all the reason they can alleadge, is: that S. Gregrery of Tours, the onely ancient Historian of France, hath spoken nothing of them in his History. I thinke the most part of these Pyrronist Historians, and a number of such as will credit nothing,Some kinde of people will not credit any thing. except it be set downe in sacred Scripture; will make as little account of these perticularities, although they had bin written by S, Gregory of Tours: as they doe of the miracles reported by him in the same History, and in his workes De Gloria Martyrum, and Confessorum.

 Were it nothing else but the credence of our Fathers, who haue giuen them vnto vs, and left them by tradition from hand to hand, and from one age to another, for memories and remembrances; surely it were sufficient. But because the curious doe couet more illumination, and to see by a perfect light indeede: we will set downe good proofe in writing, by faithfull witnesses, and by experience, which shewes it selfe daily to the eyes of the world. And we will begin with the perticularities of King Clouis his Sacring, and of the Holy Viole or Bottle.
So soone as the tydings were known, of the Battaile at Tolbiack, S. Vast, Bishop of Arras,The vow of King Clouis at the battaile of Tolbiacke to become a Christian. Diuinely inspired, concerning the vowe which Clouis had made to become a Christian: went to meete him in the Village of Toull, on the frontiers of Austrasia. ^. Vast accompanying the King, to bring him to Rheims to the great S. Rhemigius, ^he light for doctrine and sanctity of life, to all the Prelates of his time. It chanced, ^hat at passing the Riuer of Aisne, in a small Hamlet, then called by the people of ^he Countrey Vngise, neere to the Borough of Reully; a blinde man came and presen^ed himselfe to S. Vast, coniuring him by the name of God, to take pitty on him, and ^o giue him sight. S. Vast made his prayer in these words.

Sweete Lord Iesus Christ, who art the onely light,
The Prayer of S. Vast.
and who didst open the eyes of a ^ore man borne blinde, that beleeued in thee: open the eyes of this man here, to the ^d, that all the French people here present, may beleeue, that thou art the onely God, who ^orketh wonders in Heauen, and on Earth.

And making the signe of the Crosse on the blinde-mans eyes, and touching them ^ith his hand; immediately he gaue him sight, to the great amazement of the King, ^d the whole Armie. As it is written by Albinus Flaccus, in the life of the said Bi^op, reported by Surius in his first Tome, vnder the sixt day of the Moneth of Fe^ruary.
To bedewe this new plant, with cleare water of Celestiall Doctrine, S. Solenne,

Bishop of Chartres, ioyned himselfe on the way with S. Vast, as Sigibert informeth vs, vnder the yeare foure hundred and nintie, and both of them together, pertaking in one and the same holy desire: prepared Clouis to receiue Baptisme, by the hand of S. Rhemigius at Rheims.
Being there arriued, the Church was prepared with rich Ornaments, Waxe lights and Torches, Floures and Perfumes, as also the Fonte. The Sacring was preceded with an infinitie of Miracles, as is written in the Buls of Pope Hormisda, in the Legation sent by him to the said S. Rhemigius, throughout the Kingdome of France; as is reported by Surius, in the life of the said Rhemigius, vnder the thirteenth of Ianuary, in these tearmes. Vices nostras per omne Regnum dilecti, and spiritualis Filij nofiri Ludouici, quem nuper, adminiculante superna gratia, plurimis, and Apostolorum temporibus aequiparandis signorum Miraculis praedicationem saluti feram comitantibus, cum gente integra conuertisti, and sacri dono Baptismatis consecrasti.
Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rheims, who liued three hundred yeares after S. Rhemigius, (for he had seene the Kings and Emperours Charlemaigne, Lewes the Deb^^naire, Charles the Baulde, and Lewes the Stammerer, second of the name) in the life of the said S. Rhemigius, obserueth these Miracles, whereof this is the first.
As the three Bishops, the King, the Queene, and the chiefest French Lords were set in the Church, hearing the holy discourse of the chiefe Priest S. Rhemigius; God, willing to shew visibly, what he had promised to his seruants, at all such times as they met together in his name, that is, To appeare among them: Suddenly filled the whole Church with so great a Light, that the bright splendour thereof exceeded the glory of the Sunne. And in the midst thereof was heard a voyce, distinctly and well formed, which pronounced these words: Pax vobis, Ego sum, Nolitae timere,The first Miracle that appeared. man^te in Dilectione mea. Peace be with you, it is I the God of Pace that speaketh to you; be not affraide, persist in louing mee. Which being said, the Light ceased, and so sweete pleasing a smell remained in the Church, that it appeared clearely and sensibly, that God, ^he Author and Father of Peace, was descended there. And the light was so piercing, as not one of the Assistants, except S. Rhemigius, durst behold it, and the face of the said holy Bishop, became so luminous and resplendishing; that it surpassed in clearenesse, all the Tapers and Torches burning in the Church, whereat the King and Queene being astonished, fell downe at the Bishoppes feete (as in a place of safety) full of feare and terrour, with that that they ^ad seene.
The second Miracle.The other Miracle, was likewise full of admiration, reported by the said Hincmarus, and Floardus, Archdeacon of Rheims (he liued but little aboue an hundred yeares since) in the first Booke of his Historie of the Church of Rheims, and thirteenth Chapter, was that of The holy Viole or Bottle, brought by an Angell, in the forme of a Doue, or white Pidgeon. These come from those Authors, who haue filled the breaches and pits of the History, written by S. Gregory of Tours, which we haue maimed and imperfected by iniury of time, or malice of men, in more then a thousand places. For example, in the election of Pharamond to be King, and his Eleuation,The History of S. Gregory of Tour^ de^ectiue in many places. in the tenth Booke. At the Sacring of King Clouis: In the deduction of the Kings of Bourgongne, in the third Booke, and all the following reports, places and passages very defectuous. Which are easie to be supplyed, as well by the Authors formerly alleadged, as by the Monkes Sigebert, Aimonius, as also other ancient Annalists, and Chroniclers.
But to iudge of the whole Cloth, by a scantling thereof, and to shew that S. Gregory did not silent^y let slip the Miracle of the said holy Bottle: wee will here produce the testimony of the Centuriatours of Germanie, called of Magdebourg, who haue this Author more intire, then they in France haue. Behold then what they say, concerning the Sacring and Baptisme of Clouis, at the beginning of the fift Age, that is to say, the yeare of Grace fiue hundred, in the fift Chapter of their (...) Centurie. Vbi hemigius Clodoueum Baptizasset, non affiuit Chrisma, sed, ait Gregori^ Turonensis, and Henricus Erfordiensis, Columbam ore attulisse Vas Chrismate ple^* Thus you see the passage of S. Gregory of Tours.
Behold them then of Hincmarus and Floardus, in the places before alleadged. ^ricus

Chrisma ferens a Populo interceptus, ad Fontem pertingere, penitus est impeditus. Sanctificato denique Fonte, nutu diuino, Chrisma defuit. Sanctus autem Pontifex Rhemigius oculis ad Coelum porrectis, tacite traditur orasse cum lachrimis. Et ecce subito Columba ceu Nix aduolat candida, Rostro deferens Ampullam Coelestis doni Chrismate repletam, cuius odoris mirabili respersi Nectaro inaestimabili qui aderant, super omnia quibus autea delectati fuerant replentur suauitate. Accepta itaque Sanctus Praesull Ampulla, postquam Chrismate frontem Clodouei conspersit, species mox Columbae disparuit. As the Clarke which brought the Holy Oyle to Baptise Clouis, would haue come to the Font; the affluence of the people hindered his passage. The Font being hallowed, by Gods permission, the Oyle could not be brought. Whereat S. Rhemigius being much amazed, he lifted his eyes vp to Heauen, praying in teares, that this Act so importing his owne glory, might not be intermitted; to the contempt of the Catholique Religion, scandale of Christians, and the losse or shipwracke of so many Pagan soules, euen now at the gate of their saluation. But behold, presently appeared a Doue, whiter then Snowe, bringing and holding in her beake a little Viole of Glasse, very thicke, full of a sweete smelling balme, but of a ruddie colour, and which with admirable sauour, rauished the spirits of all the Assistants into such an extasie, as if they had bin rapt vp into the ioyes of Paradise. And the holy Bishop, rendering thankes to God, tooke and receiued with his hands, this sacred gift sent from Heauen, and annointed therewith the forehead of King Clouis. Which being done, the Angell of Heauen, in the forme of a Doue, vanished; leauing with S. Rhemigius, this precious Gage of Holy and Celestiall Oyle, reserued from twelue hundred yeares, to this day, to Sacre the most Christian Kings of France, the onely famous Monarchs of Christendome.
Experience hath made vs know the truth of this Miracle, at the Sacring of our Kings, from the Fathers to their Sonnes, and from Ligne to Ligne: euen to our King Lewes, thirteenth of the name, whom God preserue to infinite ages. Of whose Sacring, we will set downe the authenticall Acts, at the end of the Tract of this Order.
This Miracle of the Holy Viole or Bottle, hath bin obserued by Historians of three Lignes of our Kings, Strangers and French.Strange and French Historians haue noted this Miracle. Vnder that of the Capets (who Reigned aboue sixe hundred yeares hitherto.) Testimony is to be had of all them which haue written, namely of William the Breton, in the first Booke of his Philippides, that is to say, the life of King Phillip Augustus, second of the name, called the Conqueror, Grandfather to the great King S. Lewes, ninth of the name.

At sacer Antistes erecto lumine sursum
Cum manibus meruit sacra per supplicamina sacrum
Coelitus emitti cum Sacro Vase liquorem.
Ipso Rege palam, cunctisque videntibus ipsum
E Coelo missus quem detulit Angelus illi,
Quo Rex Sacratus fuit idem primus, and omnes
Post ipsum Reges Francorum ad Sceptra vocati,
Quando Coronantur, aleo sacrantur eodem.

S. Thomas Aquinas (who liued in the time of the King S. Lewes) in the second Booke, which he composed of a Princes gouernment, and the last Chapter, mak^th honorable memorie of our Kings Sacring, and of the gift of Grace by them re^eiued from Heauen, to cure the disease of the Kings Euill. Sanctitatis Sacrae Vncti^nis argumentum assumimus ex gestis Francorum, and beati Rhemigij super Clodoueum Re^em ex delotione Olei desuper per Columbum. Quo Rex Praefatus fuit inunctus, and inun^untur Posteri: and ex signis, and portentis, ac varijs curis apparentibus in eis ex Vnctione ^raedicta. Which he meaneth of curing the Kings Euiil, and the Armes of the Sa^ed Kings of France, sent from Heauen, because all of them tread in the same dance with the holy Bottle.
Ioannes Ludouicus Viualdis, of Monte Reale in the Kingdome of Naples, Doctor ^nd professour in Diuinitie, of the Dominicane Order, in his Royall worke, discour^ng the Miracles which happened at the Sacring of the said Clouis, saith. Ea die qua

Clodoueus 'a sancto Antistite Rhemigio vnda Sacri Baptismatis perfusus est, quat^^r mirabilia facta esse perhibentur. The same day as Clouis was Baptized by the Bishop, S. Rhemigius; foure Miracles then happened.

Nam primo Clodoueus erutus de potestate tenebrarum, translatus est in Dei lumen, and Regnum per Baptismatis Sacramentum, Spiritus-Sancti factum est Templum.


Secundo, cum in tanto Mysterio Sacrum Chrisma deesset, illico Columba candore Ni^ resplendens de Coelo lapsa est, quae rostro Sacram Ampullam Chrismatis plenum attulit, Ampullum, quo Antistes Regem liniuit. Quae Ampulla, ob memoriam tanti Sacramenti in Rhemensi Ecclesia vsque in hodiernum diem reuerenter conseruatur. Et inde Francorum Reges in sua Coronatione inunguntur. A qua Sacra Vnctione puto omnes Francorum Reges di^tu^ munere, accepisse virtutem curandi quoddam genus infirmorum, sola impositione m^nuun.


Et quia dignum erat, vt Clodoueus ob meritum tantae pietatis, aliquod perenne me^riale susciperet, ideo tertium admirabile subiungitur. Nam tria Lilia Aurea in nitido colore Saphiri, miro splendore micantia e superis transmissa sunt.


Baptisato autem Clodoueo non solum quartum mirabile, sed plurima sequuntur. N^ illico Francorum Populi, Fide recepta, baptizantur, Idolorum Templa destruuntur, and Eeclesiae in honorem Christi restaurantur; ac denique tota Gallia in qua sunt Prouinciae multae, and Regiones magnae, ac diuersarum gentium Nationes, tam in vita, quam in moribus admirabiles, quae tota ambulabat intenebris, eo quod relicto vero Deo, Idola multa, and vana sequebatur, Christianae Religioni aggregata est. Et tunc quidem vaticinium Is^ completum visum est, quod dicitur; Populus qui ambulabat in tenebris, vidit lucem magnam.

The Armes of France brought from heauen to ClouisThe same Author, discoursing on the Armes of France, brought from heauen to Clouis, saith. Huic Clodoueo, quia Mysterium Incarnationis Christi mente suscepit, Tris Lilia Aurea de Coelo delapsa sunt, vt tota Christiana Religio palam cognosceret nobilissimam Familiam Francorum Principum fore electam ad tuendum diligentius facta mirabiliora Ecclesiae Dei, etc. I passe ouer in silence that which Robertus Gaguinus, Minister generall of the Mathurins of Paris, hath said of the said Armes, in the first Booke of his History of France, to auoide reiterations of one and the same subiect.
In the former Booke, according to the testimonie of Latinus Pacatus, Sidonius Apollinaris, and Tacitus himselfe, we haue obserued, that the Lyon rampant, and the Shippe,The anci^nt Armes of the Gaules and French. were the proper Armes of the auncient Gaules and French; so that they might be tearmed common Armes to both the Nations. Besides which, the Kings of France, Predecessours to Pharamond, and his Successours vnto King Clouis, had other perticular Armes; to wit, D'Argent a Trois Corones, and Diademes de gueulles: For it is meerely a lye to speake of Toades, as we haue said.
The Armes of King Clouis.The Chronicle of the Abbey of Besne, a Manuscript, which I haue, saith, that Clouis Portoit en Blazon and Deuize, l Escu de Gueulles a trois Croissants d' Argent, the Symbole of Excellence and Nobilitie: And some of his Successours, Kings, bare the same, as wee shall approue in the Order of the Shippe, and of the double Crescent.
After that Clouis had receiued the Shield of Azure, and the three Floures de Luces of Gold, from Heauen, as they say: The Kings his Successours would no longer haue those Armes. They of the first Ligne bare but three Floures de Luces onely. They of the second Ligne, descended from Martell, Les porterent sans nombre: howbeit,Of Pepin le bref and his Predecessours. before Pepin le Bref was exalted to be King of France, his Predecessours, I^ portassent que de Guelles a trois Aigles d'Or. Charles Martell tooke sixe, auec le ch^s de France. Pepin forsooke his auncient Armes, Et prit Seme de France, sans nombre. For the Kings of France his Successors, continued vntill the last King Lewes, who did nothing, because he reigned but one yeare.
Hugh Capet the prin^s^ all of the th^^d Ligne.Hugh Capet, chiefe of the Kings of the third Ligne, and his Successours, Kings, (...) likewise Seme de France sans nombre: vntill the vnhappy reigne (and fatall to France) of Charles the sixt, who is said to be the Author, for reducing the Shield of France to three Floures de Luces onely, according as they were vnder the first Ligne. The yeare of this change is vncertaine, because some will haue it in the yeare foure hundred

and twelue, and others foureteene, yet all to no purpose: for Froissard,The Entrance of Queene Isabell of Bauaria Mon^relet, and the Chronicle of Maister Iohn Iuuenall de's Vrsins doe noate, that at the ^ntrance of Queene Isabell of Bauaria, wife to Charles the sixt, at Paris in Anno 1389. there was before the great Court, a Bed all couered with Tapistrie of Azure, with Floures de Luces of Gold, representing the Throane of Iustice, belonging to ^he Kings of France, most richly adorned. In the midst whereof was a Hart, in greatnesse resembling that at the Pallace, wholly white, and made most arteficially: ^bout the necke whereof hung the Armes of the King, to wit, L'Escu d Azur a Trois Fleurs de Lys d^ Or, very sumptuously wrought.
The Predecessors of Hugh Capet, as namely Robert the valiant Marquesse,Robert the valiant Marquesse and his descendants. and his Sonnes and descendants, Counts of Aniou and Maine, who made their ordenarie abiding at Chasteau-Neuf in Aniou (before King Eudes, who was Count of Paris, and his descendants to the said Capet) Portoient pour Armes and Banneres de Gueull^s a huict Bastons Fleurennez d' Or a la Bordure de France: So saith the Manuscrip^ Chronicle (which I haue) of Monstier-Neuf at Poictiers. These Armes are properly called Escarboucles Pommetees and Fleurettees d'Or. Wherein Feron is abused in ^is Constables of France, who giueth to the descendants of the said Robert, D'Or a (...) Aigle de Synople.
Now, here is a thing to be especially noated, in regard it hath not bin common; ^hat vnder the Kings of the first and second Ligne,Armes propet the Kings of Paris onely. there were none but the Kings of Pa^is onely, which bare D' Azur a Trois Fleurs de Lys d'Or, ou sans nombre, du^ing the second Ligne; the other caried but Color and Mettall. For my Manuscript Chronicle of Monsiur Iean de France, Duke of Berry, teacheth me, that the Kings of Austrasia, Portoient Bande D Or, and d Azur de six Pieces.
The King of Soissons Portoient Eschiquete d'Or,Kings of Soissons. and d'Azure.
And those of Orleans,Kings of Orleans. called of Bourgongne: Portoient l'Escu d' Azur, seme de Cail^ux d Or. They carried in their Mantles a bordure of France, to shew, that they ^ere issued of the most Noble blood of the world. The Effigies of King Clothaire ^he first, enterred at S. Mard de Soissons, hath one of the Shooes Tout parseme de France.Concerning them of the first Ligne. And in the same place, the figure of King Sigibert the first, hath his Coate Armor so ^amed. And these are of the first Ligne.
Vnder the second, there were none likewise but the Kings of France,The Kings vnder the second ligne. Qui ^ortassent le Lys. For the Kings of Aquitaine, Sonnes to Charlemaigne, and their ^escendants, Porterent Fuzele' d'Or et d'Azur. So saith the Chronicle of Monstier^euf.
The King of Germanie,The Kings of Germanie. descended of Lewes the debonnaire: Portoient d'Or face de ^rois Pieces d' Azur.
The Kings of Italie,The Kings of Italie. descended of the said Debonnaire: Portoient de Gueulles a Aigle d Or, a la Bordure componce d'Or and d' Azur. So saith the Chronicle of ^erry.
Vnder the Kings of the third Ligne,The Kings vnder the third ligne. there were none but their elder Sons (I meane ^eir assured and certaine Successors) that bare of France. Their other Sonnes, they are but onely Mettall and Colour in diuers Brizures: Or else they tooke the ^rmes of their Wiues, according as it was conuenient for them to ioyne in Mar^age.
I finde, that Monsieur Hugh de France, called the Great, Brother to King Phillip the ^rst, Count of Vermandois by reason of his wife; Porta d Or Eschiquete d'Azure,Armes borne by reason of the wife. the ^rmes of Hebert, Count of Vermandois, his Father in Law. The said Monsieur Hugh ^aced fiue Floures de Luces in the chiefe of the said Armes; by especiall priuiledge ^om King Phillip his Brother: So I finde it recorded in the Chronicle of Berry.
It is found likewise, that the wife of Monsieur Robert of France,The Armes of the Countesse of Dreux. Brother to King ^ewes the yonger, Countesse and heire of Dreux, as also of Brenne: Portoit D' Azure ^schiquete d Or a la Bordure de Gueulles.
It could not be in the same manner with Monsieur Peter of France, the other bro^er to the said King Lewes the yonger,Difference of another wiues Armes. who (by contract of marriage) tooke the Sir^ame and Armes of his wife Isabell, heire to the house of Courtnay: Qui portoit d'Or Trois Tourteaux de Gueulles.
Monsieur Phillip of France, Count of Bologne, Sonne to King Phillip Augustus; Porte de France au Lambeau de Gueulles.
Monsieur Robert of France, Count of Artois, brother to S. Lewes: Porta pareillement de France au Lambeau de quatre pieces de Gueulles Castellees d'Or de douze pieces.
Princes bearing Armes by especiall priuiledges.Monsieur Alphons of France, Count of Tolosa, Porta party de France, and de Tolose. Monsieur Charles of France, King of Sicilie, Count of Aniou and of Maine; Port^ Pareillement de France au Lambeau de Gueulles, mouuant du chef. These two last were likewise brethren to the King S. Lewes. All the said Princes bare of France by especiall priuiledges, which the Kings their Brethren gaue vnto them, and not otherwise.
The first King of France that gaue his brethren such liberty.And S. Lewes was the first of the Kings (so saith the Chronicle of Berry) that, i^ imitation of some of his famous Predecessours, permitted to his Brethren, and his Sonnes: to beare Escutcheons and Banners of the Floures de Luces of France, with Brisures and differences; although they bare the Floures de Luces for ornament onely (saith the Chronicle) and not as Armes. But returne we now againe to our former discourse.
King Clouis enstructed carefully, that the Faith of Iesus Christ should be preached in Gaule,Deni^ Areopagita the Sai^t of France, as Saint George of England. and namely at Paris, by the Great S. Dionysius, or Denys Areopagita* the first Bishop of the Parisians, who was taken as their Saint and Tutelarie Patron, and his Iupicer (not he whom the blinde Idolaters adored, but the great God of Heauen and Earth, whom the Gaules Apostle S. Denys preached) and his War-Cry or shoute;Mon-Ioue turned to Men-Ioye Saint Denis Mon-Ioue Sainct Denys; in time (which corrupteth all things) changed from Mon-Ioue, to Mon-Ioye. As if one should say, that the consideration of the wonderfull power of God, preached by Saint Denys; was the whole ioy comfort and contentment of King Clouis, which made him vnconquerable, and heaped with the victories of all his enemies, speeding neuer the worse, by the deuo^ prayers of the Gaules Apostle Saint Denys. And let it not be forgotten, that fro^ King Clouis,The King of Armes of France Mon-Ioye. the King of Armes of France, hath euermore to this very day, retained the Sir-name of Mon-Ioye.
Moreouer, in reuerend remembrance of the said Denys Areopagita, Protector of the French Empire; the Kings (ouer and beside the Banner of France) caused to be carried in Battaile, that belonging to the Abbey of S. Denys in France. Which they tooke with many Ceremonies. when they receiued it from the Altar; and gaue (...) to be carried and defended,The Banner of S Denys. by one of the most valiant Knights of the Kings Cou^ As Rigordus writeth in the life of Phillip Augustus.
But it behoueth especially to obserue, what difference there was betweene the Banner of France, and that of Saint Denys: very many times confounded together, and taken one for the other, by ignorants in the French History, and their Antiquitie.
The difference betweene a Banner and Standard, in their true forme and fa^on.In the precedent Booke we haue already showne, what difference there is betweene that called a Banner, and the Vexillum de Suger: because Banners, Peno^s, Ensignes and Lance-Flagges are of square forme, without any cutting. Whereas Standards (which are properly the Vexilla of the Romaines) are made in point, o^ round, and cut with two points, tailes, or tongues, like to our Standards. The Vexill^ was moreouer made, according to the fashion of Banners in Parish Churches, square in forme, but cut beneath in many pieces; like to the Gonfanons in Italie, and the Armes of the Counts in Bologne.
The Banner of France.The Banner of France (such as those Monarches carry to this present day) is (...) Veluet Violet-Blewe Celestiall, two wayes semed with Floures de Luces imbrodered, more full then sparing. As it is described by Rigordus, the Monke of Saint Denys (...) France, Physition and Chronicler to King Phillip Augustus, in the life of the (...) Conquerour, speaking of the Battaile of Bouines. Signum Regale, Vexillum Fl^ Lilij distinctum.
In like manner we see (euen to this day) the Canopie Chaire of State; the T^nique or Dalmatique; the great Cloake Royall, yea, and so farre as to the ver^ Sandales and Buskins of those Sacred Monarches: Semez de Fleurs de Lys sans n^bre. The Chronicle of Iuuenall des Vrsines, speaking of the returne of Charles the ^i^

from his Sacring, performed it Rheims saith: That he entred Paris, cloathed with a very rich Roabe, Toute semee de Fleurs de Lys d'Or.
And as at S. Denys in the Quire, we see it wholly garnished with cloathes of Violet Velue^* semed with Floures de Luces of Gold, for the Sacring and Crowning the Queenes of France, and at Nostre Dame de Rheims, for the Kings:Adorning Churches for Funerals of Kings and Queenes. Euen so at their buryings and Funerals, the Churches were round hung with adornments of Violet Veluet, embrodered with Golden Floures de Luces numberlesse; and not as now adayes, with Serdge or Blacke Veluet. The Duke of Berry (in his Chronicle) maketh mention thereof; speaking of the Obsequies and Funerals of Philip de Valois, and of Charles the fift, Alanus Chartierus, speaking of that of Charles the seauenth, saith: The Canopie was but of blew Linnen Cloath, painted with Floures de Luces. Which hee speaketh the rather, to noate the mecanicall couetousnesse of Lewes the eleauenth.
As for the Coffins and Beeres of the Kings, they were (till the time of King Frances the fift) couered with a large Hearse-cloath, or Paule of Violet Veluet,Hearse-cloths and Paules to couer Coffins. all ouer semed with Floures de Luces, and without number, of rich Gold embroderie: And not of Blacke Veluet with the white sattin Crosse. Armes onely for sixeteene Escutcheons of France: So saith the manuscript Chronicle of the Chancellor du Prat, speaking of the Funerals of King Lewes the twelfth: All these impertinences proceeded from the ignorance of Maisters of the Ceremonies, and Criers or Proclaimers, who would haue matters to be heard, though themselues (indeede) did not vnderstand any thing.
Moreouer, this is to be marked, that the Mantles or Cloakes of Dukes,Princes of the Blood being Sons of France Princes of the Blood, and especially the Sonnes of France; are indeede of Violet colerd Veluet. But as the Dalmatiques of the said Sonnes and Princes of Blood, ought not to be but of Crimosin or Red Sattin, and their Buskins and Sandales of the same: Euen so vpon their Dukes Cloakes, there should also be but Vne Bordure de trois Fleures de Lyz de front, and de large, ou quatre tout au plus, and trois apres en Eschiquier, and encore tranchees des Brisures marquees en leurs Armes. There is not any but the King, and the Daulphine, a King designed from his birth, that ought Porter les Sandales, la Dalmatique, and le Manteau Royal, semez de France, sans nombre.
As for the Escutcheon of France, without all question to the contrary,Concerning the Escutcheon of France. it was more famous and venerable: Seme de Fleurs de Lys sans Nombre, qu'estant reduict a trois. And it should be obserued by Painters and Engrauers, that like as the Sonnes of France, and Princes of the Blood, N'ont point autre Cimier sur leur Timbre tarre de front, que la scule Fleur de Lys double: Euen so their Armes should be sustained, and haue two Angels for Supporters, if (for pleasure or deuise) they haue no other perticulers. As in the Glasse^windowes of the Gray Fryers,Concerning the Crest and Supporters. we see the Armes of Mont-pensier, hauing two white Greyhounds for Supporters. As wee see ^n them of the Royall Ligne of Bourbon, in the Glasse windowes of the Chappell, in ^he Castle of the Louure at Paris.
For others, be they Princes, or great Lords, and Officers of the Crowne, euen ^he very chiefest: Ne doiuent auoir des Anges pour Supposts, (if they haue not espe^iall priuiledge from the King, who is the onely distributer) Partant pour enquerir. And as for the Kings priuie Seale, it onely is sustained and borne vp by one Angell:Of the Kings priuie Seales and Armes of France. ^ut the Armes of France should be supported by two Angels, and neuer were they ^ade otherwise, but vnder Charles the sixt, who tooke two flying Harts for his de^ise and supporters. Not for the dreame reported by Froissa^d, but as a notable remembrance, of that which happened in the yeare 1380. He being then hunting at ^enlis, a Stagge or Hart was found, that had about his necke a Chaine of guilded ^rasse: he prohibiting, that any should kill it, but onely lay snares to take it aliue, ^s accordingly it was done. And vpon the Coller of the Chaine was engrauen these ^ords; Caesar hoc mihi donauit. And thereupon, the King (by his owne meere moti^n) so altred his Armes, and bare for his deuise A Hart flying,The reason why the King altered the Supporters of his Armes. with a Crowne of Gold ^bout his necke. And euery where as his Armes were fixed, Harts in like manner sup^orted either side; as we finde in the Chronicle of the Vrsines. But now let vs come ^o the Banner of S. Denys.
The great Oriflambe of France of Banner of S. De^^.It was made of Sendall, that is to say Taffata, or other Red Silke Tissued; sometimes semed with Flames of Gold, whereby it tooke the name of Oriflambe, and vulgarly in the History of the Lord de Ioinuille, and other Historians: The Banner of S. Penys: Vexillum Beati Dionysij, which was that described by William the Breton, in the eleauenth Booke of his Philippides.

Ast Regi satis est tenues crispare per auras
Vexillum simplex Cendato simplice iextum
Splendoris rubei: Letania qualiter vti
Ecclesiana solet certis ex more diebus.
Quod quum flammas habeat, omnia, vulgariter aurea nomen
Omnibus in bellis habet omnia Signa praeire:
Quod Regi praestare solet Dionysius Abbas
Ad bellum, quotiens sumptis proficiscitur Armis.

The great Annales of S. Denys, describing the Battaile of Cassell in Flanders, won by King Phillip de Valois, sixt of the name, informeth vs, that before him was carried the Oriflambe;The Oriflambe borne before King Philli^ de Valois the sixt. Fastened to the top of a Lance, of Vermillion colour, in manner of a Gonfanon, with two tailes, hauing Strings and Tasselles about it of Greene Silke. And thereby we iudge, that the Banner of Saint Denys was of diuers fashions, that is to say, sometimes square, as Banners are in our Parish Churches: And then againe like to our Standards, with two points or tailes, as it is described in the former Booke.
Of whatsoeuer fashion this Banner of S, Denys was made: they obserued an auncient custome, that in such voyages as the Kings vndertooke, as well within as without the Realme, to fight with enemies, namely in their voyages, beyond the Seas:The Banner of S* Denys hallowed on the Altar. the Kings caused the Banner of S. Denys to be hallowed, as they took it from off the Altar, with Ceremonies of extraordinary deuotion.
Suggerus, Abbot of the same place, in the life of Lewes the seauenth, and the yeare 114^. saith. In hebdomada secunda post Festum Pentecostes, prius ordinatis rebus, aditer Peregrinationis (in the voyage beyond the Seas) venit Rex, vt moris est, ad Ecclesi^ beati Dionysij, a Martyribus licentiam accepturus, and ibi post celebrationem Miss^rum, Baculum Peregrinationis (the Pilgrimes Staffe) and Vexillum Beati Dionysij, qu^^ Oriflambe Gallice dicitur, valde reuerenter accepit, sicut mox est antiquorum Reg^ Francorum quando debent ad bella procedere, vel votum Peregrinationis adimplere.
The same Author, speaking of the Frenchmens ouerthrow by the Turkes, in the said voyage beyond the Seas, saith. Faciebat Antegardam illa die Gaufridus de R^^conio, vnus de nobiliorib. Baronibus Prouinciae Pictauiensis qui regebat Regis Banner^am. Quam Praecedebat Prout Moris Est Vexillum Beati Dionysij, Quod Gallice dicitur Oriflambe. Thus you see there was difference betweene the Banner of France, and that of S. Denys,The Order of the Banners marching in warre. which marched alwayes in the head of the Armie, and after it, the Banner of Fance, followed by the Ensignes and Flagges of the Lords and Commons. And the Lord of Ioinuille obserueth in the Life of S. Lewes, that the said King did expressely forbid his whole Armie, from descending before Damieta, vntill the Banner of Saint Denys was brought on Land from the Ships.
At the voyage beyond the Seas, vndertooke by King Phillip Augustus, the greatest King that hath reigned to this day, vnder the third Ligne, in the yeare of Grace 1190. at S. Iohn Baptist, went to take the Banner of S. Denys, and two more, which he had caused to be hallowed, from off the Martyrs Altar. Rigordus, Monke of the said Abbey, Chronographer and Physition to the said Philip Augustus, in the Life of the same King, writeth thus.
Philippus Rex ad Ecclesiam beatissimi Martyris Dionysij, cum maximo comitatu ^enit, causa licentiam accipiendi. Consueuerant enim antiquitus Reges Francorum, (...) quandocunque contra hostes arma mouebant, Vexillum desuper Altare beati Dionysij (...) tutela, seu custodia, secum portabant, and in prima Acie pugnatorum ponebant. Quod vi^tes Aduersarij, and cognoscentes territi, multotiens terga dederunt. Ideoque Christianissi^

Rex ante corporum sanctorum Martyrum Dionysij, Rustici and Eleutherij humiliter super pa^imentum marmoreum in oratione prostratus Deo, etc. Tandem cum lacrimis ab oratione surgens, Sportam, and Baculum Peregrinationis, (the Scrip and Pilgrims Staffe) de manu Guillelmi Rhemensis Archiepiscopi Auunculi sui reuerenter accepit. This Archbishoppe then, Legate of France, had the sirname of Champagne, and was brother to Alix de Champagne, Mother of the said Philip Augustus,The Cardinal with the white hands. and was nicknamed the Chardinall with the white hands. This was the man, who by decree of the generall Parlement, King Lewes the seauenth, his Bother in Law, sitting on his Throane of Iustice, in the Pallace of the Bishop of Paris Morice: preuailed in his suite, for Sacring the Kings of France in the Church of Rheims, as we shall haue cause to relate more at large elsewhere.
The same Rigordus, speaking of the Battaile at Pont de Bouines, wonne by the said King Phillip Augustus, behinde which Bridge he was on the day of Battaile, fought on the morrow after the Feasts of S. Iames and S. Christopher, in the yeare 1215. saith. Clamatur vbique per campos Arma, Arma Viri, clangunt Tubae, reuertuntur Cohortes, quae iam Pontem transierunt, Reuocatur Vexillum Beati Dionysij, Quod omnes praecedere in Bello debebat.
And in another place. Interea adueniunt Legiones Communiarum, quae fere vsque ad hospitia processerant, and Vexillum B. Dionysij, and accurrunt quantocyus ad aciem Regis, vbi videbant Signum Regale, Vexillum videlicet Floribus Lilij distinctum. Thus we discerne the difference, betweene the Banner of S. Denys, and the Royall one, which Rigordus affirmeth to be semed with Floures de Luces. Whereas that of S. Denys, was made but of simple Red Sendall, as it is described by William the Breton, speaking of this Battaile of Bouines, lost by the Emperour Otho, Iohn without Land, King of England, and Ferrand of Portugall, Count of Flanders, in regard of his wife. The same Breton, conuerting into Verse, that which Rigordus wrote in Prose, informeth vs; that after the said Banner of S. Denys, marched the Banner of France, carried before the King.

Ante tamen Regem signum Regale tenebat
Montiniacensis vir fortis corpore Galo.

William de Nangis, describing the descent of the King S. Lewes, into the Port of Dam^ta in Aegypt, saith. Rex cum Legato Sacrasanctam Crucem Domini triumphalem, nudam, and apertam in quodam vasello erat, Praecedente quoque iuxta ipsos in alio Vasello B. Dionysij Vexillo Fratribusque Regis, cum caeteris Baronibus, Balistarijs, and Militibus circumquaque comitantibus.
The same Author speaking of the second Voiage beyond the Seas, of the said King S. Lewes, camped before the Citie of Carthage in Affrica, after that the Christian Armie was descended to the Port of Thunis: writeth in the life of King Philip the hardie, the fifteenth Chapter. Vexillo igitur Sancti Dionysij erecto, omnibusque rite dispositis, prout moris est ad bellum praecedere, sonantibus tubis, nostri milites in hostes primae Cohortis inferuntur.
From time to time, and Reigne after reigne, those sacred Monarchs neuer marched to warre, were it without or within the Kingdome, against their enemies: but the Banner of S* Denys, the Gaules Apostle, marched alwayes in the head of the Armie. As it is obserued in their great Chronicles, and Authors discoursing on the Historie of France, as Froissard, Alanus Chartierus, and others.
The Chronicle of Iuuenall des Vrsines, in the Reigne of Charles the sixt, and Anno 1381. saith. The King went to S. Denys, to visite the Saints bodies, and performe there his Offerings: he caused to be hallowed the Oriflambe by the Abbot, and gaue it to Messire Peter de Villiers the Elder, who tooke the accustomed Oath, and kept it almost a whole yeare.
The Flemmings turning rebels against Lewes their Count,The Flemmings rebel against their Lord Count Lewes. Father in Law to Monsieur Phillip of France, tearmed the hardie, Duke of Bourgongne: the said Count requested King Charles the sixt, his Soueraign Lord, to lend him succor, whereby he might reduce his rebellious subiects to their duety and obedience. The King hauing

leuied an Armie, and being in readinesse to march away: went to S. Denys, where he was worthily welcomed by the Abbot, and Religious brethren of the place. On the morrow morning, Masse was solemnely sung, and a Sermon preached by a reuerend Diuine, the holy Reliques being set vpon the Altar. Then the King according to the laudable manner of his Predecessours, without Chaperon, and without Girdle, performed his prayers, deuotions and Offerings, as his Lords did the like. Which being done, he caused the Oriflambe to be brought, which he deliuered to an aged Knight, a valiant Gentleman, named Messire Peter de Villiers, the elder, who tooke the Oath, as in such cases is required, and then the King returned to Bo^^ de Vincennes. This was in the yeare 1382.
In which yeare, the King being ready to giue battaile to Philip Arteuelle and his Flemmings,Two strange accident^ happening at the ioyning of two Armies. at Pont de Commines; two things happened, which seemed to be somewhat marueilous. The one, there came such a flight of Rauens, which engirt the Hoaste on either side, as it was wonderfull; neuer ceasing their flickering and flying about it. The other, that for the space of fiue or sixe dayes, the Ayre was so darke, and charged with stormes; that hardly could one man see another. When the King knew that the Flemmings came to fight, he made a kinde of promise; that he would fight with them, causing his people to march, and the Oriflambe to be displayed. No sooner was it displayed, but (as the Storie saith) the Aire immediately cleared, and became as faire and bright, as euer it had bin seene; so that the Battalions plainely saw each other. The first accident was reputed almost miraculous, in regard of that great flight of Rauens, creatures which (of their owne naturall disposition doe fi^ure blood and slaughter, as a thing ordenarily happening. But the second obseruation chanced on the day of the same Battaile.
The second strange accident on the day of BattaileArteu^lle and his Flemmings encountred the French so furiously, that they retired backe diuers paces. Which the French perceiuing, they made a shoute, and out-cry, so loud as possibly they could: Nostre Dame, Mont-Ioye, S. Denis, On them, On them. At this War-crie, the strength of the French redoubled in such manner: that the Flemmings (faint heartedly) recoyled, brake their rankes, and in few houres were quite discomfited. So that there remained slaine on the ground, fortie thousand on the Flemmings side, with their firebrand of sedition Arteuelle himselfe: And of the Kings followers about, three and fortie persons.
What the King did after the day of BattaileAfter this Battaile, the King and his Vnckles went to the Church of S. Denys, tooke the Oriflambe, himselfe being bare headed, and without Girdle, and going before the Altar in great deuotion, deliuered ^^to the Abbot and gaue to the Church a goodly Pall of Cloth of Gold: So saith the Chronicle of the Vrsines.
The men of Gaunt reuolted from their allegiance.In the yeare following, three hundred fourescore and three, the men of Gaunt being againe reuolted, to a^de the English; the King resolued to goe fight with them. He departed from Paris, and came to S. Denys, where he heard Masse, receiued the Oriflambe, and gaue it to Messire Guy de la Trimouille, a very valiant Knight: who receiued the Sacrament, and swearing the ordenary Oathe, tooke it.
The yeare 1386. when King Charles enterprised the Conquest of the Kingdome of England,How the Oriflambe ought to be carried in warre* and when. at his departure from Paris; he went to S. Denys in France, where he performed his prayers and Offerings. He fell into a doubtfull deliberation, whether he should take the Oriflambe with him, or no. For he ought not to take it, but for defence of the Kingdome; and not when he intendeth to conquer new Prouinces: So saith the Chronicle of the Vrsines.
Now, it is to be noated, that the Kings of France doe cause it to be newly halowed, when they march in person against their enemies. Otherwise, when the warre is performed by Lieutenants; then there is carried no Oriflambe at all
And the order of bearing this Standard or Banner of S. Denys, was created in title of an Office belonging to the Crowne (as we learne by the same Chronicle) in Anno 1397.^earing the Oriflambe an Office of the Crowne At this time there happened a great alteration of Officers, because many were slaine in the Battaile of Hungaria (lost at Nicopolis, by the folly of Iohn of Bourgongne, Count of Neuers, eldest Sonne to the Duke of Bourgongne Phillip the Hardie, in the yeare 1396.) And then was made Constable of France, Sancerre, who

before had beene Marshall; Messire Iohn le Maingre, otherwise called Boucicault, was made and ordained Marshall; Messire Iacques de Bourbon great Chamberlaine; and Messire Hutin d'Omont appointed to carry the Oriflambe.
So by the death of Messire Guy de la Trimouille, slaine on the day at Nicopolis, the said d'Omont had the Office of bearing the Oriflambe. So that the faction of Bourgongne (fatal and vnfortunate to France) hauing constrained King Charles the sixt to goe and besiege Bourges, to ruinate the Princes of his bloud,The faction of Bourgongne fatal to France his Vnkles and Nephewes of Berry and of Orleans, in the yeere 1411. the said D'Omont, after he had receiued the Sacrament, and taken the Oath in such cases required; receiued the Oriflambe from the Kings owne hand, and restored it againe the yeere following, into the Abbey of S. Denys.
The Registers of the Court do report, that in the yeare of our Lord 1414. in the moneths of February and March, there arose a wonderfull winde, stinking and full of nipping colds,A very noysome and dangerous winde. whereby the inhabitants of Paris (without distinction of age or quality) were so troubled with Rheumes, that it caused strange Coughes in the Parliament Iurisdictions, and namely that of the great Chamber, and du Chastelet; whereby they ceased for a time, and not a man was seene to walke.
This sickenesse caused the death of many, and particularly of the said Hutin d'Omont, a worthy valiant Knight, in whose place there was choyce made of an other.
So that in the said yeere, the King marching to the Siedge of Compeigne (called Karnopolis and Karolopolis by the King and Emperor Charles the bald,Compeigne called Karnopolis and Karolopolis. who caused it to be compassed with walls) vsurped by Iohn Duke of Bourgongne. There the King caused an assembly of his Councell, to know to whom it should be deliuered: For it was a custome obserued at all times, to giue the bearing of the Oriflambe to a Knight, a man Loyall, Wise, and Valiant. And because the Lord d'Omont (who had vsed to carry the Oriflambe) was dead; by election, choyce was made of Messire Guillaume Martell,A new electio^ made of the Oriflambe-bea^er. Lord of Bacqueuille, to whom was deliuered the Oriflambe, according to order who greatly excused himselfe in regard of his olde age. But then was granted to him, as an ayde and assistant, his eldest sonne, and another goodly gentleman, named Messire Iohn de Betas, Lord of Sainct Cler; who were appointed as Coadiutors to the said Lord de Bacqueuille.
In like manner the Romane Emperours, when they marched forth to Warre, caused to be carried before them their Imperiall Banner, composed of Red silke,The Banner Imperial born before the Romane Emperors. which their Historians called Diabellion, Diuum Velum, Labarum, and by the particular word Flammeum, either for being semed with flames of gold in embroydery; or by finishing (as all Standards ought to doe) in two points, or tailes, when it waued in the ayre, then the two tailes seemed like a flame of fire. On the top of this Labarum, was exalted the Cypher and Monogramme of our Redeemer Iesus Christ, in Greeke letters of pure gold, entoured with a rich Crowne of precious stones: So saith the Christian Poet Prudentius.

Christus purpureum gemmanti textus in auro
Signabat Labarum.

It is generally knowne, that the sacred Monarches of the first Ligne, did beare so much honor and reuerence to the reliques of great S. Denys Areopagita,The first Apostles of the Gaules. and his companions S. Rusticus, and S. Eleutherius, the first Apostles of the Gaules; that ^hey held them for defenders and protectors of the holy Kingdome of France, as Rigordus hath obserued in the life of Philip Augustus, Anno 1195. Rex Philippus non ^memmor Patroni, and desensoris Sacri Francorum Imperij B. Dionysij, quam citius potuit ^d Ecclesiam Beatissimi Martyris properauit: vbi pro gratiarum actione Deo, and Marty^ibus pallium sericum pretiosum, in pignus charitatis, humiliter super Altare obtulit.
So that they made choyce of their buriall in the Church dedicated to the said holy Martyrs, long time before Dagobert (whom the vulgar fondly would haue to be the founder thereof) according to the testimony of S. Gregory of Tours in his history of France, composed long time before the reigne of the said King Dagobert,

who was no more then a repairer of the said Abbey. Thither they made recourse, as well in their sickenesse, as when they went forth to Warre: and then they caused to be taken downe the Shrines wherein their ashes were kept.
S. Lewis falling sicke very dangerously, the yeere of Grace 1244. in the Moneth of December, the Saturday before S. Lucie; all France made publique prayers for his recouery to health.King Lewis very grieuously sicke. But particularly they of the Abbey of S. Denys in France, (where is the common Mansoleum of those Sacred Monarchs) contributed so holy an action. For the fryday before the Feast of Christmasse, the Abbot caused the Shrines of the holy Martyrs to be taken forth of their Screenes and Vaults, and carried them in procession, wherein went bare-footed, the Bishops Charles of Noy^, and Peter of Meaux, the Abbot of S. Denys Odo Clementis, and all his religious brethren, followed by an vnspeakeable number of Burgesses of Paris, and of all sexes. And the very same houre of extracting the said holy bodies, the good King Saint Lewis returned from death to life.
Mathew Paris, a Monke of Saint Albanes in England, who liued at the same time, recordeth it in these words, vnder the yeere 1248. Hoc Anno multi Nob^^es Angliae proponentes iter arripere Hierosolymitanum cum Christianissimo Rege Francorum, quem miraculose a portis Mortis, vel potius ab ipsa Morte, Dominus dignatus est reuocare, and reuiuificare.
William de Nangis, in the life of the said S. Lewis, the twentieth chapter, speaking concerning the extraction of the said holy bodies, saith. Dum ista parabuntur, aud^tum est Parisijs, quod pro sainte Regis Beatorum corpora Martyrum, quae nunquam nis^ solummodo pro salute Regis Franciae, vel Regni sui periculo extrahuntur.
When the Kings were marching to Warre, the said extraction of these holie Bodies was peformed; and oftentimes they remained still vpon the Altar, vntill their returning backe.
Rigordus, in the life of King Philip Augustus, Anno 1191. when the said Philip sayled beyond the Seas, to besiege Acres, saith. Hoc Anno octauo Kalendas Septembris consilio Domini Guillelmi Rhemensis Archiepiscopi, and Adelae Reginae, and omnium Episcoporum, corpora Beatorum Martyrum Dionysij, Rustici and Eleutherij, cum purissimis Vasis Argenteis, in quibus diligentissime sigillata continebantur sunt extracta et super Altare posita, vt ibi omnes fideles ad tam Sanctum spectaculum conuenientes, cum gemit^ and susp^rijs pro sancta Terra liberanda, and pro Rege Francorum, and Vniuerso Comitatus^ puras manus cum Moyse leuan^es ad Dominum preces funderent.
This was practised as well vnder the reignes of King Francis the first, as of King Henry the second his Sonne. Francis the first, going and returning from Italie, as we read in the Manuscript Chronicle of the Chancellor Du Prat, in these words. The King being at Lyons, in Iune Anno 1515. ready to passe into Italie, to conquer his Duchie of Millaine; sent to S. Denys in France, to the end that the Holy Bodies might be descended, as was wont to be done when the Kings of France went in person to any War s^ off. And the fifteenth day of October, 1516. the King returning to Paris from his iourney of Italie, went to Saint Denys in France, to giue thankes to God, and to haue the Holy Bodies put in their places againe, which had beene descended, when the said King passed ouer the Alpes.
The like was done in the time of King Henry the second, in An. 1552. the 28. day of Aprill: the Cardinall of Bourbon, Abbot of the said Abbey, caused the Bodies to be taken forth in the Kings absence.
The Ceremony at setting vp the ho^y rel^qu^^ into ^^eir places.But concerning their replacing, it was alwaies done in presence of the King, and when he was returned home again. At this Ceremony, the King was clothed in his Royall Ornaments, the Crowne on his head, the Sword naked, the Scepter Royall, and the Rodde or hand of Iustice, carried before his Maiesty, by Princes of the Blood bare-headed; and for want of them, by the very greatest Lords of the kingdome, followed also by the Court of Parliament, in their red robes, the Chamber of Accounts, the Generalls of the Aydes, the Vniuersitie and the Hostell of the Citie. Because, before replacing the said holy Bodies, Procession was made, two Bishops bearing each of them three Shrines of the holy Martyrs, after which followed the Cleargy, the King, and his Soueraigne Courts.
In ancient times (meerely in deuotion) Princes of the bloud were bearers of them, and the Kings themselues of that of S. Denys, with their eldest Sonne. We haue the testimonies of King Lewis le Gros, sixt of the name (reported in his life by the Abbot S. Denys Suggerus) and of Lewis the yonger, his Sonne; and of Philip de Valois, according to the great Chronicle.
The Romane Emperors after Constantine the great, going in publique to solemn Festiualls, and on dayes of honourable disporting; carried a Crosse of gold in the right hand, and another as the Crest or Timbre of their Tyarus: So saith Curopalates, and the Christian Poet Prudentius.
Ardebat summis Cruxaddita Christis.
The Monarchs of the Lillie,How highly the signe of the Crosse hath been honored in France. haue so honored this marke and Symbole of mens saluation, that all their Monie is stamped therewith. Their Monagrammes, Ciphers and Signatures are made in a Crosse, as is obserued in the Treatise, concerning the principall Officers of the Crowne of France.
When they marche in publique, or in ranged Battell against their enemies; it hath beene ordinarily their custome, to haue a Crosse highly exalted borne before them. As thar of their Oratory and Chappell, finishing in a Foure de Luce, ouer the Coape of S. Martin, the second Apostle of the Gaules.
King Lewes the Debonnaire, Emperour, hauing receiued from him of the East, named Bazilius (in the yeare of Grace, eight hundred threescore and twelue,A piece of the true Crosse sent to King Lewes. and the moneth of Ianuary) a small peece of the true Crosse; hee caused it to be richly set in gold and precious stones, and had it carried before him. So saith Nithardus, and the Chronicle of Lauresheim.
Theganus, Archdeacon of the Metropolitane Church of Treuers, and Nithardus sonne to Angilbert and Bertha, daughter to the King and Emperour Charlemaigne, obseruing the dispositions of the said Lewes the Debonnaire, and of his Sonne Charles the Bauld, by the bloody factions of a distempered League, doe tell vs: That the Bauld being in the field, and seeking to passe the Riuer of Seine, where she loseth her name in the Ocean Sea; his rebellious Vassailes which kept the passage therof, acknowledging the Crosse borne before him, whereon they had sworn to him the oath of fidelitie; were surprized with such a dreadfull feare, that immediately they forsooke the Foord and bankes of Seiue, leauing them freely to the King. Who came to S. Denys in France, there rendering thankes vnto God, and to his holy Apostles add Protectors of the Holy and Sacred Kingdome of France.
In the yeare of Grace 1240. Baldwine Emperour of Constantinople, being narrowly pressed with want of money, to furnish the Warre then much importing him; aduertised the King S. Lewes to furnish him with meanes.The Crowne of Thornes pawned to the K. of France. And for assurance thereof, he would send him The Crowne of Thornes, which the Iewes planted on the head of the Sauiour of the World; which the King most willinglie accepted, and with all his heart.
The yeere following, the True Crosse (which after the death of the Prince of Sarrazins Saladine, had beene kept in the Citie of Damieta, vntill the most vnfortunate day when the City was first conquered, and afterward lost and conquered by the said Sarrazins) was brought to Paris. Saint Lewes King of France, and Queene Blanch of Castile, his Mother, made no spare of their goods and liuelode,The true Crosse where on Christ suffered, brought to Paris. to gaine this vnspeakeable Treasure. It had been pawned first to the Venetians, for an hundred and fiftie thousand pounds of siluer, by the two sonnes of Iohn de Brenne, King of Ierusalem, to warre vpon the Greekes.
The Emperour Baldwin afterward engaged it againe, and finally wrought the meanes that it was released from the said Venetians, by the King S, Lewes, who vpon good-Friday, Anno 1241. caused the said true Crosse to be brought into the Ab^atiall Church of S. Anthonie des Camps lez Paris, at the entrance whereof was prepared a Theater, whereon the King, the Queenes, Blanch his Mother,The Royall assembly at presentation of the Crosse. and Margaret of Prouence his wife, and his three brethren mounted; with the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Princes and great Lords of the Kingdome, and an infinite number

of people assisting the Ceremonie. The King and whole company, melting themselues into teares of ioy, receiued that precious gadge of our Redemption, which he raised vp vpon the said Theator aloft, to let the people see it, the Prelates singing with chearefull voyces, E^ce Crucem Domini. After adoration done thereto, the King, bare-footed, cloathed in a Coate of plaine Cloath, vngirt, bare-headed, and hauing fasted three dayes before (imitating the good Emperour Heraclius,The King him self carried the Crosse. when he returned victorious from the Kingdome of the Persians) carried the true Crosse from S. Anthonies, to the Cathedrall Church of our Lady in Paris. Followed by the Queenes and the Kings three Brethren on foote likewise, who carried the Crowne of Thornes (highly exalted to be seene of the people) brought into the Kingdome the yeare before, the chiefe Lords of France sustaining the Kings Armes, and the Princes his brethrens.
This memorable Processio^ hapned in the Church of Paris, al the Bels in the City ringing, and praier being perfected, the King (in the same Order of Ceremonie) came from the said Church, to his own great Pallace in the midst of the Citie. Reuersiu est Rex ad ma^us Palatium suum, quod est in medio Vrbe, deferens Crucem suam gloriose, Fra^ribusque eius Coronam, consequente Praelatorum ordinata Processione, qua nunquam visa fuit in Regno Francorum solemnior, aut iucundior. Alwayes bearing the Crosse, and his brethren after him the Crowne of Thornes, all the Prelates and Cleargy following in an orderly procession, the most solemne and ioyfull that had euer beene seene in the Kingdome of France, thus speaketh Mathew Paris, whereto hee addeth this remarkeable tract, for the greatnes and precedency of the holy and sacred kingdome of France. Vniuersi igitur, and singuli Dominum, qui Regnum Francorum pra omnibus alijs speciali complectitur dilectione consolatur, and tuetur (Spanish writers, answer to the passage of this Englishman!) iunctis manibus glorificarunt: That God comforteth, guardeth, and maintaineth the Kingdome of France, which hee affecteth with an especiall loue aboue all the Kingdomes of the world. Sic igitur Dominus noster Iesus Christus Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium, cuius iudicia abyss^^ multa, in cums manu corda sunt Regum, dans salutem quibus vult; ipsum Regnu^ Francis his tribus dotauit,The 3. great bl^s^ings bestowed on France. and ditauit in breui tempore beneficijs preciosis. That God had in small time enriched and endowed the Kingdome of France with three precious benefits; the Crowne of Thornes; the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ (he might haue added the steele head of the Lance that pierced his side, and the Spunge which suckt vp the Gaule and Vineger, which are likewise in the holy Chappell of the Pallace at Paris; and one of the foure nailes, wherewith hee was fastned to the Tree of the Crosse, which is at S. Denys in France) and the body of the most happy Emond, Archbishop of Canterbury in England (that is S. Edme of Pontigny in Bourgongne; where euen to this instant day, he is to be seene in flesh and bones, without any iot of impairing) and Confessour, shewing daily infinite strange myracles.
A Chappell purposely builded for the Reliques.The King of France then (so proceedeth on our Monke) caused to be builded neere to his Pallace, a Chappell of royall structure, wherein hee enclosed these precious Reliques of our redemption. Moreouer, the said King had his Chappell adorned with the Cloake of our Lord, the head of the Lance, and the Spundge, with innumerable other precious Reliques; in honor and reuerence whereof, the Pope hath granted forty daies of true pardon, to all such as goe to say prayers and meditations, in the said holy Chappell of the Pallace at Paris. Vnde Dominus P^p^ concessit omnibus eas adeuntibus in Capella Parisiensi orandi causa, Quadraginta dies relaxationis. As much auoucheth William of Nangis, in the life of the King S. Lewis, and the twelfth chapter.
The said King S. Lewis caused to be enchased in gold, a part of the said true Crosse, which is to be seene in the holy Chappell, called The Crosse of Triumph and of Victory, and he carried some part thereof with him wheresoeuer he went, and at solemne feasts, himselfe shewed it to the people.
The following Kings ^bserued the example of King Lewis.By his example, the Kings his descendants obserued the same laudable custome, when making their entrance into Paris, they went to render thankes to God in the Cathedrall Church thereof, where they shewed to the people that Crosse of victory.
Alanus Chartierus, describing the entrance of King Charles the seuenth, called the Victorious, telleth vs, that his Maiesty arriuing at the Porch (Paradisus in the Capitularies) of the Church of Paris, tooke the accustomed Oath, for conseruation of the Rights and Priuiledges thereof, betweene the hands of the Bishop of Paris: which being done, he entred into the Church, within the body whereof were three Arches, couered with great burning Tapers, which shewed the structure of the faire Temple so admirably, and as cleere as at noone day. Hauing said his prayers, and Te Deum being sung, he went to suppe and lodge at the Pallace in the wonted manner. On the next day in the morning, being Wednesday, the 13. of Nouember, Anno 1437 the King went to heare masse in the holy Chappell, and shewed there to the people, the true Crosse, and the head of the Speare, wherewith our Lord was pierced on the Tree of the Crosse.
This custome obserued by the most Christian Kings, in shewing the true Crosse to the people of Paris, on the morrow after their entrance;Whence the custome was deriued. was deriued from their yeerely meeting on good Friday, at the said holy Chappell, for shewing the true Crosse to the people, in honor and reuerence which they bare to the holy Hieroglyphicke of our Redemption. For, after that the King S. Lewis had receiued the true Crosse, from the Treasury of the Latine Emperors of Constantinople (as wee haue said) and placed it in the holy Chappell of his Pallace,Prouision made because it should not be touched. by him newly builded, as yet is to be seene: he and the Kings his successors, went to adore it yearelie on good-Friday, and soone after they shewed it to the people, at the trauers of a grate, or lattice made in an yron cage, at issuing forth of a Chappell in the Quire, fronting on the South-side of the Pallace. As it is seene on Palme-Sunday (when the Church of Paris goeth on Procession) then prepared on a Table, couered with a faire white cloth, and two lighted Tapers on both sides of the said true Crosse, when it is adored by the Cleargy and people.
This latter custome is taken forth of the Registers belonging to the Court of Parliament, in Anno 1423. wherein is an Order, whereby the Duke of Bedford,The Duke of Bedford regent of France for the King of England. Regent of France, for his Nephew King Henry of England, sixt of the name, chalenging his title to France) had power to shew the true Crosse to the people of Paris, and these are the words of the said Act. The Duke of Bedford, by the absence of the King his Nephew, and representing his person; shall shew on good-Friday the true Crosse to the people, as the Kings of France vsed the same day to doe. This was during the beginning of the most miserable and vnfortunate reigne of King Charles the seuenth, who reconquered his Kingdome by the point of the sword, and was victorious ouer all his enemies.
Passe we now to the disease called the Kings euill, and curing thereof, reserued to the Monarchs of the Sacred Lillie of France: for thereof it was that so excellently spake S. Thomas Aquinas, in the passage before alleadged, concerning the holy Viole or Bottle, and sacring the Kings of France.
King Clouis made experience thereof,The Kings Euill, and how the King of France vsed to o^re it. on the person of one of his ordinary houshold, one whom he affected, named Lanicetus, whom he made whole and sound from that foule and infectious disease. And the Kings his Successours, euen to this very day (after their Sacring, but not before) shewed by experience, that this Celestiall grace is infused into them, yea, and continued, from the day of their Sacring, vntill the houre of their decease.
Petrus Blesensis, Archdeacon of Somersetshire in England, but borne, and buried at Blois, the yeare of Grace one thousand two hundred, vnder Philip Augustus, in his hundred and fiftieth Epistle, speaking of the Kings Euill, hath these words. Fateor quod sanctum est Domino Regi assistere: Sanctus enim, and Christus Domini est, Nec in vanum accepit vnctionis Regiae Sacramentum. Cuius Vnctionis virtus si ignoratur, aut in dubium venit, fidem eius plenissimam facit defectus inguinariae pectis, and curatio Scrophularum. This wicked foule disease, hath many Latine and Greeke names, Chaeradae, Sodellae, Strumae, Scrophulae, and other beside.
Clouis and the Kings his Successors, touching their throates that were so diseased,The word vsed by the King, touching the disease. vsed but these words, as all other Kings doe to this day: The King toucheth thee; but God cure thee. S. Lewes, ninth of the name, added thereto the signe of the Crosse,

which the Kings his Predecessours had not vsed to doe. As we learne by Guilla^me de Nangis, in the liues of S. Lewes, and of his eldest Sonne Phillip the Hardie, King of France, third of the name. In tangendo infirmitates, quae vulgo, Sodellae vocantur, super quibus curandi, Franciae Regibus Dominus contulit gratiam singularem, pius Rex (speaking of S. Lewes) modum hunc,The signe of the Crosse added by the King S. Lewes. praeter caeteros, voluit obseruari. Cum enim alij Reges Praedecessores sui tangendo solummodo locum morbi, verba ad haec appropriata, and consueta proferrent, quae quidem verba Sancta atque Catholica sunt, nec facere consuenissent aliquod signum Crucis, ipse (S. Lewes) super consuetudinem aliorum hoc addidit, quod dicendo verba super locum morbi, sanctae Crucis signaculum imprimebat, vt sequens curatio virtuti Crucis potius attribueretur, quae Regiae dignitati. And yet notwithstanding, I haue seene some such diseased persons handled by the Kings Henry the third, Henry the Great, of famous memory, and King Lewes the thirteenth, now reigning, who did onely touch the Euill, pronouncing the words before remembred.
Iacobus Valdesius, a Spanish Doctor, in a Tract which hee wrote concerning the dignity of the King and Kingdome of Spaine, is compelled to subscribe to the truth, touching the excellency of the Kings of France, in healing this dangerous disease. Howbeit, according to the naturall disposition of his Nation, which in so wretched a sicknesse cannot exceed the true meanes indeed: he laboureth subtilly, to tarnish and deface the glory of the French to his vttermost, auouching, that the power of this curing, proceeded not by the purity and sweetnesse of the ayre of France, but contrariwise, by heauenly grace and fauour giuen to the Noble Kings thereof. Non desunt qui detrahere gloriae Gallorum velint, id euenire dicentes occasione aeris Gallici ^urandis Strumis salubris, and ita omnes aerem mutantes, and ad regionem Galliae venientes, valetudinem recuperare. Sed ego sentio id accidere gratia concessa a Deo optimo maximo e^us obsequio deditis Regibus Galliae, and fidelibus, presertim Diue Ludouico, adeo quod^m oppido Poblete (that is a Burrough and Monastery, seated on the frontiers of Arragon and Catalogna, where the most part of the Kings of Arragon are enterred in regione Hispania Catalauniae, vbi brachium veneratur Diui Regis Ludouu^, quos laborantes Strumis tangit, brachium illud ad sanitatem reducit. But this Author (ignorant in the French History) is mistaken, alleadging S. Lewes to be the first King that cured the Euill: the passage of Nangis before auouched, proueth the contrarie.
(...) done (...) of (...).In referring this cure to the temperate ayre of France, is a great absurdity, because the same hath beene done as well in Italy as in Spaine, which Prouinces are stuffing, and wondrous hote.
In Italie, the Continuer of Enguerran de Monstrellet, in his History of France, and the Italians ^aulus Iouius, and Guichardin, speaking of the entrie of King Charles, eight of the name, into the City of Rome, as he went to re-conquer his Kingdom of Naples. The King (saith the Continuer) shewed himselfe to haue power then sovigorous and magnificent, euen in the Citie of Rome, that hee caused to be erected three or foure payre of gallowes, commanding to be hanged, strangled, and beheaded certain theeues and malefactors, in the field of floures (In Campo Floris:) Others likewise were beaten, whipt, their noses and eares cut off, and some such delinquents drowned. To declare, that as the true eldest Sonne of the Church, and most Christian King, he had all the high and lowest meanes of Iustice within Rome: like as in the City of Paris, and others of his Kingdome of France.
After this most remarkeable Tract, followeth that concerning the touching or handling the Kings euil. On the Tuesday next ensuing, being the twentieth day of Ianuarie, Anno 1493. the King heard Masse in a place called the Chappell of France (that is of S. Lewis) where he handled and healed the disease of the Kings euill; which when the Italians beheld, they were neuer so ouercome with wonder.
Arnoulle Ferron, Counceller in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, in the life of good King Lewis the twelfth, called Father of the people, writeth, that this Prince hauing made his entrance into the City of Geneway, as being Soueraigne Lord thereof: the people of Geneway admired nothing more, then to see him cure such a disease, onely with the touch of his hand: Miratisunt illi Regem Strumis solo contacts meder^.
The Chronicle of Anthony du Prat, Chancellour of France, in the life of King Francis the first, telleth vs, that after the battell of Marignano, (in the field of Saint Bridget, a place famous for the ouerthrow and buriall of sixteene thousand and fiue hundred Switzers, slaine there in the field) King Francis became Master of his Duchie of Millaine, and Seigneury of Geneway, Cities whereinto hauing made his entrance, he went to Bologna le Grasse, where Pope Leo de Medicis, tenth of the name then remained. The King soiourning some few daies at Bologna, departed thence the fifteenth day of December, Anno 1515. Vpon which day of his departure, hee handled and healed the diseased of the Kings Euill, in the Chappell of the said Popes Pallace, to the great amazement of the Holy Father, and the Italians that came to see the wonder.A Bishop of Poland cured of the Kings Euill. Among the rest, a Bishop of Polonia was cured, who came (expressely for that effect) to Millaine, and from thence to Bologna, with commendatory Letters from the King of Poland, his Lord and Soueraigne Prince.
After the vnfortunate day at Pa^ia, so fatall to France, by surprizall of the same King Francis, and that great Prince transported into Spaine, where hee was vsed like a Barbarian, and with all rigour, by Charles the fift, his Vassall and Liedgeman for the Counties of Flanders and Artois. The said King (rendring good for euill) healed all Spaniards infected with the loathsome disease (wherewith those people are troubled beyond all other in the world.)
The bad entertainment of the King, and his goodnesse extended to the Spaniards, was sole subiect to the learned Lascaris, to make this Epigram, whereby hee touched (to the quicke) Charles the fift for the ingratitude, small respect and honour by him offered to the Aesculapius of his people, his Prince and Soueraigne Lord.

Ergo manu admota sanat Rex Charadas,The Epigram of Lascarit against Charles the fift. est que
Captiuus Superis gratus vt ante fuit?
Iudicio tali, Regum sanctissime, qui te
Arcent, inuisos suspicor esse Deis.

And now we come to the Kings Regall Right and Prerogatiue.
S. Gregory of Tours, in the second booke and thirty eight chapter of his history of France, speaking of the Presents which King Clouis receiued from Anastasius, Emperour of the East, saith that Ascenso equo, aurum, argentumque, and itinere illo quod inter Portam Atrij, and Ecclesiam Ciuitatis est, praesentibus Populis manu propria spargens, voluntate benignissima erogauit. Hauing receiued them in the Church of S. Martin in Tours, he mounted on horsebacke, and cloathed in the Ornaments of the Emperour of the East, with the Diademe on his head; hee threw (with his owne hand) gold and siluer to the people, from the Church porch of S. Martin, vnto the great Church of the City. He had learned this behauiour of the Romane Emperours, who vpon the dayes of their Coronation gaue very liberall Largesse to the people.
Curopalates, in the booke concerning the Officers of the Court of Constantinople, obserueth that ancient custome, that the new Emperour appointed, going to the Church to be Sacred and Crowned, mounted on a Theater (prepared for the purpose) at the Porch of the Gate Royall, where hee distributed his Largesse of pieces of new Cloth, being of his colours and Liueries, with some pieces of gold or siluer. Nouus Imperator ascenso Triclinio, quod Thomaites appellatur, spectans versus Augustale, vbi stat Populus, simul and milites, per aliquem Senatorij Ordinis virum (antequam se videndum exhibeat) Populo Missilia iacit, Epicombia dicta, Segmenta videlicet ex panno, in illorum vnoquoque sunt numismata aurea tria, argentea totidem. And afterward, he was shewne to the people, exalted vpon a Shield, as wee haue said in the precedent booke.
After the solemne Feast for the said Sacring and Coronation,A further largesse to the people of 8 or 10. daies continuance. there is yet a further Largesse giuen to the people, by a Senatour appointed to doe it; which is continued for the space of eight or ten daies, during the Ceremonies of the said

Coronation, more or lesse, according to the benefit of time, and season of the yere. The first day thereof, the new Emperour comming to his Pallace, presenteth himselfe to all them of his Court, vpon a place highly exalted, hauing the Master of his Wardrobe with him, or chiefest Gentleman of his Chamber, who holdeth in his Cloake skirt many peeces of gold and siluer, which the Emperour gripeth with his owne hands, and distributeth to the Princes and Lords of his Court, as also to their children, the people then present, and to all his Officers.
Saint Gregory of Tours hath not obserued (or else wee come farre short of this passage in his History, as well as of other more beside) that Clouis hauing vnderstood that this Emperour Anastasius of the East, to be infected with the Heresie of Eutiches the Magician,The strange death of Anastasius, the Emperor of the East. Acephales the Manichean, and rooted in all impiety (for he was slaine with a clap of thunder, and his body beaten into powder) sent the Crowne of Gold (whereof Anastasius had made him a present) to Rome, and made an Offering of it on the Altar of Saint Peter the Apostle.
Sigibert auoucheth this to be in the yeere of Grace, fiue hundred and ten. Clodoneus Rex ab Anastasio Imperatore codicillos de Consulatu, and Coronam Auream cum genmis, and Tunicam Blatteam (Blatta signifieth a Scarlet Robe, which the Romanes called Tyrian Purple, and Sidonius Apollonaris, in the Panegyricke spoken vnto Ma^rian, saith:
-- Pecuaria Gallus,Pontus Castorea, Blattam Tyrus, aera Corinthus,Sardinia argentum.)
accepit. Ipse vero Rex misit Romae S. Petro Coronam Aureum cum gemmis, quae Regnum appellari solet. As much saith the Monke Aimonius, in his first booke and 24. chapter of his history of France.
These words vsed by Sigibert, Regnum appellari solet, doe instruct vs, that in perpetuall memory of the piety and deuotion of Clouis, (on behalfe of the Church, the Crowne was religiously kept in the Treasury of S. Peter.A Kingdome and King. And that, For Excellency, the Realme of France was called Regnum, and her Monarch Rex, without any other addition, as we shall heereafter shew more at large in another Chapter.
The greatnesse and riches of S. Peters Patrimony, came not by the imaginarie donation of Constantine the Great, as the Greekes, to get some precedencie in honor ouer the Latine Church, haue falsly supposed: and, among other Authors, Ph^tius, Patriarch of Constantinople in his Nomocanon, Thedorus Balsamo, and some other Italians, as Augustinus Eugubinus, in hatred and enuy, which he bare (without reason) to the French, would make men beleeue.
Hunc fabulam longi temporis mendacia finxit.
And that Honor is due onely to the most Christian Monarchs of the Floure de Luce, the most iudicious are forced to confesse. Anastasius, Maister of the Romane Librarie, in the life of Pope Hormisda, saith: That Clouis gaue great Gifts and Presents to the Confession of S. Peter: And among the rest, the Imperiall Crowne which Anastasius, Emperor of the East, had sent vnto him. This is also the opinion of Ioseph^ Stephanus, Episcopus Oriolanus, in the Treatise which he wrote De Coronatione S^mmi Pontifici.
It was the same Clouis, who at the motion of the Romane Emperors, with-held the Royall Prerogatiues concerning the Inuestitures of Bishops, and Soueraigne Patronages of Archbishoprickes, in his owne Kingdome.
As concerning Inuestitures or Enstallments, Sigibert writeth in the yeere fiue hundred, that Clouis gaue great heritages and goods to the Church of Rheimes. Floardus, in his Historie of the said Church, setteth downe the number of them; of all which goods, Clouis retained the homage to himselfe, and to the Kings his Successors. Saint Rhemigius seeing himselfe stored with more riches then was needfull for his Church, gaue part of them vnto the Church of La^,

which he erected for a Cathedrall Church.The maner of inuesting Bishops. And the first Bishop was named Genebandus, inuested into the said Bishopricke by Clouis, Per Annulum and Virgam, with a Crosier and a Ring, as the Romane Emperors did.
It is generally knowne, that the Elections to Bishopricks and Abbies,Of Elections to Bishopricks and Abbeyes. were anciently made in France, by voyce and suffrages of the people and Cleargy, and were afterward agreed vnto by the Kings, who very often (without any regard of those Elections) placed others at their owne will, taking, (ordenarily) Priests and Chaplaines out of their Oratory and Chappell; of whom, after their Inuestiture, they receiued the Oath of Allegiance, which continueth yet to this day, the Kings Regall right being open for the King to this day, and the said Oath taken.
In the fift Councell of Orleans, it was namely decreed, that Ecclesiasticall persons should not make any vnder-hand sute, for election to the said Bishoprickes and Abbeyes of France, without the will and consent of the King. Vt nullus Episcopatum donis, aut comparatione liceat adire, sed cum voluntate Regis iuxta electionem Cleri, Plebis, etc. with prohibition giuen to the Comprouinciall Bishops, not to consecrate them vpon the paine of excommunication; as appeareth in the eight Article of the first Councell of Paris.
And according to these Decrees of the Gallicane Church, we see in S. Gregorie of Tours his third book, and seuenteenth Chapter, that Ommatius, Dionysio Episcopo apud Turonos decedente, tribus annis praefuit. Hoc inssu Chlodomiris Regis ordinatus est: And in the following bookes we reade, that Theodorus Proculus, and Dinisius were promoted to the said Bishopricke of Tours, by the command and nomination of the King.
In the sixt booke and ninth chapter, Dumnolus, Prior of the Monastery of Saint Laurence at Paris, which at this present is a Parish, was made Bishop of Mans, by command of King Clotharius. And after this Dumnolus (by his fauour and recommendation) the Abbot Theodulphus (the Abbots in Cathedrall Churches being in those times such as now adaies wee call Decanos, Deanes, as Archdeacons or Country Deanes at this present, were tearmed anciently Chorepiscopi) was admitted Bishop of Mans by the said King Clotharius.
In the same booke and seuenth chapter wee vnderstand, that Bishops chosen and consecrated without the consent and will of the King, were deposed,Bishops chosen and consecrated without the Kings consent, deposed, and other installed. and others enstalled in their places. Dynamius, Gouernour of Prouence and Languedocke, for the King of Bourgongne-France Gonthran, established in the Bishopricke of Vsez (after the death of Ferreolus) one named Albinus. Gonthran offended at the boldnesse of his Lieutenant, who had arrogated to himselfe the Right truely Royall: depriued and dismissed Albinus from the said Bishoprick, which he gaue to Iouinus, formerly Gouernour of Prouence. Albinus ex praefecto per Dynamium Rectorem Prouinciae, Extra Regis Consilium, suscepit Vticensem Episcopum, quo non amplius quam tribus fruiter mensibus, and Iouinum qui quondam Rector Prouinciae fuerat, Regium de Episcopatu praeceptum accepit.
These examples, taken from an hundred more, may suffice (in mine opinion) to shew, that from all Antiquitie, and from the time of the first Christian French Kings, the Inuestiture in the Bishoprickes of France,The Kings Royall prerogatiue from al times of Antiquity. was reserued by the Kings in due right of Soueraignty, and not by grant or concession of Pope Adrian, made to King Charlemaigne, as Gratian the Monke, and some other Italians after him haue imagined. For it is a case euident and notorious, that Clouis hauing embraced Christianity, made reseruation of all such markes and rights of Soueraignty, as the Christian Emperors vsed to haue; namely, that of Inuestitures, and Rights Royall: vpon which subiect, we say, that Pope Boniface, eight of that name, howsoeuer otherwise, one of the learnedst and worthiest men that held the City of Rome,The Pope deceiued in questioning the Rights of Kings. next to Pope Innocent the third; was ill informed in the particularities of the French History, and Soueraigne Prerogatiues of the holy and sacred Luces Monarchs; when he sought to draw into arbitrement and compromise, the Regall Right of Philip le Bel, King of France and Nauarre, in the yeere of Grace 1301. And the said Philip le Bel had good reason to answere him, that In Temporalibus, hee knew not any Prince in the world, who could any way command him. And that hee held his

his Kingdome of none but God, and by his Sword, and that the Regalities, that is to say, vacant Prebendaries, and fruits of vacant Bishoprickes in his Kingdome, appertained to him Iure Regio, As due Rights to his Crowne. Ecclesiarum and Prebend^rum vacantium collationem ad Francorum Reges, Iure Regio, pertinere, and fructus ear^ posse percipere.
What the Right Regale is Psalm. 24.1.Regale is a Right, which the most Christian Kings haue by reason of their sacred Crowne, aboue all the Bishops of, or in, the Kingdome of France: Domini est terra, and plenitudo eius, to enioy the Reuenues of the said Bishoprickes, and dispose of the vacant Prebendaries, in what part soeuer of the Kingdome they are, by death of the Bishop, all the while, and so long as the See shall be vacant, and vntill such time as a new Bishop (prouided in the place of the deceased) hath sworne to the King the Oath of Allegiance. In like manner is it of the Bishops, honoured by the Pope with the Cardinalls Hat,The Honor of the Cardinalls Ha^te. whether they haue any title or no; because by th^ dignity, Fiunt noui Homines Papae, The Pope hath made them new men.
How the Right Regale extended it selfe in elder times.Anciently, the Right Regale extended it selfe, not only on the Benefices, whereof the Bishops disposed, but also on all the moueables, cheuisance and riches of the said Bishops, either deceasing or changing the See, if they made not an authentical Testament, wherein they ought (first of all) to demand the Kings power; for other wise they could make no Will, and all their moueables appertained to the King, who to receiue them, deputed ordinarily men of his Court and House. I will alleadge some few examples, deriued from a million of other.
King Clouis (as wee haue already said) gaue store of inheritances to the Church of Rheims,The Borough of the Abbey S. Remy at Rheims. and to the Archbishop S. Rhemigius: among other, hee gaue the Borough of the Abbey, called S. Remy at Rheimes, with charge of taking the Oath of fidelitie to him, and to the Kings his successors, all the Inhabitants and abiders in the said Borough.
In the Registers of the Court of Parliament at Paris, is that which was giuen to King Philip Augustus, by the hands of his deputies, at receiuing the Regales of the Archbishop of Rheims, whereof heere followeth the true tenure.
The tenure of the Regale.HOmines de Burgo Sancti Rhemigij Rhemensis fecerunt Domino Regi fidelitatem s^^ hac forma. Ipsi conseruabunt pro posse suo, bona fide, vitam, Corpus, and membra Regis, honorem Regni, and omnia iura Regis. Praesente Petro de Nongento, tunc Abbate, R^aulfo Priore consanguinco suo, Monachi praesentes Garnerius Orillardus Camerarius domus, Nicolaus Auis, Garnerus Suessionensis, Petrus Capellanus Abbatis, and plures alij. Hanc fidelitatem pro Domino Rege receperunt Magister Boso Clericus eius, and Robertus de Lesga. Actum Rhemis dum ipsi custodirent Regalia post decessum Alberici Archiepisc^pi Rhemensis Anno Domini Millesimo, Ducentesimo, Decimo Octauo, Mense Martio, (...) Capellam Abbatis.
In the same Registers is the donation made by the said King Philip Augustus, o^ of certaine Acres of Vines, being in the Vineyard of Argentoe^l, neere Paris, to the Bishop of Senlis, for augmentation of the Regales of the said Bishopricke.
A Donation granted by Philip Augustus.PHilippus Dei gratia Francorum Rex; Notum sit omnibus quod nos Charissimo, and fideli nostro E. Siluanectensi Episcopo, propter eius fidele seruitium, and successoribus ipsius Siluanectensis Episcopis dedimus in perpetuum omnes vineas quas R. Comes Bolo^a habebat apud Argentocium. Et hoc ferimus in augmentum Regalium Nostrorum de Siluanectis. Actum Parisius Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Decimo quinto, Me^s^ Augusto.
Other Decrees of the Kings Regale.In the same Registers are the Arrests and Decrees of the Regales of Rouen, and Suffragan Bishops of Normandie, and the Bishopricke of Arras, the Capitall City of Artois, adiudged vnto the said King Philip Augustus. There are likewise those of Guyenne, that is to say, of intire Aquitaine, and of Bourgongne, although these Prouinces were held by Princes of the Blood, and great Lords that had them in subalterne Soueraignety.Sub^te^^e Soueraignty. And none of the Bishops of them were exempted, but by especiall grace and priuiledge, which the Kings gaue them.
In some certaine Diocesses, the Kings taxed the Bishops subiects, during the

Regale, and at their will: except other speciall grace and fauour had bin granted.People vnder Bishops in their Diocesses. The Church of Paris was one of this number, as we vnderstand by a Decree of the Parlement Court, in the time of King Phillip Augustus; which, during the Regale, after the decease of the good Bishop Maurice (vnder whom the Church of Paris was finished) taxed the Customes at two hundred fortie and so many pounds. But in fauour of Eudes de Sully, Cousine Germaine to the King (whose Picture and Tombe is to be seene in Potin, placed betweene the doore of the Quire, and the Pulpet in the Church of Paris) the Bishoppe, successour of Maurice, the custome was reduced to the summe of threescore Parisian pounds:The Parisian pound is 20. s. 6. d. starling. A very remarkeable Decree, the tenure whereof here followeth, to serue as a light to Posteritie.




The Tenure of the Decree made in the Court of Parliament.
PHilippus Dei gratia Francorum Rex; Omnibus praesentibus pariter, atque futuris, Notum sit quod nos inspeximus chartas patris nostri, and nostram, in quibus continebatur, quod nos in hominibus Episcopi Parisiensis extra Parisius non poteramus Talliam accipere, vel exactionem facere quae excederet numerum sexaginta librarum Parisiensium, nec illam accipere poteramus nisi statuto tempore, and Episcopo debitam. Quia vero vacante sede Parisiensi, defuncto bonae memoriae Mauritio quondam Episcopo Parisiensi, in hominibus Episcopi accipimus summam Ducentarum and Quadraginta librarum, aut amplius, vltra praedictas Sexaginta libras, ad petitionem dilecti Consanguinei, and fidelis nostri Odonis Parisiensis Episcopi concessimus, quod quando Regalia in manum nostram, vel successorum nostrorum deuenient, ea quae nos, aut Ministeriales nostri, accipiendo vltra praedictam summam sexaginta librarum, exigere fecimus, nullum Episcopo Parisiensi, vel Ecclesiae Parisiensi in posterum inferre praeiudicium, aut grauamen, nec in hominibus Episcopi, extra Parisius, sicut supradictum est, nos, vel successores nostri aliquid de cetero poterimus accipere, vel requirere vltra praedictam summam sexaginta librarum pro Tallia, vel exactione. Quod vt in perpetuum, etc. Datum apud sanctum Germanum in Laia, Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Septimo, Regni nostri anno Vigesimo Septimo, Dapifero nullo. Signum Guidonis Buticularij. S. Mathei Camerary, S. Drogonis Constabularij. Data vacante Cancellaria, per manum fratris Garini.




The Church of Chartres, one of the most famous in Christendome,The Church of Charters admirably famous. was subiect to these Regales from all antiquity. So that the death of the Bishop thereof happening, the Countes and the people diuided and made pillage of the Bishops Pallace, vntill such time as Count Henry, otherwise called Stephen, who by Letters vnder his priuie Seale, wherein Adela (that is Alix) his wife, and his children were vnder-written; acquitted this bad custome to the Bishops of Chartres, in fauour and contemplation of the learned Bishop Yuon, famous for his writings, which wee haue vnder his owne hand. And vpon it the King his Soueraigne interposed his authoritie, Lewes the Deuout, seuenth of the name, whose Letters Patents you may heere reade, as they are registred in the said Court.

IN nomine Sanctae and indiuiduae Trinitatis, Amen.A true Coppy of the Kings Letters Patents. Ego Ludouicus Dei gratia Francorum Rex, notum facimus vniuersis, Clericos nostros Carnotenae Ciuitatis existentes adhuc ^n desolatione quam acciperant ex morte bonae memoriae Episcopi Gosleni nostram adiuisse Re^iam serenitatem, and humiliter expostulasse, quantinus praeceptum Aui nostri Regis Phi^ippi (that was Philip first of the name) and nos iam-dictae Ecclesiae confirmaremus. ^enor igitur priuilegij talis esse dignoscitur. Regem Philippum notum facere vniuersis in Regno Franciae, per futura tempora successuris, quod Domnus Yuo sanctae Carnotensis Ec^lesiae venerabilis Episcopus humili deuotione celfitudinem suae serenitatis adierit; ob^ixe deprecans, vt prauam consuetudinem in domibus Episcopalibus eiusdem Ecclesiae a Comite Henrico cognomento Stephano, and Adela vxore eius concessiene filicrum

suorum Guillelmi, Theobaldi, Odonis and Stephani remissam* and libertatem praedictis d^mibus, and rebus in eisdem collectis a praedictis Comitibus collatam, concederet, Et sua Pragmatica Sanctione firmaret. Cuius pio desiderio assentiens, and aequissima postulat^ aurem inclinans secundum tenorem scripti quod de praedictis rebus praetaxati Comites ^ieri decreuerunt suae Sacrae Maiestatis auctoritate Rex praetaxatas a praua consuetudine liberauit, domum scilicet, and domus eiusdem, ferrum, plumbum, vitrum, lignum, lapides, caeteramque supellectilem, scilicet stabulas, scamna, scabella, vasa vinaria, lectos nec^ coquinas, and horrca granaria, cellaria, torcularia, furnos, furnorumque domos, siue in vrbe, siue extra vrbem syluas vt non vendantur, nec succidantur, nec dentur; Ann^ quoque vinum, foenum, oues, and boues, and caetera animalia, omniaque, reliqua mobilis que congregata sunt, vel collecta fuerunt, siue in vrbe, siue extra vrbem, ante obitum and discessum Episcopi cuius-libet, intacta manere firmauit, illis profutura quibus Episcopium reseruare, vel donare, seu per se, seu per Oechonomum suum eadem Sacra Maiestis dicti decreuerit, vel Maiores personae Ecclesiae, si id Episcopo aliqua occasione praeuento, facere non licuerit. Concedimus etiam vt exactio quae defunctis Episcopis, vel discendentibus fien solet, in Seruientes Episcopi, vel Rusticos de caetero nunquam fiat. Haec omnia sicut a pr^dictis Comitibus concessum est, and firmatum, and ipse praedictus Rex, vt praedictum est, ce^cessit, and per Pragmaticam Sanctionem suam firmauit. Nos autem Clericorum eiusdem Ecclesiae aud^ta, and suscepta postulatione haec omnia eis in eundem modum, and immobilit^ atque in perpetu^, sicut praedictus Auus noster Philippus Rex Francorum, concessimus, and nostri sigilli auctoritate sirmauimus, and nominis caractere testificati sumus. Datu^ publice Parisius, Anno Domini* 1155. adstantibus quorum nomina subscripta sunt and s^gna. Signum Comit^s Blesensis, Theobaldi Dapiferi nostri. S. Guidonis Buticularij. S. Matthei Camerarij. S. Mathaei Constabularij. Data per manum Hugonis Cancellarij.

Another Charter granted to the said CountThe Charter of the said Count Henry Stephen of Chartres, registred after this, is very remarkeable, which neuerlesse we will passe ouer, because it would seeme too long and tedious.
The same King Lewis the yonger, called the Deuout, and vulgarly the Pittifull, exempted or gratified (for the same subiect) the Church of ^aon by his Letters Patents registred at the Parliament, as heere you may reade.

EGo Ludouicus Dei Gratia Francorum Rex. Notum facimus vniuersis praesentibus and futuris. Quod per consilium fidelium nostrorum nobis assidentium pro humili and re^^renda prece Episcopi Laudunensis Magistri Galteri de Mauritannia (de Mortaign, or Mortagne) grangias, and curtes, carrucas, greges, and armenta, de quibuscunque animalibus, vineas de campo Britonis, de clauso iuxta Brolium, and ipsum Brolium, vineas de P^aco, alias etiam vineas quascunque plantauerit siue acquisiuerit, and omnino omne insta^mentum suum libertate donauimus in perpetuum. Ipsius etiam petitione omnes eiusdem successores in ea auctoritate posuimus, vt tempore vindemiarum ad reficiendas vineas de fructu earum tantum residui conseruetur, and cultoribus reddatur, quod earum culturae s^sficiat, libertate quorum donauimus domos Episcopi de Lauduno, and quascunque extra L^duno, and quascunque extra Laudunum habet, and quidquid in eisdem domibus consistit de l^gno, and filo, de ferro, and vitro, and aere, and de quacunque alia materia. In hoa autem Me^rali, Regio, and pro euidentia rerum in posterum, and pro conseruando eiusdem libertatis ^^tu inserere dignum duximus, quod decedens Episcopus, sicut testatus fuerit, ratum eri^. Et si decesserit intestatus (quod absit) Regij iuris erit aurum eius, and argentum totum, A^nona tota, excepta illa quam custodes granchiarum, and Magistri carrucarum retinebunt (...) seminandos agros, and ad sufficienter sustentandum se, and seruientes necessarios sibi, and ^imalia sua. Similiter vinum ab intestato Episcopo remanens totum Regij iuris erit, excep^ vino illo quod de vineis acquisitis, vel plantatis a praefato Episcopo fuerit, quod sane vi^ nostrum non erit* sed inde praenuncupati Episcopi soluentur debita, and sinulla sunt, reseruabitur vinum successoribus. Porro post decessum Episcopi, Episcopatu veniente in ma^ Regiam, Seruientes de parte Regis venientes non stabunt in domibus Lauduni, nec in a^ domibus vbi munitiones non erunt, sed alijs in locis vbi munitiones sunt, ipsi Ministr^ Regij in munitionib* manebunt ad custodiam earum, and in distrahendis rebus Episcopi pr^dicti, quas libertate donauimus, vel ordinando, vel in vsus suos assumendis, potesta^

carebunt, sed illi potius Seruientes, (Ministeriales, and Seruientes, are such as now a dayes are called Sergeants) qui in vita Episcopi eam sortiti sunt administrationem, retinebunt eandem, and seorsum in domibus, and grangijs Episcopalibus manebunt. Dum in manu Regia Episcopatus fuerit, Brolium, nec vendere, nec donare, nec aliquo modo diminuere poterimus; and si vacauerit sedes messionum tempore, custodes grangiarum retinebunt quod sufficiat seminandis agris, pascendis, and conducendis bubulcis, pastoribus, ministris, and animalibus, caeterum Regij iuris est. Et si vacauerit Sedes in vindemijs, vinum de Taxone, de Tallijs, and vinagium quod per pagum colligitur, caeterique omnis redditus, praeter ea quae libertate donauimus; similiter Regij iuris erit. Vt autem hoc donum nostrum in posterum ratum sit, and fixum permaneat, etc. Actum Parisius Anno Incarnationis Domini Millesimo Centesimo Quinquagesimo Octauo, Regni vero nostri Vicesimo secundo.

The same King, beginning his voyage to the Holy Land, among the Infidels and Miscreants; remitted to the Bishop of Chaalons in Champaigne his right Regale,When the Christian forces went in the expedition. in regard of the victuals by his kinred sent into his Campe neere Verdune, and here followeth a Copie of the same.

LVdouicus Dei Gratia Francorum Rex, and Dux Aquitaniae. Notum facimus Vniuersis, etc. Inter vniuersa quae Magnitudo Regalis agere debet, nihil gloriosius esse dignoscitur, quam quod Ecclesiarum tranquilitati studet in posterum prouidere,The Kings free remission of his Regal right and libertatem earum ad honorem nominis Domini nostri Iesu-Christi incessanter angere. Huius rei gratia, dilectissimi nostri Bartholomei Catalaunensis Episcopi precibus annuentes, ei, and successoribus suis Episcopis in perpetuum condonamus, ne post decessum Catalaunensis Episcopi, sicut antiquae consuetudinis huc vsque tenor habuerat in domibus Episcopalibus, quidquid ligneum, aut ferreum, siue per nos siue per Ministeria les nostros, de caetero capiamus. Animalia quoque Episcopi, and caetera omnia quaecunque ad supellectilem domorum Episcopalium pertin^re dignoscuntur, sub eadem immunitate concludimus, praeter annonam, vinum, aurum, and argentum, quae omnia iuxta vetustam consuetudinem in manu, and potestate Regia retinemus. Quod si de his praefatae Sedis Episcopus ante obitum suum sub legitimo testamento disposuerit, illius ordinationi contradicere nolumus. Vt hoc igitur in perpetuum, etc. Actum in Castro apud Verdunum Anno ab Incarnatione Domini Millesimo Centesimo Quadragesimo Septimo, Regni nostri Vndecimo, quando viam Sanctae Hierosolymitanae Expeditionis inuimus. Bartholomeus Cancellarius, Sacri Nostri Palatij Subscripsit.

Of the same Kings Letters Patents, is to be seene in the said Court Registers, concerning his Regall Right in the Bishopricke of Menda in Geuaudan, a Suffragan Bishopricke belonging to the Archbishopricke of Bourges,Bishops that called themselues Lords Soueraignes and Count^ the Primacie of Aquitaine. The Bishops of the said place (it is a small Towne, seated neere the Riuer of Ol, on all sides engirt with Mountaines of the Seuenes in Languedocke, betweene the Bishops of Montpellier, Nismes, Puy in Velay, and S. Flour) haue heretofore tearmed themselues Lords Soueraignes, of the Lands belonging to their Diocesse. And therefore they made solemne Festiuals, with a Scepter of Gold carried before them, which likewise they would lay vpon the Altar, when they celebrated in Pontificalibus. Vnto this day, they beare the title of Counts of Geuaudan, and in their Episcopall house (beside other places in the Citie of Menda) are to be seene many Armes of the Bishops thereof, couered with a Counts Circle or Crowne. Others haue aloft a Miter, on the one side, an Helmet on the other, and a Crosier in the midst, to shew, that they were Lords Spirituall and Temporall of the Countrey. But afterward, the King became Maister thereof; were it by consent of the Bishops of the place, or by some other manner. This small Citie of Menda hath for Armes L'Eseu d' Azur a vne M. a l' Antique (as one would say Mimatus) and vn Soleil d Or en Chef, and pour Deuise a lentour: Tenebrae eam non comprehenderunt.The Armes of the small Citie of Menda. But now the case is altered, because it being ouercome with Heresie, it hath proued to be the ruine of the Citie, and the Bishoppes Church, one of the richest in France. Here are the Letters Patents of King Lewes the seauenth, sent to the Bishop Aubert, who did him homage for the said Countie of Geuaudan.





The Kings Letters Patents, directed to Aubert, Bishop of Menda.
LVdouicus Dei Gratia Francorum Rex: Adelberto Venerabili Gabalorum Episcopo, and omnibus Successoribus suis in perpetuum. Longe est a memoria omnium mortalium nostri temporis, quod aliquis Episcopus Gabalorum ad curiam Antecessorum nostrorum Regum Francorum venerit, and eorum subditionem agnouerit, and fidelitatem eis fecerit, qua^uis tota terra, illa aditu difficilima, and montuosa, in Episcoporum potestate semper extiterit, non tantum ad faciendum Ecclesiasticam Censuram, sed ad iudicandum ingladio, super illes quos culpa sua monstrabat sic redarguendos. Vir autem illustris iam dictus Adelbertus Episcopus, religiose cogitans materiales gladij iustitias ad virgam Regni pertinere, nostram serenitatem adijt Parisius, and ibidem in praesentia totius Baronia nostrae cognouit Episcopatum suum de Corona Regni nostri esse, and se nobis subdens, nobis and Regno, celebriter tacto Euangelio sacro, fidelitatem fecit; quod sane factum ad nullum detrimentum, ad nullum prorsus priuationem hactenus habitae potestatis in posterum conuerti volentes, Notam facimus vniuersis praesentibus, and futuris, quod Ecclesiae Gloriosi Martyris Priuati (Saint Priuat was Patron of the Citie of Menda, and yet neuerthelesse, the Cathedrall is dedicated to the Virgin Marie) and Episcopis omnibus venerabili amico nostro Aldeberto can^nice succedentibus, totum Gabalorum Episcopatum, cum regalibus ad nostram coronam pertinentibus, ex integro concedimus, and vt libere and quiete in perpetuum possideant, auctoritate Regia confirmamus. Ne autem de cetero aliquis successorum nostrorum molestiam, and viole^tiam aliquo modo inferre conetur; Pacis, and Quieti pra^ictae Ecclesiae Regia benignitate prouidentes, ipsam liberam, and ob omni exactione immunem esse concedimus, and vt sic temporibus cunctis permaneat decernimus, subtus inscripto raminis nostris charactere confirmantes. Actum publice Parisius Anno ab Incarnatione D^mini Millesimo Centesimo Sexagesimo Primo. Astatibus in Sacro Palatio nostro quorum r^mina apposita sunt, and signa. Signum Comitis Blesensis, Theobaldi Dapiferi nostri. S. Guidonis Buticularij. S. Mathei Camerarij. Data per manum Hugonis Cancellarij.




These were no common fauours of the King* but to perticuler personsThis was a great Priuiledge, and could not be common to all the Bishopricks in France, and these relinquishings of the Regale, were but to perticulers, and, as personall. For we finde that King Phillip August^s his Sonne, who wonderfully augmented his Kingdome, by an infinite of requisitions: tooke these Regall Rights from the Lords that had vsurped them, as in possession and absolute enioying.
An Inqui^^tion made concerning the Right Regale.In the Registers of the Court, there is found an Inquisition made by the Kings Attourney Generall, and the Vidame de Chaalons in Champaigne, who pretended to be in possession thereof, by the Bishops death. Enquirie being made on either side, by the Iudge of the Inquisitions, giuen by the Bishops of Paris, and Meaux, Lotha^re de Cremona, Rodolphe, Arch-Deacon of Bourges* Master Godfrey de Poissy, and Nu^las de Chartres, Councellers, and Knights by Learning, the Count de Beauniont, the Count de Ponthieu, Simon de Montfort, Guillaume de Barres, Guillaume de Garland, G^^t^er Chamberlaine of France, B. de Roye, Phillip de Lens, and Nicolas le Chat, Councellers and Knights at Armes; it was said. That the Regales ouer the Cathedr^ Churches in the Kingdome of France, appertained to the King onely in common right; that they were without compasse of perscription*The Ver^^^t giuen by the Iu^ie. and no way communicable, to any other then the Royall person. The Vidame de Chaalons was frustrated in his cause, and he condemned in a merciament to the King (Phillip Augustus) vpon a day named, as hee was, and you may behold the Act. Notum. etc, quod Vicedominus Catalaunensis fecit eme^dam Domino Regi apud Castrum nouum super Ligerim, de illis mobilibus quae caeperatap^d haeredes Domini Episcopi Catalaunensis; Testibus Decanis Aurelianensis Ciuitatis, and Magistro G. de sancto Lazaro, and G. Iuuene.
So that the new Bishops were bound immediately after their election, to come and take the Oath of fidelity to the King, and to acknowledge, that that the Regale Prerogatiue appertained to him, in right of his Crowne, as here you behold an example, concerning the Bishopricke of Mascon.


NOtum, etc. Quod ego P^electus Matisconensis veniens ad Dominum nostrum Philippum illustrem Regem Francorum, potestatem habens (...) Decano,The publique acknowledgement of the elect Bishop of Mascon. and Vniuerso Capitulo Matisconensi, per litteras eiusdem Decani and Capituli patentes, videlicet quod quidquid facerem in presentia Domini Regis ratum haberent, and in perpetuum obseruarent; Recognoui ius Domini Regis Francorum quod habet in Regalibus Matisconensis Ecclesiae, scilicet quod mortuo Episcopo Matisconensi, vel quotiescunque sedes Matisconensis vacauerit, omnia Regalia, and omnes prouentus Regalium existentes in Regno Franciae, libere sunt Domini Regis Francorum, sicut Episcopus libere possidebat. Et si quis Episcopus Matisconensis decesserit: intestatus, quod omnia tam mobilia, quam prouentus omnes sunt dominij Regis Francorum integre, and absolute. Quia vero Decanus, and Capitulum Matisconense contradixerunt Nuntio Domini Regis Francorum, Odoni scilicet Clementi Archidiacono Parisiensi Clerico suo Regalia, and mobilia in Morte R. Episcopi, ego emendaui pro Decano, and Capitulo, and Dominus Rex Francorum hanc emendam misit in summonitione sua. Quod vt ratum, firmumque permaneat hoc scriptum sigilli nostri munimine fecimus roborari. Actum Parisius Anno Domini M^llesimo Ducentesimo Primo, Mense Martio.

So that vpon the refusall which was made by the Deane and Chapter of Mascon, to the Archdeacon of Paris, Eudes, Clearke of the Chappell to the said Phillip Augustus, of the Regales, as well in vacant Prebendaries, as the moueables of the last deceased Bishop: the said King reuoked the power of electing a new Bishop.The King reuoked the power of the electing a new Bishop. And yet he restored to them (at their owne charge, to make amends to him, according to his owne liking; as is specified in the Letters Patents, sent to the said Deane and Chapter, in such manner as followeth.

PHilippus Dei gratia Francorum Rex. Nouerint vniuersi praesentes pariter and futuri. Quod quotienscumque Episcopus Matisconensis morietur, vel quotienscumque Sedes Matisconensis Ecclesiae vacauerit, and Capitulum Matisconense a nobis licentiam de electione facienda requisierit, eidem sine contradictione eligendi licentiam concedemus. Si vero Episcopus eiusdem Ecclesiae intestatus decesserit, omnia mobilia, quae ipse, vel per se, vel per alium in Regno nostro possidebat, libere, and integre nostra erunt. Si vero idem Episcopus nostra licentia testamentum fecerit per testimonium bonorum virorum de mobilibus quae ipse in vita sua possidebat, nos contra idem testamentum nequaquam veniemus. Praeterea sciendum est quod omnia Regalia, and omnes Prouentus Regalium post mortem Episcopi Matisconensis, quandiu sedes dicta vacauerit, vbicunque sint in Regno nostro quiete, and pacifice possidebimus; and nos eadem Regalia in eo statu, and puncto, postquam ad manum nostram deuenerint, sine violentia contrectabimus, quomodo praedecessor Episcopus Matisconensis ea contrectauerit. Quod vt firmum sit etc. Actum Parisius Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Primo, Mensis Aprilis, Regni nostri Vicesimo quarto.

The same Philip Augustus, during the warre which he had against the elected Emperour Otho, Ferrand of Portugall, Count of Flanders, and Iohn and Richard,The Regales of Langres Bishoprick giuen to the Deane and Chapter, and vpon what reason. Kings of England, Vncles to the said Otho: gaue the Regales of the Bishopricke of Langres, to the Deane and Chapter of the said Bishopricke, and power to elect a new Bishop, without attending his permission: in contemplation or regard of this, that Langres was a Frontier Citie of the Kingdome of France, vpon the marches and limits of Lorraine, and because (of this neere neighbouring) it was exposed to the rauages, courses and robberies of enemies to the Crowne. With charge neuerthelesse, to keepe the moueables of the deceased Bishop, for him that should succeede him. Who immediately after his election, came to the place where his Maiesty as then resided, to take the Oath of allegeance, and also to acknowledge, that he held the Regales of his Maiesty. This priuiledge was giuen to the said Church of Langres, in regard of the war, and not by being a Ducall Peerdome, as some haue written. For it was and should be common to fiue other Ecclesiasticall Peerdomes, Rheims, Laon, Beauuais, Chaalons and Noyon; and yet notwithstanding, we haue before reported the contrary. These are the Patents of the said King Philip Augustus.

PHilippus Dei Gratia Francorum Rex, Vniuersis praesentibus pariter and futuris.The Kings Letters Patents. Notu^ fieri volumus, Quod nos concedimus vt Decanus, and Capitulu^ Lingonensis Ecclesiae Regalia Episcopatus Lingonensis eade^ sede vacante, quotiens, and quandiu vacauerit, libere teneant, and

conseruent ad opus Episcopi successoris. Et quod Ecclesia praedicta a nobis rem^ta, and in cumfinio Regni, and Imperij sita est, ad periculum vitandum, and pro vtilitate Ecclesia, and nostra concedimus, vt quotienscumque sedes praedicta vacauerit, Decanus and Capitulum, (...) petita a nobis, aut successoribus nostris licentia eligendi Episcopum, sed eligant, and in^^ntinenti quam citius poterunt ipsum electum ad faciendam nobis fidelitatem, and suscipienda a nobis Regalia nobis repraesentem. Actum Parisius Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo tertio, Regni nostri Vicesimo sexto. Data per manum Goufredi Cancellarij Sacri P^laty.



CHAP. XII. Of the Rod, called the Hand of Iustice, borne by the Kings of France onely: Of their Throane, and Great Seale: Of the greatnesse of their Court of Parlement: Of the Peeres and Chancellers of France: And of forraigne Princes who haue voluntarily submitted to the Iudgement of the Parlement of Paris.
IVSTITIA ante cum ambulabit, and ponet in via gressus suos. The Queene of Vertues, that cleare and bright-shining Astrea,Iustice the Queene of all vertues whatsoeuer, in what manner figured by the Druides. Iustice, whom the wise Druides represented by a Rod of excellent beauty, her garments long, and of Azure blew, celestiall colour, thickely powdered with Starres, with the Crescent of a Moone at her feete, the Symbole of Nobility, holding in her right hand a Ballance, and the other full of eares of Corne, the noate of Aboundance. This Diuine and heauenly Virgin, the signe whereof is the assured Horescope of France, and hath euermore serued as a Lanterne and guide to the Monarches of the Lillie, whose steps haue* at all times) bin ruled and disposed in the wayes of Iustice.
Of whom the Romans borrowed Royalty.The Romaine Emperours borrowed of the Persians, the noates of Royaltie, and the Persians learned them of the Iewes, being kept and restrained in slauery among them.
In Media* flowing into Tigris by the borders of Persia.The capitall Citie in the Kingdome of Persia, was named Susa, which in the Syriake tongue and Easterne, signifieth Floure de Luce. It was thwarted with the great Riuer Choaspis, of which water (and none other) the Kings of Persia vsed to drinke, in whatsoeuer place they were. At one Parasangue of Susa (a Parasange containeth threescore Stades, which make seauen thousand fieu hundred Paces, amounting to two miles, or thereabout, at foure thousand paces for a Mile) was a Village called Pers^polis, for excellency, and therein was a Temple dedicated to Pallas, the goddesse of Armes, and named Pasargadis: in which Temple the Monarches of the Persians were crowned.
The Coronation of the Persian Monarches, and in what manner performed.At which Coronation were assembled the Princes and Lords of the Kingdome, the Priests and the People. The high Priest (in the language of the Countrey, called Surena) receiued the Prince whom he was to Crowne, at the entrance of the Gate: and put on him the Cassocke and long Cloake or Mantle, which was wo^^ by their auncient Cyrus. Then he presented him (to feede on) a Turtle-Doue and a Cake, composed of Figges and Turpentine, and gaue him to drinke a Cup of Wine or Breuage, mixed with Milke and Vinegar. Afterward, he laid both his hands on the Princes head, inuoking their great god Mitra (for so the Persians called the Sunne) whom hee supplicated, to make happie and prosperous the reigne of this Prince, to dilate and extend the bounds and limits of the Persian Empire, and to make him agreeable, beneficiall and beloued of his people.
The mo^all mea^^^^ vnderstood by the Cake and WineHe gaue him then to vnderstand, that the Cake thus brought him to eate, and the Breuage or drinke prepared for him, compounded of things very contrary, some sweete and other bitter, signified; that Royaltie, which gaue men Soueraigne power to command ouer other, was a thing very sweete and acceptable: neuerthelesse, (...)

was confexioned with bitternesse and crosses, that very seldom did the pleasure exceede the paine and trauaile. And therefore he ought to be very carefull and respectiue, not to suffer himselfe be led and ouer-come with voluptuous pleasures and delights, which doe too easily ouer-rule Princes, that haue no superiours to reproue them, and restraine their desires from exceeding reason. Because the safetie of his Kingdome, and repose of his Subiects, should be the full scope and principall end, of all the actions of his life, onely to the end, of maintaining and conseruing ^hem in peace, entreating them with mildenesse, as a good Shepheard is carefull of ^is Flocke. Moreouer, hee should haue engrauen liuely on his heart,Fiue words fit to be vnderstood of Princes* these fiue words, Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto. A Sentence, which Princes (borne to rule o^er People) ought to vnderstand from their tender youth: as well as that La^ne one of King Lewes the eleauenth; Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit reg^re.
These aduertisements giuen, the Surena placed on the head of the new King, the ^iademe, and the Persian Tiara, called Sidaris, round, yet pointed aboue like a ^uger-loafe. And in this manner he leadeth him, to sit downe in the Throane and ^haire of Gold, belonging anciently to Cyrus, where the chife Surena, the Princes ^nd Lords adore him, couched and prostrated on the ground: As we learne of Xe^phen, Arianus, Quintus Curtius and Plutarch, in the liues of Cyrus, and of Alex^der the Great. Persas quidem non pie solum, sed etiam prudenter Reges suos inter ^cos colere Maiestatem enim Imperij salutis esse tutelam. For they knew not how to do ^onour enough to the Prince.
Now, like as God had commanded Moyses, that fire should night and day be ^nserued in his Sacred Temple: euen so the Kings of Persia neuer went abroade (...) publique, but they caused to be carried before them, Vessels and Cassolets of ^old and Siluer, full of fire, maintained with Incense and Perfumes, as also most ^romaticall Odours. And Xenophon in the Institution of Cyrus, the eight Booke, ^riteth; that in the Oratorie and Cabinet of the Kings of Persia, was maintained ^pon an Altar (destenied for the same subiect) a perpetuall fire: And the like in the ^aules of Presence, and Chambers of the said Kings, where Suiters and Suppli^ts required grace and pardon; were dispersed Aromaticall sauours and perfumes.The Order obserued among the Iewes on certaine daies. ^his Custome was taken from the Iewes, who vpon their Festiuall dayes, and o^er beside, when they made Expiations for the sinnes of the People: by offering (...) the Golden Altar sweete Sauours, prepared by King Salomon before the Propi^torie, and Arke of the Couenant. That Altar was called Altare Thimiama^is.
Thimiama is a Greek word, which signifieth Euaporation, Suffumigation,The Wood whereof the Pagans made their gods. and ^erfuming with Incense. Thima was a Wood of admirable smell, whereof the Pa^ns made their pretended gods, and neuer would it be worme-eaten. And this ^^imiama of the Hebrewes, was not onely compounded of the Incense named ^us, and otherwise Lebona, but also of sweete ingredients of Perfumes, more ex^isite and precious, beaten and made in such a manner and fashion, as the fume ^cended wholly aloft and vpright, without any dispersion here and there. This ^mposition was called by the Rabbines Retoreth, interpreting the Verse of the ^ndred and fortieth Psalme. Dirigatur oratio mea, sicut incensum in conspectu tuo,Psal. 104.2. ^d hereupon they nominated these sweete kindes of Sauours, Aromaticall ^ices.
God imployed to his owne seruice, the Element of Water, for drowning the ^d World. But his Iustice being ouer-past, he promised to the Patriarch Noah,Gen. 7.20. ne^r to make any more vse thereof, but the Element of Fire. And he did the like (...) his Angels, conuerting them into fiery formes; as is described by the Psal^st, and the Apostle. Facit Angelos suos spiritus,Psal. 50.14. 1 Cor. 7.12. and ministros suos flammam ^is.
He communicated himselfe with the auncient Patriarches, in the forme of fire, ^d contracting Alliance or a Couenant with Abraham, the Father of the faithfull;Gen. 15.17. (...) presented himselfe to him in the forme of a smoaking Furnace, and a burning ^mpe. Ecce Clibanus fumans, and Lampas Ignis quae transiebat per di^isiones illas.
Exod. 3.21.In Exodus we reade, how he conducted his People thorow the Deserts of Arabia,Exod 19.18. vnder the forme of an enflamed Pyramide. Praecedebat eos per columnam (...) To the Law-giuer Moyses, hee spake in a flame of fire, issuing forth of the (...) Mountaine.Leuit. 9 23. Reuelat se in flamma ignis ex ipso Rubo. At the first Sacrifice of the high Priest Aaron,Zach. 2.5. he appeared in a flame of Fire. In a wall of Fire, as in Z^ch^ the second Chapter.Act 2.3. And in fiery Tongues vpon the Apostles, and Disciples a^sembled together in Ierusalem on the day of Penticoast. And this was the reason* why he did forbid, that any Sacrifice should be offred to him without Fire. And the^ was the perpetuall Fire maintained night and day without quenching (after it h^ bin Sacred and kept carefully;King Manasses carried captiue into Babylon. vntill the time of the King of Iuda Manasses, carried as a miserable captiue into the Kingdome of Persia in Babylon, the capitall Citie of Assyria, builded in former times by Nabuchodonosor: and not by Semiramis, (...) Herodotus hath written, and the Greeke lyers, who haue falsified the Sacred Historie.
The Fast Nations iudgement of the Sunne.To the said Assyrians and Persians, came the Doctrine and knowledge of the perpetuall Fire: but veiled and not discouered by the Iewes their slaues. And these Nations of the East, iudging the Sunne to be the Author of that perpetuall Fire; tooke it for God himselfe, and for an assured Symbole of Diuinitie. The Thro^ whereof they beleeued to be seated, and planted iustly in the midst of the Sunne, enstructed by the Iewes to such beleeuing, and the saying of the Royall Psalm^* In Sole posuit Tabernaculum suum. Whereunto the Apostle conformeth himselfe, saying,Psal 19.5. 1 Cor 4 9. In Sole Deus habitat, suum domicilium habet, vnde gloriose illustris maiestate ^nus apparet.Sapient. 7.6. And the wise man to the same purpose teacheth vs, that the Sunne (...) Vas admirabile Excelsi, and opus ipsius. This is the reason, why the Persians, Assyri^* Medes,Diuers Nations that adore the Sunne. Aegyptians, and other people, as well in the East-Indies, as those of the West, vnto this day doe adore the Sunne, which the Persians vnderstand by the name of Mithra, and Sacrifice to him in the bottome of a Caue, as we learne of the great Tertullian, in the Treatise which he wrote, De Corona Militis; seeking th^ by to hide the misteries, which the Iewes had taught them.
Sacrifices to the god Mithra.They represented this pretended god Mithra, round compassed with flames of Fire, and the beames of the Sunne, according as our Painters doe, and to him th^ sacrificed Horses wholly white, without spot of any other colour, and likewise Cockes altogether white: creatures which Psellus and the Naturalists affirme to be Sunnie, swift, and very prompt of flight and course, and so consequently, acceptable offerings to the Sunne, the fountaine of light; admirable for his three qualities; his luminous beautie; his force and efficacie of heate; and his promptitude an^ swiftnesse of course.

Placat equo Persis radijs Hyperiona cinctum,
Ne detur Celeri victima tarda Deo.

The same Persians carry the figure of the Sunne in their Guidons, Standards, an^ Flagges, and likewise on their Shields and Targets; as Xenophon writeth, and Te^tullian in his Apologetickes. Ad Persas si forte deputabimur, licet solem in linte^ ^pictum non adoremus, habentes ipsum vtique in suo clypeo, quod innotuerit apud (...) Orientis Regionem precari. He answered the Pagans, who rumourd abroad, th^ the Christians worshipped the Sunne, after the manner of the Persians; beca^ from the breake of day, they sent vp their prayers to God, as offering themsel^ to him in the beginning of the day (yea, and at midnight, Media nocte surgeb^ (...) confitendum tib^,Psal. ^.^^. saith the Royall Prophet; which Plinie obserued of the Christia^ in the Primitiue Church, in one of his Epistles written to an Emperour of th^ time, that persecuted them, and martyred many) and that their Oratories were ^^ned towards the Sunne rising. Tertulian declareth to them, that the Christians (...) no correspondencie with them, setting downe good reasons, why our Church^ are ordered toward the East. Because they worshipped but onely one God, (...) they themselues were Idolaters, in adoring the creature^ for the Creator by a ^uellish instigation, punishable with fire, kissing their hands, and eleuating their ey^

at the rising of the Sunne; Ad Solis ortum vibrantes. As the noble King of Edom,Iob 31.26.27 28. Iob, mirrour of patience, reprehended the Gentiles of his time. Si vidi Solem cum fulgeret, and Lunam incedentem clare. Et latatum est in abscondito cor meum, and osculatus sum manum meam ore meo. Quae est iniquitas maxima, and negatio contra Deum altissimum. A custome practised by the inhabitants in the West Indies. For they of Peru and Mexico, in adoring the Sunne and the Moone, put their Gloues on their hands, and then lift them vp towards heauen: as is recorded by Iosephus Acosta, in his naturall Historie of the Indies, where also he obserueth the behauiour of the people to be such, in making their prayers to those false Deities: that they open their hands, and kisse them, making a certaine sound and muttering with their lips, which is answerable to the saying of the holy Patriarch Iob.
Now, it was an ordenary matter among the people of the East, to adore the Sun,The East Indies held the Sun to be their greatest Deitie for the very greatest of their Deities. The Rabbines expounding the third Chapter of the Historie of Hester, write, that the Minion of Ahasuerus, Haman, to the end he might be honored, quite contrary to the Princes of that great Monarchs Court (euen in arrogancy and remarkeable vanitie, which euermore waites on such, as from base and low degree, are exalted to the chiefe fauours and dignities of a Kingdome) wore a Chaine of Gold about his necke, whereat hung the Idole of the Sunne,A notable example of Hamans pride, in coueting a peculier honor to himselfe. ^ound engirt with beames of Gold. So that the people seeing this Shittle-cocke passe by them, as Fortunes Tennis-ball, and plaine mirrour of inconstancie and vo^ubilitie, wearing vpon his brest, the Idole of their great god Mithra: they fell on their knees presently to the ground, kissing their hands, with all humiliation of their bodies. Thus was he honored in an extraordinary fashion, and farre from the common rule or practise.
The Persians published abroad, that the Armie of Cyrus was preceded by (...) flame of Fire, to make him knowne as Monarch of the world, this was ^eriued from the Iewes, as already wee haue said. Ammianus Marcellinus ^estifieth in his Romaine Historie, speaking of the Persians, Medes and Par^hians. Feruntque etiam (si iustum est credi) ignem coelitus lapsum apud se sempiter^s foculis custodiri, cuius portionem exiguam vt faustu praeisse quondam Asiaticis Regibus ^icunt,
When the deceasse of a King of Persia happened, all the lighted Fires (so care^ully preserued night and day in the Pallace) were extinguished, and afterward ^hose in euery chiefe Family, maintained on their perticular houshold Altars, (...) Xenophon informeth vs: to expresse their intire griefe and mourning, for the ^eath of their Prince; according to the testimonie of Diodorus Siculus, in the ^auenteenth Booke of his Antiquities. And those Fires were not kindled againe, ^ll after the Coronation of a Successour in the Empire; when the Surena lighted (...) new Fire, obseruing such Ceremonies therein, as is described by Plutarch in ^e life of Numa Pompilius, the Author of this pretended Diuine Fire, which hee ^ppointed to be kept by Vestall Virgins, without quenching, in imitation of the ^wes.
The Ceremonie of carrying Vessels full of Fire before the King of Asia, was ^ommon to the Ynguas of the West Indies, and to the Samorins of the East. Iophus Acosta, in the fift Booke of his Indian Naturall Historie, the fourth Chap^r, and other following, reporteth, that the dwellers in Mexico and Peru doe ^ore the Sunne, which in their Language they call Pinchao, kissing their hands, ^d babling with their lippes, as wee haue said. And that before the Idole ^ereof (which in Peru they name Viracocha, and at Mexico, Vitzilipuztli, that (...) to say, God supreme, most high and most great) was maintained night and day a ^erpetuall Fire.
Gonsalo Ferdinando d'Ouiedo, at the discouery of this new Spaine, obserued the same ^ing, and by way of addition, saith: That the people of the Indies in the West,How the people were admitted to salute their King^ ^ere neuer admitted to salute their Kings, till first they had throwne strong ^ummes and Aromaticall Perfumes, into the Cassolet and Brazeraine burning ^ntinually, planted (for that purpose) on the right hand, in the Haule of Pre^nce.
And our fore-named Acosta, discouering the presages, fore-runners of the losse and ruine of the King of Mexico Motecumacin, sheweth, that the Kings of that rich Prouince, caused ordenarily to be carried before them, lighted Torches, and flaming Lampes, compounded of incredible costly Odours and Perfumes.
Moreouer, that in all those Countries, the people maintained a perpetuall Fire. And from one Iubilie to another, which they kept after the Iewish fashion, from fiftie to fiftie yeares,In what manner the Iubilie is ob^erued amo^g the Indians. the last night whereof; they quenched all their Fires, bra^e and defaced all their Houshold-stuffe and Goods, being assuredly perswaded, that the World was come to his finall period. And so consequently, they had not any more neede of Fire nor light, neither of any Furniture for feeding: but they m^st all dye that very night; which they spent in horror, and certaine expectation of death. But when they beheld the breake of day to appeare; as ouercome with vnspeakeable ioy and gladnesse, they would all issue forth of their doores, beating D^ums and Tabers euery where, and sounding their other Instruments for warre, Fifes and Trumpets, in signe of reioycing, because their great God Vizil puztli had prolonged their time,Procession vsed am^ng the Indians. to behold yet another Age. And the first day, their Papas, or high Priest walked about their Townes and vtmost limits, with a generall Procession: wherein the people assisted, with giuing of thanks, that they were spared to see the beginning of another new world. The Procession being ended; with great and solemne Ceremonies the new Fire was kindled, to burne both day and night before the Idole of their great God: and thither the people went, to take some for kindling their owne Fires.
Hiero^mus Ozoriu^, a Portuguiz^, Bishop of Sylues in the Algarues, in the fourth Bo^ of his Portugall Historie, writeth; that (in his time) the King of Benemotapa a Kingdome of very great extendure, and which maketh part of Ethiopia, beyond the Cape de b^na Speranza) caused vsually to be carried before him, the no^tes of his Royalty. The first whereof was a Mattocke, hauing the handle of I^^rie,The King of Benemotapa, and his (...) of Royalty. and two small Iauelins, crossed into a Saltour. By the Mattocke hee gaue his Subiects to vnderstand, that they ought to addict themselues to labour and husband^* the most innocent and happy life that any man can wish to leade, and his iust^^ Reuenewes, all that the earth yeelded. One of the Iauelins serued him as a Scepte, and the other he vsed in stead of a Sword.
This King had vnder his obeysance, many Princes and great Lords his Vassa^ls, whose Sonnes he educated in his Court; as well to accustome, fashion and (...) them to his seruice, as to containe their Fathers, within the compasse and tearmes (...) dutie and obedience, he hauing their Sonnes in hostage. Euery yeare, at a certaine day beginning their yeare,New (...) yearely to the Princes a^d Lord^ from the King. he sent his Couriers or Posts, to carrie them new Fire, in whose houses when the Posts were arriued: all their former Fire was quite quenched, which belonged to the precedent yeare. And they that were subiect vnder ti^, when they kindled new fire; they were to fetch it from their Lords houses, which was performed with great Ceremonies, and publique reioycing. And whosoeuer of the Princes and Lords, that refused to take and receiue the new Fire: warre was iustantly made on them by the rest, as on him that entred into rebellion, and so should be punished for his treacherie.
Euen so the Romaine Emperours, be it that they deriued it from the Kings of Persia,The Romaine (...) and S^ueraigntie. or them of Iuda, ouer whom Augustus and Tiberius commanded (as ouer their owne Vassailes after great Pompey: they vsed as a noate of their Excellencie and Soueraigntie, when they went forth in publique, or made their entrance in Triumph, to haue borne before them, vpon their Battaile-Axes, in forme of halfe-Pikes, Ve^sels and Censers of Gold and Siluer, like to the bottomes of Lamps, fill^d with prouision, and maintained with Oyles, Perfumes and Aromaticall moistures.
P^rtinax being exalted to the Empire, refused the honor, to haue Lampes of Perfumes carried before him; vntill the Romaine Senate had agreed to his ^leuation, so saith Herodian in his life. Neque Ignem sibi praeferri, neque (...) principatus insi^a passus est attolli, donec Senatus sententiam sciscitaretur. And the same Historian, speaking of the Emperour Gordianus at Carthag^

in Affrica, discouering the markes of the Empire (whereof hereafter we shall say something) speaketh thus. Sequebantur cum Virgae Laureatae, quo insigni Principes a priuatis dignoscuntur, praetereaque Ignis de More deferrebatur. This Honor and priuiledge was granted to women, and sometime to the Romaine Emperours Sisters. The same Herodian, in the life of Commodus, speaking of his eldest sister Lucilla, to whom Sella Imperitoria sedere in theatro, and Ignem de more praeferri patiebatur. Which was not permitted to their Fauourites; for the same Authour speaking of Martia, whom Commodus loued better then his lawfull wife, saith. Sic, vt praeter Ignem, omnes honores illi, velut Augustae tribuerentur.
God had commanded Moyses, that the Sancta Sanctorum, should be engirt with Veiles and Curtaines;Concerning Seates o^ Iustice among the Iewes. because it should not be daily exposed to the peoples sight. The same was practised for the Benches and Seates of Iustice of the Iewes, which they called Sanhedrins. For before the Pretorium of the Iudges, called Camera, and Domus Iudicij, and by the Hebrewes Gazith, the Councell Chamber; there were Custodes or Curtaines, which were very seldome drawne: because sacred and holy things, such as Iustice is, ought not to be seene of the common people, or in any manner to be prophaned.
And so the Kings of Persia had their Imperiall Throane of pure Gold,Of the Imperiall Throane of the Persian Kings. couered and Veiled with Curtaines of Tyrian Purple, and of Crimosine Silke* For, when any spake to them with words of Crimosine Silke, that is to say, in tearmes of excellence and honour, and with all reuerence: their faces were Veiled (as we reade in the Historie of Hester of King Ahasuerus) Necdum verbum de ore Regis exierat, and statim aperuerunt faciem eius. The Rabbines explicating this passage,The Kings of Israel and Iuda say, that in the Chamber of Honor, and Hall of Ptesence, belonging to the Kings of Israell and Iuda, before the Chaire and Throane of them, hung Curtaines, and ordenarily, when any one spake to them in publique, their faces were veiled and hidden, and that from them the Kings of Persia tooke the practise. Which the Subiects also did, in honor of their Princes, not daring to looke them fixedly in the face, no more then the Sunne: because they are liuing Images of the Diuinitie, and the best affected Sons of great Iupiter, saith Homer. It was an extraordinary fauour, when the said Kings of Persia spake to any one bare faced.
-- Satis est potuisse videre.
So spake the God of the Bucoliques in Virgill. And so the Children of Israell at the Mountaine of Sinai, learned to see God with feare of death, and by his vision, the face of Moyses being become resplendantly shining; he spake to the people, his face being veiled.
In like manner, the Throanes of the Kings of China, of Motecuma, of Mexico,Throanes of the Indian Kings. and of Atabalippa of Peru, were veiled and couered with Curtaines: so speake the Histories of the Indiaes, and of China, meaning of the Yngas.
The Romaines had the same practise, in the person of their Emperours, of their Altars, the Statues of their pretended Gods, and Councell Cham^er.
Concerning Counsell, there are many Law-passages, and namely in the fift Law De Naufragijs, at the Code, de submersis Nauibus decernimus vt leuato ve^ causae istae cognoscantur. That is to say, that the causes of this nature, where^n many persons associated haue interest: they were pleaded, iudged, and ter^inated in full Audience, and not with a closed doore. Oppanso velo, as Ter^ullian speaketh. Vpon this Law, the light of Ciuill Lawyers, Iacques de Cuiaux, ^bserueth many Antiquities. Of those Curtaines is mention made in the last Law De Officijs diuers. Iudic. vnder the name of Secret. Sciant Principes, and ^ornicularij, and Primates officiorum, and Iudices etiam, ternas libras auri de suis fa^ltatibus eruendas, si honoratis viris (quibus etiam Consistorium nostrum ingredi^d^ facultas praebetur) Secretarij Iudicium non potuerit ingressus. In the fift Law ^e Proximus sacro. Scrini at the Code. And the Ordonance of the Emperour Con^tantine. Non sit vaenale Iudicis Velum, non ingressus redempti, non infame licitatio^bus Secretarium.
There is an excellent passage, concerning those Veiles and Curtaines, in Chambers of Iustice, in S. Basile the Great, in the Epistle ad Eusebium. In the Ecclesiasticall Historie of Eusebius, the seauenth Booke, Chapter 32. And in the third Book De Gubernatione Dei, written by Saluianus, Bishop of Marseilles. Intra ianuas (...) modo illustrium potestatum, sed etiam Praesidum, aut Praepositorum non omnes passi^ intrare praesumunt, nisi quos aut Index vocauerit, aut negotium taxerit, aut ipsa honori^ proprij dignitas introire permisserit. Which passage referreth it selfe to the fift Law before alleadged.
Of Statues, Tertullian in Apologetico. Solis Sacerdotibus adire licentium, and c^nspectu ceterorum velo oppanso interdicebatur. Apuleius, in the eleauenth of his Milesians, speaking of the goddesse Isis. Ac dum velis caudentibas reducti^ in diuersum, Deae venerabilem conspectum apprecamur. And of himselfe, in the said Booke. Sic ad instar Solis exornato, and in vicem simulacri constituto repente velis reductis in ^spectum Populi errabam. Those that were on the Marches, and publique places, were veiled at such time as they performed Iustice, or some dismall and Tragicall act, besmeared with humaine blood, as we vnderstand by Dion. Claudius delectabatur gladiatoribus, and praesertim Meridianis. Ideo plerosque seruos, qui dominos sub Caio aut Tiberio calumniati erant, hoc modo perdebat. Eorumque tantus fuit numerus, vt August^ statuam eo loci positam iusserit transferri, ne aut semper aspiceret caedes, aut semper Vela^^ maneret.
Of Altars, there are an infinitie of passages in Plautus: we will rehearse but this following.

-- Querulo
Isti sunt qui in fanis, and in facellis obseruant Vela.

And Lucretius in his fift Booke.

Nec pietas vlla est, Velatum saepe videri
Vertier ad lapidem, atque omnes accedere ad aras.
Paulinus ad Cytherium.
Tunc and discusso nudata altaria Velo
Amisere sacri religionem adyti.

Of Emperours, Suetonius in the life of Vitellius. Idem miri in adulando ing^^ij primus C. Caesarem adorari instituit, quum reuersus e Syria non aliter adire ausus esset, quam Capite Velo, circumuertensque se, deinde procumbens. The Emperour Tiberius, making the Speech and Funerall Oration, for his Sonne Drusus, had his face Veiled; Vt a Funere oculos suos auerteret: So saith Seneca De Consolatione ad Mutiam. And this was as well in regard of the Emperours quality, as of the chiefe Priest, to whom it was permitted to assist in Funerals, according to the ordonance of God in the Mosaicall Law. Lampridius setteth it downe for an example of great familiaritie and priuacie, in the Emperour Alexander, because that Salu^^^tur quasi vnus de Senatoribus, Patente Velo. In this manner Princes gouerned themselues,Princes employed Diuine Honour, to their own vse. by borrowing Diuine Honors, for imploying them to their owne vse; and namely Fire in Lampes carried before them, but now abolished. Yet to this day, they retaine the practise, of making their pompous Entrances in night time, with lighted Torches. And on dayes of publique receiuing, to haue lighted Lampes, lighted Lanthornes in their Windowes, and at the doores of their houses, a custome likewise taken from the Persians and Easterne Kings.
For, ouer and beside that which wee learne from Xenophon, and Plutarch i^ the life of Cyrus: we reade in the Historie of Iudith, and third Chapter, that Holofernes, Lieutenant Generall to the King of the Assyrians, was receiued by the Assyrians into the Citie of Damas, with the light of Torches, f^^ming Lampes, Chaplets of Floures, and sound of Musicall Instruments. Cum Coronis and Lampadibus, ducentes choros in tympanis, and tibijs. As much was done at the entrance of Antiochus, King of Aegypt, into the holy Citie. Magnifice ab I^s^^t

susceptus est cum facula^ium luminib^s, and laudibus. Augustus would neuer enter into any famous Citie, but in the night-season: So saith Suetonius in his life. And the Ceremonies of strewing Floures, and other greene Hearbes along the Streetes, and decking Gates and Doores with branches of diuers goodly Trees, and beautifying Windowes with burning Lampes, filled with Balmes and costly Perfumes; was learned (as meerely borrowed) by the Romaines, of the Easterne people. Herodianus, in his first Booke, describing the entrance of the Emperor Commodus into Rome, saith, Imperatorem faustis omnibus, acclamantibusque, and coronarum, florumque sparsionibus exceperunt.
As for Lampes in Windowes, Perseus;
--Vnctaque fenestraDispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere Lucernae.
But much more apparantly Iuuenall, in his sixt Satyre.

Hic nostrum placabo Iouem; Laribusque paternis
Thura dabo, atque omnes Violae iactabo colores:
Cuncta nitent, longos erexit iauua ramos,
Et mat utinis operiatur fenestra Lucernis.

Tertullian, in the Treatise which hee wrote De Corona Militis, declareth, that the Romaine Emperours, and Kings on the Earth, worne their Crownes in the forme of the Sunne-beames: because they were as Sunnes, and flaming Lights to their people.
Lux publica Principis Ignis.
Because that
Commonly we see the conquered ProuinceShapes manners by the same mould of the Prince.
Crownes Royall had their circle enamelled with Colours of the Bowe fix^d in Heauen. Velleius Paterculus, in his second Booke, speaking of Octauius Caesar, saith;

Aduentanti Romam immanis amicorum occurrit frequentia, and cum intraret vrbem, ^olis orbis super caput eius curnatus aequaliter, rotundatusque in colorem arcus, velut coro^^ tanti mox viri capiti imponens conspectus est.

Suetonius in the life of the same Augustus, saith Videre visus est Filium mortalium ^ecie ampliorem, cum fulmine and sceptro, exuuijsque Iouis optimi maximi, ac Radiata Co^na super Laureatum currum bissenis equis candore eximio trahentibus.
Where he remarketh to vs, that the Triumphall Chariots and Waggons of Kings ^nd Princes, were drawne by Horses absolutely white,The Chariot of the Sunne drawne by white Horses. which are dedicated to the ^unne: the Chariot whereof is represented by Poets, to be drawne by such crea^ures. And thence ensued the custome, that Kings and other Princes of the world, ^e ordenarily mounted on white Horses; on those dayes when they appeare in ^reatest brauery.
Plinie in his Panegyricke, Horum vnumsi praestitisset alius illi, iamdudum radiatum ^put, and media inter Deos sedes aurostaret, and ebore. And the Panegyricke spoken to ^aximianus; Trabeae vestrae triumphales, and fasces Consulares, and Selbe curules, and has ^sequiorum stipatio, and fulgur, and Illa Lux Diuinum Verticem claro orbe complectens, ve^rorum sunt ornamenta meritorum pulcherrima, and Angustissima.
We finde, that the Kings of Israell were (by title of excellence and honor) cal^d of their people, The Lampes of Israell.Kings of Israel called the Lamps of Israel. The Princes and Captaines attending on ^ing Dauid, seeing that hee had runne the fortune of life, going himselfe to warre ^gainst the Philistims; would no longer suffer him to goe with them. Iam (...) egredieris nobiscum ad bellum, ne Extinguas Lucernum Israel. And their rea^n was very pertinent, because the Scripture speaketh in the same Booke,2 Reg. 21.17. That the ^e person of the King,2 Reg. 18.3. is reputed of greater worth then an hundred thousand

men. Wherefore he should not daily (as we say) expose himselfe to the hazards of warre,A Kings life should not be exposed to perils of war and aduenture like to a Captaine or Souldiour; the losse of them is not of such importance, as the very least accident that can happen to a King, who is the Lampe and light of her Kingdome. Princeps est Lucerna Regni sui; the maine Lanterne of the people of Israel.
The Kings of France called Sires, of an ancient Gaulish word.Now, concerning the French, they honour their Kings and call them Sires, of the auncient Gaulish word. (...), which signifieth the Sunne: because those Monarches haue bin said to be truely the Suns, not onely of France, but of all Christendome, which will last so long as their Kings endure. They are the sacred supporters of the Catholique Religion; Colimus Reges nostros sicut homines a Deo secundos, and solo Deo minores: They depend immediately vpon none but God onely.
Plutarch, in the Treatise which he wrote, concerning the defect of Oracles, very aptly compareth the Kings and Princes of the world, to a lighted Lampe, hanging in the midst of a Haule, it delighteth all the by-standers with the light. But then men must not behaue themselues like diuers kindes of Flyes, who sporting pleasantly thereat, flye so oftentimes about it, that in the end they are scorched with the flame,An especiall noate well worth the obseruation. as we vse to say in a common Prouerbe; Kings are not to be taunted, or risen against, no, nor troubled in their State. Fire is the Symbole or Hieroglyphicke of Royalty: Sic cum Igne. Sic cum Principe: Such as presume ouer-neere to the Fire, burne themselues: and they that stand too farre off, feele no warmth at all.
So then we may say, that as a bright-burning Lampe, is ioy and comfort to all the beholders: the like we say also of a Prince, that so long as he liueth, he is the admirable Lanterne to his people, the holy fire and sacred flame, by the splendor whereof, Mutatur pro ^^lla Maris in auram, and silent fluctus eius.
Concidunt nubes, sugiuntque Venti.
What perils hapen at the death of a Prince.His very name onely stisleth troubles and seditions. But so soone as this bright Lampe is extinguished, the Land seeth it selfe obscured with darknesse, and pitchie cloudes. As the Eclipse of the Sunne happening, by little and little the Ayre is darkened, altred into sullen lookes; and the Subiects troubled, being (without a guide exposed to the windes of ambition, of all disorder and disobedience. Because at all times, and as often as there is no Maister in the house, all is in confusion where contrariwise, his very presence serueth as an ornament, and keepeth all within compasse of duety. And this is the reason, why the extinction of these faire Lights,Strange Star foretelling the death of Princes. the death of great Princes; is ordenarily foregon by extraordinary Starres, and Comets of a fiery nature, which appeare in heauen, as Auant-Courreurs, of their quite quenching.
Nunquam visus impune Cometes.
The Romaine Emperours, beside those Lampes of Fire, liuely described by Ap^letus in the eleuenth Booke of his Milesians, describing the order of the Procession of Isis, saith. Quorum primus Lucernam praemicantem porrigebat lumen, non a deo ^siris illis consimilem, quae vespertinas illuminant epulas, sed aureum cymbium me^^o s^ patore flammulam suscitans largionem) caused also to be borne before them, The Eagle,The Hand or Rod of Iustice in (...). The Scepter, And the Hand or Rod of Iustice; which in the times of peace, wee kept in the Temple of Saturne, at the Capitole of Rome. And in warre, in a Tent or Pauillion (in forme of a Temple) which they called Ad Principia, close ioyning to the Tent Pretoriall. And when as the Emperours or Lieutenants Generall made Orations to the Souldiors (they tearming that Oration or speech Militarie Adloc^t^nem) some one or other fetched out of the Ad Principia,Adloc^t^nem the Militarie Oration. the markes or noates of the Empire, The Eagle, The Hand of Iustice, The Lampe and The Scepter, which either were fixed, or brought to the Tribune, at the Orations. Then were there to be seene an infinite number of Medales, or stamps of Auncient Coines, and among

the rest, that of the Emperour Galba, whereof here you may behold the Figure.




Of all the Princes of Christendom, there is not any one,No Prince beareth the Hand of Iustice but the King of Fra^ce onely. but the King of France onely, that beareth this Hand or Rod of Iustice. He carrieth a Scepter of pure gold in the right hand, which is also common to other Princes: but, in the other, hee carrieth the Hand of Iustice, that is, a Rod of a Cubit in height, hauing on the top thereof a left hand wide open, wholly of Iuorie (and not of gold or siluer) to shew the integrity that Iudges should obserue, in rendring Iustice equally to euery one, without hatred or fauour, and any acception of Prince or Vassaile, Rich or Poore. And this is the reason, why this Rod and Hand of Iustice is called Aequitatis Iudicium, the marke and Hieroglyphicke of Equity, by Apuleius in his Milesians, as a most remarkeable passage. For there hee rendreth a reason, why this Iudex and Symbole of Iustice, is rather, the left hand then the right. Quartus Aequitatis ostendebat iudicium, efformatam Manum Sinistram porrecta palmula: quae gemina Pigritia, nulla calliditate, nulla solertia praedita, videbatur A^quitati magis aptior, quam dextera. The left hand (saith hee) being not imployed to the working of many dishonest actions, or violent, without Art, Deceit, or Industry; is much more proper to represent and signifie the Rudder or Sterne of Iustice, then the right hand.
This Hand of Iustice, which Saint Clemens Alexandrinus, in the sixt book of his Obseruations inward calleth Cubitum Iustitiae, The Cubit of Iustice, was framed all of Iuorie, which white like snow, is the note of the brightnesse of the faire Virgin Astrea. And euery one knoweth, that the teeth of an Elephant are Yuory; and therfore Propertius called them,
Libici nobile dentis opus.
Among all foure-footed Beasts, the Elephant is obseruable for his deuotion and Pietie, loue to his Gouernours, and likewise for his Equity: as we learn of Aristotle and Plutarch in their bookes De Animalium. Plinie in the eight booke of his Naturall History, reporteth wonders: Intellectus illi sermonis Patrij, Imperiorumque obedientia, Officiorum quae didicere memoria; Amoris, and Gloriae voluptas; imo vero (quae etiam in Homine rara) Probitas, Prudentia, Aequitati: Religio quoque Syderum, Solisque, ac Lunae veneratio. The French Lucretius, Du Bartas, in his sixt dayes worke, setteth him downe, as the Generall of all foure-footed creatures.

Digne de telle charge,Du Ba^tas in Sexiesme Luinee. ou soit qu'on ait egard
Ason dos tourrele qui porte maint Soudard:
Ou soit qu'on mette en ieu ceste prudente adresse,
Dont il semble obscurcir des Humains la sagesse.
Escolier studieux, il rumine a part soy
La lecon qu'on luy baille. Il reuere son Roy.
Il salue la Lune, etc,


Worthy of such a charge: be it in regard
His Castle backe, to Souldiers a safe Ward.
Or be it for his discreet readinesse,
Wherein he dimmes all witte men can expresse.
A studious Scholler; he consults alone
With his owne soule, Lessons to him made knowne.
He riuer enceth his King: Salutes the Moone.

Kings of Israel carried the hand of Iustice.The Kings of Israell carried (with their Scepter) this Hand of Iustice, so say the Rabbines, who describe it; Virgam Eburneam, An Yuorie Rod; Virgam Regni; Virgam Directionis; id est, Sceptrum Rectitudinis, Aequitatis, and Iustitiae: The (...) of Right and of Equity, and the Iustice of Astrea.
And from the Iewes, the practise passed among the Aegyptians; before the King and the President of Iustice, this Hand of Iustice was carried. Clemens Alexandridrinus, in the place before alleadged, saith: That there was borne before them, that is to say, before the King, and the high Priest, the Intendant of Iustice (named by Diodorus Siculus Prince of the Iudges, Princeps Iudicum, and by Elianus in his fourth booke of Diuersities, Princeps Sententiae) the notes and adornments of the Priesthood, as also of Royaltie: namely, this Hand or Rod of Iustice, and the Challice for Sacrificing, and the bearer of them was called (...). Clemens in the forequoted Booke, reporteth more particularly the full manner and order of proceeding. And Dioderus Siculus, in the second booke of his Antiquities, who obserued, that the Prince of Priests, and Iudges of the said Aegyptians, wore vpon his brest a precious stone called Veritie, which they had borrowed from the High Priest of the Iewes. Alianus in the passage formerly alleadged, saith: Iudices apud Agyptios ijdem quondam fuerunt, qui and Sacerdotes. In his Princeps erat sententia Maximus natu, and in omnes statuendi ius habebat. Eum omnium hominum esse iustissimum, and syncerissimum oportebat, qui circa collum Imaginem ex Saphyro gemma confectam gestabat, quae vocabatur Veritas.
The Prince of the Druides had the hand of Iustice before him.The Prince of the Druides had it borne before him, as the marke of his Principality, and he had the guard and managing of Iustice, euen ouer the Kings and Princes of the Gaules: who gaue strong hand to the execution of Iustice, and commands deliuered from the Druides, to whom they were euen as Ministers and seruants. As it is obserued by Dion of Prusia in Suidas, in these remarkeable words.
Celtae habent Druides Diuinationis, Sapientiaeque studiosos, sine quibus nihil est licitum Regibus facere, aut consulere; ita vt si quis rempenitus consideret, Druidas regnent, Reges autem sententiae sint administri, and serua. For it is not for Kings and Princes of the earth,How Kings and Princes ought to reigne. to reigne and command absolutely after their owne fantasie, and by an immoderate power; but to reigne in all assurance, to gouerne himselfe, and rule his Estate, by Councell of the wise, and according to Iustice.
According as the Kings of France vsually haue done, who at all times haue beene commended for louing Iustice; because they take the Scepter thereof at their Sacring, Coronation, and at receiuing thereof, the Prelate that Sacreth and Crowneth them, saith:

The words of the Prelate, at Sacring and Crowning the Kings of France.
Accipe Virgam Virtutis and Aequitatis, qua intelligas mulcere pios, and terrere repro^^^, errantibus v^am dare, lapsisque manum porrigere, disperdasque superbos, and releues ^^miles, vt aperi^t tibi estium Iesus Christus Dominus noster, qui de se ipso ait. Ego s^^ ^st^um: per me fi quis introterit saluabitur. Et ipse qui Clauis est Dauid, and Sceptru^ do^^^ Israel qui aperit, and nemo claudit, claudit and nemo aperit, sit tibi adiutor, eduxit vinct^^ d^ dom^ carceris, sedentem in tenebris, and vmbra Mortis: vt in omnib. sequi merearis c^^, de quo Dauid Propheta cecinit. Sedes tua, Deus, in saeculum saeculi, Virga Aequitatis Regni (...), and imiteris eum qui dicit. Diligas Iustitiam, and odio habeas iniquitatem, propterea enim ^nxit te Deus, Deus tuus laetitiae ad exemplum illius, quem ante sacula (...) prae particibus suis Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, Amen.

Mention also is made of the Ornaments for their Kings, and namely of the Hand of Iustice, in the history of Sugerus Abbot of S. Denys in France, speaking of the Sacring of Lewes le Gros, sixt of the name: Diademate Regni gratanter coronauit* ne^ non and Sceptrum, and Virgam, etc. Wherin it is euident, that they are mistaken, who haue written, that Charles the fift was the first King of France, that (at his Sacring) receiued the Hand of Iustice.
Of the great (...) and Throne of Iustice.These Monarchs then, as they are the onely Kings of Christendome, who (beside their Scepter) doe beare the Rod and hand of Iustice: so are they likewise the onely Princes, who are figured by their cloathed Royalty, and in peaceable habits; whereas other Princes make themselues to appeare Armed, and mounted on horsebacke, like to S. George.
That is called the Throne of Iustice, when the King comes in person into the golden Chamber of the House of Parliament at Paris,The golden Chamber of the Parlament house. about great and serious affaires of the Kingdome. Then is it, when the said Chamber is hung and adorned with rich violet Veluet, very thickly powdred with Floures de Luces of gold, in costly embroydery, and the great Canopy of the same ouer the Throne Royall, garnished with sumptuous pillowes to sit on, and to support the feet of his Maiesty, assisted with the Princes of his Bloud and Parliament, in their red Robes, as Peeres and Officers of his Crowne. On the contrary Seale to the said Great Seale, are the Armes of France crowned, sustained and supported by two Angels; and the same is also allowed to the lesser Chancellours of France.
In some of the Charters of the first Kings,Concerning the Seales of the first Kings their Seales haue beene stamped with the sole visage of the said King, as halfe faced, that is to say, onely halfe of the countenance, which the Latines tearme Luscam Imaginem, as we see on Testons, and other peeces of gold and siluer, euen so low as to the Doubles, a Money of France. And the Seale thus engrauen, was cut somewhat deepe inward, that the face appeared swelling fully vpward; as hath beene obserued in that of King Childebert, first of the name, Founder and endower of the Church of Paris, in his Charter ^ept to this very day, and in other of the Kings his Successors, which haue beene seene in the same manner presented.
The Kings of France onely haue sealed at all times with white waxe,Kings of Fra^ce onely seale with white waxe. whereas o^her seale with greene, or red, or yellow, and some with blacke. King Lewes, the eleuenth of the name, by his Letters Patents, renewed from the twenty eight day of Ianuary, 1468. and to the moneth of May 1469. granted by an especiall priui^edge to the Duke of Aniou Rene, King of Sicilie and Ierusalem, Count of Prouence, ^nd to his heyres in direct Ligne (which went not farre, being ended in a daugh^er married in the House of Lorraine, and in regard of her, the Dukes of Lorraine haue retained to this day, the Armes and Title of Kings of Ierusalem and Sicilie) to seale with white waxe, as well in the Kingdomes of Ierusalem and Sicilie, as in his ^ands in France.
The Throane and Seate of Iustice, ordenary to the most Christian Kings of France, is the Parlement of Paris, called (for Excellency) The Court of Peeres,The Throane and Seate of Iustice. and Parlement of France; albeit there are seuen other in principall Prouinces of the Kingdome, which we shall elsewhere speake of more conueniently.
It is obserued in the second booke, concerning the Officers of the Crowne of France, and the tenth Chapter, that the Estates and Parlements general of France,Parlements vnder the second Ligne. ^nder the Kings of the second Ligne, met and held but twice in the yeere onely, ^ccording to the testimony of Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rheims, drawn from the ^arration of the Abbot of Corbie Alard, who liued in the time of Charlemaigne, Emperour of the famous French.
Vnder the Kings of the third Ligne, at this instant happily reigning,Parlements vnder the third Ligne now reigning. the Parlement hath beene diuersly changed, according to the occurrences and necessitie of ^he affaires of France, and as they walked foot by foot, with the Princes and Lords ^hat were possessed of the Prouinces, and Successors to them, who had compassed ^heir affaires (as some say, fishing in troubled waters) vnder the declining of the Kings, descendants from Charlemaigne. Which is meant of two Thrones of Iu^tice, held by the Kings Lewes the Deuout, and Philip Augustus,Two thrones or seates of Iustice. called (by good right) ^he Conquerors Sonne: both of them held in fauour of the Church of Mascon, and Bishop thereof, against the violences of the Count of Vienna. The first was held at Chaalon-Cabillonis, in the yeare of the Word Incarnate, 1166. the nine and twen^ieth of the reigne of Lewis the Deuout, being set downe in eloquent tearmes, as fol^oweth.
PEr longam Regum absentiam sine disciplina,The tenure of the Rule set downe in the Court co^cerning K. Lewes. and fraeno iusti regiminis longo tempore dissoluta fuit terra Burgundiae, and illis qui in ea erant alicuius potentiae licuit impugna^e, and inter se decertare, and pauperes opprimere, and Ecclesiarum bona vastare. Nos propter ^antam indignitati malitiam, and zelo Dei commoti, terram Burgundiae cum copijs Regni ^nteruenimus obtentu faciend vindictas, and reformandi pacem in patria. Notum itaque

facimus vniuersis, praesentibus, and futuris, quod cum sederemus Cabillonis ad indic^^dum super negotijs, and ad cognoscendum causas diuersas, inter alias audiuimus quer im^^iam Ecclesiae Matisconensis contra Comitem Girardum Vianensem, and ipse non pot^^t asserere, se super Ecclesiam aliquid iuris habere, siue in Episcopi, siue in Capitulis terri^ ^^que Hominibus: And that which ensueth.
The other proceeding of K. Philip Augustus.The other of Philip Augustus, for execution of the said Arrest before specified, was with raising a maine Armie against the same Count Gerard of Vienna, in behalfe of the Bishop and Chapter of the Church of the said Mascon; and was giuen Apud Petrae pertusum, Anno Incarnati Verbi Millesimo Centesimo Octuagesimo Regni ^ostri Anno primo: which sheweth, that according to the occurrences, the first Kings of the third Line,Parlements held by armed power. went to hold their Parliaments and seats of Iustice, with a strong Armie; where the accused were constrained to be by Law, and to obey the Decrees which were signed by the King, and sub-signed by the Officers of the Crown. For those of Lewes the Deuout, had the signatures of Thibault, Count of Blois, and Champaigne, of Master of the houshould; of Guy de Boutieller; of Matthe^ the Chamberlaine, and of R^oull, Constable.
Vnder the Reign of King Lewes, called Sanctus, when France was in her flourishing estate, and the Princes and Lords werie of souple nature, rancking with the tearmes of duty and obedience: the Parliaments were ruled and assured at certaine seasons of the yeere.Foure Parlements holden yeerly in times of peace. For in times of peace, foure Parlements were holden yearly, or three at the least. And the same was vsed vnder the reigne of his sonne, Philip the Hardie, third of the name.
In the time of Philip le Bel his sonne, King of France and Nauarre, they were reduced to two yeerely, according to the ancient custome; one in Winter, and the other in Sommer, during peace; and but one in Winter during warre. It appeareth neuerthelesse by the Registers of the Court, that by hinderance of warre against the rebellious Flemmings,No Parlement in foure yeeres by reason of warre. there was not any Parlement during some yeeres. And the King by his Ordinance, dated the Monday after mid-Lent, Anno 1302. see downe in the Register of ancient Orders of Parlement, fol. 45. appointed that two Prelates, and two Councellers Layicks, should dispatch causes most pressing and attending the Parlement. Quia vero multae magnae causae in nostro Parlamento inter n^t^bil^s pers^^^ and magnas aguntur, ordinamus and volumus quod duo Praelati, and (...) aliae bonae, and susficientes laicae de nostro Consilio, vel saltem vnus Praelatus, and vna persona la^ca, causa deliberandi, and audiendi istas causas continue in nostris Parliamentis exista^t.
^ speciall Ordinances of K. Philip le Bel.In the same Ordenance, the said King Philip willed, that for the commodity of his Subiects, there should be two Parlements at Paris, two Exchequers at Roane, and extraordinary Sessions, called Great dayes, at Troyes in Champaigne, and a Parlament at Tolosa.

Praeterea pr^pter commodum Subiectorum nostrorum, and expeditionem causarum, prep^nimus ordinare, quod duo Parlementa erunt Parisius, duo Scacaria Rothomagi, and does Trecenses ^is tenebuntur in Anno, and quod Parlamentum apud Tolosam tenebitur, ^^ gentes praedictae terrae consentiant, quod non appelletur a Praesentibus in Parliament^, praedicto.

Of causes appealed in the (...) of Audience.The Ordinance of the King Saint Lewes, speaketh expressely, that causes should be appealed in the Audience, according as they are in the Rolles, and that they should be concluded, before any other be appealed, without Checquer-play, as the Prouerbe was in those times, or calling on the nayle; that is to say, calling other cases, and then leaping from one cause to another, without determining any. Deputati ad causas andiendas, partes duarum, vel trium causarum coram se faciant euoc^^, and quo^sque fuer^^^ and quantum ad diem pertinet, expeditae, alias non audiant introd^^^, illis expeditis, aliae audiantur, and sic fiat quousque totum sit expeditum.
In the Registers of Decrees of Parlement, beginning Anno 1320. vnder the Reigne of Philip le Long,Court Registers vnder K. Philip le Long. fift of the name, King of France and Nauarre, in the A^e^ or Order of the Count of Bologne on the Sea, (who was a Counceller of the Parlement) pronounced the tenth of Nouember, in the said yeere 1320. it is shewn

that the Lords of the Parliament of Paris, had their cause commised in the said Parlement, which was held to be of such esteem and greatnesse,Chiefe Lords of France Councellers of the Court. that the very chiefest Lords of France laboured to haue themselues receiued as Councellers of the Court; and hauing that priuiledge, they did account it for the prime Ranke of Honour.
And this is the reason, why we see at S. Quentins the picture of Herbert, Count of Vermandois (vpon the Tomb) attired in his Robe and Cloake, furred with Ermines, as a Counceller of the Court: and at the Church of S. Iohn at Dijon, in the great glasse window of the Quire, the foure last Dukes of Bourgongne, cloathed and habited in the same manner.
In the same Register is also to be seen,Gentlemen of the Parlement exempted fro^ calling to Combats. that the Gentlemen of the said Parlement were exempted from being appealed to Combats: for in the Order or Decree dated the sixt of Ianuary, in the said yeere, 1320. Messire Guillaume de Marsilly, a Counceller in the said Parlement, was appealed to Combat by Iohn Remilly, vassall and houshold seruant to Alix, Lady of Arsis, Aunt to the King; who charged the said Marsilly for being corrupted with money, in Commission of a Processe depending in the said Court, betweene the said Lady and Henry of Lancaster. Answere being made, that there was no place for Combat; as well, because that formerly hee had beene accused and absolued, as also by being a Counceller in the Parlement, he stood clearely exempted.
Charles le Bel, fourth of the name, King of France and Nauarre, made his Ordenance, to rule the said Parlement of Paris, as is to be seene in a Rolle and Register of Priuy Councel for the said King.The Order enacte^ by K. Charles le Bel. Haec fuerunt ordinata in consilio celebrato apud Asnerias (Asnieres neere to Royaumont, an ancient house of pleasure, belonging to the King S. Lewes) videlicet die Lunae ante Ascensionem Domini, Anno Millesimo Tricentesimo Vicesimo Secundo, qui incipit.

Primo mandatum est per Regem Magistris Inquestarum, quod non recedant quousque Cancellarius venerit Parisius. Et id est mandatum Domino Thomae de Marafountaine, and Domino Erardo l' Alamant, and quod illi duo dicant hoc idem alijs de Parlamento.

Item ordinatum est eadem die per Dominum Regem in Consilio suo, Presentibus Domino de Valesio, Domino Roberto de Attrebato, Episcopo Viuariensi (Viuiers at Seuenes) and Domino Ioanne de Cheichemon, and alijs de quibus videbitur, ordin^t de Magistris Inquestarum qui remanebunt: and idem de illis de Requestis, and qui adiungentur eis,The triple composition of the Parlement. and qui ibunt ad commissiones vsque at futurum Parlamentum. Which approoueth, that the Parliament was composed of the great Chamber for the audience; of the Iudges for Enquests, and of Commissaries for Requests.
And which more particularly may be vnderstood from the Register, concerning the ancient Ordinances of the said Parlament, there is (among the rest) that of King Philip de Valois, sixt and last of the name, which was made the eight day of Aprill Anno 1342.

Item, that when our said Parlement shall be ended, we will send our said Chanceller,
The Ordina^ce of K. Philip de Va^ois.
the three Masters Presidents of our said Parlement, and ten other persons, as well Clearks as Laricks of our Councell, such whom we shall please; who shall ordaine (according to our Will) of the said Parlement, as well of the great Chamber of our said Parlement, and of the Chamber of Enquests, as the Requests for the Parlement to come. And they shall be sworne, that they shall name vnto vs, the most sufficient persons which are in our said Parlement; and shall tell vs, what number of men will suffise for the said great Chamber, Enquests, and Requests.


Item, that hence-forward, we will not make any Maisters of Requests of our said Houshold, vntill such time as they shall be come to the number of sixe; three Clearks,
Concerning the Masters of Requests.
and three Layickes. And of the said Maisters which at this present are: there shall bee but foure, that is to say, two Clearkes, and two Layickes, which receiue any thing in houshold; but only in the manner as the Maisters of Requests of our said Houshold were wont, and haue accustomed to receiue in ancient times.

Vnder King Iohn, Sonne and Successor to the said Philip de Valois, in the Register of Decrees of Parlement, beginning Anno, 1351. there is an Order set downe for the Abbot, religious persons and Conuent of Vendosme. Wherein it is expressed

that the Count of Vendosme was a Councellor in Parliament, in the great and secret Councell for the King, and that the causes of Councellers, as well of the said Parliament, as the great Councel; by an especiall priuiledge, ought to be treated on in the said Parliament, and not elsewhere, and so it was adiudged.
In the Register of Letters, and orders of Parliament, beginning the Moneth of February, Anno 1356. in the Commission of the fourth of Iuly, 1357. for M. Regnauld Dacy,An Order for Lords and Gentlemen of Parlement Aduocate for the King in the said Parlement; it is expressely said, that the Gentlemen and Lords of the said Parlement, are not obliged to pleade any where else, but in the said Parlement, if they will haue right and Iustice there.
In the Register of Orders of Parlement, beginning in Anno 1360. in an Order bearing date the foure and twentieth day of Iuly 1361. M. Iohn Pastourean, Aduocate for the King in the said Parlement, pleading and concluding against a Partie:A condemnation for threatning the Kings Aduocate in Parlement. the Sonne of the said Partie being present at the pleading, threatned him in open Audience. He was condemned in a thousand pounds Fine to the King, and in an hundred pounds to the said Pastoureau. Which Order imported, That the said Sonne had dared to quench the l^ght of Iustice, in her principall Candlesticke, that is to say, the Parlement, which is the Capitall Court of the Kingdome.
In the same Register are two Orders, giuen the seuenth, and one and twentieth of August, 1361. whereby appeareth, that such as come to plead in the said Parlement,No persons to be imprisoned that haue suits in Parlement. are in Safeguard and safe conduct thereof; and are not to be imprisoned for debts, cause, or any subiect whatsoeuer, without appointment of the said Parlement; except it be for debt of expences for the belly, during the awaiting and persuing his affaires in the said Parliament. There are diuers other Decrees made, concerning the same priuiledge, dated the one and twentieth day of May, 1365. and the sixt of Ianuary, 1365.
Vnder King Charles the fift, called the Wife, Sonne and Successour to the said King Iohn, in the Register of the said Parliament, beginning in Anno 1365. is an Order, dated the seuenteenth day of Ianuary in the said yeere, 1365. for Thibault de Moreuill, which sheweth; That such parties as ought to appeare personally in Parlement, are to haue (during their iourney) all their other causes to cease, and be intermitted before all other Iudges whatsoeuer.
A condemnation in Parlement presently remitted by the King.In the Register of Acts or Orders of Parlement, beginning 1366. by Decree dated the twenty fiue of Nouember in the said yeere, the King then sitting on his Throne of Iustice: Thibault, Lord of Bedox was condemned in fine to his Maiestie, which presently he remitted to him. And the said gift was signed by the Register or Pregnotarie of the Parliament, and not by any Secretary of the Finances.
High treason to kil a Counceller o^ Parliament.In the Register of Acts of Parliament, beginning 1368. there is one dated the twenty seuenth of Iune, 1369. for matter of murder and assassinate, committed on the person of M. Emery Doll, Counceller of the said Parliament, whereby it was approued, That it was the crime of high Treason, to kill a Counseller of the said Parliament
In the Register of Councell of Parlement, Anno 1475. it is declared, that the eleuenth day of Nouember in the said yeere, Monsieur the Chanceller came to aduertise the Court for going to the Bastille, to heare the confession of the Constable of S. Paul, to whom for his rebellions and disobediences, King Lewes the eleuenth directed his Processe.The Declaration of the Parlement. And the said Parlement declared, That there was not any Lord in the Kingdome so great, Except the King and Monsieur le Daulphine, but caught to come and appeare at the said Parlement in Person, when it was ordained for him.
And this is witnessed by a Lion abasing his head, and the tayle betweene his legges exalted ouer the gate and entrance of the great Chamber, by the Parque^ des Huissiers thereof. So that by this illustrious and Soueraigne Parlement, are ordered and determined the principall affaires of the Kingdome.
In the Register of Parlement Councell, beginning Anno 1482. the second day of Aprill in the said yeere, King Lewes the eleuenth sent vnto the Parlement, the Oath which hee tooke at his Sacring, exhorting the said Parlement to performemed

good Iustice, according as the King had promised to doe by his said Oath, which he purposed to keepe: and the Oath is there Registred downe.
It is not then to be wondred at, if Kings and Princes in the sacred Scriptures, are mistically represented by the Tree called an Oake,Kings and Princes represented in Scripture. and that God himselfe (who honoureth them with the Throne and Scepter, according to his owne good pleasure) did communicate or impart himselfe to the ancient Patriarches, vnder the Oake of Mambre. Because in like manner, as the Oake couereth and defendeth from the ayres iniury, such as commit themselues to the shelter of his branches, his leaues and fruites being apt for pasturing and nourishing the creatures of the earth: euen so the Parlements of France are Oakes with exalted heads, vnder whose branches the people are couered from the very strongest violences, which constraineth them to yeeld obedience to their Prince.
Plutarch in the life of Coriolanus writeth,How the Greeks and Romanes honored their Emperours and Captaines. that the ancient Greekes and Romanes honoured their Emperors and Captaines, with Crownes made of Oaken leaues, which also they bestowed on a Burgesse and Cittizen, who had saued the life of another in a ranged battell: and this was giuen as a note of honor, because this Tree was consecrated to Iupiter, the sauer and defender of Cities, that is to say the conseruation of men. Moreouer, the Oake (among all other Trees) is that which bea^eth the very fairest fruit, and amongst those cultiue and domesticall, the very strongest and durable. Beside, at the beginning, men made their bread of Acornes,A corns, mens bread, and their drinke hony. and their drinke of hony. Also, to the said Emperors and Captaines, being Victors, they gaue a sufficient part of Beasts and birds, and likewise the Missell-toe of the Oake, whereof they deuised to make Glew for the catching of them.
Now it plainely appeareth, that Parlements are the true conseruatours and protectors, not onely of the people,Parlements protectors of the King, State and people. but also of the State and persons of our most Sacred Kings, who ought to haue all submission and obedience rendred to them by their subiects. Whom likewise (as by an equall Ballance) they shelter and defend from vnreasonable willes in the Prince; because they make a moderate and equall harmony, by the Queene of all vertues Iustice.
By good and iust cause is it then, That the Parlements of France are compared to Oakes. But when Princes (by bad Councell) mis-prize the authority of them,Princes ought to be zealous defenders of their people. whereof they ought to be zealous defenders, as being exalted to the Royall dignitie, to rule and gouern their subiects by Iustice; they cut off the right hand from the ^eft. If they refuse the holy remonstrances of their Parlements, vnder colour, that they are not to meddle with affaires of State, but onely with the act of Iustice, and ^end a deafe eare, when they are aduertised of euill gouernment; it is an assured Prognosticke fore-warning, of the intire decadence of the kingdome.
These great Oaks are neuer smitten with the lightning of the Princes contempt,Princes are examples, good or bad, for their people. but as soone followeth that of the people, who rather imitate the Princes example for the worst, then for vertue, which neuer bringeth harme to any Kingdome. As hath beene obserued by examples in the last troubles, when France being gouerned by Strangers, was euen at the point of totall ruine, if the King (whose minoritie was so long time abused) had not boldly vndertaken to steere the shippe.

Saepe malum hoc nobis, si mens non leua fuisset,
De coelo tactas memini praedicere Quercus.

Now come we to the Peeres of France.
In the third booke of Officers of the Crowne, and the second Chapter,The first Institutor of the Peeres of France. mention is made that King obert the Deuout instituted the Peeres of France, in the yeere of Grace 120. the 24. yeare of his reigne. And the first cause iudged by those ancient Peeres, was that of ^ichard Duke of Normandie, second of the name, for the Castle of Dreux and the appurtenances, against Eudes Count of Chartres. It is likewise there said, that a Peere of France was assigned by a Peere, assisted with two Knights, and thereon reported in the following Chapter, the Decree giuen against Ioane, Countesse of Flanders, to the benefit of Iohn de Nelle; giuen at the Castle of

the Louure in Paris, by King Lewes, eight of the name, holding his Court adorned with Peeres, Anno Dom, 1224. We shall now relate here another remarkeable matter, giuen by King Philip Augustus, the reading whereof will giue vs to vnderstand, that the number of the Twelue Peeres was from thence assured,The number of the Peeres of France. and the Ceremonies which were to be obserued, for calling to Iustice a Peere of France, and heere followeth the subiect of the said Order.
Henry Count Palatine of Champaigne.Henry le Large, or the liberall, Count Palatine of Champaigne and Brie, espoused Madame Mary of France, daughter to King Lewes the seuenth, and by her hee had two sonnes, and one daughter, Mary of Champaigne, wife to Baldwine Emperour of Constantinople, and Count of Flanders.
The eldest sonne was Henry, who tooke to wife Hermenzeta, daughter to Henry Count of Namur, deceasing without issue. Henry seeing himselfe to be a widdower, went in the voyage to the Holy Land with King Philip Augustus, by whose fauour he espoused in second marriage, Isabell,Isabel, Qu. of Ierusalem. Queene of Ierusalem, sister to Baldwine fourth of the name, King of Cyprus and Ierusalem; who in her first nuptialls had married Geoffrey de Tholon, from whom she was separated. In the second, she had to husband, Conrade, Marquesse of Montferratt, and in the third, Henry of Champaigne, of which marriage issued two daughters, the eldest whereof was Madame Alix, Queene of Cyprus; and the other was Madame Philip, Wife to Eyrard de Brenne. And of this marriage came Thibault de Brenne. The said Henry died at Acres, in the yeare M.C.XCVII. as Rigordus writeth in the life of Philip Augustus. Temporibus istis Henricus Comes Tracensis Rex Hierosolymitanus, apud Achon (...) cui in Comitatu Trecensis surcessit Theobaldus Frater eius.
The second sonne to the Count of Champaigne Henry le large, was named Thibault,Thibault, second sonne to Henry le Large Count of Champaigne. who had to Wife Madame Blanche of Nauarre, Sister vnto the King of Nauarre Sancio the Strong, eight and last of the name. And in this marriage was borne Thibault, sixt of the name, who in right of his Mother was King of Nauarre, and as his owne inheritance, Count Palatine of Champaigne and Brie.
Phillip, second daughter to the K. o^ Cyprus.Eyrard de Brenne pretended on behalfe of his Wife Philip of Cyprus, second daughter to King Henry of Cyprus, eldest sonne of Le Large; that the Counties of Champaigne and Brie appertained to him, and not to Blanche of Nauarre, Mother and Guardian in Wardship of Thibault the sixt: whom hee procured to be called before King Phil^p Augustus, in his Court of Parliament furnished with Peeres, to be receiued in homage for the said Counties, whereof they were debauted by solemne Order (whereon grew the question) considering the generall custome of the great Fiefes of France. And here followeth the same Decree of the Court, quoated 23, as it was taken out of the Register.




The Order agreed on solemnely by the King and Peeres in Parlement.
PHilippus Dei Gracia Francorum Rex, etc. Nouerint Vniuersi praesentes pariter, and f^turi, Quod cum dilaecta, and fidelis nostra Blanca Comitissa Campaniae citata esset per Ducem ^urgundiae, Mathaeum de Monte-Maurencij, and Wilelmum de Barris, vt in Cariam nostram veniret iuri paritura de querelis quas Erardus de Brena, and Philippa que dicitur vxer eius, contra eandem Comitissam, and eius filium proponebant, and super eo quod ipse Erardus, and eadem Philippa petebant a nobis, quod nos reciperemus eiusdem Erardi h^magium de Comitatu Campaniae, sicut Comes Henricus Nepos nosteri, quem ipsa Philipp^ patrem suum esse dicebat, inde saisitus fuerat. Tandem apud Melodunum in nostra pr^sentia constituti praedicta Blanca Comitissa Campaniae, and Theobaldus Filius eius ex (...) parte: and praedicti Erardus de Brena, and Philippa ex altera, requirentes super hoc fibi fieri iudiciam. Iudicatum est a Baronibus nostris, videlicet a Rhemensi Archiepiscopo, Willelmo Lingonensi, Willelmo Catalaunensi, Philippo Beluacensi, R. Nouiomensi Episcopis, and Odone Duce Burgundiae Paribus Regni Nostri, and alijs multis scilicet Willelmo Com. P^^ti^i, Roberto Comite Drocensi, R. Comite Britanniae, Guidone Comite Sancti Pauli, Willelmo de

^upibus, Senescallo Andegaui, Willelmo Comite Iouiniaci, Ioanne Comite Belli-Montis, Roberto Comite de Alenconia, and etiam quibusdam Episcopis videlicet Antisiodori, Car^otensi, Syluanectensi, and Lexoniensi, nobis audientibus, and iudicium approbantibus. Quod hommagium Erardi de Brena, vel dicta Philippae, de Comitatu Campaniae nullate^us recipere debebamus, quamdiu Comitissa Blanca, and Theobaldus Filius eius vellent ius ^acere in Curia nostra, and persequi: and quod vsus, and consuetudo Franciae talis est, quod ex ^o aliquis saisitus est de Feudo per Dominum Feodi, Dominus Feodi non debet alium reci^ere in Hominem de eodem Feodo, quamdiu ille qui saisitus est de Feodo per Dominum Feo^i, ve^it, and paratus sitius faecere in Curia Domini Feodi, and persequi. Et quia Comitem Theobaldum quondam Nepotem nostrum, Patrem istius Theobaldi, per assensum Baronum ^ostrorum, nullo contradicente, recipimus in hominem de Comitatu Campaniae, and Briae, ^icut Pater eius Comes Henricus tenens, fuerat, and post decessum dicti Comitis Theobaldi, ^ecipimus Blancam Comitissam de codem Comitatu in foeminem nostram, sicut de Baillio, and praeterea Theobaldum filium eius, saluo Baillio, and praeterea Theobaldum filium eius, ^luo Baillio Matris suae, nullo contradicente, de iure non debemus dissaisire Blancam Comi^issam, vel Theobaldum filium eius de Comitatu Campaniae, and Briae, quamdiu parati essent ^us facere in Curia nostra, and persequi. Et ipsa coram nobis, and alijs Baronibus nostris ^d semper obtulit. Hoc autem Iudicium factum fuit, nihil amplius quaesierunt de praedicta ^omitissa, and eius filio, and sic sine die recesserunt.




This Order giuen at Melun, is dated in the Moneth of Iuly, 1216. And this ^entence is very remarkeable, that the Court representing the Kings most sacred ^erson, rendreth a reason of the Iudge,The Court presenteth the Kings Royall person. which is likewise practised in the pronoun^ing and proclaiming of criminall Iudgements, where demonstration is giuen to ^he people for some reparation of forfeits, wherein the criminall are condemned. To shew, that the Kingdome is ruled by Iustice open to the whole world, and not ^nthralled vnder the yoake of a voluntary and absolute power, which hath no o^her language, but I will haue it to be so, tyrannicall words.
Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas.The absurdity of tyrannicall power.
And this great Equity declareth it selfe in Propositions of Error, when the Court ^ffecteth much rather to retract her Sentences and Iudgements, confessing freely ^hat she hath erred; then to doe any iniustice.
It behoueth moreouer to obserue, that from the time of King Philip Augustus, ^he number of the Peeres of France was firmely ordered to be Twelue. This is iustified by ^he Historian of England, Mathew Paris, Monke of S. Albanes in England, who ^ued in the time of the King S. Lewes. This Author informeth vs,At what time the number of the Peers was concluded on. that about the ^ffaires of the Holy Land, wherein the said King Lewes then was: Queene Blanche ^is Mother, at that time Regent of France, to deriue some commodities from the ^ing of England, Henry the third; would needes render to him the Duchy of Nor^andy, which by decree of the said Phillip Augustus, and his Court furnished with ^eeres, had beene confiscated from King Iohn without Land, for causes whereof we ^all speake heereafter.
Against this restitution opposed themselues, the Princes of the Blood, the Peeres ^nd Parlements of France, by these remarkeable Tracts. Si velit Domina Blanchia ^c facere nunquam Regni Francorum Vniuersitas hoc concedet.Opposition of France against restoring the Duchy of Normandie. Absit enim vt duodecim ^arium Iudicium, quo iuste abdicatur Rex Anglorum, vt priuatur Normannia, cassetur, (...) pro friuolo habeatur. And it was sent to tell the King of England, on behalfe of ^he Princes and Bernage (that is to say Baronage) of France, with a dreadfull oath: Quod antequam Rex Angliae sperata reciperet, oporteret eum necessario per mille lancearum ^ucrones, and post earum fragmenta, per totidem gladios cruentandos transitum facere mi^tarem.
The King S. Lewes, conferring with the King of England Henry the third,Speeches at the two Kinge meeting. who was come expr^ssely to visit him at Paris, in the yeere 1254. O vtinam ait Rex Fran^rum, Duodecim Pares Franciae, and Baronagium mihi consentirent certe amici essemus in^ssolubiles. Mathew Paris.
The very greatest Lords in the sacred kingdome of France, are the 12. Peeres, whom Mathew Paris, vnder the yeere 1257. calleth Magnates. Non reor (saith this English Author) a materia alienum, si nomina Francorum Nobilium, precipue ad quos n^gotia Regni spectant ardua, praesenti inserimus paginae.
Archiepiscopus Rhemensis, qui Regem Francorum Coelesti consecrat Chrismate, qu^propter Rex Francorum Regum omnium censetur dignissimus (Spanish Writers auouch this passage) est omnium Franciae Parium primus and excellentissimus Episcopus Nouiomens^^,Peeres of France being Ecclesiasticall persons. qui est Comes Palatinus. Episcopus Beluacensis, qui est Comes Palatinus. Episcopus C^talaunensis. Episc^pus Langonensis, qui quamuis pauper sit, dignus tamen habetur. Episcopus Laudun^nsis qui Dux est, and Comes, ratione Sancti Rhemigij, ad quem deuoluta f^^t illa praeclara haereditas.
(...) Noblemen Peeres of France.Dux Normanniae primus inter Laicos, and dignissimus. Dux Aquitaniae, Dux Burgundiae: Comes Flandrensis. Comes Campaniae, and Comes Tolosae, qui dicitur Sancti Aegid^. But this Order is changed, the Duke of Bourgongne being Deane of the Lay Peeres, and not he of Normandie, and the same of the Ecclesiasticks.
The Cham^ers (...) the chiefe Office in France.The chiefe of the Parlements of France, and of all the Iustices, and Soueraigne Chambers in the Kingdome, is the Chancerie; which the Abbot of Corbie Alard, by good ri^ht calleth Cancellarium Summum. Already hath been said sufficient, concerning ^he Dignity of the Office, in the second booke of the Officers of the Crowne, and the fourth Chapter. Onely we will adde in this place, that which is obserued in the Court Registers, vnder the reigne of the great King S. Lewis, ninth of the name, concerning the Rights of the Chancery, and them belonging to the Chancellor.
The Sol of Pa^ (...) much a^ t^e Iour^o^, and (...).The Chancellor taketh for himselfe, his horses and seruants on horsebacke, a Parisian Sol daily for Oates and for all other things; but excepteth his Clerke and Seruant which wa^e in his Chamber at the Court, and feede there. Their wages were double at foure good feasts of the yeere, and when the King had his priuate lodgings in the Countr^y. These Chancellors had Liueries also, as other Clerks of the Kings,Gifts and be^ belonging vnto the Chancellor. and LiuerieeT of Candles, such as were conuenient for his Chamber, and for his Notaries to write by. Sometimes the King gaue him a Palfrey (that is a Hackney or ambling beast for his owne saddle and riding; a horse for his Clerke, and a Sumpter horse for the Register. Of Letters which haue duely threescore Sols for the sealing, the Chanceller hath tenne, and his portion of the common Chancerie, as the other Clerkes belonging to the King. And when this Chancellour lay in Abbeyes or other places, where he spent nothing for horses; it was abated to him in his wages or allowance.
In the Register for Acts and Orders of Parliament, beginning Anno 1343. Philip de Valois then reigning, in the Order of Guillaume de Quernes, the one and twentieth day of May,In the time of K. Philip de Valois. 1344. is declared* that vpon refusall made to the Bishop of Auranches by the Chancellor, to seale him certaine Letters; the said Bishop caused them to be re-written, and sealed with the Kings priuy Seale, but the said Letters were declared to be of no worth.
In the Register for Acts of Parliament, beginning Anno 1348. there are two Letters Patents of the said King Philip de Valois, dated the fourth and sixt of Ianuary, in the said yeere 1348. whereby is declared, that because the King had sent his Chancellour ^n iourney about his affaires, hee appointed, that in absence of the great Seale which he carried with him,The Kings appointment for ^^aling in absence of the great Seale. they should seale with the Seale Chastelet de Paris, and counter-sealed with the Signet of Parlement. Yet to this effect, that the said Seale and Signet should be deliuered to M. Peter de Hangest, and Foulques B^doull, Clerks Councellers of the said Parlement, to whom he committed the trust for thus doing. And yet notwithstanding, from those times then, there were Maisters of Requests in the Kings houshold, to whom at this present appertaineth the keeping of the Chancery Seale of the Pallace (neuerthelesse discerned by the name of the lesser Chancery, because the greater is in the Court of the King, where the great Seale representeth the image of his Maiesty, sitting on his Throne of Iustice, and is kept by the Chancellour, or keeper of the Seales) from moneth to moneth following, according to the order of their reception.
It is not any long time since, that the Chancellours of France being chosen; on the day of their enstalling, tooke their Oath in the Court of Parliament of Paris,The Chancellor sworne on the day of his Enstallment. as is iustified (from time to time) in the Registers thereof. An Oath wholly answerable to that which (at this instant) the Chancellers and Keepers of the Seales doe take before the King. And the ancient Oath importeth, that they shall not take any garments, pensions or gifts of any other Prince, but onely of the King.
It remaineth now to shew, for the concluding of this chapter, to the honour and preheminence of France: that the famous Monarches thereof, haue bin continual-renowned, for rendring of Iustice in an vpright ballance, and according to Equity, without regard eyther to the weake or strong.
Strange and forraigne Princes haue sought,Of vpright Iustice in the Kings of Fra^ce to stra^ge Princes. and submitted themselues to the ^udgement of their Parlement, euen in their affaires of greatest importance. And from the time of the first Ligne of their Kings, forraigne Writers foretold an eternall continuance to that Monarchy, for Iustice to be there sincerely rendred.
The Chronicle of Lauresheim, vnder the yeere eight hundred and three (followed by the Monke Aimonius, in the fourth booke of his history of France) reporteth that King Lewes the Debonnaire, holding his Parlement in May (which was the first of the yeare, as we haue already said) there came thither from strange Prouinces, two Brethren, Kings of Vuilses, who with franke and free good will, submitted themselues to the iudgement of the said Parlement, to which of them the Kingdome should belong. The elder of these two Brethren was named Meligastus, and the yonger Celeadracus.
Now, albeit the Custome of the said Kingdome,A difference betweene two brethren for a Kingdome, adiudged by the Parlement of France. adiudged the Crowne to the eldest, according to the right of Primogeniture, allowed and practised by the Law of Nature, and of later memory, in the person of the last dead King Liubus, father commune to these two Contendants: yet notwithstanding, in regard of the Sub^ects vniuersall consent of the Kingdome, who for the cowardise and want of gouernment in the elder, had giuen the Crowne to the yonger, for his valiancie and discreete carriage; by sentence, the Kingdome was adiudged to him, and the eldest did him homage, with oath of allegiance in the said Parlement. Obserue here the words set downe in the said Chronicle.
Mense Maio conuentus ibidem habitus est, in quo inter ceteras Barbarorum legationes que sua sponte venerunt, duo fratres Reges Vvilsorum controuersiam inter se de Regno habentes ad Regis praesentiam venerunt: quorum nomina sunt Meligastus, and Celeadratus: erant enim filij Regis Vvilsorum Liubi, qui licet cum fratribus suis Regnum suum diuisum teneret, tamen propterea quod natu maior esset, ad eum totius Regni summa perti^ebat. Illo occiso, commisso cum Orientalibus Obotritis praelio, Vuilsi filium cius Meligadum, qui maior erat, Regem sibi constituunt: Sed cum eius secundum ritum gentis commissum sibi Regnum parum digne administraret, illo abiecto, iuniori fratri Regium hono^em detulerunt, quam ob causam ambo ad Regis Imperatorisque praesentiam venerunt. Quos cum audisset, statuit vt iunior frater delatam sibi a Populo suo potestatem habe^et, etc.
Vnder the third Ligne, then reigning Philip Augustus,A difference betweene the Pope and Emperor referred to the Parlement of Fra^ce and there ended by good right called the Conqueror; Pope Innocent the third, and the Emperor Otho, fourth of the name, being in variance for the forme and tearmes of the Oath of fidelitie, which the ^aid Emperor should make to the Pope; they referred it to the iudgement of King Philip in his Parlement furnished with Peeres, and here ensueth the subiect of their contention.
The Emperor Fredericke, sirnamed Barbarossa, first of the name, left fiue sonnes, Henry who was Emperor after him, and by the Popes fauour and furtherance (as we shall shew elsewhere) espoused Constance a professed Nunne,The 5. sonnes of the Emperor Barbarossa already well stept ^nto yeeres, the onely daughter to Roger King of Naples and Sicilie, so that by her ^e had the said Kingdome. Fredericke deceasing in Syria) and Otho, Count of Bourgongne and Palatine of Besancon; Conrade, Duke of Suaba; and Philip, who was King of the Romanes after his Brother.
This Emperor Henry, sixt of the name, the eldest sonne of Barbarossa, was a capitall enemy to the Church and Popes, who had aduanced him, as it is a common custome. So that dying in Anno 1198. some Princes of Germany elected in the Empire, Philip, brother to him deceased. Against whom Pope Innocent the third made opposition, he succeeding in the Papall seate, by the death of Pope Celestine the third, happening the sixt of the Ides of Ianuary, in Anno 1197.
The causes of the Popes opposition in this case.The causes of this opposition in Pope Innocent, are specified by the Historiographer to King Philip Augustus, named Rigordus, vnder the said yeere, 1197. and set downe in these tearmes.
Eodem Anno Henricus Romanorum Imperator obyt qui eo tempore per tyrannidem suam Sciciliam sibi subingauerat, and multos viros magnos, and nobiles ibidem peremerat, and contra Religionem Christianam, Archiepiscopos, and Episcopos trucidauerat: contra Ecclesiam Romanam, sicut and praedecessores sui, semper tyrannidem exercuerat. Qua de causa Innocentius Papa Tertius in promotione Philippi Fratris sui aduersarius fuit, and omnes fautores eius excommunicaunt, and Othoni Filio Ducis Saxoniae viriliter adhaesit, and Aquis-Gra^ in Regem Germaniae coronari fecit.
Otho crowned K. of Germany by the Pope.So that by the fauour of the said Pope Innocent, this Otho, fourth of the name, eldest sonne to Henry the proud, sirnamed the Lyon, Duke of Saxonie, and Bauaria, slaine by Freder^cke Barbarossa, was crowned King of Germanie, in the Cittie of Aix le Chapell^.
But hee made some exception, concerning the forme and tearmes of the oath of fidelitie, which the said Otho should sweare to the Pope. And not being able to agree of themselues; both Parties submitted to the Iudgement of King Philip Augustus,Exception agai^st the oath to the Pope. and of his Court of Parliament furnished with Peeres. So that by Order giuen at Melun in Iuly 1204. the forme of the said Oath was prescribed and Registred in the Parliament Register at request of the said parties, and sent vnto Otho, to render it to the said Pope Innocent, who sent assurance and Certificate to the said Parliament, for registring it (being performed) in these words.

INnocentius Episcopus, seruus seruorum Dei, Charissimo Filio nostro Philippo Francorum egi Christianissimo, Salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem. Absque dubitatione ^^ueritis, quod secundum formam a vobis, and Curiae Regni vestri Paribus praescriptam, habetur apud nos iusturandum Charissimi Filij nostro Othonis Romanorum Regis Illustris aures Bulla munitum, nobis, and Ecclesiae praestitum.
Ego Otho Romanorum Rex, and semper Augustus, tibi Domino meo Innocentio Papa, and Eccl^siae Romanae spondeo, polliceor, promitto, and iuro quod omnes possessiones, honores, and iura Romanae Ecclesiae, pro posse meo, bona fide protegam, and ipsam ad eas retinedas (...) fide iuuabo. Quas autem nondum recuperauit adiutor ero ad recuperandum: and recuperatarum, secundum passe meum, ero sine fraude defensor: and quaecumque ad manus meas d^uenient, sine difficultate restituere procurabo. Ad hanc aut em pertinent tota terra qu^ est de Radicofano, vsque ad Ceperanum; Exarchatus Rauennae; Pentapolis; Marchia, D^catus Spoletanus; terra Comitissae Mathildis, Comitatus Bricenorij, cum alijs adacentib^ terris expressis in multis priuilegijs Imperatorum, a tempore Ludouici Pij Francorum, and Romanorum Imperatoris Christanissimi. Has omnes pro posse meo restituam, and quiete dimittam, cum omne iurisdictione, districtu, and honore suo. Veruntamen cum ad recipiendam Coronam Imperij, vel pro necessitabus Ecclesiae Romanae ab Apostolica Sede vt catus accessero, de mandato summi Pontificis ab illis terris praestationes accipiam. Prater^ adiutor ero ad retinendum, and defendendum Ecclesiae Romanae Regnum Siciliae. Tibi etiam Domino meo Innocentio Papae, and successoribus tuis omnem obedientiam, and honorifacentiam exhibeo, quam deuoti, and Catholici Imperatores consueuerunt Sedi Apostolicae exhibere. Stabo etiam ad consilium, and arbitrium tuum de bonis consuetudinibus Populo I^mano seruandis, and exhibendis, and de negotio Tusciae, and Lombardiae. Et si propter neg^t^ meum Romanam Ecclesiam oportuerit incurrere guerram, subueniam ei ficut necessitas postulauerit in expensis. Omnia vero praedicta tam iuramento, quam scripto firmabo, (...) Imperij Coronam adeptus fuero. Actum Aquis-Grani, Anno Incarnationis Dominica ^lesimo Ducentesimo Quinto, mense Martio, Regni nostri Septimo.

But this Emperour kept not his Oath,The Emperor slain by Court Landanga. for the Emperour Phillip being slaine in the yeare 1208. by a Count Palatine, whom Rigordus calleth in the Germaine tongue Landanga, for these are his words. Eodem anno quidam Comes Palatij, qui Germanica lingua Landanga vocabatur, idest, Comes Palatini, Philippum Romanorum Imperatorem interfecit. Quo mortuo Otho Filius Ducis Saxoniae per nidustriam, and auctoritatem Innocentij Papae Imperium obtinere nitebatur. The Histories of Germanie write, that he was murdered by Otho Palatine of Vuitlispach, to whom the said Emperour had affianced his daughter, and yet notwithstanding,Otho crowned Emperour in Rome by the Pope. married her to his competitor Otho) Phillip being then dead at Babemberg, Otho was crowned Emperour by the said Pope Innocent the third, in the Citie of Rome, in Anno 1210. And at the said Coronation, he renewed his former Oath, as Rigordus noteth in the same yeare. Exegit Papa ab eo in ipsa Coronatione iusiurandum de patrimonio, and iure beati Petri indemniter ei, and Ecclesiae Romanae in pace dimittendo, and contra quostibet defendendo.
And forasmuch as Phillip Augustus impeached this Coronation, because hee was his mortall enemy, and fauoured the part of Iohn without Land, King of England, his Vnckle by the Mothers side, and the Counts of Flanders, of Bologne and Auuergne, his rebellious Vassailes: Pope Innocent added to the Oath this clause.Another addition to the Oath. Si militer and consilio tuo, and mandato parebo de pace, and concordia facienda intere me, and Regem Francorum. Hereupon he gaue his Seale to the said Pope, by a publique instrument: but the very same day after his Crowning, he violated his faith so solemnely sworne, as Rigordus thus relateth. Recepto itaque iureiurando, and instrumentis publicis super hoc confectis, and Imperiali caractere confirmatis, eodem die quo Coronam suscepit, contra iuramentum temere veniens significauit Papae se non posse ei dimittere castra, quae ab Antecessoribus suis aliquib. temporibus fuerant possessa. So that at his parting from Rome, he possessed himselfe of Castles and strong places, which were the patrimonie of S. Peter. As Aquapendente, Radicosani, S. Quirice, Monte-Flascon, and of all Romania. And pursuing on his fortune, in Apouillia he became Lord of all that, which Fredericke, Sonne to Henry the sixt Emperour had enioyed, and afterwards of the Cities and Townes, the Churches de-meanes and dependances.
So he was excommunicated by the said Pope Innocent the third,Otho excommunicated by the Pope. who deliuered his Vassailes and Subiects in the Lands of the Empire, from the Oath which they had sworne to him. And consequently, of this Fulmination it followed, that the Landes-Graue of Thuringe, the Archbishops of Maguntia and Treuers, the Duke of Austria, the King of Bohemia, and many other Princes and great Lords of Germanie and Italie, as well of the Church, as Layicks, forsooke his seruice.
Whereupon, in the yeare 1211. by the councell and power of King Phillip Augustus (to whom Pope Innocent the third,Fredericke, second of the name chosen King. in imitation of his predecessours in the holy Seate had recourse) the Princes of Germanie elected for their King the said Fredericke, second of the name, sonne to Henry the sixt: who being aided with meanes, and the forces of France, went to Rome, where he was well receiued by the Pope. From thence he passed by Sea, and landed at Geneway, going ouer the Alpes, and made his entrance at Constance, where the Herbingers had before marked the lodgings for Otho: who was constrained to make his retreate to Brissac, and from thence he was expulsed. Fredericke (the same yeare) went so farre as to Vaucouleurs, to parley with Augustus, who sent (on his behalfe) his eldest Sonne Lewes, accompanied with great Lords of France, where a new alliance was sworne. And afterward, Otho lost both his honor and power, being vanquished by King Phillip Augustus, in the Battaile fought neere Tournay at Bouuines, Anno 1214.Otho ouercome in the Battaile at Bouuines. Returne we now to the Parlement of Paris, and Princes Strangers, no way Iusticiable to the Crowne of France; which yet voluntarily haue submitted their differences, to be censured by the iudgement thereof.
William Rishanger, Monke in the Abbey of S. Albane in England, continuer of ^he Historie of Mathew Paris, obserueth vnder the yeare 1263. that the King of England, Henry the third, and the Barons of England, who made warre vpon him: commited their whole difference and quarrell, to be iudged by the Parlement of France. Vt Pax reformaretur inter Regem Angliae, and Barones ventum est ad istud, vt Rex and proceres

se submitterent Ordinationi Parlamenti Regis Franciae (in the time of S. Lewes) in praemissis prouisionibus Oxoniae. Nec non pro depraedationibus, and damnis vtrobique illatis.
Igitur in crastino S. Vincentij, congregato Ambianis populo pene innumerabili, Rex Franciae Lud^uicus corum Episcopis, and Comitibus, alijsque Francorum proceribus solemniter dixit sententiam pro rege Angliae, contra Barones, statuis Oxoniae, prouisionibus, ordinationibus, ac obligationibus penitus annulatis. Hoc excepto, quod antique Chartae Ioann^ Regis Angliae Vniuersitati concessae, per illam sententiam in nullo intendebat penitus derogare. In this Parlement at Amiens, were present the King of England, Henry the third, Queene Eleuor his wife, Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Peter, Bishop of Hereford, and Iohn Maunsell: and on the Barons of Englands side, a very great number of choice elected Lords, who (the same yeare) repassed backe into England, after the Parlement, as the same Monke speaketh. Eo tempore redierunt a Francia, qui Parlemento Regis Franciae inter fuerant, Rex videlicet Angliae Henricus and Regius Eleonora, Archiepiscepus Cantuariensis Bonifacius, Petrus Herefordensis, Ioannes Ma^sel, etc.
A number more might be here alleadged, of the like nature, concerning this distribution of Iustice, which renowned the Kings of the first Ligne, euen by the pennes of strange Writers. Agathias, the Greeke Authour, in his sixt Booke of the Gothes warres, deliuereth two diuers passages, in honour of the French, concerning Iustice and Equitie, the two maine props and Pillers assured of any Estate.
Where Iustice flourisheth in true splendor, the Kin^dome is most happy.THe French are all Christians, and their Cities gouerned by Bishops, and Priests. Among all the Nations descended from Allemaigne; they follow and professe the true opinion. They obserue and solemnise dayes of Feasts, as we doe. Among all other People, they are adorned with good manners, very ciuile and courteous: and there is not any thing in them (in regard of vs) which maketh them strangers, but their garments, and language smooth enough I. commend them infinitely, by reason of their vertues, and namely for that of Iustice; for they vse it equally to euery one. And therefore it is not to be wendred at, if they winne much, and make themselues mighty. Because in what place soeuer Iustice flourisheth among men; it is an infallible rule, and without all ques^^^ to the contrary, that onely and principall Vertue, maketh the State and Monarchie to be must happy, firme and stable, and to remaine in longest continuance,
The same Author (as we haue formerly obserued) liued in the times of the Kings Sonnes and Successours to Clouis, the first Christian King, and saith afterward. Very hardly can that Monarchie fall, or see it selfe brought into such calamitie; as it be surmounted by her enemies. For the French being addicted to the Vertues of Iustice and Pietie, by a commendable manner and course of life: first, they vanquish and ouercome themselues, and next, all the neighbours about them.
So the Monarchs of the sacred Lillies of France, excell all Kings and Princes on the Earth, for greatnesse and excellencie, euen as the Sunne doth all the Starres of heauen: their Iustice and Pietie so singuler, hath wonne them the ranke of precedency and honor, and their Throane of Iustice, is luminous and wholly shini^g with glory and magnificence. Thronus Regis Lilij est sicut Sol in conspectu Dei, and fi^^^ Luna perfecta in aeternum Dominatio eius.
To them may aptly be appropriated that Prophecie of the diuine Wisedome. Dilexisti iustitiam, and odisti iniquitatem, propterea vnxit te Deus, Deus tuus Oleo l^titiae, prae consortibus tuis. For, among all the Princes of Christendome, there is none, but onely the Monarch of the Lillie, that is Sacred with Oyle sent downe from Heauen, or with more Ceremonies. For the Kings of Spaine are not Sacred, b^ sworne onely, and acknowledged for heires to the Kingdome, by such me an^ actions, as merit not to be registred downe in writing. So the Sacred Lillies of France doe surpasse in greatnesse and excellencie, the glory and magnificence of the great King Salomon, and all the Princes on the earth.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Excellencie and Precedencie of the Kings and Kingdome of France; aboue all them of Christendome beside.Primogenitum posui eum, Excelsum prae Regibus Terrae.Psal. 89.28.I will make him my first borne; higher then the Kings of the Earth.ALthough to Iudge soundly the honor of Precedencie,How to iudge of the Honor of Kings Precedency. betweene Kings, Princes, and great Lords, cannot be deriued as an essentiall cause, by Blazons of their Armes, which they may varrie, and paint according to their owne fancies, or the diuers occurences of their Battailes and Conquests: yet notwithstanding, in regard that the vulgar sort make Trophees of them, and (according to wordly apparance) draw antiquitie of Nobilitie, by the matter of Escutchions; we will begin honestly, to shew briefely (leauing a taske so serious, to others of more able performance) with the Armes of our most Chri^ian Kings, which are, The Lillie floures of Gold, in a field Azure.We will begin with the subiect of Armes, because such as are desirous to shew the greatnesse and excellency of the Catholique Kings of Spaine, and to make them march, not onely equall with the most Christian Kings, bur imagine also, that they haue a Precedency aboue them; among other reasons, call in question, and maintaine, that this imaginarie Precedency, deriueth it selfe from their Armes of the Kingdome of Ouiedo, or of Leon,The principall Prouince in Spaine. which they would gladly haue to be thought to be the first and chiefest Prouince of Spaine, conquered from the Moores by the Prince Dom Pelagius. In memory whereof, he and his Successors, Kings, haue carried to this day, D'Argent au Lyon rampant de Sable: And that the Armes of Spaine were miraculously brought from Heauen by Angels. Thus is written by Iacobus Valdesius, a Spaniard by Nation, in a Treatise which he made, concerning the dignity of the Kings and Kingdome of Spaine: And by one Augustino Cranato, a Romaine, in a Tract Of the Precedencie of the Kings of Spaine: which this named Author pretendeth to iustifie by Arguments, badly grounded, and reasons so vnedged and impertinent, as they doe not deserue any answere.They haue imitated, and formed the miracle of their Armes, (pretended to be ^ent downe from Heauen) from the truth of the Historie of the King of France, Clo^is, first of the name. For the most part of the Armes of the Prouinces of Spaine, doe answere to their names; which declareth nothing miraculous in them. Leon hath a Lyon; Gallicia a Cup, couered in forme of a Challice; Castille a Castell; Granado an Apple of Granado, Pomo de Granado, a Pomgranate, and so of others. Concerning them of Arragon, they came from the Kings of France. And Dom Pelagius, who conquered the Realme of Ouiedo, or Leon, could, nor cannot be qualified, the first King of Spaine, because he had deriued example from fighting with the Moores vsurpers and possessors thereof, by the faint-hartednesse of the Vuisigothes Kings) of Dom Garcia Ximenes, a French Prince, and Count of Begorre, first King of Sobrar^re, or Nauarre, to whom the Armes appeared in heauen, which he should take, as ^arkes of his Conquest.Salomon obserueth in his Prouerbes, that there are foure things,Pro. 30.30.3^ seruing as Sym^oles of strength and power. Tria sunt quae bene gradiuntur, and quartum quod incedit ^^iriliter: The Lyon, the Cocke, the Ramme, and the King. Leo fortissimus bestia^um ad nullius pauebit occursum. Gallus succinctus lumbos, Et Aries. Nec est Rex qui ^esistet ei. The Cocke, mounted on his Spurres, chanteth victoriously,Foure notes of strength and power. by prefer^ence aboue all the creatures of the earth; so say the Phylosophers and Naturalists, God hauing giuen him such light and power: As we learne from the wise King of

Edom,Iob 23.17. and mirrour of patience, the Patriarch Iob. Quis dedit Gallo intelligentiam?If then preferrence iudgeth it selfe, by Armes and Blazons of creatures without reason;Differences of honor in the Cock and Lyon the Cocke must march first, and not the Lyon. And if that is giuen to the Lyon; it must then be common to the most part of the Germaine Nations, and of the North; who beare it in their Armes. And the ancient Gaules (before them all had it for their Ensigne, with the Ship, as we haue already related in the first Booke.But yet (by your leaue) some Tracke of precedencie and honor (moreouer) may be fetcht from Armes charged, and diapred with Eagles, Lyons, Buls, Vnicornes, Harts, or Horses, and other creatures; which contrariwise we learn by Iosephus, the most learned Hebrew Historian, in the life of the King of Israel Salomon. That this Prince committed great offence towards God, by hauing imployed as vtensils of his sacred Temple,Iosephus describing the life of King Salomon. Buls to sustaine the brazen Sea of Expiations and Lauings, and of Lyons also, to serue as ornament to his royall Throane. Deum suum proprium (saith Iosephus, speaking of Salomon) non solum illicitis vxoribus iugiter inhonorabat, sed etiam ante haec peccauerat, and circa Legum custodiam iam deceptus fuerat, quando Bou^^^ Aenaeorum similitudines fecit, quos Mari subiecit, and Leonum quos in suo Solio Regali decoris causa disposuit. Non enim haec facere fas erat, dum optimum, and familiare pater^s gloriae, and Virtutis habuisset exemplum, quod ei propter Dei pietatem fuerat relict^^. That Salomon off^nded all his dayes his owne God, running after Idolatrie, the sinne of si^s (as Heresie is the paine of sinne,Heresie i^ tearmed the (...) and punishment of sinne. wherewith God punisheth depraued soules) not onely by medling and con^^yning with strange wiues; but before that, hee had committed very great offences, preuaricating the Law of God, because he placed in the Temple, to support the Sea, Buls of ^rasse, and Lyons to vphold his Throane royall, they seruing as reliefe and ornament thereto. For Salomon should haue gouerned himselfe, by the module and example of King Dauid his Father, the mirrour and glasse of a true Christian, fairely polished with glory and vertue,Salomon s^^rued greatly from the steps of his father Dauid. as also singuler pietie: who neuer taught him, to place in the Lords Temple, pictures and representations of Buls, Lyons, or other creatures. So farre proceedeth Iosephus.God commanded Moises to place Lillies and Pomegranets in his Temple, but not Beasts, And from thence is it, that the Spanish writers before named, should haue drawne some tract of aduantage, in fauour of their Catholique King; and not from an vntameable Beast, the fiercest of all other creatures. In like manner, it is taken in the sacred Scriptures, for the Hieroglyphicke of cruelty and tyranny, as it is said of Lucifer: Leorugiens, qui circuit quaerens quem deuoret. The most vniust creature of all other on the earth,The Lyon more vniust then any other creature, for deuiding his prey. in the deuiding of his prey, for hee will haue it alone by himselfe: to verifie the deuision of the Cormorant (whose nature is) All ^s one side, and nothing on another. He will neuer let loose his hold, and the wise Polititian durst neuer trust him.--Quia me vestigia terrentOmnia te aduersum spectantia, nulla retorsum.Those Spanish Historians, might (I say) much more properly, haue deriued the excellencie of their Catholique Kings, from the Pomegranate (Entre en pointe d^ leurs Armes) which in the holy Scripture,(...) of (...) ^oyalty. Psal. 45.16. is the noate and Symbole of Loue, and of royaltie: whereof the Rabbines sing wonders, explicating this verse of the 45. Psalme. Insimbrijs aureis circum amicta varietatibus: It beginning, Eructauit cor ^^um verbum bonum.They say, that the Mantle Royall of the Kings of Israel and Iuda, was of Cloath of Gold, damasked with Apples of Granada; Apples which likewise were apted by order and Symmetrie, beneath the Ornament of the Iewes high Priest.The Pomegranate carrieth a Crowne. This fruite is the Symbole of Royaltie, because it weareth a Crowne on the top.The passion of Loue is aboue all other.And of Loue, because that among the same Hebrewes and Aegyptians; Loue was crowned, to shew the force and perfection thereof. Because the passion of Loue is

^o mighty and powerfull, that it tameth and ouer-maistreth all other in men: And Loue being so contenting in it selfe, deserueth to be truely crowned, and obserued by the same noate of the Pomegranate.The Naturalists doe hold,To helpe the bitternes of the Pomegranate tree. that to take away the bitternesse of the Pomegranate tree; it behoueth to cut the barke, and fixe therein a splinter or slice of the Pine tree: which, by a soueraigne and naturall power, sweeteneth the Pomegranate tree, and cleareth it from bitternesse and sharpenesse.Among the Aegyptians, the Pine tree was the Hieroglyphicke of death: because ^his tree being but once cut, lopt or plashed, it neuer buddeth or sprouteth againe, it ^s of such an exceeding cold nature. So saith Plinie. And therefore dead bodies among the Aegyptians, Greeks and Romans, were crowned with Pine tree branches, when they carry them to the graue. And the man that died without issue, was figu^ed by this barren and vnfruitfull tree.At Picea emittat nullos quod stirpe stolones,Illius est iudex qui sine prole perit.Saith Alciat in his Emblmes.We could adde to the nature of the Pomegranate, a thousand and a thousand ra^ties: the search whereof we leaue to the Spaniards, because it concerneth them. ^or we will come to our Lillie, the ornament of the Armes, belonging to our ^ings and Monarches, the most renowned in the world, and Precedencie adiudged (...) them by Blazon of Armes. Nouices in that Noble Scienee, doe well know, that ^rgent and Sable (whereof the Armes of Leon consisteth) haue euermore bin held,Concerning the Armes of Leon. for ^^e most abiect mettall and couler that are in Armes.The Pomegranate, as we haue already said, is the Symbole of Royaltie; And ^^e Lillie, the Floure of Floures, is of the Diuinitie, of whitenesse and puritie; Of a ^oue most compleate in all perfection, Charitie and Benediction. And this was ^^e reason, why God commanded, that this Floure chosen and elected among all ^oures, should namely be represented in his holy Temple, as it is written in Exo^s 25.37.The Lillie is the Symbole of Benediction, because by that which we learne from ^^e Hebrewes, there are two kindes of Benedictions or blessings. So say the Rab^nes, in the first Booke of the Talmud,Two kindes of Benedictio^s at the Chapter of them entitled Massechot ^rachor, that is to say, Of Prayers and Benedictions. The one of them was perfor^ed by the high Priest, and that was the most excellent, and the perfection of Be^dictions. The other, euery Father of a Family exercised in perticuler, two seue^l times in the day at the least, namely, at Euening, and in the Morning: and this (...) was called the common Benediction, which was performed in this order. The ^ther of the Family stood obliged, twise in the day (at the least) to say by hart, and ^dily, these words taken out of Deuteronomie: Heare O Israel, the Lord our God is God ^ly. In vttering which words, he lifted his head vp towards heauen,Deut. 6.4. then he bow^ it downe to the earth, and afterward turned it to the right hand, and then to the (...), in forme of a Crosse.But that of the high Priest was done otherwise. The Sacrifices being ended, he ^ned himselfe to the people, and hiding his face with the Palme of both his hands,In what manner the Benediction was performed by the high Priest ^wing somewhat backeward; in proffering the Benediction, he spake these words, they are written in Numbers 6.24. The Lord blesse thee, and keepe thee. As he vtte^l the word Adonay, The Lord; he ordered the three great fingers of his right hand, ^o the fashion of a Floure de Luce, so say the Rabbines, and so shewed it to the peo^^^. This was the Symbole of the Sacred Mysterie of the Trinitie, noated in the ^t Chapter and the first Verse of Gensis. This Benediction he performed (say they) ^rding to that which is written of the Worlds Creation by the Prophet Esay. ^is mensus est pugillo Aquas, and Coelos, palmo ponderauit? quis appendit Tribus Digitis ^lem terrae? Esa. 14.10.It is generally knowne, that the Crosse is applicated to Benedictions, because it ^he Symbole of our Redemption; and therefore it is exalted on all Churches of

Christendome.The Crosse exalted on all Chu^ches of Christendome But this is a matter very remarkeable, that from the time of the Apostles, all Crosses finished in Floures de Luces. As it is obserued by Hieronimus Ozorius, Bishop of Sylues in the Algaraes, in his Historie of Portugall, discoursing on the Crosse of the Apostle S. Thomas, martyred in East India, in the Kingdome of Narsinga, and in the Citie of Malipur, aunciently called Calamina, at this present S. Thomas, after that the Portugales had there found the body of the said holy Apostle of the Indiaes; the Author setteth downe these words. About the yeare 1548. there was found on the hill of Malipur, a Crosse cut in Stone, on the top whereof was the figure of a Pigeon, the Baze beng planted on a tuft of Hearbes, which spread abroad in length and largenesse. The top, the Baze, and the Armes, had the ends cut in fashion of Floures de Luces. As much is written by P. Gouean the Portuguize, an Hermet of S. Augustines Order, in his Historie of the Indiaes. S. Thomas (saith he) was slaine, and transpierced with a Launce, as he made his Prayer before a Crrsse, the forme whereof he had engrauen in a Stone, and figured like to ehe Crosse, which the Bretheren D'Auis vsed to weare. We shall shew you that Crosse in the Armes of Portugall. So though at this day it be not so, the Crosse finishing in Floures de Luces; yet not in France onely, but thorow all parts and corners of the earth, where the Faith of Iesus Christ had bin planted, this fashion of the Crosse was in vse, and practised from the yeare threescore and fifteene, when the said S. Thomas so dyed by Martyrdome.Loue full of perfect charityThe Lillie is the Symbole of such a Loue, as is altogether filled with perfect charitie. Sal^m^n was the most wise, learned, rich, and potent, of all the Kings that had bin before him, or euer shall be. Makeda so is shee called in the Relations of the great N^gu^ of Aethiepia, to the King Dom Emanuell of Portugall, reported by Dam^^nus a (...), in his Ae^hiopian Historie: Iosephus and the Rabbines name her N^caula,The Queen^ of Saba that came to see King Salomon. in his Iew^sh Antiquities) Queene of the higher and lower Aethiopia, of S^b^, the East Indiaes and part of Aegypt, came expresly from Countries so farre remote, to heare the wisedome of the said Salomon. She was rauished with admiration, seeing his Prudence so admirable, the magnificence of his Court, Pallace and proud buildings, as also his sumptuous treasures. But all the glory and magnificence of this great King, was nothing, in comparison of the Lillies beautie. Considerate lilia agri quo modo crescunt,Mat. 6.26.29. non laborant, neque nent; Dico autem vobis, quoniam nec Salomon, in omni gloria sua, coopertus est sicut vnum existis: So speaketh the same Wisdome. Affirming the Lillie to be more excellent, and to surpasse in glory and magnificence, that great King Salomon.The Lillie, an ornament Royall, and the principall flouret in the Crowne of the said Salomon,2 Reg. 10 and 12 a King, who, beside that which his Father King Dauid had left him, conquered by him from the King of the Ammonites, Ammon, who put him to death, and raced his capitall Citie Rabbath for hauing violated the Law of Nations, on the persons of his ^mbassadours, as it is in the second Booke of the Kings. His Crowne weighed a ^alent of Gold (which amounteth to sixe hundred Crownes) garnished with precious Stones, and namely a Sardonixe, of inestimable value; so saith Iosephus. Beside this Crowne, I say, King Salomon foreseeing a farre off, as perticularly enstructed by that wisedome, which he had desired of God at the beginning of his Reigne: caused another to be made of admirable workemanship. To wit, a Garland of pure Gold, semed with Lillie Floures, enterlaced with a circle (...) Thornes, naturally growing in the Countrie of India, hauing this deuise enamell^ round about the circle of the said Garland: Victoria Amoris; The Triumph and P^ctorie of Loue. Makeda hauing seene the Kings Cabinet, garnished with so many singuler rarities, and among them this Crowne, with the fashion and deuise thereof, she desired him to acquaint her with the interpretation.The answere of King Salomon to the Queen of SabaSalomon made her answere, that among all the Floures, whereof God had gi^ expresse command to the great Law-maker Moyses, to adorne and enrich the Vessel^ of his Temple withall: he had made choice of the Lillie, a Floure which orden^ receiueth his springing and growth among Tornes, as delighting to dwell with Thornes, and so much the rather, because the more it is pricked with Thornes, (...) sme^l of this admirable Floure is the more sweete and pleasing. And that by this Floure, was denoated or signified a Sacred Virgin, the Lillie of the Vallies, who should

issue of his seede, that should produce a childe without blemish, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who should take delight to repose himselfe, and be nourished among the Lillie Floures. That this great King should loue his people with a loue so feruent, and a fire of Charitie, surpassing that of the most violent loues: whereby he should expose himselfe (and of his owne free will) to death, to giue his people eternall life. And that on the day of his death and Passion, instead of a Crowne of Gold, his head should be crowned with sharpe pricking Thornes. In which manner, triumphing ouer death; he should haue against him a most famous victorie, ^oated by that deuise, Victoria Amoris, The Victorie of Loue.The Lillie is the Symbole of Puritie and Chastitie, and in the holy Scripture,Purity and chastitie denoated by the Lillie. the blessed Virgin is represented by the Lillie. So are we enstructed by that great ^ight of the Church, S. Hierome, in his Epistle Ad Rusticum Monachum: And in ^hem which he wrote Ad Demetriadem, and ad Eustochium. According to the Natu^alists, the Lillie being of a most cold qualitie, hindereth conception, as it is obserued by Rabbi Aben-Ezra, vpon the thirtieth Chapter of Genesis, expounding ^hat passage of the Mandrakes, found in the Field by yong Ruben, and gaue them ^o faire Rachell, the figure of the blessed Virgin. The Lillie odoriferous of the Vallies, and wherewith the whole world hath bin embalmed. Mandragorae dederunt odorem ^als^mi. So beareth the Ierusalem Thargum, explicating this passage in the seauenth of the Canticl^s, by that of the sixt, where the holy Ghost, speaking of the fruite ^f the Virgin Mother, saith of him. Dilectus meus descendit in hortum suum, ad a^eolam Aromatum, vt pascatur in hortis, and Lilia colligat. And in holy Scripture, ^he mirrour of Chastitie Susanna, is defined by the name of Susan, which signi^th the Lillie Floure: as the chiefe Citie of the Persians bare that name for excellen^ie. Euen so, the Lillie excelled the glory and magnificence of the great King Sa^^mon.The Lillie Floure, or Floure de Luce (so speaketh Nicolaus Aegidius,The figure of the Floure de Luce. in the ad^irable life of the King S. Lewes) hath three Leaues or Flourets; the greatest in the ^idst, signifieth the Catholique Faith, firmely kept and defended by the Kings and ^ingdome of France: since such time as King Clouis, first of the name, made profes^on therof, and the French, by his example. The two other Flourets, standing lower ^e represent (saith he) Nobilitie and Iustice, two bodies of the State, euermore repared to maintaine the Faith Catholique.We may say moreouer, that our Lord gaue himselfe the name of a Lillie, in the ^ong of Songs. Ego s^os campi, and Lilium conualium. S. Bernard expounding this ^assage, in his 72. Sermon vpon the Canticles, speaketh to good purpose, saying. ^d hath euermore had especiall care perticularly of the Monarchy of the Lillie, to loue, pro^ct and defend it.In the second of the same Canticles, verse 16. the holy Ghost saith. Dilectus meus ^ln, and ego illi, qu^ pascitur inter Lilia, donec aspiret dies; and inclinentur vmbrae. Some ^ue appropriated this to the Noble Kings of France, whose reigne shall endure to ^e worlds end, because thus speaketh S. Bernard in his 71. Sermon. Si plenitudo (...) tutum in Christum est, Liliorum. The Kings of France are they that haue endowed, ^riched and defended the Church in all plenitude, aboue all other Christian Prin^s: and this is the reason, why they are stiled Most-Christian.There are three reasons, why the Scripture compareth our Lord to the Lillie,Three reasons why Christ is compared to the Lillie, and no Floure else. ^ther then any other Floure; as the Gillifloure, the Rose and such like. It is, be^^use, as our vnderstanding is guided, and led by the hand (as it were) to the know^^dge of the Diuini^ie by that of naturall things: So in like manner, by this Floure ^e Lillie, we are eleuated to the contemplation of the diuine Essence. The Leafe (...) the midst, more highly exalted then the other, doth represent the height of Gods ^iesty, because, as Plinie speaketh in his Naturall Historie. The Lillie among all ^ures, mounteth higher by three cubites. Nullis florum excelsitas maior, interdum ^rium: l^uen so our Lord, as it is said in the Apocalips, Is the onely King of (...), and Lord of Lords, who hath all power in Heauen and on Earth. He sitteth on ^h, at the right hand of God, in exalted Maiestie, aboue all Principalities, saith the A^^stle S. Paul.By the Lillie, the humility of Christ is designed: Quod languido semper collo, and (...) sufficiente, capitis oneri, saith the same Plinie.And by the good smell or sauour of the Lillie, are noated the effects of his Godhead, he hauing the power (alone of himselfe) to ouerthrow and conquer death, and to expell the darke shades of sinne, to illuminate vs with the Sunne of Grace and righteousnesse. Lilium est lactei floris haerba (so Isidore telleth vs) cuius candor, and ardor admirabiles sunt. There is not any thing more soueraigne for burnings, and to consolidate the skarres of old vlcers, then Onyons and the Lillie roote well boyled, and applied with the Oyle of Roses, saith Dioscorides, Auicenne, and other Doctors in Physicke. Also, that it hath wonderfull effects, for incision of the Nerues; to asswage the swelling of the spleene; to ripen Impostumes; to resolue tumours; and to heale the biting of venemous beasts, for they shunne the very smell of the Lillie.Soueraigne vertues of the Lillie. This was diligently obserued by the Rabbines, vpon the tenth Chapter of Iudiths Historie, where it is said: That to goe fight against venemous Beasts, which would haue deuoured the Iewes of Bethulia (that is to say) H^lophernes and the Assyrians, who had besieged it) She adorned her head with sweete smelling Lillies. Assumpsit ornamenta Liliorum plena, ornamenta in modum Liliorum facta: So speakes the Chaldean Paraphrase, and the common of Saint Hierome, Assumpsitque dextraliola, and Lilia, and in aures, and annulos, and omnibus ornamentis suis ornauit se.Iosephus Acosta, in his Naturall Historie of the Indiaes, reporteth; that the new world hath her common plaines and gounds, flourishing with millions of faire shrubbes,The Lillies of India. and diuers Floures of most exquisite beautie, smelling excellently. But aboue them all appeareth The Lillie Floure, hauing such a sweete and pleasing sauour; as it rauisheth (with admiration) all such as come neere it. And that the Vice-Roy Pom Franciscode ^oledo, sent some of those Lillies (as a rare and exquisite present) to the King of Spaine, Dom Philip the second, to shew, that this Floure had no equal in the world.The bottome of this rare Floure, is Yellow, as our view of it testifieth. And S. Isidore saith. Lilium est lactei floris herba cuius dum candor, and odor in folijs est; A^ri tamen species intus effulget. And as the Sunne out-shineth all the Starres: eue^ so doth Gold all other mettals, hauing in it an infinite number of vertues, and medicinable properties.Water is the best Element,And Gold, like the Fire resplendent,Shineth aboue all other Cheuisance.The Golden Lillie^ of Floures de Luces of France.Saith Pind^us very learnedly. And that is a reason, why in the Armes and Banners of France, the Floures de Luces are of Gold: to enquire and acknowledge, the Excellencie and Precedencie of the Monarchs of the Lillie aboue all the Kings and Princes of Christendome.And for the same reason, the Field of the same Armes, is rather Azure, which is the true colour of Heauen, when it is calme and cleare; then Guelles, Sable or Sy^ple. For like as our Redeemer, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, hath for Armes in the sacred Scripture, and in the Apocalips, the Heauens shining with Azure,The Armes of our Sauiour compared with them of France. and the true Blew Celeste, thickly stored with Starres, twinkling and resplendishing like Gold, nailed or fixed in Cloudes of Diamonds: Euen (...) the most Christian Kings of France, for the glory of Iesus Christ, Portent l Es^ d Azur a trois Fleurs de Lys d'Or. Scuto Francorum Regum color similis sereno Coel^ c^uenienter datus est, quia sicut Coelum situatum est in loco eminentiori, atque inter (...) corporalia altius eleuatum est: Sic Rex Christianissimus inter omnia Reges, and Principes Christianae Religionis, dignitate potentia, Nobilitate, and diuitijs est sublimior, (...) mirabilior.Like as (saith the Diuine Vinaldus, an Italian Doctour, in his Royall worke) Heauen is seated in the highest place of the world, exalted aboue all corporall things; (...) so the most Christian King, is the most sublime, the most excellent, and admirable, of all Kings and Princes in nobility and riches. And this is the cause why he beareth l'Escu d'Azur a

^ois Fleurs de Lys d'Or. According as the Saphir is spred with points of Gold: euen ^o is the Stone, which beareth name thereof for excellencie. Saphyrus aureis collucet ^nctis, as Plinie hath obserued.Moreouer, this celestiall colour, which is of the Saphyre (and which is called ^he holy Stone) like vnto Heauen, when it is calme and cleare; agreeth better with the Armes and Escutcheon of the most Christian Kings, then any other.The comparison of the Saphyre Stone. Be^ause, like as the Saphyre is more medicinable, and full of vertuous properties na^urally, then all other precious Stones whatsoeuer (and in the holy Scripture, it is ^e Symbole of eternall Glory, like vnto the Seate of God. Quasi opus lapidis Sa^yrini, and quasi Coelum cum serenum est: as it is in Exod. 24.10. and in Ezek. 10.1.) E^en so the most Christian Kings, are full of excellencie and glory, aboue all Kings ^d Princes of Christendome. For they haue succeeded one another, persisting (...) the Catholique Faith, euer since the great King Clouis, euen to this instant, by (...) eternitie, race and long continuance, of more then twelue hundred yeeres in^ely, not hauing any Kingdome in Christendome,The long continuance of the Kingdome of France. that can equall and compare ^ith the long lasting of the Monarchie of the sacred Lillie of France. So hath the ^xcellencie of the Lillie, exceeded and surpassed the glory and magnificence of the ^eat King Salomon.Thronus Regis Lilij sicut Sol in conspectu Dei and sicut Luna perfecta in aeternum Domina^tio eius. The Throane of the sacred King of the Lillie, is wholly luminous and shining in ^cellencie and glory; like to the Sunne, and the Moone when she is in her full among the ^ars, and that Monarchie shall eternally continue and endure.Eagles, Lyons, Leopards, Serpents, and other Beasts, naturally fierce, doe ^e and shunne the sauour of the Lillie. Concidet Dominus inimicos eius,Wi^de Beasts shun the smell of the Lillie. and ^ientes eum in fugam conuertet. By extraordinary meanes, hee will serue him^^lfe with an Infant King, and a yong Shepheard Dauid, to deliuer the most ^oble Kingdome of Christendome, from the gripes and menaces of Gyants; ^ho had vndoubted hope, to become maisters thereof, and to haue it vnder their ^utroule.This goodly odorifferous Lillie of France, shall neuer wither,An allusion to the future growth and prosperitie of the Lillie and his stemme all grow greene to infinite ages. Folium eius non defluet. Erit tanquam lignum quod ^ntatur super aquas, quod ad humorem mittit radices suas: non timebit cum venerit ^us. Erit folium eius viride; on tempore siccitatis non erit solicitum, nec aliquando de^et producere fructus: Prophesies of the Royall Psalmist Dauid, and of Ie^ue.Germinauit Lilium (before God in future times, and instantly, because his promi^^d are altogether infallible) radices eius eruperunt vt Libani, quasi Oliua Gloria eius, and ^ore ius vt Libani, saith the Prophet Osea 5.7. All the Prophecies before alleadged ^y adapt, and morally appropriate themselues, yea, litterally,The application of Prophecies to the Lillie of France. and more purpose^ to the sacred Monarches of the Lillie, then to any other Prince of Christen^me: because in them cannot be demonstrated, any such subsistance and conti^ance of their State, as can compare or equall it selfe with that of the French. Be^e alliance or linking in kinred with the Lillie, is honor, ornament, renowne, and (...) very rarest splendour, that Princes here on earth can wish for, wherewith to dia^ their Armes.Whatsoeuer we haue said hitherto in this second Booke, by discourse (at ad^ture) perhaps lasting with too long a breath; hath bin expresly set downe,The Authors absolute determination, to answer the cauils of wrong opposers. and ^th an aduised purpose, to answere those Doctours, who to tarnish the luster and ^ry of the Kingdome of the Lillie, by a fantasticke and imaginarie Precedencie: ^uld preferre the Kings Catholique, and Spaine, before the most Christian, and ^ngdome of France, and paragon Madrill with Paris. Like as the Neate-Heard (...) Virgill (by a depraued kinde of sence) beleeued Mantua to be as great as Rome. (...) there is so much difference betweene Paris, and the very greatest Cities of ^ine; as b^twee^e day and night. I may safely speake it, as hauing seene Spaine ^ers times. Part is an abridgement of the World, and of it may be said, as some^e it was of Rome.Verum haec inter alios tantum caput extulit VrbesQuantum lenta solent inter Viburna Cupressi.Sic Canibus Catulos simileis, sic Matribus HaedosNoram, sic paruis compouere magna solebam.The Gaules did heretofore people the greater part of Spaine, the markes whereof remaine yet to this day, in the ancient names of Portugall, Gallicia and Celtiberia; as we haue already said at the beginning of this Booke.The Gothes, Ostrogothes of Italie, and the Vuisigothes of Spaine, are obserued by Historians, to be more then two hundred yeares after the French; of whom Pharamond was not the first King, as (thorow extreame and grosse ignorance) it is set downe in writing by Augustino Cranato. With whom hee appointeth Athanaricus, to be the first King of Spaine, and that there hee tooke place, before Pharamond was King. Hee would haue sung naturally in another noate, if he had read the Historie of Spaine, composed by Dom Roderigo Ximenes, Archbishop of Toledo. and the Chronicler Idaccus, who conuince the errours of the new Spanish Historians.The first appearing of the Scandinauian Ostrogothes.Hee would then haue learnd, that the Ostrogothe people of Scandinauia, appeared not till the yeare of Grace three hundred fourescore and three, in which yeare, they elected for their chiefe Commander, Vinitharius. And the Vuisigothes, their Fritigernus, and after him Athanaricus, who reigned but one yeare; for this man dyed at Constantinople, in the Court of the Emperour Theodosius. Hee had for his Successour Alaricus, first of the name, and the first that had title of King of the Vuisigothes, which was in the yeare three hundred fourescore and eighteene.Succession of the first Vuisigoths Kings.Hee would haue learnd, that the said Alaricus dyed in Italie, the yeare foure hundred and ^hirteene; and that he had for Successour Athaulphus, slaine in the yeare foure hundred and fifteene, at Vienna in Daulphine, next whom succeeded ^ricus, who reigned but one yeare, being massacred by his owne people, as his predecessour was. After the said Gisericus succeeded Vallia, to whom the Emperour ^norius gaue Aquitaine, one of the Prouinces of the Gaules; which extended it selfe from the Riuer of Loire, so farre as to the Pyrenian Mountaines.Hee would haue learnd also of Paulus Orosius, a Spaniard, that this donation was performed the yeare of Grace, foure hundred and eighteene; and that this Prouince giuen by the ^mperour, was then vsurped by the Alains, Vandales, and Swe^s, driuen thither by the Fren^h, who made them to dislodge, without sound of Trumpet, and to flit from the Gaules called Belgicke and Celticke. And that the Vuisigothes, as one naile driueth another, chased the Vandales and their associates, out of the said Aquitaine, from whence they scudded ouer the mountaines, and possesse^ themselues of Spaine, but very long time after. And that the Vuisigothes, vnder conduct of their King Vallia, conquered Aquitaine, Anno foure hundred and nineteene.King Vallia conquered Aquitaine. And that the same King beganne not his courses in Spaine, (...) in the yeare of Grace foure hundred twentie foure (according to the Ch^^nicle of Idaceus) where hee made a great progresse in the yeare foure hundred thirtie two.He had for succour Theodoricke (not he of the Ostrogothes of Italie, who bare the same name) who conquered a great part. This man dyed in the furious and bloo^ battaile lost for Attila,The bloody Battaile of So^^^ne, lost by Attila. on the plaines and fields of Sologne, and his Son Thoris^ had his succession and hauing reigned but three yeares, he had for his successor Theodoricke, second of the name, his brother. After whom succeeded Eoricus, Father (...) Alaricus the second, put to death by Clouis King of France, in a foughten Battaile who had the honour and profit thereof, by the conquest of Aquitaine and To^ the seate Royall of the said Vuisigoths Kings.So that Amalaricus was constrained to shifr for himselfe in Spaine, despoy^ of that which his Predecessours had held in France, and there hee who^

^stablished his abiding. Thus we may iudge of the learning and expertnesse of Doctor Cranato, in the Historie of Spaine, whereof hee will haue to be the first King in painting, Atalaricus (he would haue said Athanaricus) who neuer saw Italie ^or Spaine.To deriue more aduantage in fauour of Spaine, by the Armes of Leon: wee ^aue showne, that in this point of Nobilitie, the Precedencie it due to the sa^red Lillie of France, which excelled the glory and magnificence of great King Sa^omon, and consequently, that of all Kings and Princes on earth.Cranato draweth one point of his pretended Precedencie, because Ptolomie pre^erreth Spaine before France. But if his argument may take place, the Prece^encie appertaineth to the Isle of Albion, that is Great Brittaine, which the same ^tolomie setteth downe, and placeth before Spaine.That excellent Aegyptian Geographer,Ptolomies deuision of Europe. who liued vnder the Empire of Adrian ^nd Traian, hath deuided Europe into sixe tables. The first whereof is that of Al^ion, seconded by that of Spaine, followed by that of Gaule, of Alemaigne, of Rhetia that is the Leagued Griso^s) of Vindelicia, that is the Countrey of the Switzers, of ^ardignia, Sicilie, Sarmatia, Dacia, Misia and Greece.At this day, the moderne and new Geographers begin the discourse,The order of the new Geographers. and their ^ables of Geographie, not onely with England, Scotland and Ireland; but also with ^roenland, the last Isle discouered vnder the North. Shall it therefore be well ar^ued, to deriue some Precedencie from that desert and ill peopled Island, against ^hat of Great Bretaigne?Cranato for a Romaine, hath showne, that he was most ignorant in the Romaine Historie: not knowing, that England and Scotland were subiected to and with the Gaules, vnder the Romaine Emperours.Deuision of the West Empire. If he had read the Notice of the West Em^ire, he would then haue learned; that the Empire of the West was deuided into ^hree Gouernements, which were called the Praetories: All that of then Gaules, of Ita^ie, and of the Citie of Rome.That vnder the Gouernment of the Illustrious Praefect of the Gauls Praetorie,Gouernement of the Gaules Praetorie. were ^omprehended nine and twentie Prouinces: namely, seauenteene in the Gaules; sea^en in Spaine; and fiue in Great Bretaigne.Sub dispositione Viri Illustris Praefecti Praetorio Galliurum, erant Dioceses infra scriptae.Galliarum Prouinciae Septem and Decem: The seauenteen Prouinces of the Gaules.VIennensis.Lugdunensis prima.Germania prima.Germania secunda.Belgica prima.Belgica secunda.Alpes maritimae.Alpes Penninae, and Graiae.Maxima Sequanorum.Aquitania prima.Aquitania secunda.Nouempopuli,Narbonensis prima.Narbonensis secunda.Lugdunensis secunda.Lugdunensis tertia, andLugdunensis Senonia.Hispaniae Prouinciae Septem. The seauen Prouinces of Spaine.Boetica,Lusitania,Gallecia.Tarraconensis.Carthaginensis.Tingitana. andBaleares Insulae.Britanniarum Prouinciae Quinque. The fiue Prouinces of Great Bretaigne.MAxima Caesariensis.Valentia,Britannia prima.Britannia secunda. andFlauia Caesariensis.You behold here, how the Prouinces and Dioceses of Spaine, England and Sc^land, were comprehended vnder the departement of the Gaules, and not the Ga^l^ subiected to that of Spaine.But we will say, and that truely, that Spaine shall neuer walke Peere-like, for aboundance of people, fertillitie of all good things; excellencie of ground; te^perature and wholesomenesse of the Ayre; length and largenesse of her whole e^tendure (comprehending thereinto the Kingdome of Nauarre, vngraciously vs^ped, and worse detained from the iust Lords thereof) with France. For Spai^^ being seperated from Affrica, but onely by a narrow straite, of some three miles in largenesse; is (for her burning heates) barren in most parts of the Kingdome; that is as much to say, as Prouinces badly peopled. and almost vn-habited. Full of Fields without Corne, without culture, without Trees, Springs or any Riuers. And the foule disease of the Kings Euill, wherewith most part of the Inhabi^a^ are infected, and made lothesome: serueth for a sufficient poofe, what difference there is betweene Sunne-burnt Spaine, and the sweete Ayre of France. Whether they may come yeerely, to make proofe, that the excellencie and vertue of the Lillies Monarche,The temperate ^yre of France excelleth and surpasseth that of Salomon; so consequently the King of Spaine, and all other Kings and Princes on the earth.Wee haue the meanes to passe by, that which encreaseth and commeth from Spaine: because the sterrilitie of the Soyle, causeth continuall carriage thither from France, of Corne, Wine, Cloth and other things, most necessary for the life o^ man.The Kings of Spaine want no qualifying and stiling themselues, to be Kings of Leon, of Arragon, of Nauarre, of Valencia, of Granada, of Toledo, of Murcia, of Cordoua, of Portugall, and of the Algaraes, with a long thred of other the like titles, which are all but Prouinces, and hath caused such as haue not seene the Countrey, to thinke, that Spaine is a number of times farre greater, then is the Kingdome of France.-- Sed non ego credulus illis.Experience hath suffered me to see the contrary, and verifie both plainely and palpably, that it can no way be compared with France; except through extre^ ignorance. And whosoeuer shall measure the fertile Prouinces of the Monarch of the Lillie; as Prouence, Languedocke, Guienne, Poictu, Bretaigne, Normandie, Champaig^, Bourgongne, Lyonnois, and Daulphine (without making any mention of the Prouinces, seated in the midst of them which we haue named, and which would make as many Kingdomes, if our Kings gouerned themselues, according to the manner of Spa^

will finde without all doubt, that France in latitude and longitude, excelleth very much that of Spaine.It is admirable France, from all antiquity, that (for her greatnesse) serued as a spacious field, and a most noble subiect to the Spanish Poet Lucane; to shew:How Caesar became Lord of the Romane Empire. That Caesar became Master of the Romane Empire, by the meanes of her wealthy Prouinces; whereas he hath not spoken the like of Spaine. He admireth earnestly her extendure, and preferreth her (by good right) before all Kingdoms of the spacious World.-- Sparsas per Gallica rura CohortesEuocat, and Romam motis petit vndique signis.Deseruere cauo tentoria fixa Lemano.He beginneth with Suetia, watered by the Lake of Geneua, and of Lozana, and ^unneth from thence to the mountaines of Vaulga, which make separation of the ^ands of Germany and France.Castraque quae Vogesi curuam super ardua rupemPugnaces pictis cohibebant Lingones armis.These mountaines extend themselues very far into Germany, by Luxembourg,The great extendure of the Mountaines. and so farre as Strasbourg; and from thence take and deriue their sourses, the Riuers of Meuse, and of Saoha, separating them of Mentz, Toull and Verdune, with the Bourgongnons and Langrois, whom Lucane tearmeth Pugnaces. And saith, that they delighted to weare enameled Armes, varied with diuersity of colours. And Martiall saith, that the Common people of the Langres were cloathed with a garment of smoaky colour, called a Minime, such as the Bardes vsed to weare among the Druides.Sic interpofitus vitio contaminat vnctoVrbica Lingonicus Tyrianthi^a Bardocucullus.And Lucane maketh a Leape, saying:
Hi vada liquerunt Isarae, qui gurgite vastoPer tam multa suo, famae maioris in amnemLapsus, ad aequoreas nomen non pertulit vndas.He spake concerning the people of Sauoy, which is watered with the Riuer of ^isera, that taketh her sourse neere to Mont-Cenis, and (running rowling thorow ^auoy) taketh largenesse to Mont-Melian, thwarting Granoble, and Romans in ^aulphine, and some few miles from thence, sinketh it selfe in the Riuer of Rhosne, ^or Rhone, arising out of the Alpes) which he calleth Amnem famae maioris. Plinie (...) his naturall history, noteth the originall and spring of the Riuer Rhosne, where^to it swalloweth and looseth it selfe, and Isara and Saona thus. Galliarum fertilis^mus Rhodanus Fluuius ex Alpibus se rapiens per lacum Lemanum, segnemque deferens ^rarim, nec minus se ipso torrentem Isaram, because Isara hath her course as impetu^us as Rhosne.And thence againe the Poet hath another leap into Rouergne, whereof Rhodes (...) the Bishops See; Ciuitas Ruthenorum.Soluuntur flaui longa statione Rutheni.And with these Rouergas, he windeth on the same bottome, them of Narbonois Narbonensis Gallia, the Countrey of Narbone in France) and Carcassois, watered ^d bathed with the Riuer of Auda; a Riuer big enough, but troubled and heauie (...) her course, which cannot carrie any great Bottomes.Mitis Atax Latias gaudet non ferre Carinas.It passeth betweene the Towne and the City of Carcassona, and passing the Rocks (...) the Carcasses and Minerues; passeth on all along, crossing the Martiall and Me^politane City of Narbonna, to Serignano and Beziers, a very pleasing and de^ghtfull Citie, whereof arose the Prouerbe.Si Deus in terrisVellet habitare Biterris.Pleny calleth it Blitterae, and some few miles frnm thence, Auda looseth it self^ i^ the Mediterranean Sea: Of this therefore is it that Trebellius maketh mention,
Hunc fore Aquitanas posset qui fundere gentes,Quem tremeret forti milite victus Atax.And Pliny in the place formerly alleadged, saith; Flumen Atax e Pyrene^ r^bre^ sem permeans lacum, etc.From Auba he commeth to the Riuer of Gar.Finis, and Hesperiae promoto milite A Riuer diuiding Narbon from Laguria. Varus.He saith that it maketh separation of the Gaules from Italie, and in this maner speaketh Plinie. Narbonensis Prouincia appellatur pars Galliarum, quae interno mari allu^tu^, Braccata ante dicta, Amne Varo ab Italia discreta. But hee must take it to be thus, d^ring such time as the Prouince was wonne by the Romanes, and reduced into the forme of a Prouince, for otherwise, at all times it made part with the Kingdome of France. There is in the lower Languedocke, a Riuer which beareth name in the same manner, and rowling from the Seuenes, passeth betweene Nismes Ne^sus in Latine) the Episcopall City and Auignion, to Romoulins. It is very obserueable for the bridge of Gar, one of the Wonders of the world, an admirable worke and worthy the greatnesse of the Romanes; as well as the Arenes of Nismes, a mile and a halfe from which, is the said bridge of Gar.Thence the Poet passeth to the ends of the Prouince,
Queque sub Herculeo sacratus numine portus--Et tuta prohibet statione Monoeci.To the Port of Hercules, at this present called Ville-Franche: Of this Port, and of Monego, or Monacho, writeth Plinie: Portus Herculis, Monoeci, Ligustica Ora.From the side of Prouence, and of Gennes, hee commeth to cut ouer the Riuer of Rhine, and in the Episcopall City of Spire, Ciuitas Nemetum, and the Inhatants called Nemetes.-- Tunc rura NemetisQui tenet, and ripas Atiri qua littore curuoMolliter admissum claudit Tarbellicus Aequor,And from Spire, he flieth away to the last end of the Gaules in the Ocean Sea, to the Countie of Begorre, and the lower Nauarre. Of this Countie, Tarbes is the Episcopall City, the Inhabitants whereof are called Tarbelli by Caesar. The Riuer of Adona,People of Gasco^g^^ neere the P^^^ne Mountaines. called by Lucane Atirus, and by Scaliger Ador, rowleth from the Pyrenean Mountaines, and making two branches the one is called Adoua, and the other Midoua; it commeth to loose it selfe in the Ocean, neere to Bayonne. Sid^^ Appollinaris in his Epistle Ad Trigetium, calleth it Atturricus Fluuius: And the B^delois Poet Ausonius, baptizeth it with the name of Aturrus.Insanumque ruens per saxa rotantia lateIn mare purpureum, dominae tamen ante MosellaeNumine adorato, Tarbellius ibit Aturrus.Afterward, the Poet recouereth them of Xaintonge, and of Berry (or Bourdea^ for there are the Bituriges Cubi, which be the Berruyers of Bourges, and those of Bourdelois, called Bituriges Vibisci, or pronouncing according to the ancient G^lish retained in Gascongnie, Biuisci, changing V. into B by the conuersion.Signa mouet gaudetque amoto Santunus hoste,Et Biturix.And from thence he commeth into Champaigne, vpon the Riuer of Aysne*-- Longisque leues Axones in armis.Axona (whereof Ausonius maketh mention in his Mosella,
-- Axona praceps.)And taketh her sourse from Bassigny, or (according to others) from the mountaines of Vauga, the people wherof are commended by Lucane, for doing good seruice with the Pike or Partizane, whereby he meaneth long Armes. He g^ them for their neighbors,^ong Armes then in vse. them of Rheims, the Metropolitane City of Champa^^^^ and of Toull the Episcopall.Optimus excusso Leucus, Remusque lucerto.He giueth them the honour of being stout and strong; for acting, casting, and ^etting loose Darts, Iauelins, and Arrowes, making them to be good and skilfull Archers.Then he setteth downe the Sequanois, which are they of Bourgongne, and other neighbouring people.Optima gens flexis in gyrum Sequana fraenis.For the Riuer of Seine, writhing it self like a Serpent, receiueth her Spring aboue ^. Seine, drawing towards Chanceaux, within fiue miles and a halfe of Dijon,The course o^ the riuer Seine des^ending to S. Mard, Aize the Duchie to Chastillon, Mussy the Bishopricke, Bar, Troyes and Nogent, where it beareth bottomes of charge, to come to Paris. From whence it rowleth to Poissy, Meulant, Mante, Vernon, Gaillon, Ponte de l'Arche, ^ouen, Chaudebec, Honfleur, Harflew, Haure de Grace,New Hauen. and drowneth it selfe in the Ocean Sea.From Champaigne and Bourgongne, it passeth into Picardy, and to the Coun^rey of Flanders; to the Inhabitants whereof hee giueth commendations,Good wagon driuers. for well-gouerning and mannaging Waggons and Chariots, and for being very expert Waggonners.Et facilis rector rostrati Belga Couini.From Belgicke Gaule, he returneth backe into Aquitaine, and the Countrey of Auuergne: the People whereof, boasting themselues to be Romane,The men of Auuergne tearming themselues Romanes. hee mocketh for their vaine oftentation.Aruernique ausi Latios se fingere FratresSanguine ab Iliaco Populi.From Auuergne hee leapeth into Tournaisis, the people whereof vanquished a Legion and fiue Companies, left in Garrison by Caesar in the Countrey of Liege, as he writeth in his Bello Gallico. And thus Lucan obserueth it.--nimiumque rebellisNeruius and caesi pollutus sanguine Cottae.Vpon one thred he fileth them of Treuers, sometime the Capitall City of the Gaules, them of Wormes and of Holland.
Tu quoque latatus conuerti praelia Treuir,Et qui te laxis imitantur Sarmata braccisVangiones, Batauique truces,
^abited after the Scythian and Poland manner.And from thence hee commeth to the Garden of France; Poictou, Touraine,The garden of France. Aniou, and round-neighbouring people, dwelling on the Riuers of Loire, and them of Guien and Maine.Pictones immunes subiugunt sua rura; ne vltraInstabiles Turones circumsita castra coercent.In ripis Manduana tuis marcere perosusAndus, iam placida Ligeris recreatur ab vnda,Inclyta Caesareis Genabos dissoluitur alis.The Pictes or Poicteuins, of whom the Capitall City is called Augustoritum Pi^tonum, seated on the Riuer of Clan, which descendeth into that of Vienna, were so ^amed, because they made markes in their faces with a hot yron, as Claudian informeth vs.Ferroque notatasPerlegit examine Picta moriente figuras.And in his second Panegyricke,
Ferro picta genas, cuius and vestigia verritCaerulusAs for that which Lucan calleth Genabum inclytam, such as take it for Orleans, ^re sottishly deceiued; because it is Gien vpon Loire, part of which City retaineth ^et the name of Genaba, euen to this day. Caesar saith, that in his time it was the Magazine or Storehouse of the Chartrains, whereof it seemeth that Tibullus tooke note, extending the said Chartrains to the Riuer of Loire.Carnuti and flaui caerula lympha Liger.Caesar consumed this poore Citie into cinders, for the reasons which himselfe reporteth in his Bello Gallico. Now the Riuer of Loire, which Plinie calleth Fla^^^^s clarum Ligerim, taketh her sourse neere to the Towne of Puy en Velay, tearmed in Latine Anicium, encreased with other Springs, and Snowes melting from the Mountaines of Auuergne. After it hath rowled foure and twentie miles from the Spring, to Rouana, it beareth boates of Burden, and passing by Desise, Neuers, la Ch^rite, Sancerre, Cosne, Gien, Gergeau, Orleans, Boigency, Bloys, Amboyse, Tours, Sa^, the bridges (called corruptly by Caesar) Sea, Ancenis and Nantes; it commeth to d^gorge it selfe into the Ocean Sea, at S. Lazaro.From thence the Poet scuddeth to the Pyrenean Mountaines, where the Inhabitants of them are noted to be of the Gaulish Nation; and extendeth himselfe farre into high Spaine called Celtiberia, so farre as the Riuer of Ebro, or rather Iberus, (A Riuer in Spaine rising neere Iuliobrica in Cantabria.) So that in those times then, all that rounded the Cinga, was inhabited with naturall Gaules.Gurgite -- Qua Cinga pererrat.And the same Lucan hath described it elsewhere.Cinga rapax, vetitus fluctus, and littora cursisOceam p^pulisse suo: nam gurgite mixto,Qui praestat terris aufert tibi nomen Iberis.This Riuer hath not changed her name, but descendeth from the Mountaines of Catalogna, and after shee hath laued the Townes of Balbastra, Moncon, Lerida, Fraga, with some other little villages and Bourgades of Nauarre and Arragon, she commeth with the Segro (Sicoris called by Lucane) to discharge her burden in the Riuer of Iberus, which causeth her to lose her name.-- Qua Cinga pererratGurgite:From thence he skippeth to the Riuer of Rhosne,
Qua Rhodanus raptum velocibus vndisIn mare f^rt Ararim.Rhosne or Rhodanus, receiueth her sourse from Mont de la Fourche, in high Valais, passing by the Lake of Lozana, and Geneua the Knightly, and doeth descend to Lyon the Merchant; where beyond it, she meeteth the sleepy Or Sa^ona in (...) by the Sea side, which exten^e it hath. Sa^na, and f^lleth with it into the Sea of Prouence. Rhosne maketh two branches, separating the Viuarez and Languedock, from Prouence and Daulphine. Beside which Principalitie, (the title to the eldest Sonnes of the Monarches of France) it watereth the Cities of ancient Vienna, the olde Chancery belonging to the Emperorus of the West; Thin, Valencia, Lorioll, Mont-Limar, Auignion, Nonna, Tarascon, Arles l^ Blanche, and S. Gilles, where one of her hornes droppeth into the Sea. The other watereth all along from Viuarez, the Townes of Tournon, Cursoll, Viuiers, Pont S. Esprit; and from thence coasting Auignion and Beauquaire, shee throweth her selfe into the Sea at Aiguesmortes at Langudock. Ysera at Saona loose themselues in Rhosne, as the Durance doth, whereof Ausonius speaketh, calling it Parance, which after it hath washed part of the Cities and Towns of Daulphine, Prouence, and the Countie of Venissa, to witte, Guilera, Ambrun, Tallart, Cisteroe, Cauaillon, and Poincte d'Orgon, it looseth it selfe in Rhosne, which they of the Countrey call Rose.Concerning the people of Languedocke, and their dwelling.Lucane disciphereth, and afterward taketh the people of Languedock, for inhabitants on the Mountaines of Ceuenes, which eythet begin, or finish them of the Pirenean. Ioyning to the Martiall City of Narbona, they goe (like a Scarfe) to gaine them of the Alpes; hauing trauersed the higher Languedocke, the County of Geuaudan, the Puy in Velay, S. Floure, part of Viuarez and Auuergne, so farre

^s to the Riuer of Rhosne. Lucane calleth all the people generally Seuenois, by the ^ame of those Mountaines.Qua montibus ardua summisGens habitat cana pendentis rupe Gebennas.G. being set downe for C. Strabo, Potolomy, and other Geographers, comprehen^eth them vnder the name of Cebennus mons, Caesar; Mela, and the Naturalist Plinie,The error and mistake of some Geographers of Cebenus Mons. ^ens Cebenna in the singular, and the Inhabitants Cebenni Populi. Ausonius the Bour^elos, describing the City of Narbonna, saith:
Interiusque premunt Aquitanica rura Cebennae.And in that of Tolosa.Ninguida Pyrenes, and pinea CebennarumInter Aquitanas gentes.From thence Lucan maketh a leap to the City of Treuers, seated on the Riuers of Mosella, and of Seila; and thence he flitteth to the people of the Alpes, and be^ond the side of Genoway and Millaine, which at all times made part of Long^eard Gaule.Et nunc tonse Ligur quondam per colla decora,Crinibus effusis toti praelatae Comatae.Lucan, to very good purpose, finisheth the Gaules extendure,How the Gaules extendure is finisht by Lucan. by the Riuer of Rhine; because their naturall extent was from this great flood, so far as to the Py^enean Mountaines on the one side, and from one Sea to another, as we haue elsewhere said.Et vos Crinigeros bellis arcere CaycosOppositi, petitis Romam, Rhenique ferocesDeseritis ripas, and appertum gentibus Orbem.Now, concerning that which giueth precedency of one Prouence to another,The Precedencie of one Prouince to another. ^t is the fertility of the Soyle, for abounding in fruites, Woods, and Gardenings; which is wrought by the meanes of Riuers watering it. Spaine (for the most part) ^s wanting and defectiue in such an aduantage, few great Riuers to water it. For ^ake away Iberus, Guadiana, Tagus and Guadalquibir; and there are none but small Brookes. Spaine is halfe desert; of a yellowish earth; burnt with the Sunne, euen ^s her neighbour Affrica is. And you see the Spaniards to be of small stature, de^nie-Moores, duskie and swarthy like the Affricans; with whom they haue conso^ance enough in manners and fashion of behauiour. Whereas the French are of a ^ich shape, actiue, and of gracefull presence; white fleshed, and open visaged: which ^heweth the goodly temperature of the ayre in France, not ouer-hot, like that of Spaine, nor yet too cold, as it is in England.Tibullus tooke pleasure in making France famous by her Riuers.Testis Arar, Rhodonusque celer, magnusque Garumna,Carnuti, and flaui caerula, lympha Liger.But more particularly the Senator Ausonius.Non tibi se Liger anteferet, non Axona praeceps,Matrona non Gallis, Belgisque intersita fines,Santonico refluus non ipse Carantonius aestu,Concedit gelido Durani de monte volutasAmnis, and Auriferum postponet Gallia Tarnem.The one maketh mention but of Saona, Loire and Garonna, as also of Rhosne; and the other of Loire, Aisna, Marne, Charanta, Dordogna and Tarn. The Riuer

Charauta is named by Ptolomy Cauentelus, which running from Poictu, after (...) hath watered the Townes of Engoulesme, Congnac, Xaintes, Tallebourg and S^^bisa; commeth to loose it selfe in the Ocean Sea, Father of all these Riuers as we learned by Homer.That which Ausonius saith, in deriuing her Spring from the Mountaine Dura^a, is in our ancient Annales, and in the life of great Charlemaigne, called Dordog^a, Dordania, whereof Sidonius Apollinaris maketh mention:
Exis ^^rua^a, Durani muscose, saburra.Sh^e (...) and trauerseth Perigord, and the Townes of Fumell, Bergeyra^, S. ^oy, (...), ^onsacke, built by Charlemaigne, and called (according to the opinion of (...)) Pr^us Saracenorum, at this day a Duchie and Peeredome, belo^ging to the Illustrious House of S. Paul of Orleans, neere vnto which place, this Riu^^ of Dordogne looseth it selfe, in that of Garonna beneath Bourdeaux.As so the (...) of Tarn, which hee depicteth as Pactolus, and whereof (...) speak (...) for a Raye among the Tolosians, and them of Perig^^^, Tar^^^ ^ne discr^t^, a Tolosanis, Petrocorij: she receiueth her Originall from the Seuenes, from whence she rowleth to Lauregais, watereth the Townes of Lesc^^^^, Vill^m^r,The Moth^r of M^. Cicero born in (...) Alby (where it was said that the Mother of Cicero was borne) Gaill^ck, R^b^^e^^^ (...) places, discharging her selfe into that of Garonna, aboue the (...).And (...) Garonna, (or Garumma, parting Celtica from Aquitania) a Riuer so m^ch renowned* I haue seene it from the Spring, to her declining, which is in the V^^^^y of A^^^^, Vallis aurata, in the Diocesse of Comenges, and bottom of the Py^^^^^^* p^^sing to Montre^an de Riuiere, to Baccrauera, and to Pont de S. Iust, beneath S. Ber^and (the Episcopall Seate of Comenges, Ciuitas Conuen^^^^, and h^ d^^^sion, Co^^nis conueniunt Conuene, drawne from S. Hierome, a light in the Church (...) S. Gaudens, Estaucarbon, S. Martory, Caseres benea^h (...),A (...). Te^ass^, Muret, Partet, Tolosa, Grenada, Le Porte S. Mary, Aiguill^^ (...) and Peeredome of France, in the famous house of Maie^^^e of Lorraine^ (...), M^rmande, La Reole, S. Macary, Langon, Cadillack, Bourde^^x, (...) T^^mond and ^eian, where Garonna looseth her selfe in the Ocean Sea, and yet re^^oweth aboue it so farre as to the said Langon. Heereupon shes called (...) Ans^^^, ^ar^mna (...) quorea, and in Claudian.-- Retro perni^ior vnda GarumnaeOcea^ p^^no q^^^^us impeli^tur ^s^u.It would require a discourse, able to breake the longest breath, to obserue a re^^lion of Riuer^ that water and besprinkle France, and which make it to abound (...) all things that can be wished for,(...) ^ic and necessary for the Nature of Man; without her constraint of begging any thing of strange Countries, especially of Spaine, which cannot be two yeeres (at the most) without the helpe of France, a good n^sing mother ^o the rest of Europe.(...)Among (...) the Nations of the world, that of the ancient Gaules was the best poll^^ed, and most ciuilized: because they were taught, ruled, and gouerned by the (...) Diuides, Masters of all Sciences and Vertue. For, in the first place, they had ^^ff^ed knowledge of one only God, Creator of Heauen and Earth; and vnder stood p^^f^^^ly his Worship and Seruice, that is to say, in what forme hee should (...) ^dor^^, in Sp^^^^, and outwardly also.(...)A^d to obser^e (in a briefe Summary) the whole Masse of their knowledge and (...), they made profession of enstructing the Gaulish Nobility, in the Moralls and (...); all parts of the Mathematicks, the Immortality of the soule, and the (...) of one onely God. But they opened the dore to all these, first by knowl^ege of ^hemselues; the point most needfull and important, and precisest to know any matter of goodnesse.Their first Classe or forme in Schoole, was hung with Mirrours, in whose

^lasses their Schollers learned their first Alphabet. Such as were endued with cor^orall beautie, were admonished to make themselues much fairer by the goods of ^he Soule: because those of the body were but flitters, subiect to changes, the ^heele of age, and the least sickenesse.Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque accedit ad AnnosFinis minor.Deformed and mis-shapen men, were taught to couer the defects of Nature,For imperfection of body. with ^ll manner of vertuous actions, which made all such truly noble, as embraced them.For the knowledge of God, they had for Maxime, Non colere Idola,For the knowledge of God. and in all the Gaules (of very great extendure) there was no Image to be seene: But of the Sacred ^irgin, that should bring forth, and giue sucke to the fruite of life, the onely Sauiour of the World. And yet this Image was but on the Generall Altar, for all the Gaulish Pro^inces: prepared on the Mountaine of Chartres, and in the fairest middest of the ^acred Forrest, as it is reported by Epiphanius.Cohibere parietibus Deos, and in vllam oris speciem assimilare, ex magnitudine Coelesti^^ non arbitrantur: so saith Tacitus in his Germania. Because God being a pure Spi^t, diffused throughout the whole Vniuerse; hee cannot be restrained, nor shut vp ^ithin walls, or represented by humane figure. Deus est Sphera cuius centrum est ^erra, Superficies vero nulla. God is a circle, whose point and Center is the earth,Acts 7.48.49.50. without ^^perficies, and without circumference. This is the doctrine of S. Paul, Excelsus non (...) manufactis Templis habitat, sicut per Prophetam dicit? Coelum mihi sedes est, Terra ^^tem Scabellum pedem meorum: Quam domum aedificabis mihi? aut quis locus requieti^is meae est? dicit Dominus: Nonne manus mea fecit haec omnia. The most high dwelleth ^t in Temples made with hands, as saith the Prophet. Heauen is my Throne, and earth is ^y foot-stoole: What House will ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of my rest? ^ath not my hand made all these things? And preaching to the Athenians,Acts 17.24 45.34. when he ^onuerted to the faith of Iesus Christ, the great S. Denys Areopagita, and his Wife ^amaris. Deus qui fecit mundum, and omnia quae in eo sunt, Hic Coeli, and Terrae cum sit ^ominus, non in manufactis Templis habitat, nec manibus humanis colitur. God that made ^^e world, and all things therein, seeing that he is God of Heauen and earth, dwelleth not (...) Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with mens hands.Before the building of Salomons Temple, God was not adored in enclosed Tem^es; but In Excelsis, and in Lucis: as we reade in Genesis, that the Patriarch Abra^m, contracting alliance, and making a Couenant with the King of Palestine Abi^elech; planted a Wood in Beer-sheba, and there called on the name of the Lord.Gen. 21.32.33. ^antau^t nemus in Beer-sheba, and inuocabit ibi nomen Domini Dei aeterni. The same is (...) be read in infinite passages of the Scriptures, which serueth to shew, that before ^e building of the Temple at Ierusalem; Forrests and tufted Woods were Temples,Places for Prayer, before the temple at Ierusalem was made. ^d places destined for prayer by the people of Israell, and their Sacrifices to the ^^ing God. And that those Woods and places of deuotion, were ordinarily In ^^celsis, on the tops of Mountaines, shaded with Forrests and Woods. Gloria in ^tissimis Deo; as the Angells sung in the night time of his blessed birth.Euen so the Wise Druides, diuinely inspired, ordered their Temples in the ve^ fairest places of thickest Woods,Where the Druides prepared their temples. couered and shadowed vnder the couert and ^eading of high tufted Oakes; without enclosing their Temples with Walls and ^^uertures, as the materiall are, built by mens hands. Lucos ad Nemora consecrant, ^orumque nominibus appellant Secretum illud quod sola reuerentia vident, so saith the ^^e Tacitus. The Gaules and Germanes (saith he) had for their Temples some goodlie ^arate place, in the middest of a thicke Forrest, which they dedicated and consecrated vn^ God.There were not any Idolls, but the secret and most shadie place of the Temple ^s by them reuerenced, euen as the Mansion or dwelling of the Diuinity, which ^ey durst not looke on with their eyes, but in great feare and reuerence.The Celies dedication of their Woods and Forrests. As if ^ey would haue said. This Celticke people and Nation, doe dedicate and conse^te their Forrests and Woods to God, and serue him there as in Temples, the

thickest tufts whereof is contemplated with their eyes, with all condigne honor and reuerence; not hauing so much boldnesse or presumption, to approach neere the Sanctuary of the Diuinitie: that is to say, from the most secret and deep^^^ place of this sacred Temple, to draw neerer then by sight onely.The Druides* had knowledge of sacred ^etters. Gen. 13.18. Exod. 3.2.And we need make no doubt, but that those diuine Druides had (without al^ question to the contrary) notice and knowledge of those sacred mysteries, obserued in holy bookes; as God made himselfe seene and knowne to the Patriarche Ab^^ham, vnder the Oake of Mambre; and to the Law-maker Moyses, in the thickest of a Bush, burning on the Mountaine of Horeb, which Bush Moses approached vnto, in all feare, honor, and reuerence, after he had put off his shooes.The secret place of the Druides Temple, how they called it, and reuerenced it.And so those Druides called the most secret place of their Temples, by the name of the liuing God: Domini Dei viuentis nomine dicabant Secretum illud quod (...) reuerentia videbatur. Honouring the place as most sacred and holy, where they presented their prayers to God, which they beleeued to make them most happy by his Diuine presence. And the reuerence which they bare to those Temples, w^^ so great, as they dared not to approach neere them, but in all humilitie. Euen so the Sueues, the most potent people of Alemaigne (issued and descended from them of S^ns,An Order obserued among the Sueues euery moneth sometimes renowned among all the Gaules) on the first day of their yere, th^ is to say, the first day of the Moone of September, they assembled together in their principall Temple, according to the custome of their Noble Grandfathers, which was in a thicke Forrest, where they held their Generall Estates, for an hundred Bourgades and Cominalties vnder their obedience. Tacitus saith: Vetustissimus se, nobilissimosque Sueuorum Senones memorant. Fides antiquitatis religione firmatur* Stato tempore in Syluam, -- Auguris Patrum, and prisca formidine sacram -- omnes eiusdem sanguinis P^puli Legationibus, c^eunt. Est and alia Luco reuerentia. Nemo nisi ligatus ingreditur, (...) minor, and potestatem Numinis prae se ferens; si forte prolapsus fuerit, attolli, aut insurgen haud licitum, per humum euoluuntur, eoque enim superstitio respicit, tanquam inde in^t^gentis, Ibique Regnator omnium Deus, caetera subiecta, atque patientia.A supersticious ceremony for such as entred the temple.Whosoeuer desired to enter into this Sacred Temple, were he the Prince of the greatest Lord; was to haue his hands and feet fast bound with cords, so that if peraduenture he fell or tumbled to the ground, it was not permitted him to rise again, or so much as to lift vp his head; but onely to rowle along on the earth. This superstition pointed and tended to this end; to make it knowne, that God alone (the onely Gouernour of all things) had chosen there his sanctuary.The same Antiquary Tacitus obserueth in other places, that the Celtes had not any Idolls or Images in their Temples. Nulla Simulacra, nullum peregrinae superstit^^^ vestigium ibi videre liceat.The Gaules met in hallowed ^orr^st, before the Romanes came into Gaule.The passage of Tacitus, concerning the Assembly of the Seuenois, or people of Alemaigne, giueth vs to note; that before the arriuall of the Romanes in Gaul^, the publique assemblies of the ancient Gaules, were alwaies made in those Sacred Forrests: Because they verily beleeued, that there was the acceptable dwelli^g of the Diuinitie: to whose prescience or fore-knowledge, they referred the beginning and conclusion of their said Assembly.This is it which the same Tacitus obserueth in his Histories of assemblies, called Ciuilis, the Hollanders to treat and feast, and (by degrees) to hold a Councell what they had to doe for redeeming themselues from the Romaines slauery. Vocauit Batauos Sacrum in nemus specie epularum. And Lucius Florus affirmeth: Ve^^^ gentorix festis diebus, and Comitialibus, quum frequentissimos in Lucis haberet, fer^c^ dictis ad ius pristinum libertatis erexit. All which these Authors say, is to remar^^ the fashion of the ancient Druides, Presidents of the Generall States, that eu^^^ yeere they assembled on the first day of the Moone in September, in the Sacr^^ Forrest of the City of Charters, the Nauill or midst of the Gaules, according (...) Caesar speaketh in his Bello Gallico. Druidae certo Anni tempore in finibus Carnutum, (...) regio totius Galliae media habetur, considunt In Luce Consecrato.In those times then, and more then a thousand yeres after, Paris, and all (...) thereabout, for more then twenty miles round about, drawing towards Dreux, and (...)

^^^sse, was but one great Forrest, called by our Annalists, The Forrest of Paris, o^erwise named Aquilina Sylua, and at this present Yuelina. Thereof William the Bre^^ maketh mention in his Philippides, speaking of Mont-Fort l'Amaury,Aquilina Sylua the Forrest of Paris, or Yuelina. of S. Arnoul ^nd S. Legier in Yuelina, where King Philip Augustus merited to see our Lord in hu^aine forme, betweene the Priests hands at the eluation of the holy Hoste.In castro Syluis Aquilina quod vndique cingitCui sanctus nomen Leodegarius aptat,Dum forte audiret Missae mysteria, viditPresbyteri in manibus qua sacra leuantur in hora.Returne we to our Gaulish Temples.Numa Pompilius, the very wisest King of the Romanes, Scholler to Pythagoras, ^ho had beene Scholler to the wise Druides (as wee learne by Clemens Alexandri^s) instituted for Temples to the Romanes, Woods and Forrests, without any I^lls. And therefore the Latine Poet well obseruing this Antiquity, purposelie ^termined to figure the same by the Venerable Temple of King Latinus.Horrendum syluis, and relligione parentum.And Seneca saith, Si tibi occurrat vetustis arboribus, and solitam altitudinem egressis, ^quens Lucus, and conspectum Coeli densitate ramorum aliorum alios protegentium submo^s; illa proceritas Syluae, and secretum loci, and admiratio vmbrae in aperto tam densae at^e continuae, Fidem tibi numinis facit. If thwarting a great way as thou passest a^^g, is offered or presented to thine eyes some goodly Forrest, or some faire Bos^ge, shadowed with aged Oakes, hauing their heads exalted aboue all the woods;Concerning great Forrests, and high topping trees. (...) it be an vndoubted perswasion to thee, that this exceeding height, and admira^^ shade, made by those goodlie tall trees, and the secrecie of a place so vene^le, doe plainely shew, that there did remaine some Diuinitie, which ought to adored.And Plinie (next to this wise and Christian Philosopher, the familiar friend of ^nt Paul the Apostle) spake to good purpose: That olde Oakes, with their ^ds crowned in a round forme; were to our Auncients as their sacred Temples, ^d onely places for their deuotion. Haec fuere Numinum Templa, priscoque ritu ^m nunc simplicia rura Deo praecellentem Arborem dicant. And in his Panegyricke the Emperour Traian. Atque inter haec pia mente Adire Lucas, and occursare Nu^ibus. And therefore the Poet in his Transformations, in the person of Ere^bonius the Atheist, maketh appearance of the paine or punishment, for all such as ^phaned them.Ille etiam Cereale Nemus violasse securiDicitur, and Lucos ferro temerasse vetustos.And Apuleius would elegantly darken the renowne of his Accuser Aemilianus, (...) imposed on him, that in all his Inheritances hee had neither Temple, nor ^es, dedicated and consecrated to the Gods, wherein to make their offerings and ^ers.^am, vt audio percensentibus ijs qui istum nouere, nulli Deo ad hoc aeui supplicauit, nul^ Templum frequentauit. Si fanum aliquod praetereat, nefas habet adorandi gratia ^um libras admouere. Iste vero nec Dijs rurationis qui eum pascunt, ac vestiunt, sege^^llas, aut vitis, aut gregis primitias impartit. Nullum in villa eius Delubrum, nul^cus, aut Lucus consecratus. Et quid ego de Luco, and Delubro loquor? Negant ^sse se, qui fuere, vnum saltem in finibus eius aut Lapidem vnctum, aut Ramum co^tum.All this before recited, was drawne from the practise and doctrine of the Anci^ Druides, whom the Philosopher Tyrius Maximus presupposed (badly informed

as he was) to haue for their principall Deity, the highest exalted Oake in their sacred Forrests, (...).Heereupon it was especially, that the ancient Philosophers would represent the God of Nature (as speaketh the Gaules Apostle, S. Denys Areopagita, seeing that generall Ecclipse,The generall Ecclipse at our Sau^ours Passion. which happened at the death and Passion of our Redeemer Ies^^ Christ) by a thicke Forrest, which they called (...), because, that like as it serued in buildings for cou^ture,The God of Nature did al by his word onely. and repaire to all kinde of creatures, which she fedde and nourished from her fruitfull wombe: Euen so the God of Nature, by his Wo^^ onely, is the production, sourse and birth of the whole Vniuerse, and all there^^ comprehended.Iupiter est q^^d^umque vides, quodcumque mouetur.Such then were the Temples of the ancient Gaules, without Idolls or Images whatsoeuer: they adored but one onely God, to whom they dedicated and consecrated such spoyles as they conquered from their enemies. For it hath been a practise from all times,Spoyles con^^^ed from (...) dedicated to God. among the most ciuill and best gouerned Nations, to offer and present to God, by way of gratitude and thankesgiuing, the spoyles of conquered enemies; and to hang vp or affixe them to sacred and sanctified places: because ^e is pleased, and delighteth in the title, to be called The God of Battells and Armies, as the sole Author of Victories, which he giueth to whom hee pleaseth. So the Patriarch Abraham,Gen 14 22.23. after he had ouercome the fiue Kings his enemies; hee offered (...) God the tenth part of his conquered spoyles. And so the King and Psalmist Dau^^, hauing vanquished the Giant Goliah in single fight, and in the Valley of Tere b^tha,(...) 21.11. hung vp in the Tabernacle of the Lord, the Coutelas or Sword of the Gia^^, where it was kept to serue for a memory to posterity.In like manner, the Ancestors of the Gaules, hauing vanquished Caesar at o^^ Cle^mont of A^^ergne (Gergouia) where he ranne his fortune for life: hung vp^ a Trophee, in the great Temple Vasso, his sword, which they had wrested from h^ hand. And afterward, Caesar hauing visited the Metropolitane Temple of Auuerg^ (about which, on the height of Mountaines, were prepared Temples for the principall Gods and Goddesses) he found there his Sword, which neuerthelesse he d^ not take away, as Plutarch noteth.The Romaines, by the Gaules example, exalted as Trophees, the Armes of Generals and Captaines of Armies, belonging to conquered Nations. Virgil, spea^ of that which h^s ^^^neas prepared, saith.Ingentem quercum decisis vndique ramisConstitu^t tumulo, fulgentiaque induit armaMezenti ducis exuutas, tibi Magne, trophaeum^ellipotens* aptat rorantes sanguine cristas,^^laque trunca viri, and bis sex thoraca petitumPerf^ssumque lecis: clypeumque ex aere sinistraeSubligat, atque ensem collo suspendit eburnum.The order of (...) vp (...) of Arme^.For among these Trophees of Arms, they exalted in the highest place, the he^ piece or Helmet, garnished with Lambrequins and Plumes, died red in the bl^^ of enemies. Christas sanguine rorantes: and then followed the Gorget of Maile^ the Cuirats or Brest-plate, the Vambrace, Tasses, and Greues: the Shield, Swo^ Lance, Dart, or Iaueline, Arrowes and their Quiuer, yea Bucklers and Targe^ Souldiers on foote, with their Flagges, Banners, Cornets and Pennons; yea, so^ as Drums and Trumpets, the Watch-bels and Proclaimers of Warre.In the same Temples, beside the Spoyles of enemies Armes and Harnesse of Wa^ there was kept (as in safeguard) the Dismes or Tenths of Gold and Siluer, wo^ from conquered people, so saith Diodorus Siculus in his Antiquities. It is a (...) marue^l^us, that in the Temple of the Gaules, you might behold great heapes of gold (...) siluer, not any daring to touch them; although that Nation was deepely in loue with (...) yet were they so deu^ut and religious.Strabo in his Geography, remarketh the ancient custome of the Gaules, to (...) yerely, and on certaine daies, their offerings to the Temples of most deuotion a^

^e Gaules, speaking of that at Tolosa. At Tolosa there was a Temple, most famous (...) sanctitie of the place, whereto all the neighbouring people sent yeerely their Offerings of ^ld and siluer, and a very great number of all kindes of gifts; yet not any one of the Gaules ^ring to touch them. This Temple, vpon report of the Tolosans, was dedicated to ^e Sacred Virgin, adored at Chartres; and at the same place is yet at this present (...) be seene, the Monastery and Church De la d'Aurade, that is, Our Golden Lady, ^^on the border of Garonna.The same Geographer, speaking of the Tolosans, calleth them Tectosages,The voyage of the Tectosages into Greece with Brennus their Captain. and ^ith, that they made a voyage into Greece, with their Captaine Brennus; who ha^ng heard the Idoll of Apollo speake, which was at Delphos so highly renowned, (...) all the poore Idolaters of those times, and detesting such impiety; he resolued ^ith his followers, to spoyle and deface that Idoll, by the Organe whereof, Sa^an the common seducer, deliuered so many of his lying Oracles.The Deuill in the Idoll of Apollo at Delphos. This Prince of ^euils wrought wonders, to conserue his Rocke-hold, the dungeon of his tyran^call Empire, by dreadfull Lightnings and Thunders; as is written by Pausanias, ^stine the Historian, with other Greeke and Latine Authors.Yet so neuerthelesse it came to passe, that notwithstanding all these Bug-beare ^rightments, Brennus and his Gaules, who had no other feare, but lest heauen should (...) on their heads, forbare not to steale or pilfer the incredible treasures, which had ^long time beene kept in that Plutonicall Mansion.Which doth make publiquely knowne, that if the Gaules had beene Idolaters,Caesar wronged the Gauls in tearming them Idolaters ^ccording as Caesar supposed, and such as haue followed him, building vpon his ^port, contrary to truth) they would not haue beene strupulous in robbing the ^elphian Temple, which serued them as present supply, considering that they were ^owned aboue all the Nations of the World, for singular piety and deuotion. ^s admodum dedita Religionibus, saith the same Caesar in his Commentaries of the ^ules.Part of those Tectosages dwelt in these quarters, where afterward they founded ^e City of Ancyra, on the confines of Cappadocia and Paphlagonia: but the rest ^urned home to Tolosa, the place of their birth and breeding, called by Geogra^ers, Tolosa Tectosagum. Where being arriued, they presented and offered in the ^mple De la d Aurada, the spoyles gotten from the Deuill of Desphos,Spoyles won fro^ the Deuill at Delphos. as matter ^nquered by iust Title. Adding thereunto, the Tenths of that which they had got^ in so long a voyage, and the inscription thereon according to the ancient cu^me. These Treasures were kept there whole and intire, vntill such time as the ^omane Consull Quintus Coepio, hungring after so rich a Booty (which by estima^ commonly spoken of, amounted to more then 15. thousand Talents,Quintus Coepio robbed the treasury at Tolosa. taking ^h Talent of siluer at sixe hundred Crownes of our money) laded himselfe and ^lowers with so much as they could carry. Which Sacriledge made him after^rd most miserable, and the very Tennis-ball of Fortune. For, as Strabo saith, af^ he had run through a thousand dangers, and banished from his Country, he died ^ishonest and vnfortunate death, like a sacrilegious theefe as he was; as his chil^n likewise did, after they had spent all their meanes in dissolutions and wicked ^ces. The same disasterous fortune fell on all the Souldiers of Coepio,A iust reward of Sacriledge. who with ^ir prophane and impure hands, had made their shares of those spoyles. Which ^de way to a Prouerbe vsed among the Romanes: He had Gold at Tolosa: Aurum ^et Tolosanum, as much as to say, He carried mischiefe away with it; and fit for any ^e, that maketh such a fatal ending, as Aulus Gellius obserueth in his Attick Nights. ^e Tolosans, to preserue the rest of the Romane pillage, melted into massie In^s of gold and siluer, which they threw into the Lake and Marish ground, made Garonna round about their Temple. The Romanes within a while after (hauing ^quished the Gaules sold) this Marish ground at Port-sale, which the buyers cau^g to be digged, made themselues extraordinarily rich; for there they found infi^ ^ngots of gold and siluer, the quantity being vn-ualuable.These spoyles and treasures, thus left as in depost and safety, and kept in the Gaules ^mples, serued as a modell and example to the Romanes, for doing the like, as Plu^ch obserueth in infinite places, and namely in his Aulularia. Vide fides etiam atque

etiam, nunc saluam vt aulam abs te auferam. Tuae fidei concredidi aurum, in tuo Lac^, and fano est situm.Lucian, a Greeke Author, in his Gaulish Hercules sheweth, that the Romanes had deriued from the Gaules, as well how to obserue their offerings, as also gifts, by their names, which they tearmed Litterata dona, Litterata spolia. Plautus Rudente.Vt comprehendar cum sacra a Vrna Venerea.N^mpe optimo me iure in vinclis enicetMagistratus; si quis me hanc habere viderit.Nam hac Litterata est, apse cantat cuia sit.And to this purpose Apuleius saith in his Milesians. Videt dona speciosa, and lac^^^^ auro Litteratas Ramis Arborum, Postibusque suffixas, quae cum gratia facti, nomen De^, cui fuerant dicata testabantur.There were also kept their Standards and Banners, which the Captaines went to receiue from the hands of the Druides,The power of the Druides in the States House of Custodie. when there was any noyse of Warre. Fo^ the Druides only had power to take them into the Closture of the Generall States; and likewise to deliuer them to him or them, whom they had determined and named for conducting the Armie. Signa detracta Lucis in praelium Ferunt, saith Tacitus. And in those Standards and Flagges were painted the Arms of the Gaules, the Lyon and the Ship, which Tacitus hauing seene in their ancient Temples, imagined that they worshipped (as Idolaters and Pagans) the great Mother of the Gods Cybele, otherwise tearmed the Idoll of the Syrians, the same error of Caesar.It is well knowne that the descendants of Cham, Founder of the Assyrians Monarchy, were the first inuenters of Idolatry, as well in the person of Belus, father to Ninus*Cha^, Founder of the Assyrians Monarchie, and first inuenter of Idolatry. as in representation of the Starres and Planets, euen as in humane figure, which they reuerenced for gods, forgetting the Creator, to honor Creatures: making the seuen Planets of Mettalls, which Nature (a most fruitfull Mother) engendreth and produceth in her hard entrailes, after continuall trauell of many ages of yeeres.The attributio^ of the seuen Planets. Attributing Gold to the Sunne, Siluer to the Moone, Iron to Mars, Lead to Saturne, Tinne to Iupiter, Copper to Venus, and Quicke-siluer to Mercurie* The holy Scripture calleth these ordinarily, a Luminous company: Exercitum, and Militiam Coeli.Genes. 2.1.God did seuerely forbid the adoration and worship of these Idoles. And therefore the wise King of Edom, the Patriarch Iob, iustified himselfe before the heauenly Maiesty,The Patriarch Iob, the wise K. of Edom. who enthrone^h and vnsceptreth Kings and Princes on earth, according to his owne good pleasure: because he being (on all sides) enclosed with Idolatro^^ Nations, yet he notwithstanding, neuer bowed his knee to Baall, or soyled his so^^ with such abhomination.Iob 31.26.27 28. Si vidi Selem cum fulgeret, and Lunam insedentem clare, and l^tatum est in abscondito cor meum, and osculatus sum manum meam ore meo, quae est ^quitas maxima,Pagans worship the ^u^^e and Moone. and negatio contra Deum altissimum. Those Infidels, seeing the So^beames thining on their heads, and the Moone cleering the nights darkenesse, ^ting vp their eyes to heauen, kissed their hands in signe of adoration, reuerence and honor. And the like they did, in passing before their Temples and Idolls. Ap^leius, in the place before alleadged saith: Si fanum aliquod praetereant, nefas habet, ^dorandi gratia, manum labris admouere. It was Idolatry to represent Iupiter, and other Deities adored by Pagans, vnder the Image of a Ramme, a Bull, or other brutish Beasts and Creatures, as the Aegyptians did, Greekes and Romanes: because, N^entis nulla est ratio, neque figura.The Idolatry of the Syrians extended to other Nations of the East, but principally it was planted among the Aegyptians, who be-mealed the Greeks therewith* And they,The Greekes notoriously infected with Idolatry. hauing (in verity) liuely and ingenious spirits, yet alwaies children neuerthelesse; as daily they were reproched, excelled in Demonomanie, all them that had gone before them, the Deuill seducing both the one and the other, by an infinite number of impostures, false miracles, and lying Oracles, euermore carrying (...) double intent. For the Assyrians, hauing no Idolatry but in the hoast of Heau^* the Greekes (hardy and bold lyers) ranked in the rolle of their gods, Princes and Tyrants of their first knowledge, addicted to all vices and disorders, as Herodotus (...)

vs, and the Oratour. Si vero scrutari veteri, and ex eis quae Scriptores Graeciae prodiderunt eruere coner, illi ipsi Maiorum Gentium Dij qui habentur, hinc a nobis profecti, in Coelum reperientur. Quaerere quorum demonstrentur sepulchra in Graecia, etc. Of mortall men, and whose graues and Tombes were daily to be seene; they made their GodsNuma Pompilius, enstructed by the Phylosopher Pythagoras, had learned of our Druides the very best of his Phylosophie, as is written by Clemens Alexandrinus: prohibited the Romaines, to represent the Image of God, by any humaine figure and representation, or any creature whatsoeuer, which was obserued for an hundred threescore and ten yeares continuance. Numa Romanorum Rex (these are the ^very words of Clemens Alexandrinus, in his first Booke of diuersities) prohihuit Romanis, ne Homini, aut Animali similem Dei facerent imaginem. Cum itaque Centum, and Septuaginta primis annis Templa aedificarent, nullam imaginem, nec affictam, nec de^ictam fecere. Occulte enim iudicarat Numa quod id quod est optimum, non alia ratione,The Romans Temples in Forrests and Woods in the time of Numa Pempilius. quam sola mente vlli licet attingere. And in his time, the Temples of the Romaines were in the middest of Forrests and Wods (as we haue already said) without any wals or couerture whatsoeuer; which continued so an hundred and seauenty years, and vntill the vnfortunate Reigne ofSeruius Tullius, who hauing heard the winde of the proud Temple of Diana at Ephesus, built at the common charge of the Grecian people; assembled the Romans, and he caused one to be built in the Citie of Rome, in such fashion:The first man that planted Idolatry in Rome. as hee was the first that planted Idolatrie, formerly vnknowne in the Latines Land, which from ^hat time forward, became plundged (euen as with vailed head) to the diuels seruice, who caused himselfe to be adored vnder diuers figures, and by sundry names of Gods; As the Orator (before alleadged) obserued for principall Gods of the Gentiles; Ma^orum gentium Deos, comprised in these two Verses.Iuno, Vesta, Minerua, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,Mercurius, Iupiter, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Appollo.Because, that ouer and beside the deifying of the seauen Planets, they added to ^hem the foure Elements; and afterward Bacchus, with other names of Diuels beside, ^s Eusebius noateth.The Romaines then thus enstructed in Idolatrie by their King Seruius, who suffred ^ust punishment by a speedy death (and by the hands of one of his own begetting) no ^ooner set he footing in the Gaules: but he established thorow all the Cities and Prouinces of them, the worshippe and adoration of their false Gods. As it is affir^ed by Saint Augustine; Eusebius in his fore-alleadged passage; and Paulus O^osius.And as the Citie of Authune in Bourgongne, was the first of the Gaules, that sought for alliance with the said Romans: euen so was it the first likewise, infected with their Demonomanie, to the end that they might appeare acceptable and pleasing to these ^ew-commers. The Inhabitants of this Citie, refer her foundation to the Patriarch ^omer, who made it one of the capitall Cities in his Kingdome. But howsoeuer, Caesar, and the Noble Romaine Historian, make honorable mention of this ancient Citie. For Tacitus, in his Annales informeth vs, that vnder the Empire of Tiberius Caesar; it was called Augustodunum, in memory of the Emperor Augustus (vnder whom it had ^in built) and that then it had in it a most famous Vniuersitie, whereunto the yong Noble men of the Gaules were sent to studie. Apud Aeduos maior moles exorta,A famous Vniuersitie at Angustodunum quan^a Ciuitas opulentior. Augustodunum caput gentis, armatis Cohortibus Sacrouir occupauerat ^obilissimam Galliarum subolam, liberalibus studijs ibi operatam, vt eo pignore Parentes, Propinquosque eorum adiungeret.In this Citie was prouided the Colledge of the Druides,The Colledge of the Druides the most famous of the Gaules: in all parts whereof, those diuine personages taught the worship of the true God. And yet (to this present) is to be seene, the prints and markes of this Col^edge of the Druides of Authune, at Mont-Iou, otherwise called Mont-Dru,Mont-Iou, o^ Mont-Dru, the Druides Mount or Colledge. that is to ^ay, the Coll^dge of the Druides, and afterward named the Mount of Iupiter, ^istant a quarter of a mile from Authune, taking foure thousand paces for a ^^ile, after the manner of the Romaines account. Vpon this Mountaine (which

is Westward from the Citie) was raised a Temple to Iupiter; Cybele, Mother of the Pagans Gods, and to Mercurie.On the North side, in the Suburbs of the Citie, neere to the Riuer of Aro^, was another Temple dedicated to Proserpina, and her husband Pluto. And there was the dwelling of the Bardes, who lodged neere enough to the Druides, to receiue their commands: for, by knowledge of the Starres, they foretold of things to come.Genethliacus, a foreteller of mens fortunes by their Natiuities. And therefore the Romaines named them Genethliacus, directers of Nati^ities: and of them the memorie remaineth to this day, at the Port of Authune, which is called Genethoye.In the faire middle of this Citie, was the Temple of Mars, whom the Gaules (infected with Idolatrie) tooke to be their principall God: as best correspondant to their naturall disposition, being Martiall and Warlike.On the East side of this small Hill, called Philosia, as one would say, a place destined for Loue,Madames of the common gender, liuing in the Bordell or Stewes. was the Chappell of Cupid, and of his Mother Venus, and round about it were Stoues and Hot-houses, where the daughters of delight and dalliance, won gaine for maintenance of their wretched liues, by the sinnes of their bodies. Close ioyning thereunto was the Coucoubarre, that is to say, a thicket or thornie Copice, on the highest part whereof, was exalted the figure of a Cuckoe, made of I^orie;Like God, like Sacrifice. before which yearely) at the Springs beginning, those scan^-honest Wenches, sacrificed to their God Priapus, the first Cuckoe that they could catch.In the highest part of the Citie, was the Capitall on the one side, and on the other the Temple of Apollo,The Dog-like God Anubis in the Dog-quarter. ioyning to the Fraixine Streete, which we hold so called of Ash-trees, sometimes there growing. At the West side of the Citie was the Dog-quarter, where the Idole Anubis, with his Dogs-head stood fixed: And in that quarter, Cut-purses and Theeues were punished with death.Beside these forenamed Temples, the Authunois had another, belonging to what Idole I know not, but named Roch: which they tooke for the Tutelarie God of their Citie,Romanessus the Tutelarie God of Rome in imitation of the Romaines, who had their God named Romanessus. If this Roch were the Roth* or Rothot, which they of Rouen said, had bin the principall Idole of their Citie, and of whom it retaineth the name to this day: it may then be said, that such names were taken and deriued from the seede and off-spring of the Romaines Romanessus, as (in complement and flattery) honouring and reuerencing them, whereto the inhabitants of Authune addicted themselues too much. For vnder the Reigne and Empire of Vespasian, it was called Aedua Flauia, or Fl^uia Aeduorum.One Citie euill example draws on many more.By example whereof, other Townes and Cities of Bourgongne, gaue themselues to the honoring of Idols, erecting and building Temples and Chappels to them. One to Iupiter, instead of Ioigny, called (by reason thereof) Iouiniacum to these times. Another at Flauigny, and at Semur en l Auxon, at Auxerre, in Latine Autricum. One to Diana, and her Nimphs of the Woods, whereto from all parts of the Gaules, the very greatest Maisters in Hunting,The Hunters offerings to the Temple of Diana. sent their Offerings of Gold and Siluer, and afterward (as times drew on) in faire Linnen cloathes, they sent the spoiles of Harts, and heads of the greatest Boares they slew in hunting. This Citie of Auxerre had diuers names, the most auncient whereof was Autricum (and not Antricum, ab A^tris, as some say.) Concilium Autrici, in the Itinerarium of the Cosmographer Athicus, made in the time of the Emperour Theodosius the elder, first of the name, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred.A Iournall of trauailes from Countrey to Countrey. This Itinerarium was (to small purpose) imprinted vnder the name of Antoninus Pius Augustus, as Hermolaus Barbarus dreamed in his Annotations vpon Plinie. Floardus, in his Historie of Rheims, on the name Durocortorum Remorum, citeth for Author Aethicus in Cosmographia. Gesnerus in his Bibliotheca, saith, that he liued in the time of S. Ambrose, and Symmachus; and that this Cittie of Auxerre was called Antisidiorum, now at this present Altissiodorum.In the small Citie of Dijon, at this instant the chiefest of Bourgongne, in regard of the Parlement, and which was called but a Castell, by S. Gregory Victor, Archbishop of Tours, in his Historie of France, where he setteth downe the description, according as now it standeth, and watered with the Riuer of Ousche, which he cal^

^th Oscarum, and accompanieth it with another, which is not named by him, and whereof he maketh the entrance at one Gate of the Citie, and issuing forth at ano^her. This is the torrent of Suson in winter, and yet without water in Summer; ri^ng from a Spring in the dangerous Vale of Suson, foure miles from Dijon, and one ^rom S. Seine. In this Citie of Dijon was a Temple, dedicated to all the Pagan gods.A Temple called Pantheon, dedicated to all the Pagan Gods. The Romaines made such Temples for all the Gods, which they called Pantheons, ^ormed round, and open aboue: as that which is now at Rome, dedicated to the Mother of God, called S. Maria la Rotunda, the like is yet to be seene at Dijon, euen ^uch an auncient Pantheon, behinde the Church of S. Benigne.The entrance (at this present being the Quire of the moderne Church) as made in ^he forme of an Hemicicle, with strong Collomnes, and numbers of degrees,The forme of the Pantheon at Dijon. with ^wo Towers on both sides: the whole builded of Stones with wals and couertures, ^he rest is altogether round, open, and without couerture likewise in the roundnesse, ^uen from the toppe to the bottome, to receiue light, raine, and other iniuries of ^he Ayre. There are three stories or stages one aboue another, the two vppermost being garnished with Ballisters of Stone. At the foote of this Pantheon are three Chappels erected one aboue the other: that highest, is dedicated to the most holy Trinitie; that in the middest, to the blessed Virgin; and that lowest of all, to the Martyre S. Benigne, the tutelarie Patron of Dijon, and where he was buried,S. Polycarpus the Disciple to S. Iohn the Euangelist. after he had finished his course of life. Hee was the Disciple or Scholler of S. Polycar^us, the Scholler to S. Iohn the Euangelist, who sent him to the Gaules, there to proclaime the Law of Iesus Christ: and being arriued in Gaule, he was there martyred by the Gouernour thereof, named Terentius, Lieutenant to the Emperour Marcus Aurelius the Phylosopher, Founder of Dijon (and not Aurelianus, as we read in S. Gregory of Tours) the first day of Nouember, in the yeare of Grace one hundred, sixtie and fiue.At Talan, halfe a mile beneath Dijon, on the beginning of the Mountaines, was a Mannor house of the Druides, and another of the Bardes at Fountaines,The place where the holy Father S Bernard was born a quarter of (...) mile from thence. where (since then) hath bin builded the Church of S. Ambrosian, and the Castell of Fountaines, famous by the birth of the Father of Religion S. Bernard, of Noble extraction. Et qui portoit de Sable a la Bande Eschiquettee d'Or and de Gueulles de deux filets.At the said Talan was a Temple, dedicated to the sacred Virgin,The Romains prophaners of temples that should bring forth a childe: but afterward prophaned by the Romaines, and (by them) dedicated to their Gods Apollo and Mercurie; yet rechanged after againe, and consecrated by the Christians, in honor of the Mother of God, and graced with Miracles. The ouer-plus of those Antique Temples, may be read in them, that haue written the Annales of Bourg-Ogne.But seeing we are now come to the Mannor and Colledge of the Druides and Bardes; we will touch one word more of them, as we passe along, and then returne to the Demonomanie of the Romaines.There remaine some noates in good Authors of ancient Phylosophers,The Office and charge of the Druides in the Gaulish Prouinces. who report their ordenary dwellings to be in Woods, and not in Cities, Townes or Vil^ages, peopled with inhabitants. As in the Forrest of Iury, vulgarly called the Forrest of Dreux, where the remainder of the Castle is to be seene, belonging to the Prince of the Druides, and where he made his continuall abiding. And round about it (in the same Forrest) were Cottages and small houses of other Druides, that were neere in Office about their Prince: who yeerely the seauenth day of September (the beginning of the yeare, Sacred by the Druides) assembled the generall States of all the Gaules Prouinces, at the foote of the Mountaine of Chartres.These Druides were dispersed and scattered, throughout all the said Prouinces, whereof they had the charge as well of the Sacrifices and Priesthoods, as also of Pollicie Criminall and Ciuile, and institution of the Gaulish youth. They knew also the affaires of State, as well in matters of peace, as for warre: so that they were Priests and Iudges together, iudging without any further appeale; so saith Caesar and Strabo likewise, speaking thus. Iustissimi omnium opinione sunt Druidae, ideo and priuata,

and publica iudicia eorum fidei mandantur, adeo vt rem etiam Bellicam ante^ iudica^, and Martem collaturi, illis iubentibus desistunt: Capitis quoque iudicia horum sententiae permittuntur.And because those wise Druides did not set downe any thing in writing, b^^ their learning and doctrine was giuen from hand to hand, by Cabala and traditio^^, we must make our recourse to the pens of strangers,The Druides did not set downe any thing in writing. as namely to the Romans, and after them to the Greekes.Caesar was the first of the Latines, who in his Commentaries hath said somewhat, and vpon his relation, and Iulius Celsus, Secretary of his Cabinet: the Greeks, Strabo, Possidomus, Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch, Atheneus, Pausanias, Lucian and others haue likewise said something.Caesar in his Commentaries obserueth in the first place, that the Gaules (in generall) were very full of deuotion, and that in their sicknesses of minde and body; they made their recourse to deuotion, to vowes and Sacrifices, and, for discharging themselues in those cases,The deuotion of the Gaules. they made their repaire to the Druides. But because he hath added thereto somewhat of their humaine Oblations, wholly dyed red with Blood: that by his consorts) is annexed to his narrations, to make the conqu^^^ of the Gaules the more admirable. According to a common saying of the Oratour, that ordenarily such as come from farre: Saepe aliquid de suo, c^ nuntiant latine. And as they say at Paris: Hee may easily lye, that commeth (...) farre off.The two Estates among the Gaules, Clerg^e and Nobilitie.Hee enstructeth vs moreouer, that throughout the Gaules, there was but two Estates (speaking as now we doe at this present) that of the Cleargie, which had the power of Iustice annexed thereunto, which at this day is reduced to the third Estate (by ignorance in the Noble men.) And the other of Nobilitie. For hee speaketh nothing of the third Estate, which is tearmed Plebeian. Plebs pene seruorum ha^^^^ loco, quae per se nihil audet, and nulli adhibetur consilio. They were not called to the Generall Estates, nor to publique charges. De his duobus generibus alterum est Druidum; alterum Equitum.The Offices and charges belonging to the Druides in their gouernement.The Druides (saith he) had the charge and superintendencie of the Sacrifices, publique and perticuler, and of preaching what ought to be beleeued in Religion. The direction of the Vniuersities and Colledges, whereto the yong Nobilitie were sent to studie. In causes Ciuill and Criminall, as well in State matters, that is to say, for that which respected and concerned as well generally, as perticulerly; of Successions, Deuisions, and generally for the Iudgement of paines and punishments, for chastising of bad behauiors, and regarding the honors and gouernments of such, as for their faithfull seruice, deserued recompences.If the Generall states in some Prouince, or the Perticuler, obeyed not (saith Ce^sus) that which the Druides had determined by their sentence and iudgement: they thundered against them, and depriued them of the Sacrifices. After this excommunication,Excommunication vsed by the Druides, and the powers thereof. such refractarie people were auoided and hated as execrable, forsaken of God, and of men: who fied from their frequencie and conuersation, without saluting, receiuing them into their houses, speaking or conferring with them; as fearing, least they should be polluted and blemished by touching them. They might complaine, but there was no Iustice for them.Tacitus addeth to this power of the Druides, that they presided in the Generall Estates; that the Nobilitie dared not to speake, without their permission: yea, they had such height of prerogatiue and authority, as, beside interdiction and suspension from the Sacrifices; they sent such to death as had deserued it, and whom they had condemned with such sentence. Silentium per Sacerdotes quibus tum, and c^erce^^^ e^^s est, imperatur. Caeterum neque animaduertere, neque vincire, neque verberare quidem nisi Sacerdotibus permissum, non quasi in poenam, nec Ducis iussu, sed quasi Deo i^perante. And the same Tacitus, speaking of the force and power of their Excommunication, informeth vs, that such men of the Nobilities body, as in warre had suffered their Shields to be lost, or taken from them; were interdicted from publique assemblies, yea, and from the Sacrifices also. Scutum dereliquisse praecipium flagiti^^, nec aut Sacris adesse, aut consilium inire ignominioso fas est.These Druides were presided and commanded by their Metropolitane, knowne (...) the name of Prince of the Druides, who had that supreme place during life.The Metropolitane Prince of the Druides and the manner of his election. By (...) decease, they proceeded to election of another in his Office, by plurality of the ^yces loudly pronounced, and not by Scrutinie: but in this election, none were (...) downe in the Bill, but onely the most excellent in learning, and integrity of life. ^c mortuo, si quis ex reliquis excellit dignitate, succedit; at si plures sint pares, suffragio ^uidum (the Kings, Princes and Nobles had no voyce at all in those Elections) ad^itur. The Princes and Nobilitie (by their Armes) fauoured those Elections, if ^ey came to them.All the Druides were exempted from contributions and charges, both in times of ^ace and warre, whereto they could not be constrained to march. So that in re^d of their great priuiledges; the Noble men sent their Sonnes to their Colledges,The Druides free from all taxations. ^t they might attaine to the dignitie (by Studie) to become of the Druides So^tie.The Rules and Precepts of the Druides Doctrine, were reduced and couched in ^erses, which they taught to their Schollers, and by hart: and the time of Studie,The time of Studie limited to their Schollers. (...) such as would excell other in learning, was twenty yeares. For in those things ^hich concerned the Sciences, they had not any Bookes by writing; but all must (...) apprehended and engrauen in the Booke of Memorie. For Contracts and o^er publique Acts, they were written in the Gaulish-mother tongue, which Cae^, and others that haue followed him (against all reason) called the Greeke ^gue.And therefore, in this case, I entreate the Reader not to dislike of this digressi^ to vnderstand and know, whether the Gaulish tongue was the same,The Gaulish tongue called Greeke by Caesar and others. which ^s knowne to the Sages of Aegypt, Greece and Italie, by reason of the Druides. ^^d that it was not without subiect, that the excellent Poet Du Bartas, speaking of (...) auncient Gaulish tongue said.Before the Latine name, and the Romulides,Were by Euander sharpned in such sort:The Learned-Holy speech of Bardes and Druides,In Greece, in Italie, and Memphis held report.We will shew what this Gaulish tongue was, which we haue maintained to be the ^ne, that (by wrong information) was said to be Greeke.Some haue thought, that it was perticularly to the Gaulish Nation, neither Greeke (...) Latine, building vpon some passages of Suetonius, in the name of Galba, which (...) affirmeth to be Gaulish, and to signifie a man grosse and fat, plumpe or well-liking,Concerning certaine names ^ing full the bellie of his doubtlet: as now a dayes we vse to say; Hee hath a good (...) belly. Or that of Beco (in the life of Vitellius) which in the Tolosane-Gaulish tongue, ^nifieth the Bill or Beake of a Capon. Or of Caracalla, a name which in the same ^^gue signifieth a Garment for a Horseman-Souldior, vulgarly called a Cassocke, ^aque or Mandillion, according to the common kinde of speaking at Paris, where ^s pronounced instead of R. As contrariwise the Romaines doe, in imitation of (...) Parisians, pronouncing Fusius Camillus: Si quis Asam Struxesit,Pronouncing one Letter for another. instead of Fu^s Camillus, and De Aram Struxerit, and a thousand such like. And so of Caligula, ^tocking or Hose, proper for a Gaulish Horseman, made in forme of halfe-Bus^s, and of curried-leather, the soales whereof were set thicke with nayles, for the ^^ger-lasting: these Buskins rose vp to the calfe of the legge. The like of Alauda, Gaulish word, the meaning whereof is a Larke, the sirname of that Gaulish Le^on, so much renowned for valour and readinesse.The Larke legion of the Gaules very famous. These are the most pregnant ^d pressiue passages to serue their turne, which (neuerthelesse) are not sufficient to ^ld on, for inferring and concluding from thence, that the Gaulish tongue was ^ther Greeke nor Latine, but perticuler by it selfe. Whereto wee may answere,The Romans and Greekes altered names of the Gaules as themselues pleased. ^t it is a Romaine which speaketh it, and as well the Greekes as the Romaines ^e confused and altered proper names, and appellatiues of the auncient Gauls, ac^rding to their owne fancies, as we haue already said before in other places.
(...)
to make themselues vniuersall in all their Sciences, Customes and Ceremonies; which soone after they carried into Italie, Greece and Aegypt. For euery one knoweth, that Plato was the most famous Phylosopher, which euer had beene in Greece.
Learning brought into Italie (...) Pythagoras.Concerning Italie, Science was brought thither by the Phylosopher Pythagoras, a natiue of Thuscanie, who, according to the Druides manner; caused Colledges to be erected, or rather Conuents and Monesteries well gouerned. He called his Conuent (...), as we say a Church. So speaketh (well to purpose) Clemens Alexandrinus; according to whose testimonie, the Priests and Iudges of Aegypt had deriued the very choisest of their Ceremonies, as well for Religion, as Iustice. So that in the same authoritie of the Prince of the Druides, who had the dignitie of the high Priest-hood, and the intendance or Soueraigne Gouernement of Iustice: the Aegyptians had of their Bodies and Colledges, a Prince, Chiefe of Iustice, whom they called (according to Diodorus Siculus, and Aelianus) Principem Iudicij. So likewise were they Priests and Iudges together, eued in the same manner as the Druides were.
Pythagoras was Schoolemaister to Numa Pompilius, second King of the Romaines, so saith Clemens Alexandrinus. Numa Pompilius Romanorum Rex erat Pythagoreus. Hee taught him the Ceremonies of Sacrifices, and of Religion, as also how to gouerne the Romaines by good and holy Lawes, drawne from the Gaulish customes, and obserued by the wise Druides. In like manner the Greekes had for their Law-maker Draco, and after him Solon, Founder of the Areopagites or Athens: hauing learned of the Gaules which passed into Greece, at the time before noated, Tarquiniu^ Priscus being then King, the fift of the Romaines. For, before that passage, the Greekes were but meere children, so speaketh diuine Plato,The grosse ignorance of the Greekes, and likewise of the Aegyptians. In Critia, being st^p^fi^d in such grosse ignorance; as they knew not Phylosophie, Astrologie, Geometrie, and other parts of the Mathematicks. The Aegyptians knew not any more, and whatsoeuer is found written of them* before that named time; they are nothing else but Fables and tales, made vpon pleasure, without any certainty, or appearance of probabilitie.
Asclepius and Pimander, the true Tables of Diuinitie of the Druides.Mercurius Trismegistus, enstructed in the Schoole of the Druides; had there his eyes vnseeled, and by communication with his Asclepius and Pimander, which are the true Tables of the Theologie of our diuine Druides, and which hee wrote in the Greeke tongue, proper and naturall to the Gaules; he taught a solide and perfect Doctrine. All the Sages and Phylosophers, Solon, Thales, Chilo, Periander, Cleobulus, Bias, Pittacus, Pherecydes the Syrian, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Numenius, and Diuine Plato, all men renowned for Phylosophie: had learned from the Druides, the keye and secret of the Soules Immortalitie; of Diuinitie, Astrologie, Philosophie Morall and Naturall, and other good Sciences, accounting their labour pleasing and acceptable, comming into the Gaules Countrey, to sucke from the sweetefull bottome,The Druides were enstructer wel neer to the whole world. the excellent learning of our Phylosophers, whereof they had begun to taste, by commerce and frequentation with the Gaules dwelling in Greece, and the firme-land of Asia. For all those men forenamed, had no noate or fame, but since the passage of the Gaules thither, and about the yeare of the World three thousand fiue hundred sixtie, and almost to sixe hundred yeares.
At what time Mercurius Trismegistus liued.As for Mercurius Trismegistus, hee liued vnder Ptolomie Lagus Soter, ninth King of Aegypt, after Alexander the Great, the yeare of the World three thousan^ eight hundred thirtie seauen, some three hundred yeares before the Incarnation (...) the Eternall Word. So then if it were so, that the Marseillans should bring i^ France, the knowledge of Sciences, and of the Greeke (which quite contrary they drew from the Gaulish Druides:) the reason is alleadged, because Ptolomie in (...) Geographie, speaking of Achaia (vnder which he comprehendeth most part of the Isles of Greece) saith in eloquent tearmes, that it was peopled by the Gaulish people, who (with their victorious Armes) carried thither their Religion, Polli^ and Language, and so Graecos a Gallis Litteras habuisse. The Elanians, th^ is to say, the Greekes, learned of the Gaules, the knowledge of the Greeke tongue^

and good Sciences: as it is concluded by Clemens Alexandrinus; and Xenophon in his Equiuocations, saith. That Cadmus brought into Greece, Letters and Characters of writings, altogether like to them of the Galates, that is to say, Of the Gaules. Wherefore Du Bartus hath said to good purpose, that the Language of the Druides, that is to say the Gaulish, improperly tearmed and called Greeke; was knowne to strange Nations, to wit, in Aegypt, Greece, and Italie, long time before that Cadmus and Euander had deliuered the knowledge and vndeestanding of Letters.
Before the Latines name, and the RomulidesWere by Euander sparpned in such sort:The Learned-Holy-Speech of Bardes and DruidesIn Greece, in Italie, and Memphis held report.
And to shew yet more clearely, that the Greeke tongue was the same of the Gaules, behold here two passages of Caesar, which can receiue no reproach. The first is in his Commentaries of the Gaulish warre, thus set downe. In Castris Heluetiorum tabulae repertae sunt Graecis Litteris confectae, and ad Caesarem perlatae. That the Rowles of the Horsemen of the Switzers, People inhabiting a Countrey of the Gaules, were (after their disroute) brought to Iulius Caesar, written in Greeke Letters.
The other is in his sixt Booke, where he writeth, that the Druides, did set downe nothing of their Science and Learning, by writing: howbeit, in their affaires, they serued their turne with the Greeke tongue, as well in their Acts Publique, as Perticuler. Neque fas esse existimant ea Litteris mandare, cum in reliquis fere rebus, publicis, priuatisque rationibus Graecis Litteris vtantur.
Lucian, a Greeke Author, who liued vnder the Empire of Traiane, Contemporane with Plutarch, describing our Gaulish Hercules, saith; That the Gaules spake elegantly the Greeke Language, as being theirs naturally.
S. Hierome, that glorious Light of the Church,Treuers the Capitall Citie of the Gaules in those times. and incomparable for knowledge and learning, had long time made his aboade in the Citie of Treuers, it being then the chiefest of the Gaules; and there hee ranne the course of his Studies, wrote the Paraphrase and interpretation of the Psalmes of Dauid, and transcribed with his owne hand, the long labour of Saint Hillaries Synodes, as himselfe witnesseth in his sixt Epistle Ad Florentium. This worthie man, who liued the yeare foure hundred of our Saluation, in the Commentarie which hee wrote on the Epistle of Saint Paul, sent written to the Galatians, who in his time were them of the Hellespont, Aeolia, Phocaea, Ionia,S. Hierome died in the Holy-Land at Bethleem. with other people of Greece and Asia (he had trauailed thorow all those Countries there, passing from Rome to the Holy-Land, where he confined himselfe all the rest of his dayes, and died at Bethleem) spake the same Language, as they then did at Treuers.
These considerations caused a resolution in the learned Gulielmus Budeus, the honor of our France, in his Booke De Asse, and in his Pandects on the first Law De Ser. Corr. at ss. Quod ait Praetor; Lazarus Baif, and other skilfull persons, to say:The resolution of diuers men concerning the Gaulish language. That that Language, which the^ Greekes and Romaines haue called the Greeke, was the Naturall and Maternall of the Gaules. From whom shee went to the Alemaignes, our Germaine Bretheren; to the Italians and Greekes; who of vs learned Eloquence, the Mathematickes and Philosophie. This is it which heretofore moued many learned men, to report the conformitie of the most part of French vocables, to them that are called Greeke.
The Alemaignes or Germaines, are not sundered from the Gaules,The bounds and limits of Alemaigne and France. but by the Riuer of Rhine, which from all Antiquitie) hath made the bounds and limits of France and Germanie. And beyond the Rhine is Franconia, that is Orientall France, so much renowned by Claudian, Ausonius, S. Hierome, and the Bishoppe of Auuergne Sidonius Apollinaris. And it is not to be wondred at, if this neighbourhood

occasioned, that the Greeke tongue, or (to speake better) the Gaulish, had her course throughout Alemaigne, the most part whereof was peopled with naturall Gaules, as we haue said. Iulius Caesar writeth, that Ariouistus, King of Alemaigne, vnderstood and spoke perfectly the Greeke tongue, without neede of any Trucheman or Interpreter: which is not to be admired, because it was his mother tongue. And Cornelius Tacitus hath obserued in his Germania, that the Epitaphes in that great Prouince, were written in Greeke letters. Monumenta, and Tumulos quosdam Gracis Litt^ris inscriptos in confinio Germaniae, Rhaetiaeque extare audio.
If those Greeke Letters had not bin those, which the Gaulish people brought thither, from whence should they else come? For the same Author noateth at the beginning of his relations, that no man of any strange Nation had euer entred into Alemaigne, before Iulius Caesar. Quis praeter periculum horridi and ignoti maris, Asia aut Africa, aut Italia relicta, Germaniam peteret? And that which the same Historian supposed, concerning the voyage of a pretended Vlysses; are meere lyes and inuentions, hauing taken Vlysses for, and instead of Hercules, the memorie of whom was venerable,The memorie of Hercul^s venerable with the Gaules and Germaines. as well among the Germaines, as Gaules. So that he must make his recourse to truth. Gallos atque Germanos nulli, aliarum Nationum connubijs infectos fuisse. That the Gaules and Germaines had not any commerce and habitude, with strange Nations. And this is the reason, which moued Ioannes Auentinus, the Annalist of Bauaria, to say: That the Alemaigne tongue was wholly like to the Greeke.
And as concerning that of the Isle of Albion, called at this present England, heretofore peopled by the Gaules, as we shall hereafter more at large relate; it was that language of the Druides. For we learne by that Father of learning Origen; Quo nemo melius, vbi b^ne dixit. That God, by his vnsearchable Prouidence permitted, that the Wise Druides should passe from the Gaulish Bretaigne, into great Albion, to the end; for gouerning the Inhabitants of the Isle of England; to enstruct them in their Language, and to giue them knowledge of one onely God, Creatour of the World.
For the Language of the auncient Spaniards, Iosephus deduceth their first Originall from Tuball,The auncient Originall of the Spaniards. Tuball or Ioball; but hee speaketh nothing else, neither haue the Greekes and Romaines made any great account. There was no acknowledgement of them, but vnder the conquest of Spaine, made by the Carthagenians, whom the Romaines sent packing by force of Armes. And that which is spoken by a false and supposed Ber^sus, with his Sequell; is a fabulous discourse, without any likelihood of truth whatsoeuer.The ^rst Predecessours. And the Spanish Historians agree with one consent, that their prime ancestors liued grosely in ignorance, and all rusticitie. They speake not any thing of their Religion, neither had they any Druides, to guide them in the way to Saluation: which is attained vnto, by the knowledge, worshippe and seruice of one onely God. So that Poets haue made Spaine to serue as a Theater, for bloody and pittilesse Tygers; for Geryons with three heads, and an infinite number of Monsters,The writings of Poets concerning Spain and Sonnes of the Earth, destroyed and trampled on by our Gaulish Hercules. They speake nothing of the Gaulish Nations comming thither.
The first language of the Spaniards by their owne Authors.The first Spanish Language, was that, which their most remarkeable Authours name Sepharadin, that is to say, Armenia, Syriacke and Africane; corrupted by commerce and frequencie of Phoenitians, Tyrians, Carthagenians, Romaines, Vandales, Alaines and Sueues: to whom succeeded the Vuisigothes, issued from Scandinauia, as we haue said, supplanted by the Moores of Affrica, who for a long time gouerned the Spaines, where they haue conserued such memorie of their Conquests, as most part of the proper names of Cities, Prouinces, Mountaines and Riuers there; are meerely Arabe, or mingled with the Arabian and Gothish language, euen to this day.
The renowne of the Gaulish Nation from time to time.Whereas the Gaulish Nation (from all times) hath bin renowned for her Mother tongue; for her deuotion and singuler pietie; and for being the most ciuile, of all them on earth. According to the faithfull testimonie of the

Greekes and Romaines, whom truth it selfe hath forced to testifie for vs, yea, euen in our fauour and contemplation. Returne wee now againe to our Druides.
The principall thing,The Druides chiefest, lesson, Immortality of the Soule. which they imprinted in the minde and memorie of their Schollers and Disciples; was, The Immortalitie of the Soule, which serued as a sharpe Spurre or Needle, to beare themselues valiantly in hazards of Warre, and to despise death by assured hope of eternall life. Hoc maxime ad virtutem excitari putabant, metu Mortis neglecto. This Caesar obserued.
This being perswaded as an Article of their beliefe;Other lessons deliuered by them to their Schollers. they taught them the Mathematickes, and namely Astrologie, which discoursed on the nature and motion of the Planets; the Creation of the World; the greatnesse of the Earth; and the nature of things. And from Physicke, their Schollers mounted to Metaphysicke, that is to say; to the knowledge of things purely essentiall and supernaturall, which are God and the Angels.
After Caesar, Strabo speaketh thus. Among the Gaules, the Druides are honored aboue all other, and next to them goe the Bardes and Poets, (Vates, so say the Romaines, a name equiuocall and common, as well to them that make profession of Poesie, as to prepare Horoscopes and Natiuities, and to foretell of future things, onely by inspection of Physiegnomie. And many Druides, and Druiades foretold to Romaine Captaines, that they should attaine to the Empire, as wee reade in the Romaine Histories.) I let passe in silence, that which Possidonius reporteth of the Gaules, and of their Iudges and Priests the Druides: because Strabo argueth to be lying and falsehood,The Druides were Iudges and Priests of the Gaules. whatsoeuer is alleadged by that Authour. Whereto the Naturalist Plinie (a bold lyer) hath added out of his owne braine, a thousand reports of old tales, done vpon pleasure: as of Egges hatched by Serpents, the vse whereof was neuer practised by the Druides; without displeasure offred to the honest man of Chasseneux, in his Glory of the World, who hath set downe Egges for Armes of the Druides, instead of Oaken Leaues and Acornes.
Diodorus Siculus in his Antiquities, speaking of the Gaules and Germaines (whom he comprehendeth all vnder the name of Galatas) calleth our Druides, Saronides, whom hee maketh Theologians and Phylosophers, honoured by the Galates aboue all other, and that after them went the Bardes and Deuiners: who by other Authours, and namely Ammianus Marcellinus, are called Eubages, and the Druides, Drasidas and Druidas. For they haue had diuers names; Saronides, by one of the descendents of Gomer, who instituted the first Colledge of the Druides, in the Prouince of Bretaigne Armorica, as wee shall report elsewhere. Semnothes of Samothes, a sir-name giuen to the Patriarch Gomer, our Gaulish Hercules,Semnothes o^ rather Samotheans. whom the Bourgongnons make Founder of their Citie Alexia, or by the rest, of Flauigny: And the Piccards of their Mother-Citie Bratuspantium, on the ruines whereof are remaining Brestuell, Castelet and Camp-Reims, Beauuoir, etc.
Diogenes Laertius, at the beginning of the Phylosophers Liues, writeth, that Phylosophie receiued her sourse and first originall, not out of Greece or Italie; but from Nations farre further off. Because among the Babylonians of Assyria, the Chaldeans made their profession; the Mages among the Persians; and among the Celtes and Gaules, the Druides, otherwise called Samotheans, that is to say more plainely, Diuiners.
Euen so Suidas, vpon this word (...), speaketh thus. Druidae qui and Semnothei Philosophi Gallorum.
S. Clemens Alexandrinus maketh honorable mention of the Druides, and other Gaulish Phylosophers, saying. Philosophie, most beneficiall and necessarie for Man, to guide* and conduct to the path of Vertue, and the notice or knowledge of the Sciences: tooke her birth from the Druides, Gaulish Phylosophers. Whence the Greekes did deriue. Philosophia res valde vtilis olim floruit apud Barbaros (it was a custome with the Greekes, to baptize with the name of Barbarians, all strange Nations, more ciuilized then themselues, alwayes children) per gentes resplendens; postea autem venit ad Graecos. Et autem praefuerunt Gallorum Druidae, and Celtarum, ij qui Philosophati

sunt. Non solius autem Philosophiae, sed etiam omnium fere artium fuerunt Inuentores.
Strabo writeth, that the Druides, beside the knowledge which they had in naturall things;The whole scope of the Druides Studies. practised also those Polliticke and Morall. For they addicted all their Studies, to professe Vertue, and to auoide Vice, so that their Colledges were Seminaries and fruitfull Orchards, stored with men of knowledge, and of merit to gouerne an Estate. And so their Soules being pure and cleane from all soyle of sinne; it was not to be wondred at, that they became so capable of diuine seedes.
Ammianus Marcellinus, who had remained long time at Paris, and other places of the Gaules, with his Emperour Iulian the Apostata, vnder whom he serued as a Souldiour, and whose life he wrote; speaking of the Druides, with whom he had conferred very often, saith thus to their aduantage, concerning the Colledges of the Gaulish Priests. Inter hos Druidae ingenijs celsiores, sodalitijs adstricti consortijs, quaestionibus occultarum rerum, altarumque erecti sunt, and despectantes humana pronuntiarunt Animas Immortales. And this is no more then Caesar said in his sixt Booke, formerly spoken of.
Great difference between the Druides and Bardes or Diuiners.The Druides, endowed with soules more sublime and exalted, then the Bardes and Diuiners, were assembled by Conuents and Colledges, lodging and dwelling together. They addicted themselues to the contemplation of secrets in Nature, and of Celestiall things; contemning humaine matters, as too lowe, and vnworthie of their meditation, which they mounted to a higher flight, to Heauen, and therefore they pronounced, that mens Soules were Immortall. Of them it was that Ouid spake.
Foelices animae quibus haec cognoscere primis,Inque domos superas scandare cura fuit.Credibile est illos pariter vitijsque, i^cisque.Altius humanis exeruisse caput.Non Venus, aut Vinum sublimia pectora fregit.
And the Poet Lucane reporteth, that they onely were capable, of hauing perfect knowledge in all things, and to Philosophize, euen from the Phoenixe and Cedars of Libanus, to the Ante and Hisope. De Syderibus atque eorum motu, de Mundi ac Terrarum magnitudine, de rerum natura, de Deorum immortalium, vi, ac potestate disputant, and Iuuentuti tradunt.
Strabo addeth hereto, that they assured themselues, that as the face of the Earth was purged by the vniuersall Deluge: euen so the same World, shall (one day, by a generall burning. And that the beliefe of this consuming, being the Doctrine of the Druides, was passed to the Greekes and Romaines.
Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur aeffore tempusQuo Mare, quo Tellus, correptaque regia CoeliArdeat, and Mundi moles operosa laboret.
Diodorus Siculus writeth, that the Gaules made such an account of the Druides for their great knowledge and good life; that they beleeued them to be descended from Heauen, and to participate with the Diuinitie. Druidas esse diuinae naturae conscios, and tanquam Dijs propinquiores; horum intercessione bona a Dijs censent petenda. And that the more men had from the Druides, the more blessings they receiued from heauen, in far greater affluence* and plantation of all goodnesse. And that their holy Prayers being carried vp to heauen, they heaped all benedictions and most happy life vpon Gaulish People, such was the opinion of Strabo. So that the Gaules, grounding certaine beliefe, on the sanctitie of the Druides, their Iudges and Sacrificers, it was no wonder, if they grew wealthy, and heaped vp treasures in the Colledges, which they had through all the parts of Gaule. For they had the charge and direction of youth, that was sent to them from all places, as to an assured Schoole of Pietie.
The Orator Cicero maketh mention of Diuitiacus, one of the principall persons in the City of Anthune, because being a Druide; hee had perfect knowledge in things Supernaturall and Diuine, whereby he could presage and foretell matters to happen afterward. Diuitiacus ille Aeduus, cum ex Druidis vnus esset, Natura rationem quam (...) Graeci appelant, notam esse sibi profitebatur, and partim augurijs, partim contectura, quae essent futura dicebat. For they measured them by their Elle of Idolatry, of Auguries, and such follies: as another,
-- Interpres diuum qui numina Phoebi,Qui tripodas, Clarij lauros, qui sydera sentis,E volucrum linguas, and praepetis omnia pennae.
And Tacitus to the same purpose, Sin permissum, Auspiciorum fides adhuc exigitur, and illud etiam hic notum, Auium voces, volatusque inuestigare. But they gaue not themselues to such Sorceries, till after they were corrupted with the Demonomanie of the Romaines.
Now, for the Immortality of Soules, taught by the Druides to the Gaulish youth; it made them to contemne death, as Lucane obserueth.
-- Vobis auctoribus vmbraeNon tacitas Erebi sedes, Ditisque profundiPallida regna petunt: Regit idem spiritus artusOrbe alio longae, canitis si cognita, vitaeMors media est.
So that the Gaules, filled with the faith of this Resurrection,The Gaules beleeued the Resurrection. had no feare at all of death; it being no more then a passage to immortality, and a life happy and tranquile in all eternity. And this was it that made them so couragious and valiant in War, holding it a note of great cowardise, to be sparing of the body, which was to rise againe.
-- Hos ille timorumMaximus haud vrget Leti metus. Inde ruendiIn serrum mens prona Viris, animaeque capacesMortis, and ignauum est rediturae parcere Vitae.Said the same Lucane.
To this purpose is very obseruable, that which Aelianus,The Gaules courage in going to Warre. a Greeke Author reporteth, concerning the valiancie of the ancient Gaules, in his booke of Varieties. I vnderstand (saith he) that the Celtes (among all the Nations of the World) are the most prompt and ready, in exposing themselues to perills and hazards. They marche to the Warre Crowned with Garlands and Chaplets of Floures, as if they were going to a Wedding. To conserue the memory of such as dye in Warre, they cause to bee composed by their Bardes, Hymnes and Songs, containing their praises. They make Trophees with the Armes of their conquered enemies, to leaue notes and ensignes of their valour to posteritie. They hold it for great shame and ignominie, to flie from dangers and dreadfull encounters; so that they will not shun houses which fall by age, no more then those that are consumed with fire, suffering themselues rather to be scorched and burned, then cowardly to flie away. Others, beholding the Sea angerly swelling, and mounting out of her bounds and limits; stand boldly to the bankes and shoares, as if they would force her backe againe into her bed, and ordinary Channell, by strength of their bodies. And others throw themselues couragiously into the midst of her sterne billowes, to graspe and restraine their fury; fighting against them with thoir drawne Swords, their Arrowes, Darts, and Iauelins. These are the very words of Aelianus.
Polybius a Greeke Author hath left vs written, that the ancient Romanes, hauing seene the Gaules fight on the day of Plombine,The name of the Gaules dreadfull to the Romanes. and with inuincible courage; did so admire their Valiancie and generositie, that they reputed them to be the onely braue spirits of the habitable World. In like manner, this Nation was so dreadfull to the Romanes, after they heard Rome to be ransacked, and her Capitall; that at the least noyse of the Gaules arming themselues, the rumor (were it

true, or but supposed) caused all the States of Rome, without exception of age or qualitie, immediately to enter Armes. The Priests and Sacrificers stood exempted by their habits, as much to say, from going to Warre: but if any one talked of the Gaules comming, then, they were no more priuiledged then the meanest of the people.
The Alemaignes or Germanes, brethren to the Gaules, and liuing vnder the same Lawes and Policie, held resoluedly the Immortality of the Soule. Whereupon, Appianus Alexandrinus, speaking of this Warre-like Nation, saith. The Germaine Nation is of wonderfull hardinesse in Fights, holding great contempt of Death, by firme beliefe which they haue of the soules immortality, and the Resurrection.
Tacitus also writeth, That they sing when they march in Battale: Ituri in praelia canunt. For the Germanes had the same Religion as the Gaules, of the Druides and Bardes, contrary to that which Caesar saith in the sixt Booke of his Commentaries, speaking vnaduisedly, and without hauing beene there.
But Tacitus writeth otherwise, because he had hanted and frequented them, as formerly we haue related somthing, concerning their Temples. They branched aloft and below on Trees, such as sled from, and forsook their rankes on the day of Battel: or else drowned them in some Marle or Lime-pits, throwing clay and earth on them, because they should no more be seene. And marching to the Warres, euen as the Gaules doe they haue at the head of their Armie, Bardes, who sing hymnes and songs,The Bardes sing songs marching in the Armie. composed to honor the memory of hardie and v^liant Captaines, dying in the Warre* the Germanes and Gaules taking the Refret or burthen of the Song, sing after the Bardes.
Tacitus in his Germania, saith: Sunt illis carmina, quorum relatu, (quem Barditum vocan^) accendunt animos, futuraeque pugnae fortunam ipso cantu augurantur. The Gaules celebrate the memory of their Patriarche Gomer, whom they place chiefest in the number of their worthiest. The Germanes in like manner, saith Tacitus, Fuisse apud eos Herculem memorant, primumque omnium virorum fortium. Of our Gaulish Bardes the Poet Lucane writes.
Vos quoque qui fortes animas, belloque peremptas^audibus in longum Vates demittitis aeuum,Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi.
And the same Poet, speaking of the excellency in knowledge of the Druides, wrote: That they onely were worthy and capable, to sound and know the depth of the Diuine Essence.
Solis nosce Deos, and Coeli numina vobisAut Solis nescire datum.
The Druides abiding in great Forrests.And that their dwelling was in the greatest Forrests.
Nemora alta remotisIncolitis lucis.
Onely he wanted, in describing the Garments of the Bardes and Druides, and what fashion they walked in the Cities of the Gaules. Yet hee instructeth vs, that the King, Numa Pompilius, had brought into the City of Rome, the Ceremonies of Temples without Idolls, and the Order of Priests and Sacrificers, deriued from the Gaulish Druides.What manner of Habit the high Priest vsed to weare. And according to their example, their high-Priest was daily cloathed with a Sotane or Cassocke gowne of fine white Serge, guirded to him with a broad guilded Belte, and ouer that a Rochet of fine white Linnen cloth, with the Albo-Galerus. And that the other Priests (like vnto the Druides) had but onely the white Sotane, and white hood or Bonnet, differing neuerthelesse from that worne by the Prince of the Druides; and on his head a Focquet of fine white silke, with Eare-lappes of the same, and somewhat resembling the Manniples of our Bishops Miters.
He had written, that in publique assemblies, and namely, of the Generall States of all the Gaules (which was kept at Chartres yeerely,The Prince of the Druides carried vpon mens shoulders. the seuenth day of the first Moone in September) the Prince of the Druides, was carried by the chiefest of the Gaulish Nobilitie, hee sitting vpon a broad Shield (according as the Kings of the Gaulish Prouinces did) exalted on their shoulders; and so they walked three times about the assembly, as we haue formerly said.
That at all times, and so often as the same High Priest went in solemnity to the said Assemblies, one carried before him (as a Scepter and note of Soueraigne power, belonging to the Priesthood and Iudgement) A Hand of Iustice,The Hand of Iustice carried before the high Priest. fixed vpon a rod of Iuorie. And that in imitation of the Druides, this Hand of Iustice, and other notes of Soueraignty, were carried before the High Priest of the Aegyptians, as hath beene elsewhere already obserued.
Now, concerning the other Druides, they neuer went abroad in publique; but carried in a mouing Chariot, drawne by Oxen or Buffells,How the other Druides vsed to bee seene in publicke abroad. like to our Kings of the first Ligne. And the said Chariot was couered with Basketting Wicker, wholly round, like to a Coach of the Antique fashion; the fore-part and hind-part finishing like the Prow and Poope of a ship. The forme of this Coach is noted by Lucane, in the place before alleadged, and named Couinum.
Et docilis rector Rostrati Belga Couini.
And Tacitus telleth vs, that the Priests of the Romanes, called Flamines, and the Princesses and great Romane Ladies, had taken the practise, vse, and fashion of those Coaches or Chariots of the Druides. Numa Pompilius (in like manner) granted the same Priuilege to the Vestal Virgins.Priuiledges of the vestal Virgins to ride in Coaches. The Noble Historian Cornelius Tacitus in his Annales, saith: Suum quoque fastigium Agrippina extollere altius, Carpento Capitolium ingredi, qui mos Sacerdotibus, and Sacris Druidibus communis, venerationem augebat foeminae, quam Imperatore genitam, Sororem eius qui rerum potitus sit, and Coniugem, and Matrem fuisse, monicum ad hunc diem exemplum est Which Tacitus admireth vpon iust reason, as a rare example, this Agrippina to be Daughter, Sister,Agripina, daughter, sister, wife, and mother of Emperors. Wife and Mother of Emperors, which neuer was at any time seene in France, nor yet elsewhere.
The Greekes in all their Histories, haue obserued but Lampedo of Sparta, who was Daughter, Wife, and Mother of a King, but not Sister, Sonne, Brother, Vnkle, and Father to Kings of France, (without hauing beene King) was seene in the person of Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois, sonne to Philip the Hardie, brother to Philip le Bell, Vnkle to Lewes Hutin, Philip le Long, and Charles le Bell, and Father to Philip de Valois, Kings of France.
And to very good purpose is this Text of Tacitus remarkeable,Coaches not so common then as now in these daies. that the vse of Coaches was not common then, as now at this present, when all is out of reason and order, and they ought to be permitted but to especiall persons. For then there was sufferance but to high Priests, and Illustrious persons, to enter into the Capitole, and the Imperiall Pallace Coached. From whence issued the custome obserued in the Courts of Kings and Princes, to enter (on horse-backe, or in Carosse) the Court; which was neuer permitted in France,The order for entring the Court of France. but onely to Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royall. An honour (since then) communicable to Princes Strangers, allied to the house of France; to the Constable, prime Officer of the Crowne, and to Cardinalls Legates in France. But now a-daies, all is confounded, without rule or any obseruance (whatsoeuer) of the dignity Royall: euery one will carue with the Prince, and goe as his Peere.
That which the Romanes called Carpentum,A Chariot vsed in Warre. the Gaules in their language tearmed Couinum: the olde Glosse Couinum, vehiculi genus cameratum, Galli sua linguae Couinum appellabant. Those Coaches were made after the modell of Gondolaes and boates for passage, whereof the Gaules made good seruice, for going to any place (neerer then otherwise) by water. And those Gondolaes are called by Aulus Gellius, Galli, as particularly proper to the Gaules, and of their owne inuention, hauing the Prow and Poope discouered, to haue the Rowers or Watermen there placed, and the middle couered Arch-wise.
Of this fashion were the Coaches of the Gaules, large and broad behinde; like the Poope of a Ship, and pointed before, like the spurre of a Prow, couered aboue in round wise, and in the middest onely. According to this modell, the Romanes made their Chariots for Warre, whereon their Knights fought stoutly; Couinarius Equ^s, in the same Tacitus.
And as the Coaches and Chariots of the ancient Gaules, were built in forme of Stems and Gallies, Rostrata Couina; so in like manner were their Hose and Shooes. The Romanes vsed shooes (the fashion whereof is seene in ancient Paintings and Medalls,The hose and (...) of the ancient Gau^s. leaning to the fashion of Espartignes, and shooes of cords, vsed in Spaine) which they called Soleas. Those of the Gaules were not couered with leather, but in the midst onely, the heele squared like halfe a Lozenge, and the toe pointed and raised, as in forme of a Spurre.
The Romane Ladies Pantofles.The Romane Ladies doe yet weare their high Patines and Pantofles, couered and diapred, the point or toe rising in two hornes, and the heele in halfe a Lozenge. The Romanes gaue their name to their shooes, as well as to their Bonnets Galer^, so saith Varro. P^leu^ rotundus in modum Galeae factus a Gallis inuentoribus dicitur Galerum, for it is Masculine, and Neuter. So their hose and shooes were called Gallicae, at this instant tearmed Galoches.
Cicere rep^ehendeth Marcus Antonius, because he disdained to habit himselfe Romane like, b^t went cloathed after the Gaulish manner, Cum Gallicis, and lacerna cucurristi. Aulus G^llius s^i^h: Omnia f^rme id genus quibus plantarum calces tantum infime t^g^^tur, catera prope nuda, and teretibus habenis vincta sunt, Soleas dixerunt, nonnunquam voce Graeca Cr^pidulas. Gallicas autem verbum esse opinor nouum, non diu ante aetatem Marci Ciceronis vsurpari caeptum.
Vpon the same subiect we may s^y, that the ancient Greekes, in steed of Goblets, Cups and Glasses; serued themselues with Cornets and Rams-hornes to drinke in: as is obserued by Ath^neus and the learned Xenophon. But the Gaules had their Cups and Bo^^es to drinke in, not made round and high; but long and Ouall-wise, in forme of a Shippe or Galley. Wherefore the Romanes called those Vessells Galeolas, which we now at this day tearme Gondolaes. Nonius Marcellus, Sinum and Galecla V^s^ ^nus^. Varro* in his ancient liues of the Romane people, saith. Vbi erat Vinu^^n (...) p^situm, aut Galeola, aut Sinum. And from thence descended the ancient V^rle^ ^lla^e, that is to say; to drinke Iouially; to row in a good Galley like a Gaul^is. The same Varro, cited by Nonius Marcellus, saith: Gallare est Bacchari Varro. Cu^^llo ventito, vtdeo Gall^rum frequentiam in Templo, qui dum esset iam hora, Deam adl^tam imponerent aedis signo, and Deam Gallantes vario retinebaut studio, etc. Now adayes,The O^^^r (...) at great tables. at the Tailes of our Kings, Princes, and great Lords, the ancient custome is retained, to set at one end of them Shippes of Gold, or Siluer enammelled with Gold, and in them are placed Salts, Spoo^es, Forkes, Kniues and Napkins, by example of the ancient Gaules, who euer made vse of such seruice, as a note and memor^ll of their ancient Originall.
The Habit of the Druides.Returning now to the Druides, they were clothed like to the Chanons Regulars, of S. Augustines Order at Paris, at S. Geneuiefue, S. Victor, S. Lazarus in the Suburbs of S. Denys.
But concerning the Bardes, how they were distinguished from the Druides, by dwelling separated;H^b^t of the Bardes. so in like manner were they garmented. For the Bardes were cloathed poorely and simply, in a duskie or smoaky colour, euen of the same fashion and manner,Poor Schollers as goe the Capettes of Montagu Colledge at Paris. For they haue a Cowle or Capouche close and strait, sowed to their Cassock, to couer them against the Ayres stormes and iniuries: and ouer that, their long Cloake or Houpe-land, without any coller, but tied with a Tach-hooke of wood. And because they of Xaintonge delighted to goe cloathed in the Bardes fashion, Martiall and other Latine Poets called them Santones Bardocucullatos.
Gallia Santonico vestit Bardo cuculloCercopithecorum penula nuper erat.
Yet to this day, not onely in Xaintonge, but in all the rest of Guienne, Gascoigne

and Languedocke; most part of the men goe cloathed in the naturall colour of the Minimees, (a light sootie colour, with an eye of grey in it) hauing sleeues to their Cloakes, and a little Cowle or Capouche, to thrust the head in.
Come we now to the Romanes Demonomany, brought into Gaule.
Caesar in his Commentaries, supposed the Gaules (in his time) to adore Mercurie as the very principall and greatest of their gods,Caesar his opinion of the Gaules gods: and to haue many Idolls and Images of him. They made him the inuenter of Arts, the guide and conducter to Merchants, and other men in their Voyages; because hee had the whole power of giuing riches, and all affluence of good things.
After Mercurie, they worshipped Apollo, Mars, Iupiter, and Minerua: For Apollo healed Diseases, Minerua instructed in Workes and Trades; Iupiter held the Empire of the heauens, and Mars presided in fights and battels.
And adding to this first supposition of Idolatry, murder and slaughter;Bloody sacrifices offred by the Gaules. hee feigneth, that to all those imaginary and fantasticke Deities, the Gaules offered in bloody Sacrifice, liuing men of all qualities, innocent and faultie, good and wicked indifferently, according as the humor tooke them. Such (saith he) as they found afflicted with some incurable disease,Liuing men offered in sacrifices. exposing themselues boldly to dangers and hazards of the Warre; offered liuing men, in stead of Beasts for Sacrifice, or else made vowes to offer them.
In these Sacrifices they made vse of the Druides Ministery; as neuer beleeuing that the Maiesty of the immortall Gods, could and would recompence the life of one man, with that of another. This was, because they held publiquely Schools of such bloudy Sacrifices. Hee adethd moreouer (lye vpon lye) that the Gaules had Idolls of immeasurable greatnesse, made and composed of Oziers and Wickers,Huge Idolls with liuing men in them. which they filled with liuing men, and then set them on fire, to burne them aliue, being stifled with flame and smoake, and so consumed to ashes.
But Caesar returning to truth, and the ancient Custome obserued amongst the Gaules, of burning malefactors publiquely, and principally the Criminalls in high Treason (as they would haue done as much to the pretended King of the Switzers,Offenders in high treason burn'd among the Gaules. Orgetorix, if he had not bestowed death on himselfe) he saith, that the execution of them which had beene condemned to death for crimes; was a most acceptable oblation to the immortall Gods. Is not this conforme to the doctrine of the Old Testament, that is an agreeable worke to God, to wipe the wicked out of the Booke of Life, and to take them from off the face of the earth?
Caesar, for his owne aduantage, and to make his conquest of the Gaules more admirable to the Romanes, hath described the Gaules, wholly comparable to the inhumane Lestrigons. But instead of arming them with constancy and magnanimity,Caesar maketh his conquest of the Gaules wonderfull to the Romanes. which are ordinary companions with the Queene of Vertues, Iustice; hee supposed them all to be died red in the bloud of their Citizens, especially in speaking of their Generall Assembly. For he saith in his fift booke, that Indiciomarus, hauing made an Assembly or generall Muster in Armes (which was, after the Gaules manner, an infallible note of commotion and ouuerture of warre) ordained by publique Cry, that all youthes (aged fourteene or sixteene yeeres) stood bound to appeare armed to their vttermost. And hee that came last, was to be massacred before the assembly in the same place, after he had beene first tortured with all torments, and the most cruell punishments that could be deuised.
Most certaine it is,The Gaules came armed to generall assemblies. that the ancient Gaules went alwaies armed to the Generall Assemblies. Tacitus saith in his Germania: Vt Turbae placuit, considunt armati. Titus Liuius, speaking of such Assemblies in his Romane History, saith. In his noua terribilisque species visa est, quod armati (ita mos gentis) in consilium venerunt. A Gaule could neuer be taken without a sword by his side, his Lance or Iauelin in his hand. At feasts and banquets, as going about their very meanest affaires, Tacitus.The Gaules went armed about all their affaires. Tum ad negotia, nec minus saepe ad conuiuia procedunt armati. Their seruants following their Maisters, were it in the hall of banqueting, carried Shield, Lance, and other Armes of their Masters. Atheneus saith in his Dypnosophists: That going to their Temples, the place of all assurance, they went Armed. And the Panegyrist said, Maiores vestri haec Templa ingrediebantur, nisi armati.
The Gaules born to be warriours.In briefe, this Nation declared in all their actions; that they were generous, warre-like, inured and fashioned to manage Armes. In the generall Estates, they approued the sayings of their Prince, by the clattering of their Armes. Si Principis sententia placuit, frame as concutiunt: Honoratissimum assensus genus est, armis laudare; Striking the Steele of their Lances on their Shields, saith Tacitus in his Germania* And in his Annales, speaking of the Oration of Ciuilis, he saith. Vbi sono armorum, tripudijsque (ita illis mos) approbata sunt dicta. They exalted their Princes and Generalls of Armies, vpon broad Shields, so soone as by the resultation of the generall Assembly, they were declared to be such. And the same Tacitus saith againe. Brinio Impositus Scuto (more Gentis) and sustinentium humeris vibratus Dux eligitur. At their reception, or (to speak better) their eleuation, the Gaulish Nobility take their Oath of fidelity to them, vpon their Armes: A custome kept by the ancient French as Cassiodorus hath obserued. Iudicamus Parentes nostros inter procinctuales gladios (more maiorum) Regalem constituisse dignitatem. And the Bishop of Poictiers, Fortunatus, who liued vnder the Kings of our first Ligne, in his Epithalamium of Chilperick and Golsinda of Spaine.
Vtque fidelis et sit, gens armata per armaIurat, iure suo se quoque lege ligat.
But that the Gaulish Nation, so milde and so benigne, euen toward Strangers, should be so cruell against their owne bloud, in an age so tender as fifteene or sixteene yeeres; this must needs stand out of all beleefe. Resembling (to speake vprightly) the Tales of the Storke, whereof Plinie speaketh in his Naturall History, reciting their meeting. These Creatures (saith he) assembled together yeerely in the Moneth of August, and in a wilde field of Asia, called Pithon, to conceiue (from thence) the drinesse of other Countries beyond Thrace: and after they haue held among them some forme of Councell, the last Storke that came to the Rendevous, is torne in peeces by all the rest. Pythonos Comen vocant in Asia patentibus campis, vbi congregatae, inter se murmurant. Eam denique, quae nouissimae aduenit, lacerant, atque ita abeunt.
Diodorus Siculus, and the Geographer Strabo, well-neere Contemporanes together, and who did (more diligently then Caesar) obserue the Gaulish customes; toucheth not so much as one word of this cruelty. Indeed the latter of the two saith, that at publique Diets, he who first shall interrupt and trouble the Assembly, by importune discourse, he ring him that proposeth the Herald, or Vsher of the doore, menaceth him with his sword drawne, to aduise him to be silent: which if he reitterate to the third time, and perceiue his aduertisements vnprofitable; hee cutteth from his Cassocke or Mandillion, such a lappet, as the rest shall remaine vn-vseable to him,A good note f^^ bus^^ b^b^^r^. a note of ignominie, for hauing no better brideled his tongue, when he had most need.
And yet notwithstanding, there are Authors, who haue credited the Gaules to be armed with all cruelty. For Lucane painteth their supposed gods, with humane blood, in stead of Cynoper and Vermillion, a colour wherewith the Romans would disfigure their Idolls on the daies of great feasts, as we vnderstand by Plinie. Lucane giueth to the Gaules, these imaginary Gods.
Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diroTentates, horrensque feris altaribus HesusEt Taranis Scithicae non mitior ara Dianae.
AN Opinion followed by Lactantius Firmianus, in his Diuine Institutions: wherunto we may answere in the same manner, as Plutarch did in the life of Pelop^das. That such abhominable, cruell, and barbarous Sacrifices, were neuer acceptable to any of the gods, or to any Essence, better or more powerfull then ours. Considering that there are no Typhons or Gyants, who haue the domination of the world: but the onely All-mighty, who is the Father of Gods and Men. And to thinke

that there be gods or demy-gods, that can delight themselues with murder, and effusion of bloud of men, vndoubtedly is a meere folly. But if it were so, there is no other account to be made of them, but of such as haue not any power: For it is the signe of a base and wicked soule, when it shall imprint in it selfe such strange and vngracious appetites, and let them dwell there still.
But like as Caesar (trusting to other mens reports) was grossely mistaken in that matter, which concerned the Religion of the ancient Gaules;Cesar deceiu'd in the Gaules Originall. euen so hath he dealt in the case of their Originall, writing thus: Galli omnes a Dite patre se prognatos reputant: All the Gaules deriue their Originall from Father Dis. The Romanes called Pluto god of Hell, the Rich Father, Ditem Patrem, Father of Wealth and riches, because the Mines created by the Sun and Moon, are drawn from the fruitful wombe of the earth.
Effodiuntur opes irritamenta malorum.
Caesar, to vnderprop his opinion with some apparant reason, alleadgeth afterward; That the Gaules had learned such beleefe of the Druides. Idque a Druidibus proditum dicunt. Next he alleadgeth the custome vsed by the Gaules, of accounting by nights, and not by daies. Ob eam causam spatia omnis temporis, non numero dierum, sed noctium finiunt, and Dies natales, and Mensium, and Annorum initia sic obseruant, vt Noctem Dies subsequatur; The Night preceded the Day.
According to the diuersitie of Climates, Moneths, Dayes,How the Druides counted their yeares and moneths. and Yeares haue had diuers beginnings. The wise Druides began their yeeres, and counted their Moneths by Nights, and not by dayes: in the same manner as the Iewes did, who had their yeares of two fashions; the vulgar or the Naturall for one, and the other was called Legall, or holy.
This last named, began at the Equinoctiall of the Spring time,Of the Legall or sacred yere. in the Moneth of March, which they called Nisan, according as God had commaunded the great Law-giuer Moyses in Exodus 22.17. when the Israelites departed from the bondage of Aegypt, to prepare towards the Land of Chanaan, which was promised them. This Equinoctiall entred it selfe, the fourteenth day of the Moone of March,At what time the Aequinoctiall entred, by the Iewish account. vpon which day the Iewes celebrated the Feast of Easter. But at this present the Equinoctiall of the Spring (when the dayes begin to exceed the nights in length) falleth not but about the twentieth of March, since the reformation of the Calender, made by Pope Gregory the 13. the yeere of Grace, 1581.
And like as the Hebrewes began their yeeres by the Moneth of March, and of September: so likewise were their Moneths Lunary, diuided into thirteene Moneths, and baptized by these names: Nisan, Iiar, Siuan, Tammus, Ab, Elul, Tizri,The names of the Months according to the Hebrewes. Marchesuan, Kisleu, Teuet, Sheuet, Adar and Veadar. Marche, Aprill, May, Iune, Iuly August, September, October, Nouember, December; Ianuary and February, first and second.
For, because the Solarie yere had three hundred sixty fiue daies and sixe houres,How many daies the Solarie yeere contained. which redoubled foure times, maketh from foure to foure yeeres, a naturall day of foure and twenty houres, from whence ensueth the Bissextile; and accounting by Moones, there are onely three hundred fifty and foure daies, by reason of allowing twenty eight daies for each Moone:A thitteenth moneth made by the Hebrewes. the Hebrewes made from three to three yeeres, a thirteenth Moneth, which they Intercalled and made it of thirty daies.
The Intercalary Moneth was called Ve-Adar, the second Moneth of February, because it had place betweene Adar and Nisan, February and Marche. And as for the Moneths of Marche, May, Iuly, September, Nouember and Ianuary;The Moone yeere equalled the Sun yeare. they were of thirty dayes, and the other but nine and twenty. So by the meanes of this Intercalary Moneth, the Lunary or Moone yeere, equalled that of the Sunne: and the first day of the Moone of Marche, made the principall, and the beginning of the Sacred or holy yeere.
The yeere Ciuill or Vulgar, began the first day of the Moone, properly tearmed the 6. Moone, because the Moones intermingled themselues one vpon another.The beginning of the Vulgar yeere.
(...)
Isicles hang ith' Ayre. Orithiaes Loue,Rocke-renting blasts to Scythia doth remoueLazile languish'd: Bacchus, Vulcan appeare,To checke the cold of best moneths in the yeere.
The seuerall names of December.This Moneth, or rather Moone of December, was named by the Hebrewes Teuet; by the ancient Gaules Kimerinon, and by the Germanes, Haleg-Monacht, that is to say, The Holy Moneth, as wee learne by venerable Bede, in his booke of Times, where he saith: The Ancient Germanes named the Moone Monaon, and by Almanish aspiration, Monacht, Princesse of the Night, who began their yeare at the Solstice of Winter, in the moneth of December, which they called Sacred or Holy, because therein were performed their solemne Sacrifices, for a good beginning of the yeere. That the Moneth of Aprill was called (by them) Easter-Monacht, the Moneth of Reioycing: in remembrance that they came to their Lands in the said Moneth of Aprill.
The ancient Gaules celebrated ^oyfully the moneth of March.Which they had retained and kept from such time as they dwelt in the Gaules. For the ancient Gaules celebrated (with all reioysing) the Moneth or Moone of March, which they had baptized with the name of their Gaulish Hercules, the Patriarch Gomer, and which they called Ogmion, in memory and remembrance of this, that at departing from the Land of Sennaar, after floating long on the Ocean Sea; they were arriued (in a good port) on the Coasts of Armorica, in the Moneth of March.
And as for the Moone or Moneth of December, beginning the vulgar yeere of the Gaules:December, the beginning of the Gaules yeere. this Moneth was called by the Romanes, Mensis brumalis, during which Moneth, the Sea would be troubled and tossed with vnruly billowes and tempests, which made it vn-nauigable; except at such time as the gentle Halcyons brought forth their young.
Dum compte Halcyones tranquilli in marmoris vndaNidificant, pullos inuolucresque fouent.
The Druides gather Misseltoe, and send it to all their Colledges.The Gaules called this Moneth of December, A Sacred Moneth, because in it the wise Druides gathered the Misseldine, or Missell-toe of the Oake in great Ceremonie, and deuided it (as a New-yeeres Gift) and beginning of the yeere, to the people. From whence ensued the ancient Prouerbe, which yet we retaine to this very day; With the Missell-toe, comes the New yeere, Ad viscum Annus nouus: For, after that the Prince of the Druides had gathered, blessed, and consecrated the Missell-toe, he imparted it to all the Colledges of the Druides: by command of whom, the Bardes went from City to City, and from one Towne to another, to proclaime the beginning of the yeere to the people. Because they were to come and receiue the Missel-toe, (which they called Panereston) as a Catholicon and remedy for all euils. And vpon this subiect was alleadged this verse, which is generally reported to be Ouids.
Ad viscum Druidae, Druidae clamare solebant,
This ancient custome is yet kept in diuers of the Prouinces of France, so that in the night of the euening for the yeere,A notable custome yet obserued in Picardy. the children go crying through all the streets, At Missell-toe Tide, comes the New-yeeres Bride, by a kinde of corrupted speaking, The New yeeres Missell-toe. In Picardie, where are kept more particularities of the Gaules ancient customes, then in any Prouince of France, the children after they haue cried, At Missell-toe tide comes the New-yeres Bride, they adde this ancient French word, Plante, Plante, that is to say, Plenty, Plenty, or a yeere abounding and fertile in all good things; words deriued from the Prayer of the ancient Druides, where they wished the People all affluence of good things.
The ^^dit^on (...) BourgongnIn Bourgongne they adde, That God would send them a rich and plentifull yeere, with a long circumlocution and Bead-roule of words, which are trucked vp in one word by the Picard, Plentie.
The Missell-toe of the Oake, was called by the Greekes (who learned it of the Gaules) (...), the vertues and singularities whereof are noted by Galen in his Medicamentorum simplicium; by Plinie, and by Dioscorides. This hearbe or simple is alwaies greene, especially in the very strongest of Winter, when his graines are ripe and yellow as gold, as Virgill enstructeth vs.
Quale solet syluis Brumali tempore ViscumFronde virere noua, quod non sua seminat arbos.
There are three kindes of Missell-toe, for it increaseth and groweth on Oakes;Three kindes of Missell-toe. as the most hard and branchie Oake; the holme, or barren Skarlet Oake, and on the wilde Ballace and Turpentine trees, for it is seldome seene on any other Trees.
The Missell-toe neuer commeth by seede, nor planting,The strange growing of the Missel-toe but groweth maruellously by the dung of Ring-doues, or Wood-coysts, and of Thrushes or Feldi-fares who are fed therewith; for it neuer sproweth or buddeth, till it be first mortified in the bellyes of Birds: It neuer exceedeth a Cubit in length; is alwayes greene, and very branchie. The Male beareth Seedes or Graines, but the Female none: and the best is onely that, which is gathered on old hard Oakes, called strong Oakes, in Latine Robora.
Pliny in his Naturall Historie sayth, The Druides, who are the Priests and Sacrificers of the Gaules, esteeme nothing in the World more rare and singuler, nothing more Diuine and Holy, then the Missell-toe, and the Tree whereon it groweth: prouided neuerthelesse,The great account made of the Oake by the Druides. that it be an hard Oake. Therefore they made choyce of Oaken Forrests, and neuer offered any Sacrifice, but with the branches of his Tree. All things which grew on those Oakes, were reckoned by them as things sent from heauen; and they held it for an vndoubted beleefe, that this Tree was acceptable to the Diuinity, and especially elected to be honoured.
The Missel toe (saith he) is very difficult to be found; but hauing discouered it, the Druides keepe it most religiously. For the Moone (of necessity) hath sixe daies (according to the Moone they establish the beginning of their Moneths and their yeares, making their Ages of fiftie yeares. The Moone them hauing sixe daies, and mounting to her force, they prepare to gather the Missell-toe of the Oake, which in their language they call Panchre ston; Omnias sanans, An Antidote and Remedy against all harmes.
This was the liuely image of the Worlds Sauiour, extended vpon the Crosse, made and carpented of Oake, the true Missell-toe, whereby all our infirmities are healed; for he is the Author of Life, and the onely Physician for our aduersities. So Lanctantius Firmianus maketh him deciphered and described, by the Sybilla (...). A Medicine for all euills, and the Christians saluation.
Plinie continueth on further yet, saying. At the foote of this aged Oake,Bread and Wine in the Druides Sacrifice. was an Altar erected, whereon, in Sacrifice and solemne Festiuall, The Prince of the Druides offered and blessed Bread and Wine. And when the Sacrifice was ended, they brought (moreouer) two yong Buls, all white, which had neuer bin subiected to the yoake of Labour: they were coupled together, and reserued for a Sacrifice and Oblation, after the gathering of the Missell-toe.
But this Author hath let slip in silence,The Druides generall Procession. that before the gathering of the Missell-toe; the Prince of the Druides, assisted with his Colledge, the King, the Princes of the Gaules, and the People, went in generall Procession: according to the equipage and order, described as well by Diodorus Siculus, Aelianus, S. Clemens Alexandrinus, and Apuleius; as by the Ceremonies which the Aegyptians, Greekes, and Romaines had deriued and borrowed from the Druides, as well as their learning.
First, the Eubages and Diuiners went formost, leading the Buls for Sacrifice. These were followed by the Bardes, singing the Canticles of reioycing and praise,The order and manner of the Druides Procession. with thankesgiuing to the diuine Essence. After them next marched the Schollers, imitated in the mysteries of the Druides, who followed in their due order. After them went an Herald, or King at Armes; all alone, cloathed in white (like vnto the Druides his hat or bonnet likewise white, whereunto were two wings fastened, and a Caduceus in his hand. Those wings (according to Clemens Alexandrinus) shewed diligence which his Office imposed on him. Alae sunt ministeria, and operationes

sublimes dexterarum simul,The Heralds Office belonging to the Druides. and sinistrarum potestatum. For these Heralds were true Interpreters of their Princes secrets; who, vpon the fidelity of their Relations, resolued themselues for Peace or Warre. The Caduceus, which the Herald carried in his right hand, was a branch of Verueine, writhed into the shape of two serpents, ioyned together by symmetry and proportion: not for the fables subiect inuented by the Greekes (as hardie lyers, as theeues of ceremonies, and other mens doctrine) as, to their reproach, the same Clemens Alexandrinus speaketh of them; because they attributed the inuention thereof, to their pretended Mercurie.
The Caduceus was the inuention of our Sacred Druides, according to the testimonie of Plinie in his Naturall Historie, speaking there of the said Druides. Hic complexus Angu^um, and efferatorum concordia causa videtur exterae Gentes Caducaeum in Pacis argumentis circumdata effigie Anguium fecerint. Neque enim cristatos esse in Caducaeo mos est. And the King of Armes going before the Prince of the Druides, gaue thereby to vnderstand, that the authoritie of the said Prince depended on Peace and Warre; for the one and the other could not be resolued, but by his appointment, as we haue already said.
The three Sacrificing Druides in their Offices.After the King of Armes came three auncient men, the most venerable of the Druides, all equally together. The first of them carried the Challice and Cruet of Wine; He next to him, Bread for the Sacrifice; And the third, the hand of Iustice, called The Cubite of Iustice, Cub^tum Iustitiae. These three Sacrificers were followed by the Prince of the Druides, who went alone, cloathed in a white Cassocke, and ouer it an Albe of fine Linnen, girded with a broad Girdle or Belt of Gold, and a white Bonnet on his head,The Prince of the Druides his habite. with Tassels of white Silke, and the Fanons (hanging behinde) of the same. If the King were in the Prouince, he went along with the Druides Prince; followed by the Nobilitie, and all the People in traine.
The Prince of the Druides being thus cloathed, as we haue said, ascended vpon the Tree,How the Druides Prince gathered the Missel-toe. and with a Sickle of Gold, tooke and cut the Missell-toe: which the other Druides (cloathed likewise in white Linnen Albes) receiued in a faire white Napkin, or Table-cloath. Sacerdos candida veste cultus, arborem scandit, falce aurea demetit, candido excipitur sago; so saith Plinie, holding on still the thred of this Ceremonie. Which being done the Buls were Sacrificed, and the Prince of the Druides made The generall Benediction:The sacrificing of the Buls. entreating the Diuine bountie, that the gift which they receiued from his liberall hand, might be beneficiall and profitable to the Gaulish people.Missell-toe a preseruatiue against all p^^son. The Missell-toe serued as an Alexpharmacum, and a soueraigne mischiefe-expeller, against all kindes of poysons: and being taken in drinke by women barren, and vnfruitfull creatures; it made them plentifull and fertile. Foecunditatem eo poto dari cu^cumque animali sterili arbitrantur. And this was the reason, why in saying: At Missell-toe tyde, comes the new yeares Bride, the word of Plentie, Plentie was added. Which was (moreouer) obserued, in sending (from one to another) the leaues of the Missell-toe of the Oake; as a good New-yeares gift on the first day of the yeare. And that was pleasantly obserued by one of our French moderne Poets.
En lieu d' Anneau, de Dorure, ou'de ChaineAce Matin Premier Iour de l' AnneeIe vous enuoye vn brin de Guy de ChesneN'estes-vous pas richement estrenee?Ceste facon d en donner n'est pas neeDe moy premier. Les vieux Druides SagesEn presentoient ce Iour par bons presages:O qu'en ce Guy tel signe fust compris(Pursque que la Glus se faict de ses fueillages)Que vostre Coeur au mien deust estre pris!
In stead of Chaine, or Gold-Ring, I commendTo you this New-yeares morning (dearest Friend)This tender Slip of the Oakes Missell-toe:Ist not a rich Gift, to be giuen so?This forme of giuing was not bred by me,The wise old Druides, famous for memorie,This day made it their gift of good presage,I wish this louing token like in comperage.That as the Leaues make Glew, and fast combine:Euen so your heart (as fast) may knit to mine.
The Poet made his allusion to the Missell-toe, whereof the Glew or Lime is made, which for the catching of small Birds serueth very necessary: the manner whereof is noated by Virgill.
Tum laqucis captare Feras, and fallere ViscoInuentum: and magnos: and magnos Canibus circumdare saltus.
In like manner the Romaines, the first day of their yeare, with their other gifts, which they sent from one to another (instead of the Oakes Missell-toe) sent the leaues and branches of Verueine: a custome pactised from the time of Tatius, King of the Sabines, as we learne by Symmachus: Ab exortu pene Vrbis Martiae Strenarum vsus adoleuit auctoritate Tatij Regis, qui Verbenas foelicis arboris, ex Luco Streniae Anni noui auspices primus accepit. And in his imitation, the Emperour Augustus receiued the new yeare of the Romaines, the first day of the yeare.
As concerning the branches of Verueine, which Symmachus (after the Romaine manner) called The happie Tree; the Romaines (in memorie of King Tatius) called them not Verueine, but Sabine, without which they offred not any Sacrifice.The Verucine called Sabine. And yet at the first rising of their City, they sacrificed nothing else but Verueine onely, as it is obserued by Ouid.
Ara dabat fumos herbis contenta Sabinis:In sacris nullum culter habebat opus.
Which Numa Pompilius, the Author of such vnbloody Sacrifices, had deriued from the doctrine of the Druides; whose King of Armes (as wee haue formerly said* carried his Caducaeus of Verueine, which was in as great esteeme for the singuler vertue, and admirable properties thereof; as the Plant Baaras, so celebrated by the learned Iew Iosephus. And this was the reason, why the diuine Druides gathered it with the same Ceremonies, as they did the Oakes Missell-toe. They are noated by Plinie (who scarsely comprehended the misteries, either of the one or other, hauing his eyes sealed vp with grosse ignorance, by being fleshed against the blood of Christians, during the persecutions of Domitian and Traian) in his Naturall Historie. Similis est huic herbae Sabinae Selago appellata. Legitur sine ferro, Dextra manu Sinistrae superposita, modo furcae, Flamine candida veste vestito, pure lotisque pedibus, and Sacro, Pane, Vinoque, facto, priusquam legatur: Fertur in mappa noua. Hanc contra omnem pernitiem habendam prodidere Druidae Gallorum, and contra omnia oculorum vitia fumigationem eius prodesse.
To the Verueine is altogether like and conforme, that which wee callAn Hearbe much vsed of the Druides for all eye-soares: called by some Hedg Hysope.Sauine. It is gathered without any Iron instrument, hauing the right hand interlaced and put vpon the left, in forme of a Saulter. The Priest being (before) cloathed in a fine white Albe, purifieth his soule, washeth his feete to be neate and cleane: offreth the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, and after, maketh the Hearbes gathering, which is put into a faire white Table-cloath. The Druides great Sacrificers among the Gaules, strongly held: that it had power to chase away all mischances all impostures, illusions and sorceries.
In the place of Idols, behold the wholesome signe of the Crosse (whereat the Gentiles made a mockerie, calling it a Iibbet or Gallowes, not vnderstanding the misterie and power) and the pure Sacrifice of the auncient Druides, of Bread and Wine. And not those of the Mexicanes, be-smeared with humaine blood, according to the opinion of Caesar: vnder whose name, his Secretarie Iulius Celsus, hath,

supposed a thousand lyes and tales,Iulius Celsus Secretarie to Iulius Caesar. in his Commentaries of the Gaulish Warres. Which hath bin obserued by Suetonius, in the life of that great Captaine. That Caesar himselfe, acknowledging his imperfections, had resolued to new-cloath his Commentaries, and to correct the suppositions which hee had there inserted: as well in regard of his owne fleeting memorie, as hauing (ouermuch) trusted to hearesay, and other mens reports. Parum diligenter, parumque integra veritate compositos fuisse hosce Commentarios; quum pleraque, and quae per alios erant gesta, temere crediderit, and quae per se, vel consulto, vel etiam memoria lapsus, perperam ediderit.
The Diuides being infected corrupted the people with DemonomanyIt is then to be held for infallible and certaine, that the Romaines brought their Demonomanie into Gaule, wherewith the Druides once infected; corrupted the people: taking for pretended Deities, such things as best answered to their Martiall and warlike nature, and thereby susceptible of all kindes of Science, as well as mechanicall Arts. But it is to be noated, that those supposed Gods were not in the Gaulish Temples represented after the Romaine manner: but according to those effects, which the Druides iudged conuenient for them.
Venus the goddesse of generation.For, to begin with the Idole of Venus, the pretended Goddesse of Generation; the Greeke and Romaines presented her vpon a triumphall Chariot, accoasted with three graces, Venus and they starke naked, and crowned with Mirtle; a shrub greene at all times, and the Symbole of Loue.
Populus Alcidae gratissima, Vitis Iaccho:Formosae Mirthus Veneri, sua Laurea Phoebo;
The Latine Poet said; That Hercules was crowned with Poplar; Bacchus with Vine leaues, and clusters of Grapes; Apollo with Laurell; and immodest Venus with Mirtle. Pausan^as writeth, that the Greekes did crowne their Venus with a Chaplet of Roses, and that the three Carites or Graces (her associates by her) the one held a little Bone, the second a branch of Mirtle, and the third a Rose. Poets haue feigned, that (of their owne nature) Roses were white, before the death of the Minion Adonis,How the white Rose became red. torne by a Boare in hunting: but Venus at the blast of those sad tydings, vnprouided of hose or shooes, as then she was; ran swiftly to helpe him, and in her running, her feete being rent with thornes and briers, it gaue to the Rose a Vermillion tincture.
The Gaules emblazoned farre otherwise Venus (whom they tooke as the marke or Symbole of Generation) and her Graces. For they presented them in a Bastile, fortresse,How the Gauls presented their Venus and her graces or grated donion, not naked, as the Greekes and Romaines: but antiquely cloathed in Robes of course cloath, after the Countrey fashion, with face, hands, and feete veiled or couered, their heads crowned with Garlands, composed of all kindes of floures except the Rose, which the wise Druides held for the Hieroglyphicke of immodest Loue.
The picture of a wise and good woman.The donion wherein they were shut vp, declared, that the vertuous and well nurtured woman, should keepe her feete within her house, thinking vpon her houshold (without gadding daily here and there) as the Apostle wished her to be Domus C^stodem. For in figuring a wise Woman, they figured a Tortoise vnder her feete (a creature which neuer leaueth her house) and a Dogge standing by her, the embleme of faithfulnes. Moreouer, the grated or lattised donion, signified Matron-like modestie, which she ought to keep carefully all her life time, according to the end and intent of marriage.
--Natis Venus Alma creandisSerutat, hos fineis transilijsse nocet.
This chastitie was obserued in our Gaulish Women, Paucissima in tam numerosa gente Adulteria, nec corrumpere, aut corrumpi saeculum vocabatur. So said the noble Historian Tacitus. It was not then, as now at this present in Women, giuen ouer to all whoredome and dissolution: be it Man or Woman, no other answere is returned, but this; Such is the World, Seculum vocatur; youth must needes

haue his passage. This false Coine had no currencie, in the time of the ancient Gaules, as we haue said.
The face, hands and feete couered, represented modesty, with honest sweete-fac'd shame, which the married wife ought to be carefull of, in her speech, touching and ^reading, measuring her paces by the Elle of modesty and grauitie both together. Nothing was to be discouered, because (as Plutarch said, to very apt purpose) The Wife putting off the garment neerest to her body, dispoyleth her selfe of all shame and modestie. The Roabe of plaine and course cloath, figured the trauaile and care of housekeeping, and that in her cloathing, she ought to be decently modest:The difference betweene a good woman and a bad. like to a woman of honour, and not as a bold faced Courtizane, daily fitting her selfe with new deuised paintings, to make her seeme beautifull outwardly, hauing a soule worme-eaten with all vices and sinnes within, like vnto polished Sepulchers. The Crowne of all kindes of Floures, pleasing to the smell, and goodly to looke on, expressed, that the principall paintings and guildings of an honorable woman, are the loue of her husband, good enstruction of her children in feare and pietie; her care for housekeeping, seldome speaking, honor of her actions, and modesty in her carriage. These are such Odours and perfumes, wherewith shee should be sweeted; yet there were no Roses, that is to say, immodest allurements,The reason why there were no Roses in the Crown or Garland. to charme men withall, and attract them by the behauiour of Courtizanes: Because the end of such Syren Enchauntresses, is euermore deplorable, wofull and vnfortunate. Such women are descried like to false Coine, exposed to the worlds cosenage and mockery, despised and contemned, as passant Roses, becomming like Heps growing on the wilde Brier.
The Idole of Apollo (in the following Tract,The Idole of Apollo, figuring the Sunne, described. we shall see that of pretended Mars) which represented the bright eye of the world, the Sunne; had a great head, thickly bushed and tufted with haire, entoured with beames, the face beardlesse, like vnto a youth, the mouth open, euen as if he would speake. In his right hand he held a Lyre with seauen cords or strings, and a Cornucopia or Horne of abundance in the left. A Crescent or halfe Moone couered both his knees, his brest thrickly parsemed with Starres, and his feete fixedly planted on a Bowe in Heauen, bending Boulewise. Thus the Gaules figured Apollo, with his effects and misteries; as willing thereby to make knowne, that it was nothing else, but as appeareth by this morall description.
The Sunne, the Moone and Starres fixed beneath his Circle, haue no other light or splendour, but that which they borrow from him. And the same Sunne,The morall application o^ meaning of the Idole of the Sunne. although it be the goodly eye of the world, and the flaming luminous Planet of Heauen, so presented by the colour Celestiall and Azure, whereof this Idole was composed: yet notwithstanding, he was (in part) tarnished or discoloured, his brightnesse and luster couered and obscured, by the gloomy and obscure body of the Moone, vpon this occasion painted (face to face) with his head. That the same Sunne, by the attractiue power of his rayes or beames, dissipated mists, fogs and cloudes, motiues of Raine: figured by the Bowe in Heauen of diuers colours, and by that meanes, illuminating the whole round frame of the world.The Raine-Bowe fixed on Heauen. His Lyre or Harpe with seauen strings, represented the hermonious motion of the seauen Heauens, knowne by the name of the seauen Planets. Iustly in the midst of them was the Sunne planted, to impart his light to them, and by their course equally ordained,The Sun placed in the middest of the seauen Planets. the seasons of the yeare had their conuenient times and propitious, for yeelding to the hostes of this terrestriall world, plentie and abundance of all good things, obserued by the Horne of Abundance.
S. Gregory Victor, Archbishop of Tour^, in his History of France writeth, that Chrocus, King of the Alemaignes (which were the Sweues) went to forrage Gaule; and passing through Auuergne, he burned the Temple, which the Galates (in their mater^^all tongue) called by the name of Vasso, about the yeare of Grace two hundred and fourescore; the sixt of Pope Eutichianus his Pontificacie, and second of the Empire of Probus. Chrocus Alamannorum Rex, commoto exereitu, vniuersas Gallias peruagatur, ^^nctasque aedes, quae antiquitus fabricatae fuerant a fundamentis subuertit. Veniens vero Auernos delubrum illud quod Gvllica lingua Vasso Galatae vocant, incendit, diruit, atque subuertit.
Two especial things to be obserued.This passage of our most auncient French Historian, is worthy singuler obseruation, for two things. The one, for the liuely description of the principall. Temple in Auuergne. And the other, to shew; how likely it was, that the Gaules (whom this Romaine Authour, issued of a famous house, descended from Senatours, and allied to the Romaine Emperours) called Galates, as did S. Hierome, that worthy cleare light of the Church, hauing for their mother tongue, that which vnfitly was called Greeke.S. Gregory of Tour^ Roman by birth To this passage may be added an other of the same Author, concerning foure Letters added to the French Alphabet, by King Childericke: as the Emperour Claudius made addition of three to the Romaine Alphabet, according to the testimonie of Tacitus. This is spoken, to cause them enquire, that are of a contrary opinion.
As concerning this Temple Vasso, which some haue thought to be that of Polignac in Auuergne: Gregory of Tours maketh the Topographie, in these words. Miro opere factum fuit, atque firmatum, cuius paries duxplex erat. Ab intus enim deminuto lapide, a foris vero quadris sculptis fabricatum fuit. Habuit enim paries ille crassitudinem pedes triginta, Intrinsecus vero marmore, ac musiuo variatum erat. Pauimentum quoque aedis,A description of the Temple in Auuergne. marmore stratum, desuper vero plumbo tectum. This Temple (saith S. Gregorie) was built of proud structure, for it was double walled. That within was of small stone, and that without was of great Quarrie, all squared, and this Wall had thirtie foote in thicknesse. The Wall within was spotted or in-laied with Marble, and pieces painted with Mosaicall worke, diuersly colored with Floures and Animales: The Pauement was in like manner of Marble, and the roofe couered quite ouer with Lead.
The Mountaine of Polignac.Polignac (a Vicountie, and most auncient Noble house) is on a Mountaine of meane height, betweene S. Floure, Clermont in Auuergne, and Velay on the side of the great French high-way: on the top whereof was built a Temple in the honour of Apollo. This mountaine is round engirt with other hils, whereon likewise were erected Temples, dedicated to pretended Gods and Goddesses of the Romans: but much inferiour to that of Apollo, and of meaner expences.
A great Tower seated on Polignac.Vpon this of Polignac, is a great Tower, square on the one side, and neere thereto (heretofore) was a very auncient Temple, inwardly pargetted with small stones, depicted and coloured in the Mosaicall manner: but so excellently cimented and Masonned, as it was impossible (in an whole dayes space) to get forth a handfull. At the place where the head of this Idole was fixed, there is now a Crosse fastened to the Wall: because the Villagers of Velay, ascending vp to this Castell of Polignac, should there fall prostrate on their knees, vttering there their Prayers and Orisons, euen as before the Images of Saints.
The Idoles statu^e by measure of the head.The head of this Idole was fiue foote in height, and the circumference answerable to the same proportion: so that by iust measure and simmetrie of the head (which ought alwayes to make the eight part of a mans body) it is easie to iudge; that the Idole contained fortie foote in height. And yet notwithstanding, Plinie maketh mention of a Colossus, representing the Idole of Mercurie, which contained foure hundred foote in diameter. Vibio Auito prouinciae Aruernorum praesidente, aetate nostrae (Plinie the second, liued vnder Vespasian, his Sonnes, and Traian Emperours) omnem ampletudinem eius generis statuarum vicit Zenodorus, Mercurio facto (...) Ciuitate Galliae Aruernis, per Annos decem, pedum CCCC. immani pretio. That the excellent Caruer Zenodorus, made in the Citie of Auuergne, a Colossus of immeasurable greatnes, and that he was ten whole years in the caruing it, with incredible expences.
Ioyning to this Temple of Polignac, is another little Chappell, Vaulted in like manner as the Temple was,(...) and painted Mosaically, to serue as the Vestrie. At the issuing forth thereof, may be seene the steps and treadings, as also the foundation of auncient buildings, ordained as dwellings for the Priests, seruants and attendants on this Idole, whereby Sathan the seducer of men deliuered his lying Oracles. At this Temple it was, where the Emperour Tiberius Caesar shewed his deuotion, and sent his Offerings, to be assured in the length of his life. And in memorie thereof, is yet to this day to be seene (on the left hand in the Temple) an Antique inscription, but bitten and worne with age, which conteineth these words following.

Tib. Clau. Cae. Aug. Ger. Pon. Max.The inscription on the wal, in memory of the Emperour Tib. Claud. Ca.
Trib. Pot. V. Imp. XI. PP. Coss. IIII.
Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus, Germanicus, Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitia potestatis quintum, Imperator vndecimum, Pater Patriae, Consul quartum.
The Romans called their God Apollo, by the name of Belenus, and Belenus was deriued from Belus, King of the Assyrians, who was beleeued by Antiquity, to be the first inuenter of the Science Astrologicall, as Plinie reporteth in his Naturall History. Durat adhuc Beli Templum, Inuentor hic fuit Syderalis Scientiae.
The Priests imployed in seruice for the Idols of Apollo, were called Phoebitians, by the name of Phoebus. Ausonius in his Professors and Doctors Regents of the Gaules, famous and renowned for learning in his time, speaking of a Sexton belonging to this pretended God, said:
Nec reticebo senemNomine PhoebiciumQui Beleni AedituusStirpe satus DruidumGentis Aremoricae.
They had the name also of Cup-Bearers, Cup-Carriers, Tasters, Gobletters and Butlers to Apollo. Paterae dicebantur apud Romanos Sacerdotes Apollinis, qui and Phoebicij. Ausonius, speaking of Attius, Sonne to Phoebicius, both of them famous Rhetoritians, issued from the auncient Druides of Bayeux in Normandie, said:
Tu Baio cassis stirpe Druidarum satusSi fama non fallit fidem.Beleni sacratum ducis e Templo genus,Et inde vobis nomina.Tibi Paterae, sic Ministros nuncupantApollinaris mistici.
In the Towne-house at Clairmont in Auuergne, is a Coffin of Stone,Titus Labienus Lieutenant to Iulius Caesar. hollow like a Trough, in forme of an Ouall, which had (in times past) serued for the buriall of the wife to Titus Labienus, one of the Lieutenants to Iulius Caesar, in Conquest of the Gaules: And who afterward reuolted from him, and followed the part of Great Pompey. On one of this Coffins sides is an inscription, the most part thereof eaten away with yeares.
The Epitaph for the wife of Labienus.--VL. PauLL inT. I. ALLia. T. La-Bieni. VXOR.Belleno. D. D.
Which sheweth that the Romaines, from their first Conquests, had erected in the honour of Apollo, some Temple neere to Clairmont in Auuergne: the People of which Prouince, to please the Conquerours, did (with the first) embrace their Demonomanie, yea, euen tearmed them their Brethren, saith Lucan.
Aruernique ausi Latios se fingere fratresSanguine ab Iliaco populi.
As for the Idole of Mercurie, the Gaules deciphered it according to their misti^all meaning, in like manner as the rest,How the Gauls figured the Idole Mercuri^. without receiuing any Poeticall fictions of the Greekes or Romaines. They presented him cloathed with a Surcoate or loose Mandillion, made all of Feathers; great Wingges at his sides; his face Beardlesse,

like to a Woman. In his right hand hee held a Bowe bent, as readie to shoote, and a great Purse, with many little Purses; and in the other hand a Trompet.
The morall interpretation concerning Mercurie.The Mythologie or morall interpretation serued to make knowne, that Mercury was the God of Eloquence, and of Riches. His Feathered Coate; his Wings of Feathers; his yong face, and his Trompet signified, that the memorie of learned and skilfull men, flye quite throughout the world, as being for euer consecrated to the Temple of Immortalitie, continuing euermore in strength and vigour, without growing old at any time.
(...).Nunquam aeternarum marcescunt Serta Sororum.
Onely the Chaplet of th' Immortall Sisters:(As others doe) It neuer fades nor withers.
The bended Bow^ expressed the power of Eloquence, which hath effects of admirable vigour:Concerning the admirable power of Eloquence. for an Eloquent man hath so much strength, as he is able to manage and guide a whole People or Nation, at his owne deuotion, and to turne them on which side he will. Eloquentia est sagitta in manu Potentis. As for the great Purse, swolne bigge with other: it figured the wealthie substance and Riches, which is obtained by the trafficke of Merchandise; whereof they made Mercurie the Lord and President.
Per mare, per terras currit Mercator,Pauperiem sugions.
Vigilance was denoated by the Surcoate, and Wings of Feathers thereto most expedient. Such then was the Idole of Mercurie.
Beside which, they had likewise those of other Gods, and pretended Goddess^s and Deities of the Greekes and Romaines,Paris in^c^ted with Idolatrie before the comming of Dionysius A^e^pagita. adored by the Gaules, and in whose honor, worshippe and seruice, Temples were erected thorow all the Prouinces and Countries of Gaule. And namely at Paris, and in the skirts round about, where the great S. D^nys Areopagita being arriued, he found it wholly infected with Idolatrie. For, in the territorie of Vauuert was a Temple, consecrated to the Idole of Mercurie; which serued as an Orgaine and instrument for the Diuell, to render his doubtfull answeres, and his Oracles of mischiefe against the credulous Parisians.
From thence beyond the Riuer of Seine, was the Temple of Mars, where the Gaules and Romaines made their assemblies and meetings.
Repassing the said Riuer, and on the bankes thereof, ioyning to the territorie of Vauuert,The Temple of the Godnesse Is^. was that of Laas (improperly by the vulgar called S. Andrew des Ares) where was exalted the Temple of the Goddesse Isis. The Niche or hollow seate where this Idole was pearched, is yet to be seene, on the North side of the Quire. in the Church of S. Germain des Prez lez Paris. In place of which Idole, in the life time of our Fathers, Messire Guillaume Bricouuet, Bishoppe of Meaux, and Abbot of the said Abbey, caused the Crosse to be there aduanced, which at this present, is to be seene.
The (...).The Village of Isis, called Issy by the vulgar, was the Farme appointed for the sustentation of the Priests, which serued this Idole Isis.
The Temple of the Godnesse C^^^.In like manner, fiue miles from Paris, was the Temple of the Idole Ceres, whereof at this present the Village of S. Ceour, in Latine Sacrum Cereris, retaineth the name. The ignorant vulgar called it Cinq Souls, to small or little purpose. Aboue this Village there is another, which the same Vulgar call Huict Souls, instead of Vict. Ce^ur, in Latine Victus Cereris: because it was ordeined or destenied, for the nour^ture and maintenance of the Priests of Ceres, and their Familie.
Origen in his Homilie before remembred, telleth vs, that it was the most easie

for the Druides, and the Gaulish people (by their example) to abiure the Demonomanie of the Romaines; at the first preachings of S. Denys Areopagita, the Parisians first Bishop, and of other Bishops his Contemporanes, sent thorow all the Prouinces of Gaule. Because (saith he) they had assured notice and knowledge of the Sacred Mysterie, of the Incarnation, and descent of the Sonne of God on earth, for the Saluation of men.
And they liued Morally, keeping and instructing the Gaulish People in these Precepts.
Non colere Idola, sed benedicere Deum. To flye Idolatrie,The enstructions taught to the Gaules. and to worshippe one onely God.Cauere ab incestu propinquorum, and alio nefando concubitu. To keepe themselues from committing Incest, and vnlawfull coniunction.Non fundere humanem Sanguinem. Not to commit any homicide.Non rapere. Not to steale the goods of any other man.Non tolere membrum Animali viuenti. Not to mutilate, or maime the member of any liuing creature, whereby to make it vnapt for labour.
Other Maximes they had beside, and enstructions to keepe and preserue publique Societie, Precepts and Commandements, which were nominated and called;Precepts of Nature binding all men generally to obserue them. Praecepta Naturae, for obseruance whereof all men stood obliged, of what Religion soeuer they were; especially Pagans and Gentiles. So saith Rabbi Salomon, vpon the second Chapter of the Prophet Hieromie, and the Sedar-Olam, fift Chapter.Commandements left by Noah to his Sonnes. They were called Praecepta Filiorum Noe: The Commandements of the Sonnes to the Patriarche Noah, in regard that Sem, Iaphet and Cham (hauing receiued them of their Father, with charge, to leaue them as memorials to their Sonnes and descendants) they were inuiolably kept and obserued by the Linages and Families of Sem and Iaphet Whereas, on the contrary, wicked Cham contemning them, and addicting himselfe to all impietie: was the first Author of Idolatrie, and ingratitude to God; and of Idolatrie were deriued Incest, Sodomie, Theft, Robberie, Murders and Massacres.
The Druides hauing receiued from their Founder and Patriarch Gomer those Precepts:The Druides receiued their Precepts from Gomer. caused them to be exactly kept and obserued by the Gaules and vpon the preuarication of them, were grounded Iustice and Pollicie both Ciuile and Criminall.
And this was it which made them more capable, then all other Nations on the earth, of gathering those diuine Seedes, reuealed by the great S. Denys; and which made them also so apt for receiuing his Doctrine, wherby the Gaules (in a moment) became Christians, firme and constant in the Faith of Iesus Christ, without the least feare of any torments.
And their firme constancie in this case, was the foundation,The firme constancie of the Gaules in the Orthodoxe Religion. originall and wellspring of the Gallicane Churches libertie: the Bishops whereof shewed themselues as Bucklers of the Orthodoxe Religion, against all Heretiques. The Prouinces of Greece, Italie and Spaine hauing bin infected with Heresie: the Gaules onely remained constant (without wauering in the Catholique Faith) foure hundred yeares together. And vntill such time as the diuell (the enemie to man) caused to be sowne in this field of blessing, the Darnell of a most wicked and detestable Doctrine, by one Vigilantius Tauerner, a natiue of Calahorra in Spaine. As we learne by that learned Father of the Church S. Hierome, writing against Vigilantius: Gallia sola monstris caruit, cum Vigilantius (immo Dormitanus) Caupo Calaguritanus subito exorsus est, etc. Heretiques shoote vp in one night, like to Mushromes.
For the firme constancie in the Catholique Faith, the French Church hath alwaies had the preference and precedency (aboue all other of Christendome) with the holy See of Rome. And vpon this constancy are grounded the liberties thereof, which (to speake all in three words) consist in maintaining the Authority of the holy See Apostolique, and of the vniuersall Councels. Against which is no tolleration in France, of those things which Popes (made men) would innouate. In which case, the

Sacred Parlaments of France, and namely of Paris, are the Ephores, or rather the Areopagites of his power; ruled according to holy Councels, the abuses rooted out.
The great liberties of the Church of France against some Popes proceedings.The liberties of the French or Gallicane Church, are so great, that it is no matter of meruaile, if Popes (preoccupated with passions) sending their fulminations against France: haue no longer bin acknowledged for such men, and that they haue stept out of their obedience, as well by prohibiting the transport of Gold and Siluer out of the Kingdome, as the prouision of Benefices, which (in this case) are remitted to Ordenaries.
The Kingdome of France (by a most auncient priuiledge) hath power, the holy Seate of Rome being vacant, and the Cardinals not agreeing for the election of a Pope:The kingdome of France hath power to elect a Pope. to make choyce of one in France. Pope Gregory the ninth being dead, the Cardinals at Rome were long time proceeding in the election of another. The King S. Lewes, in the yeare one thousand two hundred forty three, sent his Ambassadours to Rome, to signifie and declare to the Cardinals, that they should speedily and without day, proceede to the election of a Pope: if not, thorow their default and negligence, the Prelates of France should elect one beyond the Mountaines, according to the auncient liberties of the Gallicane Church.
Per idem tempus miserunt Franci solemnes Nuncios ad Curiam Romanam significantes persuadendo praecise, and efficaciter, vt ipsi Cardinales Papam rite eligentes, Vniuersali Ecclesiae solatium pastorale maturius prouiderent, vel ipsi Franci propter negligentiam corum, de sibi eligendo, and prouidendo summo Pontifice citra Montes cui obedire tenerentur, quantecyus contrectarent. Et hoc audacter significabant, Confisi de antiquo Priuilegio suo,Pope Innocent the (...) to elected by the ^re^ch Clergyper Sanctum Clementem beato Dionysio concesso, and obtento, qui c^ncessit Apost^latum e^dem Dionysio super gentem Occidentalem. Vnde ipsi Cardinales, quasi quibusdam stimulis, hinc D^mini Imperatoris, inde Francorum agitati, Romam conuementes adierunt, vt Papam eligerent, in vnum ibidem congregati. As they did, electing to the holy Seate Pope Innocent the fourth, on S. Iohn Baptist day, the yeare aboue named, the Seate hauing bin vacant a yeare and nine Moneths.
We may, and will say, for an infallible point of Honor and Precedency of France before Spaine; that France and her Kings, haue preceded Spaine, in beleeuing the Faith of Iesus Christ, Orthodoxall, and Catholique. And the oldest Christians of Spaine, had neuer become such; but by Bishops of France.
Pope Clement sent Dionysius Areopagita into, Gaule to ^reach, and other helpers with h^^.For the Breuiarie of the Church of Toledo in Spaine, speaketh conformerly to that of Paris, and of S. Denys in France: That the Pope S Clement sent the great S. Denys Areopagita into Gaule, and namely to Paris, there to preach the Law of Iesus Christ. Hee gaue him also as coadiutor, these, S. Rusticus, Eleutherius, Eugenius and Regulus; who S. Denys sent as Bishop into Prouence, and he was the Apostle and first Bishop of Arles. To S. Eugenius he gaue the charge of passing into Spaine, which he did, trauailing to the middest thereof: making his stay at Toledo, where he conuerted a great number of Spaniards to Christianitie, so that hee was the first Bishop of Toledo. For which place, hauing prouided a Successour, and ordained Bishop in the principall Cities of Spaine; he returned into France, to conferre with his Maister, concerning the gouernment and ruling the Church of Spaine.
But being arriued at Paris; hee vnderstood, that the great S. Denys and his associates had suffered Martyrdome. And being filled with ioy, as hoping to follow them speedily in the same way;S. Denys and his companions en^red Martyrdome. he laboured to consolate the Parisians, exhorting them to continue firme and constant in the Faith, resolute to liue and dye with them, following the footesteps of his worthy Doctor and Maister.
The Prouost of Paris, Fescennius Sisinnius beleeuing that S. Denys was risen againe: caused S. Eugenius to be taken, and being vnable to compell his sacrificing to the Romaines Idols; hee sent him in banishment to Dueill, betweene S. Denys and Gonnesse, where hee was Martyred, and cast into a Ponde at the same place, where he lay (for a time) vnknowne to the Christians; vntill S. Denys appeared to one of them, named Hercolde, to whom hee gaue charge, for taking vp the

body of his Brother and fellow Scholler, and cured him of a disease,Hercold found the body of Eugen^us and buried it. which quite bereaued his sight, Hercold hauing found the holy Body, as fresh at the same houre as when it was stabd: tooke it thence, and carried it into a piece of his owne Land, where he gaue it buriall.
He made it soone after very famous, in regard of infinite miracles, so that to honour the memory of him; the Inhabitants erected a Church, where his body was reuerenced long time, and the people came thither from all parts of France in Pilgrimages. The Normans and Danes robbing the Kingdome, vnder the declining of the second Ligne of the Kings: the body of S. Eugenius was carried from Dueill to S. Denys in France, a place strong and well guarded.The Normans and Danes ransacked France. When the Warres were appeased, the people of Ducill, willing to regaine their Tutelarie Saint and Patron: it was vtterly impossible for them, to beare it from the Church of S. Denys, where it was carefully kept; so that perforce and constrainedly, they returned without performing any thing.
In the yeare of Grace 1148. the Archbishop of Toledo, called Dom Raymond,A generall Councill at Rheimes in An. 1148. Primate of Spaine, came into France to the generall Councill, then held in the Citie of Rheimes in Champaigne, by Pope Eugenius the third. This Archbishop soiourning at Paris, went to see the Church of S. Denys in France, and visiting the Reliques there, being a great many in number: he espied in one of the Chappels this Epiaphe. Here lyeth Eugenius the Martyre, the first Bishop of Toledo. The memory of whom was abolished, and vtterly lost in Spaine, as well by the length of time, that the Affrican Moores had held Toledo; as ignorance of the place, where the said S. Eugenius had suffered and endured Martyrdome. Wherefore it was at S. Denys* that Dom Raymond learned his Legend, such as we haue summarily before related; and perticularly, that he was Martyrised with stabs of a Ponyard and Sword, by Priests of the Roman Demonomanie, a yeare after the death of the Apostle of the French, S. Denys, by command from the Prouost of Pairs Fefcenious Sisinnius, vnder the reigne and Empire of Adrian.
The Councell at Rheimes being ended, Dom Raymond returned into Spaine, and aduertised the King of Castile Dom Alphonso, in the former narration; requesting his sending into France, to haue some Reliques of the said S. Eugenius. The Historians of Spaine doe confesse, that our King Lewes the yonger, made a voyage to S. Iames in Galitia,King Lewes the yonger his voiage into Spain as well for deuotion (according to our Chronicles) as to visite the King of Castile Alphonso the seauenth, whose daughter, named Constance, he had espoused (after repudiation of his first wife Aelianor of Aquitaine, at the Councell held for the same occasion at Baugency) Alphonso hauing entreated him, to giue him some Reliques of the S. Eugenius, the prime Apostle of Spaine: King Lewes at his returne, sent him the right Arme of the said Saint, richly enshrined. The Shrine was brought to Toledo, carried on the shoulders of the said Alphonso and his Sonnes; which happened in the yeare of Grace 1156. the twelfth day of February, and the said day is yearely celebrated at Toledo as Festiuall, for finding the said S. Eugenius.
In the yeare 1565. King Charles, ninth of the name, was entreated and moued by Ambassadours sent from the King of Spaine Dom Phillip the second,The body of S. Eugenius requested by the King of Spaine and sent vnto him. his Brother in Lawe; to giue him the body of the said S. Eugenius. This precious Relique, the most Noble present that one King could deuise to send to another; was deliuered to the Chanon of Toledo, Dom Pedro Mauriques, Sonne to the great Adelan^^do of Castile, expressely therefore sent into France, very honorably accompanied. The King Dom Phillip, went to receiue the holy body, and himselfe, attended by the Prince Dom Charles his Sonne, and the Arch-Dukes Rodolphus (afterward Emperour, second of the name) and Ernestus, Sonnes to the Emperour Maximillian the second, and his Nephewes;The entertainment of the body in Spaine and where it was placed. carried on their shoulders the Shrine of S. Eugeni^s, from the Gate of the Citie, to the great Church of Toledo, into a Chappell vnder the high Altar, where it remaineth. Thus Princes and Christian Monarchs, honored and reuerenced the Bones of holy Martyrs and Confessors of Iesus Christ, which the Heretiques of our times haue consumed into cinders, in all places where those angry Tygers, haue planted their Ensignes of their Rebellion.
A Lampe of Siluer sent from Spaine ^^to France.The said King Phillip the second, in acknowledgement of so great a benefit; gaue as a present to the Apostle of France, the great S, Denys Areopagita, a Lampe of Siluer, which is to be seene in the vpper Quire at S. Denys in France, before the morning Altar, called of the Trinitie: vnder which, vpon a Piller of Brasse or Copper, is exalted the Shrine of another S. Denys, Bishop of Corinth.
The same Histories of Spaine report, conformably to that which is said by S. Gregory of Tours, in his Historie of France. That Herminigilde, Sonne to Leuuigilde, King of Spaine, had to wife the Sister of Sigibert, King of France, by whose perswasions, he detested Arianisme, professed by the Gothes, and conuerted him to the Catholique Faith. Whereat his Father grew so hatefull towards him, that hee vsed him with all cruelty, sending him farre off into exile, with his wife, and caus^d him also to be slaine,Th^ deserued memory of Ingunda a famous religious Lady. on the very night of Easter, in the yeare of Grace 589. And his wife Ingunda (although shee withdrew into Affrica) ceased not to Cathechise and enstruct in the Orthodoxe Religion, the Brother of her Husband, named ^eccarede, who hauing succeeded after King Leuuigilde his Father, in the Crowne of Spaine: caused a Councill to be assembled at Toledo, in the yeare of Grace 595. the fourth yeare of his Reigne, whereat were present 62. Bishops. Before whom, the said King Reccarede, Bada his wife, and his Vuisigothes abiured Arianisme, and made profession of the Catholique Faith,King Reccarede beco^^^eth by ma^age allied to France. yet afterward, the Spanish Gothes perseuered therein. By the meanes of this conuersion, King Reccarede (being a Widdower) sought alliance and amity with Childebert, King of France, second of the name: taking in marriage Antharts, sister to the said King Childebert, and Ingunda, wife to Herminigilde, which hapned in the yeare 598.
The Gothes being exterminated by the Moores, in the yeare 714. the Ammirant of Affrica, named Musa, Gouernour of Spaine, because he would not desert Toledo,Musa Am^^rant of Affrica and Gouernour of Spaine. Corduba and some other Cities; permitted some small number of old Spanish Christians, rescued from the Moores furie, to inhabite there; namely at Toledo, where were seauen Churches of she Saints, Maria, Eulalia, and Iusta; of he Saints, Marke, Luke, Sebastian and ^orquatus. With them (to be supported) they receiued the Affricane or Arabian Christians* passing out of Affrica into Spaine with Musa; by whose name, both the one and other (confused pell mell together) were called Musarabes, iudged and gouerned according to the Gothes Lawes, by one of their Religion.Musarabes old Spani^h Christians. These Musarabes and old Spanish Christians, long time maintained the Diuine Seruice, according to the manner formerly obserued in Spaine, called the Isidorian Office, or of S. Leander; vntil they receiued that according to the vse of France, otherwise called the Romaine, and the Gregorian, in Anno one thousand threescore and sixteene.
When there was held a Nationall Councill at Burgos, the Capitall Citie in the Kingdome of Castile,A Nationall Councill held at Burgos in the Kingdome of Castile. at the request of Alphonso, sixt of the name, King of Leon and Castile* for reformation of the Isidorian vsage, which smelt yet and tasted of the old Ieuen of Arr^^s his Heresies: Pope Gregory the seauenth, then sitting in the holy Seate, sent as Legate, and to preside in the said Councill, Richard, Abbot of S. Victor at Marseiles, who with inuincible courage, and without any distaste, abolished (quite throughout Castile and Leon) that auncient vsage, instead whereof, he planted there the French. This had formerly bin attempted many times, without bringing it to passe, and likewise in this Councill, it was opposed by some Bishops of Spaine, who would not receiue a new vsage, which they tearmed Officium Galli^snum: as it is reported by the Archbishop of Toledo, Dom Roderigo Ximenes, and the good and faithfull subiect Mariana, in his History of Spaine. But especially Ximenes, in his Spanish History, where he saith: That the French earnestly pursued in Spaine the ^bolition of the Musarabe Office, for the reception of their owne.
Now, as the Spaniards were naturally opinionate and supersticious, and rather good Christians in apparance, then indeede and effect: so the Histories of Spaine doe report, that before receiuing in Spaine this Officium Gallicanum, as they called it; the Nobilitie and People openly bandied themselues, so that the most part of the Cleargie, contrary to this Decree in the Councill of Burgos, could not induce nor preswade them to receiue it: vntill after the proofe and examination,

vsually made in Spaine and elsewhere, in matters of importance, to know whether the French Office should be preferred, before their Musarabe: they brought two Champions in Battaile, to descide this quarrell in Combate, and by force of Armes.
The Spanish Historians, to despight the French, haue purposely let slip vnder silence (malliciously and disdainfully) the name of the French Champion.The difference to be discided in single Combat by two Champions. And yet tell vs, that theirs was called Iohn Ruiz de Matienza, a Bourgade seated by the Riuer of Puiserga. Also, that the Champion fighting for the Gothish Office, ouercame him for France: and by that meanes, the preferrence and honor remained to his side.
When the Combat was ended, they made their recourse to proofe by Fire.A second triall made by fire, and what succeeded thereon. For in the Citie of Toledo, in those times newly conquered from the Moores, a great Fire was kindled, wherein the French and Gothish Offices were throwne together. The French leapt immediately out of the Fire, whole, intire, and without any harme. That also of the Gothes, hauing continued there a much longer time; was likewise taken forth without any burning. Notwithstanding all these essayes, in right defended and prohibited by the Church, against the opinion of the Spaniards: the Decree of the Councill preuailed, and the Legate Apostolicall, Richard of Marseilles, Dom Bernard, then Archbishop of Toledo,The ordination for a small conclusion and the most part of the Bishops Suffragans, ordained. That in the ancient Churches, built by the Christians Musarabes, the auncient forme of Prayers should be maintained, after the Gothish manner. As yet to this day it is (in my time) certaine dayes in the yeare, in the Cathedrall Church of Toledo, in the Chappell of the Sacrament of the Altar: but in other Churches, the Office Romaine, or Gallicane, should be receiued in Castill and Leon.
Sixteene yeares before, to wit, in Anno One thousand and sixtie,The Gallicane Office receiued in Arragon, and the neighbouring Prouinces the said Gallicane Office had bin receiued in Arragon, and the neighbouring Prouinces of the ancient resort or iurisdiction of the Crowne of France (as we haue said) by the Nationall Councill held at the Citie of Iacca. Wherein Presided S. Austindus, Archbishop of Auch in Armagnac, with the Suffragans the Bishops, Sancio of Iacca, called of Arragon; Paternus of Sarragossa; Arnauldus of Roda; William of Orgell; Hera^^^us of Tarbes in Begorre; Stephen of Oleron in Bearn, and many other Prelates. In this Councill it was ordained, that the Gothish Office should be vtterly suppressed; and the Romaine or Gallicane introduced and obserued. Moreouer, if hereafter the Citie of of Huesca should be wonne from the Moores, that then possessed it; the Episcopall See of Arragon, being then at Iacca, should be there established, as it had bin before.
In this manner then, both the Monarches of the Lillie, and the Kingdome of France, had the principall aduantage aboue that of Spaine, for profession of the Catholique Faith, the true point of Nobilitie, a Precedencie obtained by our first King Clouis, when he embraced the Orthodoxe Religion, and not Arianisme, whereof the Kings of Spaine made profession. It is true Nobilitie, to be truely Christian: as the Bishoppe of Auuergne, Sidonius Apollinaris said, in the Epitaph for his Grandfather.
Haec sed maxima dignitas probaturQuod frontem Cruce, membra fonte purgans:Primus de numero Patrum suorumSacris sacrilegis renuntiauit.Hoc primum est decus, haec superba Virtus,Spe praecedere, quos honore iungas.
It is an Historicall meditation, greatly remarkeable from the Sacring of King Clouis, that then when he embraced the Faith of Iesus Christ:Clouis the onely Catholique King in the World. the Kings of Christendome were infected with Heresie, and he alone Orthodoxall. For the Emperour Anastasius, who reigned in the East, was infected with many Heresies, and for them Excommunicated by Pope Symmachus. The Kings of England were either

Pagans or Idolaters, and the rest plundged in the errour of Pelagius. Theodoricke, King of the Ostrogothes in Italie; them of Bourgongne; Alaricus, King of the V^isigothes in Aquitaine; The Kings of the Alanes, Vandales and Sweues, who then commanded the most part of Spaine and Affrica, all taking part with detestable Arrius. There was not then in all the world, an Orthodoxall and Catholique Prince; but onely Clouis: King of the French. And this was it which moued the most learned Cardinall Baronius (discoursing on his Sacring) to say. Contemplare, Lector, praesentis temporis Ecclesiae Catholica statum, quo (mirum dictu) nullus esset reperiri in toto terrarum orbe penitus Princeps. Christianus Catholicus: nam and qui velament^ Fidei Orthodoxae diu latuit Anastasius Imperator, iam apertissime cognitus hareticus, Catholicae fidei oppugnator, iuste, meruit tandem a Romano Pontifice Excommunicatione percelli, etc.
A further realtion collected out of Cardinal BaroniusAnd in another place after he had admired the vnsearchable Counsels of the Diuine Wisedome, who for the support of his Church; illuminated Clouis to embrace earnestly the Catholique Faith; he saith. Etenim hoc ipso anno (quis credit?) quo tam densae tenebrae operiunt vbique Terram, and caligo Populos, in Gallijs plane diuinitus Nou^ Lucis Fulgidum Sidus apparuit, cum videlicet Clodoueus ille magnus Francorum Rex, illustratione sacri Baptismatis filius lucis efficitur.
And from that time is it, that the Monarchs of the Lillie obtained the right of Precedency, aboue all other Kings and Princes on the earth. As God promised to Dauid (Psal. 89.28.29.30.) to giue him the right of Primogeniture, aboue all Kings of the earth, for the constancie of his true Religion, wherein the Sacred Kings of France haue bin successours to Dauid. Ego Primogenitum ponam illum excelsum pr^ Regibus Terrae: and ponam in saeculum saeculi Semen eius, and Thronum eius, sicut dies Coeli.
This is the auncient testimonie of S. Gregory the great Pope, in the Epistle which he wrote to the King of France Childebert, second of the name, and yongest sonne of Clouis. That the King of France is as excellent, aboue all other Kings of the earth, as Maiestie Royall is aboue all other men. Quanto Regia dignitas caeteras antecellit, tanto caterarum Gentium, Sentium, Regnorumque Regni perfectio vestri culmen excellit. Esse Regem, quia sunt and alij, non mirum est. Sed esse Catholicum, quod alij non merentur, hoc fortis est. Sicut enim magnae lampadis splendor in tetrae noctis obscuritate, lumints sui claritate fulgescit: ita Fidei vestrae claritas inter aliarum gentium perfidiam, rutilat, atque coruscat. Quidquid caeteri Reges se habere gloriantur, hoc habetis: sed ipsi in hac re vehementius superantur a vobis, quoniam principale bonum non habent, quod habetis.
Looke how much Royall Dignity surpasseth all them of the World; so much the more the Kingdome of France, excelleth the height and greatnesse of the Nations and Kingdomes of the earth. To be honored with the magnificent title of King, is no matter of noueltie, neither winneth a ranke of Precedencie and Honor; because it is but equall to many other Kings of Prouinces in the World.Wherein consisteth iustly both Excellencie and Prec^dencie.But to be a King that maketh profession of the Catholique Faith, and who (in that respect) deserueth to be tearmed Most-Christian: therein is the Excellencie, and the infallible right of certaine Precedencie, which is not communicable to a Prince on the earth, how great soeuer he may pretend to be. Because, like as the brightnesse of a great burning Lampe, serueth as the Sunne at mid-day, during the feares of a cloudie darke night, drowned in all obscuritie: in the same manner, the clearenesse of Faith in the Most-Christian Kings of France, shineth in all bright splendour and glory, aboue all the Kings of Christendome.
At s^^h time as great King Clouis receiued the Faith of Iesus Christ; Anastasius, Theodoricke, Alarick, and the rest, who tearmed themselues Christian Kings; were deuided from them that professed true Religion indeede, by an infinitie of torments and punishments.(...) difference betweene Clouis and the other King. On the contrary, Clouis, immediately after his Baptime; applied his minde, to bring the Church into her auncient luster, and to warre vpon such as tyrannized ouer her.
A generall Councill at Orleans in France.First, he caused to be assembled a generall Councill of all the Prouinces in France, in the Citie of Orleans (as it is obserued by Hinemarus of Rheims, and Sigibert after him) writing to the Fathers assembled at the said place, this remarkeable Letter, the tenure whereof thus ensueth.
The Letter written by King Clouis, to the Generall Councell assembled at Orleans.Dominis sanctis, and Apostolica Sede dignissimis Episcopis,Clodouaeus Rex.ENunciante fama quid actum fuerit, vel praeceptum omni Exercitui nostro priusquam in patriam Gothorum ingrederemur, Beatitudini vestrae praeterire non potui. In primo quoque de ministerio Ecclesiarum omnium praecipimus, ne ad subripiendum ea aliquis conaretur, neque de Sanctimonialib. neque de Viduis quae in Religione Domini deuotae esse probantur* simili conditione de Clericis, vel filijs supradictorum tam Clericorum, quam Viduarum, qui cum illis in domo ipsorum consistere videbantur. Idem, and de seruis Ecclesiarum, quos de Ecclesijs tractos per Episcoporum sacramenta constiterit, praeceptum est obseruare, vt nullus ex ipsis aliquam violentiam, vel damnum patiatur. Quod ita ad integrum est intelligendum, vt ex his supradictis si aliquis vim captiuitatis pertulisset siue in Ecclesia, siue extra Ecclesiam, omnino sine aliqua dilatione praecipiamus esse reddendos. De ceteris quidem captiuis Laicis, qui extra pacem sunt captiuati, and fuerint approbati Catholici, aut cui volueritis arbitrij vestri, non est denegandum. Nam de his qui in pace nostra tam Clerici, quam Laici subrepti fuerint, si veraciter agnoscitis, vestras Epistolas de annullo vestro infra signat as sic ad nos omnimodis dirigatis, and a parte nostra praeceptionem latam noueritis esse firmandum: sic tum Populus noster petit, vt cuicumque Epistolas vestras praestare fueritis dignitati, cum sacramento per Deum, and benedictione vestra dicere non tardetis, rem istam quae poscitur, veram esse: quia multorum varietates, and falsitates inuentae sunt, vt comprehendantur, sicut scriptum est: Perit Iustus cum impio. Orate pro me, Domine sancti, and Apostolica Sede Papa dignissimi.
And in the second place,His seco^d purpose to warre against the Vuisigothes Arrians. hee resolued to warre (with all his power) vpon the Vuisigothes, sworne enemies to the Catholiques; because they were Arrians, and to purge and cleanse France of such an heresie. For so saith S. Gregory of Tours in his History of France. Clodouaeus Rex ait suis; Valde moleste fero, quod hi Ariani (speaking of the Vuisigothes, from whom the Spaniards deriue a part of their pretended Precedency for their Kings) partem teneant Galliarum. Eamus cum Dei adiutorio, and superatis redigamus terram in ditionem nostram. At the very opening of this Warre, he speaketh as if he had the Victory already assured to him; and the God of battell blessed his enterprise, as we haue formerly said.
For this cause the Fathers assembled in the said Councell of Orleans (wherein are named aboue all the rest for sanctitie of life, and numbred in the Catalogue of Saints, to this day famous in the Church: Gildardus Bishop of Rouen; Lupus of Soissons (Sonne to S. Principus, Bishop likewise of Soissons, and Nephew to S. Rhemigius of Rheims) S. Melanius of Rennes, Quintianus of Rhodes,Especiall reuerend fathers assembled in the Councell, remembred for their vertues. Theodosius of Auxerre, and Leontius of Tolosa:) doe testifie that it was the feruour and deuotion of this great King Clouis, for augmentation of the true Religion, and that therefore onely, he deserued (by good right) aboue all Princes in the world, the title of Catholike, and the Sonne of the Catholique Church.
Domino suo Catholicae Ecclesiae Filio Clodouaeo Gloriosissimo Regi.OMnes Sacerdotes, quos ad Consilium venire iussistis, quia tanta ad Catholicae Religionis cultum gloriosae fidei cura vos excitat, vt Sacerdotales mentis affectu, Sacerdotes de rebus necessarijs tractaturos in vnum colligi iusseritis; secundum vestrae voluntatis consultationem, and titulos quos dedistis, ea quae nobis visa sunt, definitione respondimus: ita vt si ea quae nos statuimus, eti^m vestro recta esse iudicio comprobantur, tanti concensi^ Regis ac Domini maioris, auctoritatem seruandam tantorum firmat sententia Sacerdetum.
K. Clouis, Son of the Catholicke Church.Such was the reuerence and honour, which those Holy men bare vnto this great King Clouis, in giuing him the title of Son of the Catholique Church* that is to say, the Elogium or testimony of Catholique King. This Councel was held in the yere of Grace, fiue hundred and seuen. And the Title of Catholique was not giuen to the Kings of Spaine, in the person of Don Ferdinand of Arragon, till long time after the taking of Granada (happening in the yeare 1492. there are sixe score yeeres) to wit,Pope Iulius 2. a heauy enemie to the French. in the yeere 1412. by Pope Iulius the second, a Capitall enemy to the French, in despight of the battell at ^auenna, lost by him and his partakers. Which gaue good occasion to the Italian Sabellicus, to write in sufficient intelligible tearmes: That the King of France Clouis, was the first of all the Kings on the Earth, that drew sword against Heretiques, to extirpate them. The same honourable title of Catholike King, and eldest sonne of the Church, was giuen to the said Clouis, by the Councells of Magunce, and of Aix in Germany.
And his example serued as a Lanthorne and guide, for doing the like to his Descendants and Nephewes. King Gonthran perceiuing that the Arrian Vuisigothes held and possessed the frontiers of the Gaules, Languedocke and Prouence; concluded to rouze them thence, as S. Gregory of Tours telleth vs in his French Historie: Igitur Rex Gunthramnus in Hispania exercitum commoueri praecipit, dicens. Prius Septimaniam Pr^uinciam ditioni nostrae subdite, quae Galijs est propinqua. Indignum enim est, vt horrendorum Gothorum terminus vsque in Gallias sit extensus.
He cald the V^is^go^hes execrable, because they were infected with the Heresie of Arrius, the most abhominable of all other that euer had beene; and in regard, that in all their actions they were cruell and bloudy, according to the Nature ingrafted in all Heretiques.
Concerning the donation of S. Peters patrimony.Augustino Cranat^, among all his cunning trickes, some-what cleanly sowed together with fine white sisters thred, could not iustifie, that the Patrimony of Saint Peter should come from the donation of the Spanish Kings. In despight of his teeth he must confesse and auouch, that the Exarcate of Rauenna, Romaignia, and all el^e contained in the Oath of Otho (formerly spoken of) came onely from the Kings of France, alwaies good benefactors to the Holy See. The same Cranato, knew not how to blanche the Emperour Charles the fift, (whom hee exalted vp to the third heauen) concerning the sac^e of Rome, set downe in very few words.
Philebert de Chalon, Prince of Orenge, Lieutenant to the said Charles the fift, hauing besieged Rome,The sacking and spoyle of Rome, by the Army of Charle^ the 5. Emperor. preuailed in his purpose on Sonday, the fift day of May, An. 1527. I here, by the Catholique Spaniards, (of the grossest graine) ioyned with the Germanes, he caused to be exercised the very greatest cruelties, that the Turke and Affricane Moores coniured enem^es to the Christians) knew not how to doe the like; without respect or any distinction, eyther of Age, Sexe, or the most sacred things, no more then they that were the prophanest.
Pope Clement, the Cardinalls, Rancio de Cere, with other Romane Lords, saued themselues in the C^stle of S. Angelo: whereinto they were no sooner entred, but pressed also with a long siege, from which to be deliuered, the Holy father was enforced to giue an hundred and fiftie thousand Crownes in ready money, for redemption of the persons and goods being in the said Castle, which the Pope was to deliuer to the Spaniards, with all the munition for Warre therein, beside two hundred and fifty thousand Crownes, at time agreed vpon.
The P^pe very hardly constrained b^ the Spani^rds.Ouer and aboue those, foure hundred thousand Crownes for ransome, the Pope was constrained (by composition) to discharge the said Charles the fift, and the Kings of Naples his Successours, of an annuall Cens or quit-rent of eight thousand Ounces of Gold and of all the arrerages which formerly were owing; and to content himselfe afterward with a white Haquency, at euery Lords change. This Order was dated in Anno 1528.
The ^ing of (...) the (...) ca^e.King Francis the first, as the most Christian King of France, and Eldest Sonne of the Church, to reuenge this iniury done to the High Priest of the Catholique Church, and set him at libertie, leuied presently a potent Army, the Conduct whereof he gaue to the Lord of Lautrec, Messire Odet de Foix. It was composed of nine hundred men of Armes, and of fiue hundred light horse, and of sixe thousand Lance-Knights;

whereof was Colonell, the Count de Vaudemont; sixe thousand Gascoins, conducted by Don Pedro de Nauarre; ten thousand Switzers, commanded by Mondragon, a Gascoin Captaine; and foure thousand French, by the Lord De Burie, with good number of Artillery.
This Army being ready to marche on, King Francis sent Guyenne King of Arms, to defie the said Emperour Charles the fift, hee then soiourning at the City of Burgos in Castile. The Letter of defiance vnder hand and seale, was dated at Paris, the eleuenth day of Nouember, in the yeare 527. signed by Guyenne King of Arms, importing as followeth.
FRancis, by the Grace of God, the Most-Christian King of France, of Naples and of Sicily;A Letter of defiance sent to Charles the 5. in part declared. Duke of Millaine, and Lord of Geneway, defied and declared Warre against him both by Sea and Land: Because by his command (entitling himselfe Catholique King) the City of Rome was taken, forced and spoyled, the Pope and his Cardinalls detained Prisoners, as yet still they were; Churches pilled, Women and Maidens violenced, and that great City, the chiefest of the World, reduced into an estate so wretched and miserable, as she neuer had bin so vsed by the Gothes, Hunnes, and other sworne enemies to the Church, etc.
Charles the fifth laboured to excuse these violences, but it was apparant, that he onely had part of the booty, of the Sacke and Pillage of the City of Rome,The Emperors cold excuses in this case. and the Popes ransome; beside the acquitting and discharge of the Kingdome of Naples, amounting well-neere to a Million of Gold. The same Emperor Charles the fifth, and his sonne Dom Philip the second, then being in England, caused Rome to be besieged, making strong warre vpon Pope Paul, fourth of that name.Henry King of France sent succour to the Pope Paulus Qu^rtus. To whom in the yeare 1556. King Henry, second of that name, sent succor, conducted by the Duke of Guise; which Armie consisted of fifteene thousand Foote, fiue hundred men of Armes, and eight hundred Light-horse; which constrained the Dukes of Parma and Florence, Lieutenants to the said Emperour and Philip, to discampe from before Rome, and to leaue the Pope and Romanes quiet.
At all times, Popes being offended by forraigne Princes, and namely Emperors,Popes at all times haue found no such refuge as in France. neuer found any more assured retreat, then to France, neither any such ready succour in the very strongest of their afflictions: the Monarchs of the Lillie haue alwaies beene the men; others neuer had any part or portion, in the honour of so holy an enterprise.
Pope Innocent the fourth, being persecuted by the Emperour Fredericke the second of that name, vsurper of the Kingdome of Sicilie, came into France, as into a place of certaine safety. He assembled a Councell at Lyons, in the yeere of Grace 1245. whether the King S. Lewis went to see him,The offer of King Lewis to Pope Innocent the fourth. and offered him and the Holy Seate, for succour against the said Emperour Fredericke and other enemies, his Person and Kingdome, which (at all times) had beene the Refuge and Sanctuary for afflicted Popes, so saith the Historian of England, Mathew Paris.
In the yeare 1244. towards the feast of S. Michael, the King S. Lewis, Queene Blanch his Mother, the Kings Brethren, Counts of Artois and Poictiers, the Duke of Bourgongne, and sixe Counts of France, went to the Generall Chapter at the Cisteaux, (an Order of white Friers in France) there to vtter their Prayers, and to see so many Abbots there assembled together; who marched in Order and Procession before the Most-Christian King.
The Pope hearing of the Kings comming to the Cisteaux, sent to entreat the Abbots of the saide Order, to obtaine of his Maiesty permission to come and shield himselfe in France. Vt secundum antiquam, and consuetam Franciae consuetudinem, and libertatem, patrem suum, and pastorem summum ac praecipium Ecclesiae rectorem, videlicet Romanum Pontificem, contra insultus Imperatoris potenter tueri, atque defendere dignaretur. Et si necessitatis articulus expostularet, sinum pandens ingenuae pietatis, eum in Regno suo benigne receptaret. Sicut quondam bonae memoriae Alexandro Papae (tertio) exulanti, and a facie Frederici Imperatoris persequentis, fugienti: consolationem and refugium noscebatur praestitisse.
Philip Augustus did as much to Pope Innocent the third, against the Emperors,Philip Augustus succoured Pope Innocent the third. Philip

and Otho, as we haue already declared in the precedent Chapter.
Pope Adrian succoured by Charlemaigne.Charlemaigne went diuers times into Italy, to the assistance of Pope of Adrian, against Didier, King of the Lombards, afflicting the Pope and the holy Seate; hee exterminated his reigne in Italie, and confined him prisoner in the Castle (famous by his name yet this day) Mons-Desiderij, Mount-Didier in Picardy.
Pope Stephen assisted by K Pepin le Bref, and restored to his seate.King Pepin le Bres, Father to Charlemaigne, receiued into his Protection and safeguard, Pope Stephen, in whose fauour he went two seuerall times into Italy against Astolphus, as then King of the Lombards; whom he sent packing from Pauia, constrained (after he had endured a long siege) to submit himselfe. Hee restored the said Pope Stephen to the Holy Seate, which he held by his liberalities, euen the Patrimonie, called of S. Peter, particularized before in the Oath of the Emperor Otho, fourth of that name, to Pope Innocent the third. And the same Pope Stephen, comming into France, King Pepin, his wife, his children, and all the Nobilitie, went to receiue him at the farthest Frontires of the Kingdome, and kept him company to Pauia.
At the first meeting of K. Pepin with the Pope, he forth-with alighted on foot, and all his company, and in that manner went three miles, or three thousand paces before him* and then going neerer to him, fell on his knees, kissing his feete in all humility, taking the Holy Fathers Palfrey by the bridle, and so conducted him to the place which was prouided for him.
Like Honour and Reuerence haue many Popes receiued, comming into France (which haue beene a very great number) where they haue beene welcommed, nourished, and defended against their enemies, by our Kings and the people of France, as the like cannot be said of any other Kingdome in Christendome. As hath been obserued by the learned S. Thomas Aquinas, in his booke De Regimine Principum, dedicated to Iames King of Cyprus, of the Illustrious House of Lusignan in Poictou. That in former times the Emperours of the East, and of Constantinople, were Protectors of the Holy Seate of Rome, to the ^ime of the Sacred Kings of France, Pepin and Charlemaigne, of whom he implored helpe, to be redeemed from the slauery and seruitude of them of Lombardy. Aduocauit Romanus Pontifex ad sui defensionem contra Long-bardos ^^ges ^rancorum. Primo quidem Pepinum Stephanus Pap^, and successor Zachariae contra Astulphum Regem Longobardorum. Deinde Adrianus, and Le^ Carolum Magnum contra Desiderium Astulphi ^um. And for this cause (saith hee) the Kingdome of France is and alwaies hath beene, the assured Retreat for the afflicted Pop^s. Nothing can be said of the li^e in fauour of Spaine
Another way whereby to censure* concerning precedency.The Precedency of France ought likewise to be iudged by Learning, Pietie, and extendure of the Kingdome, with the other, which is best knowne by the great number of Diocesses and of Vniuersities: an Argument which may Warre to some purpose.
All the Spaines intirely (comprehending therein the Kingdomes of Nauarre and Portugall haue no more but sixe famous Vniuersities, as namely Academiae Illerdens^^,The Vniuer^ (...) greatest fame in Spain. Commbriensis, Oscensis, Toletana and Salamanticenfis. Speaking properly in the Countrey Language: Lerida in Nauarre; Coimbre in Portugal; Huesca in Arragon: and the rest in the midst of Spaine, to witte, Alcala de Henarez; Toledo, and Salamanca.
In France there are twelue; as namely Paris, sans Pair, without Peere, the City of the Lillie;Twelue v^iversit^es in France, Paris the (...). not of the Kings of the Persians, but the ordinary abiding of the greatest Monarch in the World, The Most Christian King of France. Paris, the true residence, and the Parnassus of the Muses; the Magazine and Store-house of all kindes of Arts, Sciences, and Faculties; and principally renowned through all parts of Christendome, for that of Diuinity.
Foure Academies in the middest of France.She is followed by the Vniuersities of Orleans, of Bourges, Poictiers, and of Angiers in the middest of France: of Bourdeaux in Guienne, of Tolosa, of Cahors, and of Mont-Pelier (particularly famous for the faculty of Physicke, Chirurgerie, and Pharmacie in Languedocke; of Valentia in Daulphine; of Rheims in Champaigne, and of Caen in Normandie. And all these Vniuersities are Regented by Professors of singular Pietie, and exquisite learning.
The names of the said Vniuersities, are Lutetia Parisiorum, Aurelia, Biturix, Pictauium, Andegauum, Burdegala, Tolosa, Cadurcum, Mons-Pessulus, Valentia, Rhemensis, and Cadomum, called and sir-named otherwise, Caij, vel Gaij-domus.
As concerning the number of Diocesses; France hath euermore made her deuotion to shine and appeare, aboue all other Kingdomes in Christendome.
We learn in the histories of Spain, that their King Bamba, or Vamba, as they please to pronounce it, and of whom the Spaniards make fabulous tales (concerning his staffe, which bloomed or blossomed so soone as it was fixed in the ground) was hee who made diuision of Bishoprickes and Diocesses therein, as now at this day; changing and disposing, quite contrary to that which they were ordered for, in the time of Constantine the Great; vnder whose Empire, the Metropolitane Sees of Spayne were these.
Hispalis, Emerita, Carthagena, Taracona, and Brachara: which in Spanish are Seuill, Merida, Carthagena is ruined, and the Metropolitane Seate transferred (say they) to Toledo, the primatiall Church of the Spaynes Taragon and Braga, famous by her Councell, called by ignorants in the Spanish tongue, Bracarense Concilium.
As for the Suffragans belonging to these Archbishopricks,The Archbishopricks Suffraganes. Seuil had the Bishopricks of Italica, Seritium, Assidonia, Elepla, Malaca, Eliberis, Astigium, and that of Egabrum: hereafter we will obserue the Spanish Vocables.
MErida for her Diocessans, had the Bishopricks, named Pax Iulia, Olissipo,Diocesses of Merida. Egitania, Conimbrica, Lamecum Ebora, Cauria and Lampa, otherwise vulgarly called Salamanca.
CArthagena had for Suffragans, Toletum, Oretum, Setabis, Segobrica, Complutum,Suffragans of Carthagena. Caraca, Valentia, Murcia, Biatia, Castulo, Montogia, Basta, and Bigena, otherwise called Bigastra.
TAragone, the Bishoprickes named Barcino, Auca, Morada, Beria Oriola, Ilerda,Bishopricks of Taragone. Dertusa, Caesar Augusta, and anciently called Salduba, Osca, Pompelo, and the last, Calagurris.
BRaga, the fift and last Metropolitane Seate, had vnder it Dumio, Portu-Cale,Them of Braga. Auria, Oueto, Asturica, Britonia, Iria, Allubria, Iffa, and the last, Tuda.
KIng Bamba diuided these Diocesses wholly after another fashion; erecting for Metropolitanes, Toledo, which he made Primatiall of all Spaine, Seuille, Merida,The diuision made by King Bamba. Braga, and Taragone.
TOledo, which was sometime the Capitall City of the Vuisigothes, Kings of Spaine, had for Suffragans these Bishopricks; Oretum, Biatia, Menteza, Acci,Belonging to Toledo. ^asti, Murcia, (otherwise called Vrci) Bagasta, (that City is ruined) Illici, Setabis, Di^nium, Valeria, Segobrica, Arcabrica (by Ptolemie called Percabica, and these two last Cities are destroyed) Siguntum, Complutum, Vxama, Segobia, and Palenca, called at ^his present Almagro, Baeca: Montison, Guadix, Baza, Almeria, Helche, Xatiua, Denia, Valence, otherwise called Valere la Bruslee, in Spanish Valeria quemada, Alcala de He^arez, Monuiedro, Osma; Segobia and Palenca haue kept their ancient appellation, and ^he Castulo of Constantine, is at this present Lez Naues de Tolosa.
SEuille had vnder her diuision these Bishopricks following; Italica, Assidonia, Lepe,Of them appertaining to Seuille. otherwise Elepla, Eliberis seated on the knap of a hill, named Eluira, two miles from Grenada, Astigij, Corduba, Egabrum and Tucci, called at this present Seuille la ^ieille, Medina Sidonia, Niebla, Malaga, Ezigia, Cordona, Cabra and Martos.Olde Seuille.
MErida had Pax Iulia, Olissipo, Elbora, Oxonoba, Igeditania, Conimbrica, Lamecum,Of them belonging to Merida. Viseo, Caliabria, Salmantica, Numantium, Auila, and Soria, at this day Begia, Lis^na, (capill City of Portugall, where the name is pronounced without N. Lisboa)



Euora, Estombar neere to Sylues aux Algarues, which at this present is a Bishopricke, Idania la Vieille, Caimbre the olde, built heeretofore, two miles from the new, Vise^ Lamego, Montange, Salamanca, Garay, built neere to olde Numantium (so much renowned by the Roman Histories for her obstinacy), and these two latter haue still retained their ancient appellations.
The Bishopricks of Braga.BRaga had these Bishopricks; Dumio, which is no more then a Monastery, Cal^, Auria, Tude, Iria Flauia, Brentonia (otherwise called Britannica, and Lucus Augusti) Asturica, and Legio gemina. This is now Caia, Orense, Tuy, Padrono in Galicia, Bretagna, Astorga and Leon.
The suffragan Bishopricks of Tarragone in Arragone.TAragone in Arragon, had for Suffraganes these Bishoprickes of Barcino, Egara, which is no more: Morada, called otherwise Gironda, Beria, Auca, Oriola, Ilerda, Hi^tosa, which is no more: Dertusa, Caesar Augusta, at this day an Archbishopricke, and chiefe City of the Kingdome of Arragon: Osca, Pompile, Calagurias, Turiaso and Auca (the ruines of this last City are to be seene beneath Burgos, capitall Citie of Castille, and from thence the List and round of Mountaines, which engirt olde Castille, so farre as neere to Nauarre, is named the Mountaines of Oca.)
Bishopricks of Barcelona.These are at this present the Bishopricks of Barcelona; Girone, Empuries, Vic D'Osone, Origel, Lerida, Tortosa, Saragoce, Huesca; Pampelona capitall City of the Kingdom of Nauarre, Calaorra and Taracone. But this Order hath beene since changed, some of these Cities being Metropolitane, as Burgos and Saragossa, which were somtimes but Bishopricks.
And this is worthy to be obserued of France, that Arragon, and the Prouinces neighbouring to France, conquered by our King Charlemaigne; acknowledged for Metropolitane,Auch in Gascoign the Metropolitane, and her suffragans. the Archbishoprick of Auch in Gascoigne, of which were Suffragans the Bishopricks of Barcelona, Girona, Orgell, Empuries, Vic D'Osoue and Tarassone. And the very greatest part of Arragon, the Counts of Barcelona, Catalogna, Roussillon, and Cerdagnia relied on the Crowne of France, and thereof they acknowledged the Soueraignty, since the Conquest of the said Charlemaigne, and the names of the Kings of France were inserted and no^ed, at the beginning of all publique Acts, which were expedited to the said Prouinces, and which was obserued vnto the yeare of Grace, 1182. when Alphonso, second of that name King of Arragon, Count of Barcelona, Catalogna, Roussillon and Cerdaignia, caused a Nationall Councell to be assembled at Taragona.A Nationall Councell cal'd by Alphonso K. Arragon against the soueraignty of France. In which Councell was prohibited for euer after, to acknoledge the Kings of France as Soueraignes in the said Prouinces, and the Notaries, Registers and Scriueners, were no more to insert in their Acts, the names of the Kings of France, and the date of their yeeres Reignes, as they had done before: but onely the yeere of the Incarnation of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ, which in France we call the yeere of Grace.
^. Metropolitans, and 60. Bishopricks in Spaine.There are then in all the Spaines, seuen Metropolitane Seates; as Toledo, Seuille, Merida, Burgos, Braga, Saragossa, and Taragona: and threescore Bishopricks, or thereabout.
In France there be fifteene Metropolitane Seates, and an hundred and ten Bishoprickes.
15. Metropolitans, and 110. Bishopricks in France.At the beginning of this Chapter, we obserued the seuenteene Prouinces of the Gaules, according to the ancient Order and Ranke which they held, when they were obedient to the Romane Emperors. But the Order is not such, in regard of the Metropolitane Seates, and Diocesses of France. Whereof S. Isidore, Archbishop of Seuill in Spaine, (for we will serue our selues with Spanish Authors, which cannot be gaine-said by them of their owne Nation) nameth the first Metropolitan Seat, to be that of Lyons.
Lyons the first Metropolitan Citie.An ancient goodly City, laued and watered with the Riuers of Rhosne, and of Saosne, Rhone and Soan. The Archbishop thereof is Primate of the Gaules. This Primacie was heeretofore contested by the Archbishop of Sens, who euen to this day so entitleth himselfe, and qualifieth Primate of the Gaules, and also of Germanie.
And yet notwithstanding these interiected appellations of the Archbishop of Sens, it relied to the Primacy of Lyons, the Archbishop whereof preceded all the Metropolitanes in the Kingdome of France; consequently those of Spaine, and all the Kingdomes of Christendome, what part soeuer they tooke or held in the Generall Councells. The Church is dedicated vnder the name of S. Iohn the Euangelist, remarkeable for the integrity there carefully kept for Diuine seruice, as it had beene from the Apostles time, and birth of the Church. For this cause it is said of her, that Ecclesia Lugdunensis non recipit nouitates.
It is then to be noted, that the Metropolitane Sees and Diocesses in the holy Kingdome of France, doe marche in this order. Lugdanensis prima,The Order of the Metropolitane See^ or France, and how they are marshalled ech after other. Lugdunensis secunda, Lugdunensis tertia, Lugdunensis quarta, Lugdunensis quinta.
There is next after the first Gaule Belgica and second, follow
The first, second, and third Prouinces of Aquitaine: after which come the
First and second Prouinces Narbonnoise, which S. Isidore calleth the second and third Prouinces Viennoises, and these are followed by the
Fourth Prouince Viennoise, so saith S. Isidore, and of the said Prouinces, these are the Diocesses,
The first Prouince of the Gaules, is that of Lyons, called in Latine Lugdunum,Lyons the first Prouince of the Gaules. which hath for Suffragans foure Bishopricks, on this side the Saone in Bourg-Ogne; to wit Autun, in Latine Aedua in the Commentaries of Caesar, and Augustodunum by the Doctor of Doctors S. Hierome.
When as the See of Lyons is vacant, the Bishop of Autun presideth and gouerneth therein, whereof he maketh the fruits to be his: And the Archbishop of Lyons doth as much in the Bishopricke of Autun,The City of Autun now desert and ruined. at such time as it is without a Bishop. This City of Autun, heeretofore one of the most renowned of the Gaules, in the time of Caesar, and now desert and ruined, is seated on the Riuer of Aurou.
Next after marcheth Langres, called Lingonensis Ecclesia, a Duchie and Peeredome of France, a City seated on the mountaine of Vauga, or Vouge, tearmed in Latine Vos^gus, and Vogesus by Lucane the Spanish Poet. A place famous for hunting,Kings of Orleans called Kings De Bourg-Ogne. by our Kings of Orleans, called De Bourg-Ogne, of the first Line; as we haue said in the Treatise, concerning the principall Officers of the Crowne of France.
After Langres is the Bishopricke of Mascon, cited by Caesar, and called Matisco, and vulgarly, Ciuitas Matisconensis, seated on the Riuer of Saone. It is followed by that of Chalon, called by the Latine Geographers Cabilonum, and by Caesar, Cabilinum; in like manner seated on the Riuer of Saone.
Lugdunensis secunda, or the second Prouince Lyonnois,The 6. Bishopricks of Normandie, marshalled in their rank and order. is the same which wee call Normandie, the Metropolitane See or Seate whereof is Rouen, called in Latine Rethomagus, seated vpon the royall Riuer of Seine, and beautified with one of the Parlements of France. The Archbishop whereof entitleth and qualifieth himselfe Primate of Normandie, hauing sixe Suffragans vnder him, remarkeable by this a^onimate name Sacble. These are the Bishoprickes following; of Bayeux, called ^aiocassis, Baiocensis, Baiocae, and the Inhabitant Baiocasses. Auranches is second, in La^ine Abrincensis, Abrincantum, Abricatensis, Arboricensis, and Abrincae. A Seate re^owned by Robertus Coenalis, Doctor in Diuinity, of the faculty of Paris, Bishop of ^uranches, whose Tombe and figure is to be seene raised in Copper, on the North ^de in the Quire of S. Pauls Church at Paris. After Auranches, is the Bishopricke of ^ureux, in Latine Ebroicum; the Inhabitants Ebrouices in Caesar, and their City Ciui^s Ebroicensis. The next is Seez, in Latine Saiensis, and Sagium, the Inhabitants ^herof are called by Caesar, Populi Sesuuij. After Seez, followeth the Bishoprick of ^zieux, in Latine Lexouium, the Inhabitants Lexouij Populi by Caesar. And the last (...) Coutances, in Latine Ciuitas Constantienses, which is said to be so named, not of the ^mperour Constantine the Great, but of him that bare the same name, and who pos^ssed himselfe of Gaule, and of Great Britaine, as wee haue already said.Constantius tho Britaine that possessed himselfe of Gaule. And al^ough the Vulgar people of Normandie comprehend their Bishopricks vnder the ^me of Sacble (as we haue said) and assigne them their ranke according to that ano^mate name; Sees, Auranches, Coutance, Bayeux, Lizieux, Eureux: yet notwith^^^nding (from all times) the Bishop of Bayeux is the prime Suffragan, and he of Au^nches the second.
Lugdunensis tertia, the third Lyonnois Prouince, comprehendeth the Archbishopricke of Tours, in Latine Turonus, and Vrbs Turonum, called Caesaromagus in Ptolomy, a faire and famous City in the Garden of France, seated on the Riuer of Loire; greatly renowned, as well for hauing bin the assured retreat for the Parliament of Paris, during the troubles in France, excited by the factions of a bloudy and furious League:France a Nursing-mother of Popes. in memory whereof (euery yere) the Parlement of Paris feasteth the day of S. Gratian; as also for a Generall Councell, which was held there by Pope Alexander the third, who made his recourse into France, the nursing-mother of Popes, as we haue said. Alexander Papa tertius Concilium congregauit Turoni in Ecclesia sancti Mauritij duodecimo Kalendas Iunij. For the Metropolitane Church is dedicated to the Knight and Martyr S. Maurice, howsoeuer the Vulgar sort call the said Church S. Gatian.
11. Suffragans belonging to Tou^^.Shee hath 11. Bishopricks Suffragans; two in France, and the other nine in Bretaigne. The first is Mans, a City seated on the small Riuer of Sarte, in Latine Sart^, and the City Coenomanum and Coenomanensis Ciuitas. The second is Angiers, seated on the Riuer of Maine, in Latine Maduana; and the City of Angiers called Ciuitas Andagauensis,Angiers. the Inhabitants Andes in Caesar, and Lucane in his first booke.
In ripis Maduanatuis marcere perosus Andus.
And gaui Populi, by Tacitus.
The third Bishopricke is Rennes in Bretaigne, in Latine Ciuitas Redonensis, and the Inhabitants called by Caesar Redones. This City honoured by the Parlement of Bretaigne, is seated on the Riuer of Vilene, in Latine Vigelania, and Vicenon^. Nantes followeth next,Nantes a Merchant City, and riche, seated on the Riuer of ^oire, in Latine Ligeris, and the City, Ciuitas Nannetensis: the Inhabitants called Nann^tes by Caesar. Some are of opinion, that a part of the said Inhabitants, made a Colonie on the Adriaticke Sea;Concerning the Originall and foundation of Venice. Cornoa^lia. giuing being, sourse and Originall to the mighty and wel-gouerned Common wealth of the Venetians, so called of their first Founders, issuing from Bretaigne Armorica.
After followeth the Bishopricke of Cornoalia, in Latine Corisopitum, Oppidum C^riosolitarum, the Inhabitants in Caesar Cur^solitae, and their City Ciuitas Corisopitens^s. The seuenth Bishopricke is denominated Leon,Leon. Ciuitas Leonensis, and by Caesar, Leonium; her Inhabitants Osissimij, Leonium oppidum Ossissimorum. The eight is Triguet,T^iguet. Ciuitas Trecorensis, and Trecora, of the Peninsula or halfe Iland Trecor, in the Country Language. The ninth, is called by the name of her Apostle, and Tutularie Patron S. Brieu,S. Brieu. in Latine Briocensis Ciuitas, a S. Brioco. And yet notwithstanding, the Cathedrall Church is dedicated to the first Martyr S. Stephen. This City is seated between two Riuers, named by Ptolomy, Titius, and Argennus; and by the Bretons, Tri^u, and Argueunon. Next followeth S Malo,S. Malo. so named of her Patron Saint Maclon, S. Magloire at Paris; Ciuitas Maclouiensis, it is almost round engirt with the great Ocean Sea.
Doll.The tenth is the Bishopricke of Doll, Ciuitas Dolensis, which sometime was pretended Metropolitane of Bretaigne, against the Archbishops of Tours; as we will further shew vnder the Order of Bretaigne. She hath for Patron her first Bishop S. Sampson, whose body, and that of S. Malo, are in the Church S. Magloire, called S. Iames,S. Samps^^ first Bishop of Doll otherwise called S. Iacques du hant Pas, in the Suburbs S. Iacques lez Paris, so we conclude this Prouince.
Lugdunensis Quarta, or the fourth Lyonnois Prouince, containeth the Archbishopricke of Sens,Sens. Senonia and Senonensis Ciuitas, a Citie seated on the Riuer of Yonne, called in Latine Icauna. Yues Bishop of Chartres, in his tenth Epistle, called the Church of Sens his Mother, and there doth make mention of the olde quarrell of this Church, against that of Lyons, for the Precedencie and Primacie. Yet neuerthelesse, acknowledgeth that of Lyons for the Prime, and calleth it P^^mam Sedem, namely in the hundred twenty sixe Epistle. Hugoni prima sedis L^gd^nensis Ecclesiae Episcopo, Sedis Apostolicae Vicario. And in the 18. Epistle, writter

to the Archbishop of Sens, Richerius, he counselleth him to labour his cause; because the Popes had ordained and giuen the Primacie to the Archbyshops of Lyons. Non est consilium meum (saith he) vt contra torrentem brachia dirigatis:The Primacy of Lyons fou^ded on the Cities Antiquity. immo Apostolicis sanctionibus interim acquiescatis absque preiudicio Priuilegiorum, vel authenticarum scripturarum, si quando rapperiri poterunt, quae hanc subiectionem ab Ecclesia vestra remoueant, and eiusdem Ecclesiae libertatem defendant. And we learne, that the Primacie of Lyons might be founded vpon the Antiquity of the Citty. De veteri querela quam habet aduersus Senonensem, Ecclesia Lugdunensis Apostolica manu roborata, vel Scripta authentica, quae Primatum Lugdunensis Ecclesiae, quam aliquando ex catalogis Ciuitatum coniecimus exitisse, etc.
Vnder the said Archbishopricke of Sens, are seuen Bishoprickes,7. Bishopricks marshalled vnder Sens. obserued of the vulgar by this Anonimate name, Campont: as namely Chartres, Auxerres, Meaux, Paris, Orleans, Neuers and Troy in Champaigne; and yet notwithstanding, they goe not in this Order Chartres marcheth first of all,Chartres. Ciuitas Carnotensis, and Carn^tena, a Citie both high and low, seated on the small Riuer of Eure, in Latine called Andura, the Inhabitants named by C^sar Carnutes, and by the Spaniard Lucan Carnuti Populi: vpon the Mount of this City it was, that the wise Druides had erected an Altar, dedicated and consecrated to the Virgin that should bring forth a Childe, Virgini Pariturae. After Chartres is Auxerre,Auxerre. which holdeth the second place. It hath diuers appellations, the most ancient whereof is Autricum, and her Bishop, Episcopus Autrici, Altissidorum, and Ciuitas Altissidorensis, seated on the Riuer of Yonne. The third suffragan Bishopricke is that of Troy in Champaigne,Troy in Cha^paigne. a Citie seated on the royall Riuer of Seine, Ciuitas Tricassinorum, and the Inhabitants called by Ptolemie, Tricasses, and Tricassini. And in the Itinerarium of the Cosmographer Aethicus Augustobona, but at this day commonly Trecae, Trecarum. The Cathedrall Church is dedicated to S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles; after which is the Collegiate of S. Stephen, in the Quire whereof are three Tombes of Siluer, of Kings of Nauarre, Counts Palatine of Champaigne and Brie. OrleansOrleans. is the fourth, whose denomination we haue formerly obserued. After Orleans is Paris,Paris. the acceptable abiding to the Monarchs of the Sacred Lillies of France, by good and iust cause named the Queene of Cities, and Capitall of the Kingdome of Kingdomes; famous by her first Bishop, the Great S. Denys Areopagita, Metropolitane Bishop of the Gaules, as we already obserued by the testimony of strange Authors. Caesar called it in his language, Lutetiam Parisiorum. The sixt is the Bishopricke of Meaux,Meaux. the Church whereof is dedicated to the first of Martyrs S. Stephen; Ciuitas Maldorum, seated on the Riuer of Marne, called in Latine Matrona, and Materna. And the last is that of Neuers, which receiued that name by her small Riuer, called Neuy, in Latine Neueris, which rowleth into Loire, in Latine Niuerniae, and Ciuitas Niuernensis, which Caesar saith, had beene a City depending vpon Autune, and the name Nouiodunum Aeduorum. These are Bishoprickes Suffragans of the Church of Sens.
Lugdunensis Quinta, the fift and last Prouince Lyonnois, is Besancon, or Besanson, tearmed in Latine Vesontio, and by Historiographers Maxima Sequanorum. This Archbishopricke hath but one onely Suffragan in France, which is the Bishopricke of Bellay,Bellay. called in Latine Episcopatus Bellicensis, of the Citie which beareth the same name, in the County of Bresse, happening by a Treaty of Exchange to the Sacred Crowne of France, in the reigne of King Henry the fourth of glorious memory, in Anno 1600.
The first Belgicke Gaule, hath for her Archbishop and Metropolitane, him of Treuers, sometime the capitall City of the Gaules, and which Ammianus Marcellinus calleth in his History, Clarum Domicilium Principum, The dwelling best liked of the Romane Emperors; and it is seated on the Riuer of Mosella. In the time of the Geographer Pomponius Mela, it bare the name of Augustam Vrbem, Of the Royall City,Treuers. which he saith was the richest of the Gaules. S. Hierome bestowed his Study there, as we haue already said. The Bishop of Marseilles, Saluianus, and the Consull Ansonius the Bourdesois, speake wonders thereof. Yues, Bishop of Chartres giueth it the title of an Archbishopricke, Primae Sedis Belgicorum.
Mentz.Her dignity consisted in the Electorate of the Empire, because the 3. Bishopricks which she had for Suffragans, are subiect to the Crown of France. The first whereof is the Bishoprick of Mentz, called Ciuitas Metensis, seated on the Riuers of Seille, and Mosella, tearmed in Latine Salas, and Sala in Fortunatus, Bishop of Poictiers; and Mozaella, as we haue formerly said. The Inhabitants of Mentz, and of the Messine Country, are in the Geographers called Mediomatrices.Toull. Toul hath the second place, called Tullus, and Tullensis Ciuitas: the people whereof, by Caesar and Lucane are designed by the name of Leuci, Leucorum.
Optimus excusso Remus, Leucusque lacerto.
Verdun.The last is the Bishopricke of Verdun, Ciuitas Verdunensis, and Virdunum, by the Bishop Vertunatus Vereduna, seated and trauersed with the Riuer of Meuse, called Mosa.
The second Belgicke Gaule containeth a part of Champaign, and Picardy wholly. Rheimes, called Durocortorum Remorum, by the Itinerarium of the Gosmographer Athicus, and of ^loardus in his history of the Church of Rhemes, was one of the Metropolitane Cities of the rich and abounding Gaules, as is obserued by the Geographer Strabo (who liued vnder Augustus and Tiberius Emperours) and who nameth the City of Vienna in Daulphine, on the Riuer of Rhosne, Metropolim All^brogum: Du^ocorterum Metropolim Rhemorum: and Nismes in Languedocke, Nemesum Metropolim Aru^rnerum. By the name of (...) were noted the capitall Cities of the greatest and most celebrate Prouinces, before the descent of the sonne of God heere on earth.The Antiquitie of Metropolitane and Bishops in chiefe and capitall Cities. Christians had retained this name of Metropolitane, and had Bishops who had their seates in capitall Cities, where (before) Dukes and Romane Gouernours made their ordinary abiding, and who had other Prouinces also vnder their gouernments: because the Dukes commanded in Counties, and the other in Vi-Counties and Vicaries or Vecegerencies, afterwards named Viguiers in the Nature of Prouosts, as we haue said in the booke of the principall Officers of the Crowne of France.
The Christians of the P^imitiue Church gaue (for honour) the name of Metropolitanes to Bishops ordained by the Apostles, or their Disciples; in principall Cities which bare name: with charge to haue an eye and command ouer Bishops, appointed to Towns and Cities of the said Prouince: and those Bishops were named Suffraganei* Suffraganes to the Metropolitane of such or such an holy Seate.
Those Metropolitanes were called First-Bishops, and baptized with the name of Arch b^shop, about the yeere of Grace, fiue hundred foure-score and ten, or very neere,When the name of Archbishop first began. as we shall further relate heereafter. And yet notwithstanding, the said Archbishops (for humilities sake) tooke no other then the Title of Bishops, as yet (to this present) doth the Pope, vniuersall head of the Church; who tearmeth himselfe Episcopus, Seruus seruorum Dei, and who, by a name of Precedency and Honor, was sometime called Apostole, Apostoile, in our Romanciers, and by Bishops Apostolicus. And the Readings of the Bishop of Auuergne, Sidonius Apollinaris enstructeth vs; that Bishops, famous for Learning and Sanctity of life, were called by their Fellow brethren, Papae, that is to say, Fathers of Father, Patres Patrum: and by another manner of speeche, Apostolica sede dignissimi, worthy to gouerne the holy Sea of Rome, and S. Peters shippe.
The Citie of Rheims (very famous from the time of Caesar, because it was then honored with this title of Metropolitane) seated on the Riuer of Vele, in Latine Vid^la: is a Duchie, and the prime Peeredome of France, and the place where are Sacred and Crowned The most Christian Kings of France. And in the enclosure thereof, is the Abbey and Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius, Apostle of the French, as Pope Syluester, before named Gebert, calleth him in one of his Epistles: where is kept the holy Viole or Bottell, full of Baulme, brought from Heauen, at the Sacring and Baptisme of Clouis* wherewith our Monarches are Sacred.
Soisson^.The Archbishopricke of Rheimes hath eight Bishops Suffragans; as namely, that of Soissons, a Citie called by the Geographer Aethicus, and other auncient Authors,

Augusta Suessionum, seated on the Riuer of Aine, in Latine Axona, and the Inhabitants Suessiones by Caesar; but by the Spanish Poet Lucane, Axones, of the said Riuer.
Leues Axones in Armis.
It was sometime the dwelling place for the Kings of France of the first Ligne, by the diuision or partage made betweene the foure sonnes to our great King Clouis:Soissons the dwelling of the Kings of the first Ligne. and first was King thereof, and afterward of all France, Clothaire, first of the name; Founder of the Abbey of S. Mard (that is Medard) of the said Soissons; where is his Sepulchre.
Pope Gregory, first of that name, gaue great Priuiledges to this Abbey, in the Bull, where are named Flauius, Archbishop of Rheimes,Great Priuiledges granted to the Abbey of S. Mard. and the Archbishop of Arles Etherius. The said Pope (who sate vnder the Reigne of Childebert, second of the name, King of France) granted the said Priuiledges, whereby he gaue this Elogium of Honour to the said Abbey of S. Marde: That it was the Mirrour, and the Rule of them which made profession of Monasticall life. Erat regula Monachorum Franciae, and Vic on Aine, the place of their obedience. In the Cathedrall Church of S. Geruase, is written this verse in Capital Letters, for the rank of the said Church.
Vrbs debet vere haec, post Rhemos prima sedere.
AFter Soissons is the Bishopricke of Chaalons,Chaalons. in Latine Catalaunum, and Ecclesia Catalaunensis, seated on the Riuer of Marne, in Latin Matrona, and by some Historians, Materna, a Count Peeredome of France. The Church was dedicated in the name of the most blessed Trinity; of the Virgin Mary, S. Stephen the first Martyr, S. Iohn Baptist, S. Valerie, and S. Vincent Martyres, in the yeere of Grace 1147. the seuenth of the Calends of Nouember, by Pope Eugenius, second of the name,Pope Fugenius the 2. succoured in France. refuged in France, and assisted by sixe Bishops; to witte, Albericke of Hostia, Viuiers of Tusculanum, Thibault of Paris, Bernard of Auxerre, Hugo of Neuers, and Bartholomew of Chaalons.
Laon,Laon. in Latine Laudunum cleuatum, a Duke Peeredome of France, and an Episcopall See erected by S. Rhemigius, Apostle of the French, as wee haue said in the discourse of the Regales.
Senlis,Senlis. in Latine, Syluanectum, in the Epistles of Fulbertus, and of Yues Bishops of Chartres; Ciuitas Syluanectensis, by reason of the Forrest that sometime did engirt it. It hath for Patron S Rule, in Latine Regulus, scholler to the great S. Denys Areopagita, who appointed him the first Bishop of Senlis, as we haue already said in the life of S. Denys.
Beauuais,Beauuais. in Latine Beluacus, Ciuitas Beluacensis, an Ecclesiasticall Count Peeredome, seated on the Riuer of Therine, in Latin Thara: the Inhabitants are called by Caesar Belouaci, an ancient City, and renowned by the magnificent structure of the Quire, in the Cathedrall Church of S. Peter.
Amiens,Amiens.Ambianum, Ciuitas Ambianensis, so named, in regard of ten Chanells of the Riuer of Somme which water this City; famous by her Cathedral Church, the very fairest in the world, and for the head of the first Martyr, S. Iohn Baptist.
Noyon,Noyon. in Caesar Nouiodunum Belgarum, a Count Peeredome of France, chiefe of the County of Vermandois. S. Eloy her Patron transferred the Bishops Seat of Verman, to the said Noyon, beholding the remainder of the Castle of Corbeau, and in the Church neere to the Meridionall or South doore, is a Table to be seene, containing the Sacring and Crowning of Charles, afterward sir-named the Great,Charles the Great son to K. Pepin le Bref. sonne to King Pepin le Bref, made in the Cathedrall Church of our Lady; at the said Noyon. And halfe quarter of a mile from whence, the Riuer of Oyse, in Latine Isura (as well as the Lizere) beginneth to beare boates, to the place called Pont-l Eu^sque, Bishops-Bridge.
The last Suffragan is Bologne on the Sea knowne by Ammianus Marcellinus,Bologne on the Sea. to be Bononia, and Ciuitas Boloniensis. This City is seated on the Ocean sea, famous by her ancient Pharos, called The Tower of Order, rebuilt by our King Charlemaigne,

as we haue already said in the Principall Officers of the Crowne of France.
During the Warres of King Francis the first, and of Charles the fift, Terouenna, in Latine, Teruana, was razed downe to the ground; and by treatie made among them, the Bishops seate, which from all times had beene at the said place of Terouenna, called Ciuitas Morinerum,
Vltimi hominum Morini,
was diuided into three portions, each of them attributed to a new Bishopricke, as namely;Ciuitas M^rinorum diuided int^ three Bishopricks. one at Bologne, in former times an Abbey of great deuotion, dedicated to the Sacred Virgin; another at S. Omer, Sanctus Audomarus in Latine: and the third at Ypre. And these three new Bishopricks, with the three ancient of Arras, Cambray and T^urnay (the Cathedrall Churches whereof are dedicated vnto Gods Mother) were Suffragans to the Archbishopricke of Rhemes. Let vs now come to the seuerall Aquitaines.
O^ the fi^st Aquitane, ^ll thereunto appertaining.Aquitania Prima, comprehendeth Berry, Limosine, Auuergne, Caourcy, Rouerge and part of Languedicke. The Metropolitane City is Bourges in Berry, called Auarium Biturigum in Latine; by reason of the small Riuer, whereon this City is seated, called Auron, in Latine Fur^n, and her streame passing betweene the Port of Auron* and the W^lls of the City, is tearmed Wrette. The Inhabitants beyond it are called A^r^ C^, by a difference from those of Bourdeaux descending among them and named A^res Viuisci; as we haue obserued in the History of Nauarre. The Cathedrall Church is dedicated to the Martyr S. Stephen, on the Frontespice whereof, these words are engrauen in Capitall Letters.
Patriarchalis EcclesiaSancti Stephani.
The Holy Chappell at Bourges.At Bourges is to be seene the holy Chappell, built by Monsieur Iohn of France, Duke of Berry (brother vnto King Charles the fifth) who liued aboue foure score and two yeeres: and in the Quire thereof is to be seene his Tombe of Marble, and by him one of his two wiues, whose name I haue forgot. But I remember well the deuise of th^ good Duke,The deuise engrauen on th^ Dukes tombe. which is engrauen on his Tombe, whereby I learne, that (vpon pl^asure) he called his wife by a merry nick-name Our signe, and her deuise was thus emblazoned. There was the figure of a Beare, and another of a Swanne, and between them these words, Le Temps V^nra, implying thus much, Our signe, The Time will come: perhaps vpon some hope which he had, which we are not able to diuine of. But well we know, that he bare the Beare for his deuise, a creature which produceth her like without any forme, like to a lump of flesh, as Moal^s or Moonecalues; but by the power of licking, she formeth and patterneth it. Wherefore Lambendo, by ^icking, the Time will come. According to that which Plinie reporteth: Plutarch in his Tract of loue of Fathers towards their children* with Aelianus, in their naturall Histories of Creatures.
The Chronicle of M^ssire Iuuenall des Vrsines, vnder the yeare 1411. speaking of the Siedge d Eampes, being a domaine belonging to the said Duke of Berry, in which regard,Lewis de Burden a valiant gentleman of Auuer^ne there commanded a valiant Gentleman of Auuergne, named Lewes de B^eurdon, to whom, (after surprizal of the Towne, and he retreated to the Castle, which could no longer hold out:) word was sent, that hee should come to speake with the King, Charles the sixt, and the Dukes of Guienne and Bourgongne, with safety: He came thither well apparelled, in a Robe of crimson Veluet, all imbrodered with B^ares, and according to the Deuise of the Duke of Berry, and he likewise had giuen it him.
In those times then, the solace and delight of Princes was, to take pleasure in Deuises,The delight (...) Pri^ce^ (...) the (...) of (...) dayes. and obserue them according to Creatures, and letters of Ladies names by them affected. The same Chronicle of the Vrsines, speaking of King Charles the 6. saith, that he loued the daughter of a Knight, named Cassinell, in fauour of whom, he made his Stand^rds and Banners, according to her Liuery, and in letters of gold were wrought a K. a Swan, and an L. which denoted the name of his fauored Cassignell^. In these daies a mockery is made, of the vse of Ciphers or Deuises, as in the time of King Frances. Al^ fauours of Susan, sister to Magdalen D'Estampes. Quidquid Principi placuit, lege Regia, Legis habet vigorem.
THe Archbishopricke hath ten Bishoprickes Suffragans,Bourges in Berry hath 10. Bishops Suffragans. the first whereof is that of Clairmont in Auuergne, Sedes Aruernorum, Ciuitas Aruernensis, and by another Claromontensis, and for excellencie Aruernum, seated at a place, or about the auncient Gergouia. At the said Clairmont was held a generall Councill, wherein presided Pope Vrbane the second, and his Cardinals, being come for refuge into the Kingdome of France, according to their custome,A generall Councill held at Clairmont. in the yeare one thousand fourescore and fifteene. In this Councill was resolued the enterprise, for Conquest of the Holy-Land, by the French Princes.
AFter Clairmont marcheth Rhodes,Rhodes. Ciuitas Ruthenorum, the Inhabitants Ruthem by Caesar, now at this time Rouergaiz; great vaunters in their Buffarie language. This Citie is entoured with Mountaines, washed by the Riuer of Auion, in Latine Auerio. The Steeple of the Church is made of Bricke, in forme Octogone, flat aboue: a Tower which is held for the goodliest in the Countrey, and raised a Prouerbe, as we say in France. The Quire of Beauuais; the Body of Amiens; the Porch of Rheims; and Towers of Paris, all to make a Church perfect and compleate.The compleat forming of a Church. So they of the Countrey say, Clouthier de Rhoudes, Campane de Mende, Egleysed Alby. The Steeple of Rhodes, the Bell at Menda, and the Church of Alby; which followeth next after Rhodes.
THis white Citie of Alby,Alby* called Albia, ad Tarnem Sita, is on the Riuer of Tarn. Her Cathedrall is Dedicated to the Virgin S Cecilie, and holdeth but one onely Vault or Arch. But it is so richly depicted with Gold, euen from the top to the floore; as I haue neuer seene a fairer any where else. The Inhabitants are called by Romaine Geographers, Eluij, and of the said Citie, the Mother to the Oratour Cicero, was a natiue.
AFter Alby, followeth Cahors in Quercy,Cahors in Quercy. and by them of the Countrey Cahourcy, in Latine Cadurcum, seated on the Riuer of Oll, called in Latine Olda. Famous in regard of her Bridge, Rampared with three or foure Gates, strongly Porteullized, and being the great passage to Tolosa.
LImoges,Limoges. the Inhabitants whereof are called by Caesar Lemouices, renowned by her first Apostle S. Marciall, Contemporane with the great S. Denys Arcopagita, as we haue said in the life of this first Bishop of the Parisians. It is seated on the Riuer of the Viguana, according to the Limozine pronuntiation, where all the cadence is in A: in Latine Vigenna. This Church was held for the first Seate of the said first Aquitaine, and there was held a Prouinciall Councill, in the yeare one thousand thirtie two: vnder signed by Aimon, Archbishop of Bourges; Iourdain,A Prouinciall Councill held at Limoges. Bishop of Lim^ges; Stephen, Bishop of Puy in Velay; Raucon of Auuergne; Ragamond of Men^da; Aemilius of Alby; Deus-Dedit of Cahors; Isembert of Poictiers, Arnauld of Perigu^ux; and Rooll of Engoulesme. After Limoges, commeth in order the Bishopricke of
MEnda,Menda. in Latine Mimatus, Ciuitas Gabalorum, seated on the Riuer of Oll (as well as Cahors) which is passed on a small Bridge of Stone, two Crosse-Bowe-shoote going from Seuenes (Cabennae, vel Gebennae) to S. Geniez on the banke of Oll. Wee haue said somewhat heretofore, in speaking of the Regalias, whereto we will adde, ^hat the Cathedrall Church thereof, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, was pilled by (...) wicked wretch, and rebuilded by Bishop Adam de Heurte-Lou, after God had giuen vs peace, by the treatie of Veruins; decorated by his Successour and Nephew,Dedication of the Cathedrall Church. Bishop Charles Rousseau. At the Porch of this Church, are two great Steeples of Stone, whereof that on the North-side, is of admirable structure, entoured with Galleries for the day-time. Here was the place of the great Bell, so farre famed, whereof I haue seene and measured the height and bredth, by the Clapper,

as they call it (it is a Bataill in Armes) comming neere to that of S. Geneuiefue at Paris. This Steeple is the very fairest of Languedocke, whereto that of Rhodes is not to be compared.
Puy in Velay.PVy in Velay, in Latine Auicium, so named by the Mountaine, at the foote whereof it is seated; but by the Inhabitants Lou Puech, and beyond it, Podium, her Cathedrall Church being dedicated to the Sacred Virgin, daily resorted to for Miracles; the Spanyards call it La Segnora di Francia. This Church (among all other) hath this priuiledge, that at all times, and as often as our Lady day in March, chanceth to fall vpon Good Friday (which we at Paris call Holy-Friday:A yeare of Iubilie in France vpon occasion) there is a Iubilie of plenary Indulgence; whether people resort from all the Cou^tries of France and Spaine. The Chronicle of Iuuenall des Vrsins, vnder the yeare 1406. saith. In this Lent, our Lady Day was on the Holy-Friday. And it is said, that when it falleth so on the Holy-Friday: there is then generall pardon for sinne and punishment at Puy. And there was a World of People, wonderfull to behold: for there were aboue two hundred persons crowded to death and smothered.
Foure Bishopricks added by the Pope, in the first Aquitain ProuincePope Iohn the two and twentieth, erected in the said first Prouince of Aquitaine, foure Bishoprickes, as namely; Castres D' Albigez, in Latine Castrum Albiensium, vpon the Riuer of Agu, Acutus Amnis: Vabres in Rouergue, Ciuitas Vabrincensis, and Vabrincum Tulles in Limosines, in Latine Tullum, Ciuitas Tutelensis, and in the plurall number Tutelae, as Biturige; this Citie is seated on the Coreze, in Latine Curetia. And the fourth is that of S ^lour in Auuergne, called Ciuitas Sancti Flori, scituated on an high Mountaine, called Le Plan, and beneth in the Suburbs, where passengers lodge, is the Riuer of Di^, in Latine Adia. This is the great high way from Paris to Tolosa. And all this happened in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and eighteene.
Of the second Aquitaine and her appendixes.AQuitania secunda, properly called Guienne, hath for her Metropolitane Seate, the Cittie of Bourdeaux, ^urgum Aquarum, in Latin Burdegala; and by the Geographers Portus Lunae, because shee is seated like to an halfe Moone, on that side where she is b^thed with the great Riuer of Garonna, bowed in an halfe Circle, yet wholly round, that way which leaneth to the Lands of Bourdeaux. And vpon this reason,The Armes of the Citie. this Citie beareth a Crescent in her Armes, with the representation of her Riuer, of her Towne-House, the Leopard of Guienne, with the Chiefe of France. Her Inhabitants are called Auares Vibisci, as we haue elsewhere said. The Metropolitane Church is dedicated to the Apostle S. Andrewe; honored with a Parlement, and a most famous Vniuersitie. She hath pretended the Primacie of Aquitaine, against her Mother, the Patriarchall Church of Bourges, maintained in her auncient priuiledge. Bourdeaux hath nine Bishoprickes Suffragans, as namely;
Ag^n.AGen, a goodly and pleasant Cittie, seated on the Riuer of Garonna, called by C^sar Nitiobrigum, the Inhabitants Nitiobriges: and now Aginnum, and Ciuitas Ag^nensis, renowned by her Patron S. Capraiz.
Angoulesme.ANgoulesme, in Latin Eccolisma, and Engolisma by S. Gregory of Tours, and Lupus, Abbot of Ferrieres; beneath which runneth the Riuer of Charente, in Latine C^rentonus amnis; famous by the sanctitie of her Abbot Sanctus Eparchius, in French S. Cibar, according to the testimonie of S. Gregory of Tours. The learned Cardinall Baronius, obserueth the Feast of S. Gregory of Tours, in his Romaine Martyrologe, on the seauenteenth day of Nouember, in these words. Turoni Sancti Gregorij Episcopi. He departed out of this life in the yeare of Grace, fiue hundred fourescore and foureteene, the fourth of the Pontificacie of Pope Gregory, first of the name, and the one and twentieth of the said Gregory of Tours.
Saintes or Santones.SAintes, Santones in Caesar, and in the Itinerarium of Aethicus, Mediolanum Sa^num. This Citie is deuided in two parts, by the same Riuer of Charente, and without it, in going from Poictiers to Bourdeaux, is to be seene the remnants of three

Churches of S. Eutropius, Patron of them, builded one vpon another, and laid in ruines, as markes of the irreligion of pretended Reformers, who of all the Images of Saints, haue not left one whole, or without breaking; but the representation of the wicked Traitor Iudas Iscariot, the first Sacramentarie Heretique that had bin during the Lawe of Grace. I haue seene the like Historie, at the Porch of the auncient Abbey of S. Gilles in Languedocke, where all the Apostles and their Maister, are broken and massacred by the same pretended Reformers, and Iudas is left in his Pontificacie, by a secret article of their reformed Cabala.
POictiers,Poictiers. in Saint Hierome called Pictauium; by Ptolomie, Augustoritum Pictonum, a faire Citie, and famous Vniuersitie (where I tooke my Licences in the Ciuile and Canon Lawes) seated on the Riuer of Clain. By the Inhabitants (whom Caesar calleth Pictones and Lucane
Pictones immunes,)
named the Clan, and in Latine Glanus. Which hath for her Cathedrall Saint Peter, ter and for Tutelarie Patron, Saint Hilarie, the Hammer of the Arrian Heretiques.
NExt followeth the Bishopricke of Perigueux,Perigueux. in Latine Petracorium, called and named heretofore Vesuna Petracoriorium, by the Geographers: at this present Ciuitas Petra oricensis, seated on the Riuer of Isles, tearmed in Latine Ella.
Pope Iohn the two and twentieth,In Aquitania secunda foure Bishopricks added by the Pope. added there foure Bishoprickes Suffragans and more, to wit; Condom, Ciuitas Condomiensis, seated on the small Riuer of Baize, in Latine Balisa; famous by the Poet Du Bartus, because it passeth by Nerac, three miles from whence, and sixe miles from Auch, is the Citie of Condom. In the Cathedrall Church (dedicated to S. Peter) are the Tombes of Iohn and Blaize de Monluc, Brethe^en, the one Bishop of Valencia in Daulphine, and the other, Marshall of France, honored by his Commentaries.
MAillezais in the Diocesse of Poictiers,Maillezai^. Ciuitas Maleacensis: the Chanons retaine still to this day, the habite of S. Benet.
LVg^n, or Luson,Luson: likewise eclipsed from the Bishopricke of Poictiers, Ciuitas Lucionensis, and Lucionum in one word. And of these two new Bishoprickes is descended the Prouerbe: Beati qui habitant Vrbes; exceptis Luson and Maillezais.
ANd the last is Sarlat,Sarlat. betweene Cahors and Montauban, and in the Diocesse of Perigueux, Sarlatum, Ciuitas Sarlatensis; famous by the Tombe and Body of S. Sacerdos, a Bourdelois by originall, and the thirteenth Bishop of Limoges.
AQuitania tertia called Gascoigne,Of the third Aquitaine* and her dependances of nine Diocesses. and by notice of the Roman Empire Nouem populana, commanding ouer nine Diocesses; hath for her Metropolitan the litle Citie of Auch Metropolitan of the Countie of Armagnack, and neighbouring Prouinces: but which surpasse in valure L'Arcobisco de Toledo. It is seated on a Mnuntaine, where is the Cathedrall Church, dedicated to the sacred Virgin, The Treasure of Miracles. At the foote of this Citie of Auch (called in Latine Auscensis Auscitana, and Auxitana Ciuitas) runneth the small Riuer of Gers, in Latine Aegircius, which descendeth downe the Valley of Aura, and looseth it selfe in Garonna. Fortunatus, Bishop of Poictiers, describeth these Meruailes.
Lubicat hic quoniam tenuato Aegircius haustu,Praefert diuitias paupere fonte tuas.Laus tibi forte minor fuerat generose Garonna.
Anciently the Metropolitaine Seate was in the small Borough of Eaure, called by the Romaines Elusaberis: by the Geographer Pomponius Mela, and by the Poet Claudian, Elusa.
--Murosque inuadit Elusae,
It is distant from Auch twelue great miles, and the ruines doe shew, that it had bin in much better condition, for I my selfe haue seene it: the auncient Church of Auch is S. Peter, beneath the Mountaine on the Riuer of Gers, without the Citie: on the backe whereof is the Abbey of S. Orens, in Latine Orentius, of the Order of Clugny, where I haue seene many auncient Sepulchers: it was founded by a Court of Armagnac, whom they called Bernard Lust. The Seate of Auch is famous by an infinite number of worthy Bishops, placed in the Catalogue of Saints, the chiefe of them, and their Reliques, are releuated by Leonard de Trappes, at this present Archbishop of Auch, a venerable Seate, which hath for Suffragans these following.
Acqs.ACqs, in Latine Ciuitas Aquensis by the Romaines, and in the Itinerarium of the Greographer Aethicus, Aquae Augustae, in regard of the Bathes of hot water, which are of no great moment.
Letoure in Armagnac.THe second is Letoure in Armagnac, as is the Citie of Auch, and both of them seated on the small Riuolet of Gers, in Latine Aegircius, I haue seene on one of the Gates this inscription. Iectera Ciuitas Regia, Ciuitas Lectorensis.
Cominges.COminges, which hath for Episcopall Seate S. Bertrand, of the name of the Bishop: a little Cittie, beneath which is the Village called Baccrauere, in Latine Vallis Capraria, where is a Monasterie of Cordeliers, or Graie Friers. Neere to which is the Riuer of Garonna, which hath bin passed (in my time) vpon a Bridge of Wood, called S. Iust, as we haue said. The ordenary dwelling of the Bishop is fiue miles from the said S. Bertrand of whom I haue seene the Coape,The Bishops ord^nary abiding. and an Vnicornes Horne, curiously polished, and pierced quite thorow: that at S. Denys in France cannot be compared therewith) at the Castell of Alan, repaired (in my time) by Bishop Vrbane of Gelus, of the house of Lansacke, in whose Librarie I haue seene very rare Manuscript Bookes; for that Prelate knew many things. S. Hierome enstructeth vs, that Great Pompey hauing made the Spaynes peaceable,A^tion conc^rning Pompey the G^eat in building Pompeiopolis. and laid the foundation of the Royall Citie of N^uarre Pampe^ona, called it by his owne name, Pompe^opolis, in the yeare seauen hundred from Romes foundation, Iulius Syllanus, and Lucius Muren^ being then Consuls. So passing and returning to the Gaules, hee made stay for his old Souldiours (S. Hierome writing against Vigilantius, qualifieth them to be Bandouliers, that is to say, men liuing badly, by the Such as (...) by drowni^g men in Sacks, or strangling them with Halters. Sacke or Corde: Ex Vec^^nibus, Arbassis, and Celtiberis, that had no other honest meanes) on the Riuer of Garonna, in the Pyrenean Mountaines. And that there he caused to be builded a Citie of very great circuite, thwarted by the Riuer of Garonna, and that this inhabitation he called Conuenae; afterward by corruption of Language, Comenges, as it is at this day, retaining the same deuise which S. Hierome gaue it Conuenis, Conueniunt, C^nuenae.
And of S. Bertrand, it is called Ciuitas Conuenarum; and the Prouince Comitatus Conuenarum: which hath eight Iuri^di^on (...) Castella^n Castell-wicks, as namely Muret, Semmathan, Cazeres, Aurignac, S. Iulian, Saliez, and Castillon; in all which Townes are to be seene the Armes of the auncient Counts of the Prouince, who bare De Guelles a Quatre Otelles d'Argent en Saultour. This Countie is of very great extendure, from the Frontiers of France and Spaine, so farre as to the Port of S. Subran of Tolosa, hauing many Vicounties vnder it,(...) and three Bishoprickes: as namely Comenges, from fiftie to sixtie thousand pounds, according to the most value of Corne: Couzerans, at twelue or fifteene thousand pounds: and Lombez, from nine to tenne thousand.
At what t^^e, and how it w^^ reunited to the Crowne of France.It was reunited to the Crowne of France, in the yeare 1442. as it happened by the will and testament (and as I haue read in the Registers of the Chamber or Court of Accounts at Paris) of the Countesse of Comenges Margaret, Wife (vnworthile,

and ill-entreated, these are the words of the donation) of Mathew de Foix, fourth Sonne of Archembauld de Grailly, Captall de Buch, and of Puy-Paulin, Vicount of Benauges, and of Castelbon; and of Isabell, heire to the Countie of Foix, and Seigneurie of Bearn: This was thus done vnder the reigne of King Charles the seauenth.
I let passe in silence the fabulous Tales, which they of the Countrie haue related to me, concerning the greatnesse of their auncient Citie of Comenges,^abulous reports of Pompey the great his City of Comenges. builded by the great Pompey, which (they say) extended from the Village of Barbazan, so farre as to Mont Retau (that is Mont-reall) on the Riuer, which are almost two leagues in lenoth, and the like in breadth. And as for this Countie, it extendeth it selfe farre into Spaine, and so farre, as to the Vicountie of Paillars, and to many Ports, for passage into Spaine. Namely, to that of S. Beat; another of Bagneres de Luson, so named by the excellent Bathes of hot Water, whether there is going twice yearely, in the Moneths of May, and of September. This Port is also named by Benasque;Hot Bathes (...) yearely, May and September for the prime Village of Spaine, whence men passe to Saragossa, trauailing by Seille, Campo, Agraus, La Pueble de Castros, Barbastre, Peralta, Saragnica, Hostalric, V^lle Maior, Saragossa. After that is next the Port of Beauce, so named of the last Village of Spaine, betweene Nauarre and Arragon, from whence men descend into France, to the goodly Valley of Aura, in Latine Vallis Aurata.The good^y Valley of Aurata in France And from Spaine they come to lodge at a pleasant Bourough, named Arreou, whereof S. Exuperius, Bishop of Toledo was a natiue. I haue seene the place of his house, and a little Chappell of deuotion aboue Arreou; whence they goe to Sarancoulin, Prieure, where the Marshall of Monluc (as he writeth in his Commentaries) ment to make his reteat, seeing the troubles of France, raised by the new Euangelians, to whom he was a great friend. This Priorie appertained to his Brother Iohn de Monluc: From Sarancoulin they come to M^nl^on, Castel^nau-de Maguouac, and to Auch.
AFter Comenges followeth the Bishopricke of Couzerans,Couzeran^. Consuarauensis Ciuitas, a Vicountie. The Lord of Ioinuille writeth, that at the first Voyage beyond the Seas, which S. Lewes made, he tooke acquaintance with Arnaud, Vicount of Couzerans, who bare the sir-name of Spaine (there are many of this sir-name in Gascoigne, as the Lord of Montespan, and others) Et l' Escu d'Or a la Bordure de Gueulles, Armes which our King Charlemaigne had giuen to his Predecessours. I know not whether these Viscounts (in my time, this Viscountie was fallen to the Distaffe, or Female) are as yet of this sir-name: for, concerning them of S. Girons, beneath Couzerans,A great dishonour to any House of Fra^ce to fall to the Female. they are sirnamed of Narbona, the last hauing the name of Emeric de Narbona. Now, his name of Couzerans, is that of the Prouince, and not of the Cathedrall Citie, which by the name of one of her Bishops, was called S. Lize, in Latine Sanctus Licerius, who is the Patron of the Citie, where is his Church. And as for the Cathedrall Church, which is aboue, enclosed with Walles, and seperated from the Citie by the great Corps de Garde: it is dedicated to S. Mary, where the Bishopricke is in goodly sight. Since my time, there was a Bishop, borne in Piedmont, a Gray Frier, named Franciscus Bonardus, a learned Prelate, and who Preached very often to his Flocke. He had for his successour one called De Lingua, his Nephew, a Gray Frier likewise; but yet not equalling his Vnckle in learning. This small Citie bare for Armes, D'Azur a la Campane d Argent Batailee de Sable. In the Suburbs is the Hostel de Dieu, founded by a Bishop, whose Tombe is yet to be seene in the Chappell at the same place. Beyond that we passe the Riuer of Salat, in Latine Sala, vnder a Bridge of Stone; in the midst whereof is a strong Tower, where Sentinell is kept, and the said Bridge is shut vp fast in the night time. At the end whereof, against the Mountaine, is a little Chappell, called Nostre Segnore del Cap del Pon, which is obserued by all the Townes of Gascoigne, where there are any Bridges. Vnder the first Arch of that of S. Lize, as we come from Tolosa, to goe to S. Girons, or to Castellon; I haue often times read this inscription, engrauen in old Letters, Saorum.The Bridge of S Lize. Min^uuae. Fatidicae. Which sheweth, that this Bridge had bin builded, during the Demonomany of the ancient Romans; notwithstanding the fabulous reports, which those of the Country spread abroad from time to time.
Aire, at the further end of Gascoigne.NExt followeth the Bishopricke of Aire, a small Citie, at the other end of Gascoigne, called in Latine Adura, Ciuitas Adurensis; seated on the Riuer of Adoue, Atyrus, and Aturrus, as we haue said.
Bazas.THen is Bazas, seated in the Launds betweene Castet-Ieloux, and Langon, for going to Bourdeaux; in Latine Ciuitas Vasatensis, and the Inhabitants Vazates. The ground is very meagre, barren and sandie; therefore Paulinus, writing to the Bourdelois Poet Auosnius, tearmeth his Soyle Vasates Arenosas.
Consul Arenosas non dedignare Vastatas.
The said Ausonius called this Citie of Basas, Cossionem, municipale genus Vasatum; and Sodonius Apollinaris nameth it, Ciuitatem Vasatum. Whereto he gaue this nickename or by-word; That it was not seated on greene turffie, fattie earth, but on dust; Ciuitas Vasatum non cespiti imposita sed pulueri.
NExt is Tarbes, Tarbella in Vibius Sequester, and Tibullus
--Tarbella Pyrenae.
Tarbes. The first Kings of Nauarre their descent.The Inhabitants Tarbelli Populi, otherwise Bigerriones; this is the Countie of Bigorre, held by one named Centon, Count of Bigorre, of whose Ligne are descended the first Kings of Nauarre, as we haue said in the Historie of the Kingdome, the most auncient of all them of Spaine. These Bigourdans are surnamed by Ausonius, Fourrez, Pellitos Begerras, and their houses Smoakie, because their Chimnies stand in the middest of them smouldred with fire of Pine-tree-Wood, whereof they make their Cottages and Candelles.
Nigrantesque casas, and tecta mapalia culmo,Dignasque pellitis habitas deserta Bigerris.
Tarbes diuided into three Bourgages.Tarbes is a Valley sufficiently acceptable, watered with the Adoue, Aturrus, and Atyrus, as we haue so many times said; and deuided in such sort, as into three long Villages or Hamlets: whereof one is the Citie, the Cathedrall Church whereof is dedicated to the Sacred Virgin.
From Tarbes in ascending three miles aboue, is a goodly great way paued (during all the three miles) with faire great Stones, for going to the Bathes, the very goodliest that I haue seene in all my Voyages.A goodly great way paued with Stone three miles long. For those of Barbotan, the Batherie of Lucon, and of Eucausse (which in the Itinerarium of Aethicus are called Aquas Conuenarum) nor all those of Geuaudan, Languedocke, Prouence, and other Prouinces of France, cannot equall these Bathes, for pleasantnesse of the place, and aboundance or plentie of all kinde of Game. And this was it which moued the Poet of Gascoigne to write in praise thereof, after hee had toucht others in his passage along.
Baigneres la beaute, l'honneur, le ParadisDe ces monts sourcilleux.Ces monts enfarinez d'vne Neige eternelleLa flancquent d'vne part, la verdure immortelleD'vne plaine qui passe en riante beaute,Le Vallon Penean la ceint d'autre coste.Elle n'a point maison qui ne semble estre neufue;L' Ardoise luit par tout: chaque Rue a son Fleuue,Qui clair comme Christal, par la Ville ondoyantVa toute heure bu'on veut le Paue ballayant.Et bien qu entre son flot, aussi froid que la glaceEt le Bain chasse-mal on trouue peu d'espace,Ilretient sa nature, and ne vent tant soit peuMeslanger, orgueilleux, son Froid auec son Feu.Bathe there bright Beauties: Honors ParadiseTo those high Mountaines well may you entise.Mountaines all whited with eternall SnoweFlancke the one part; Immortall verdures flowe,Vpon a Plaine, that's louely Beauties pride:The Penean Vale engirts the other side.Not any House, but seemeth fairely new,Slate shines on all. Each Streete hath (as his due)Bright Christall currents; washing through the Towne,And all the goodly Pauement streameth downeEntring his waues, so cold as any Ice,The harme expelling Bathe, as very niceOf his owne nature: proudly doth aspire,Not to commix his cold, with that of Fire.
The like is seene of all the Bathes by him specified, whether the Spaniards themselues come from all the parts of Spaine; but especially to the Bathes of Bigorre.The Bathes of Bigorre resorted to from all parts of Spain. For there is one Channell or Current of hot Water, and Sulphure, wherein Egges may be boyled, and Foules plumed or pluckt. At the rest (yearely) are an infinite number of vnknowne diseases cured, vtterly forsaken of Physitions.
Ceste Prouince abonde en Bains non achetez,Ou le Peuple Estranger accourt de tous costez,Ou la Femme Brehaigne, ou le Paralytique,L'Vlcere, le Goutteux, le Sourd, le SciatiqueQuittant du blond Soleil l'vne, and l'autre maisonTrouue sans desbourser sa prompte guarison.Encausse en est tesmoin, and les Eaux salutairesDe Cauderetz, Barege, Aigues caudes, Baigneres.
The Soyle abounds in Bathes, surpassing Art,Strange People thither flocke from euery part.The Barren Woman, and the Palsied Man,Th'Vlcerd, Goutie, Deafe, Sciaticke, canFinde present cure, without disbursing pay(When golden-tressed Sol forsakes the wayTo both his Houses:) There is no delay.Encauses Soueraigne waters witnesse plaine:That all Diseases are quite cleerd of paine.
THe Itinerarium calleth these Baths of Bigorre, Aquas Terebellicas,Aquas Terebellicas. from which he counteth the waies, which make for Bourdeaux and Tolosa, in descending from Spaine. Now although the name of this delectable place, be designed by the titles of the Bathes of Bigorre: yet notwithstanding, without the Church of S. Martin, in the Subburbs of the said Village, is a Stone of the Countries White Marble, whereon ^s an Inscription in olde Romane Letters, which declareth, that the Inhabitants of ^he place were called Vicani; and that where this Church now standeth,The people in former times were called Vicani. was some^ime a Temple, dedicated to the God of Physitians, Mercurie, to whom the blinded Romans (during the time of Paganisme) attributed the vertue of the waters of ^hese Bathes.
Merc. Sac. Vicanorum. Aquensium.
Euery one knoweth what is meant by the name Vicus, and inde Vicani: in Spaine

and Gascoigne there are many Villages and Hamlets, baptised by the name of Vic-D'Ozone, a Bishopricke formerly spoken of, in the Diocesses of Spayne. In Gascoigne, in that of Auch, Vic-Fezensac, Vic-Bigorre, and infinite other beside. Now, it is a question, to know certainely, whether this Citie of Tarbes, be that, or no, whereof S. Gregory of Tours speaketh, calling it Bigorram, when he maketh relation of Morganengeba, of the Queene of Austrasiae Brunehault, who committed so many Murders in France,Brunehault, the great Murdicise of Fra^ce on the persons of tenne, as well Kings, as Princes of the Blood of France. And by iudgement of the Generall Estates of the Kingdome, she was drawne aliue at the taile of an vntamed Mare, to Authune, where shee was buried. De Cuntat^bus Burdegala, Lemouica, Cadurco, Benarno and Begorra, etc. To take them vpon the letter of the word Citie, ought to be vnderstood as of Townes and Cathedrall Cities.
Going from S. Seua the Promontorie of Gascoigne) to Tarbes, you shall see a great Borough, which the Inhabitants of the Countrey call Lourde. All these Bouroughes, scituated within the Pyrenean Mountaines, are wonderfully faire, and well built of Stone, b^ing likewise all c^uered with Slate; whereof there is great aboundance.
In the notice of the West Empire Lapurdum.This Bourough of Lourde, is called Lapurdum, in the notice of the Westerne Empire, and where the Romaines alwaies kept a strong Garrison of old Souldiours, on dead payes, for guard of the Frontiers of Gaule and Spaine. I soiourned there one whole day with my Company, to obserue the Antiquities, among which there is a great Tower (workemanship of the Romaines) which serued as a donion to a Castell, the ruines whereof are yet to be seene. It is impossible (in a dayes space) with a Mattocke and a Chizell,Workma^ship of elder times to get forth so many Stones as will fill a Hat; it is so well wrought by Masons, and so extraordinarily Cimented. After Tarbes of Begorre, are the two Bishoprickes of the Principalitie, heretofore the Vicountie of Bearne, namely
Oleron.OLeron, seated on the Riuer of Gaure, in Latine Gauus, Gaber, and Gaberus, and the Citie Lluro in the Hinerarium; denoating the way which is from S^ragossa of Arragon, so farre as vnto the Citie of Hortez, anciently called Bearne, the one being distant from the other, an hundred and twelue thousand paces, at foure thousand to a League. Aethicus.
Iter a Caesare-Augusta, Benebarno Milia plus minus. 112. Sic.Foro Gallorum ............. Milia plus Minus. 30.^bellino. M. P. M....................... 22.Summo Pyrenaeo. M. P. M ...................... 24.^ero ligneo. M. P. M ....... ...............5.Asp^lluca M. P. M............................7.Ilurone. M. P. M.............................12.Bencharnum M. P. M... ..........................12.
Orthez or Oleron.FRom Saragossa to Orthez is twentie eight Leagues of Gascoigne and Spaine, where Land is at good rate. Of this Citie of Oleron, the auncient stile and forme of Iudging (practised in Bearne) was called The Court of Oleron, in Latine Forum Iluri.
Lescar.LEscar is the second Bishopricke of Bearne, in Latine Ciuitas Lascuriensis, the M^^s^lus for the latter Kings of Nauar, Of the most Illustrous Siruam De Foix. and D' Al^re^. The last Bishopricke Suffragan belonging to the Archbishoprick of Auch, is
(...)BAione, in Latine Baiorum Ciuitas, vulgarly called Baiona; by them of the Countrey Bo^^ne. It is seated and laued with the Riuer Adoue (which looseth it selfe in the Ocean Sea called by Lucan Tarbellica.
--Per saxa rotantia lateIn mare purpureum Tarbellicus ibit Aturrus.
The first Pro^e Narbo^ ^aTHe first Prouence Narbonoise (which hath two Archbishoprickes in her deuision) the first of them is Narbona, the Metropolitane of Languedocke, called

Septimania, in the time of Flauius Constantine the Tyrant, vsurper ouer Great Britaine and the Gaules, of whom we haue formerly described the death,Metropolitane of 7 Prouinces. after the surprizall of Arles. For this Warlike Citie, was the Metropolitaine of seauen Prouinces; as namely, of the first and second Narbonoise; of the Viennoise; of the first and second Aquitaine; of Gascoigne; and of the Maritime Alpes.
Narbona was aunciently named Narbo-Martius, because Iulius Caesar (the perpetuall Dictator) caused to dwell there a Colonie, drawne from the Martian Legion,Narbona called Narbo-Martius. which was otherwise called the tenth Legion, Legio Decumanorum. The Emperour Augustus, in honor of the Dictator (his adopted Father) appointed, that it should be called Narbonam Paternam Iuliam, as the same is obserued by Plinie, and her auncient inscription.
Col. Iul. Paterna. Narbo. Mart.
Seruing to vnderstand these Verses of Martiall, which giue to this Citie the Sirname of Faire.
Quem pulcherrima iam redire Narbo,Docti Narbo Paterna VotieniAd Leges iubet, annuosque fasces.
The Oratour giueth it the title of Bulwarke of Italie, and the Sentinell thereof; Specula, and propugnaculum Italiae. The learned Bishop of Auuergne, Sidonius Apollinaris, giueth therto these praises.
Salue Narbo potens salubritateVrbe, and rure simul bonus videri,Muris, Ciuibus, Ambitu, Tabernis,Portis, Porticibus, Foro, Theatro,Delubris, Capitolijs, Monetis,Thermis, Arcubus, Horreis, Macellis,Pratis, Fontibus, Insulis, Salinis,Stagnis, Flumine, Merce, Ponte, Ponto.
That which he saith in his first Verse, is good, in regard of them of the Country:Narbona, very vnhealthful to such as are Strangers. but for Strangers, it is very vnhealthfull, by selfe hauing bin sicke so often as I Soiourned there, for the space of fifteene dayes, and more; for the Ayre is there very grosse, by being neere the Sea, about twelue thousand Paces, so that you may easily heare the noyse thereof, when it is troubled. It is seated in a bottome, and the Parapet of the Wals leuell with the ground, so that without, there can nothing be seene thereof, except the Steeples of S. Iustus, and of S. Paul, whereupon it is now tearmed Narbona, Latrina Mundi. It is a strong Citie for Warre, without Suburbs,The Sinke of the World. not batter-able, being in a plaine euen Field, fortified with good Ramparts, strong Towers, and Case-mates, aptly disposed, to make double round both aboue and below, from an hundred to an hundred Corps de Guarde, and Magazines stored with Powder and Bals, as also a great number of Canons, which hath made it to be often attempted by the Spanyards, as well as Marseilles and Baione. It is a Keye for France, and therefore she beareth for Armes; De Gueulles a vne Croix Patriarchale d'Or, and vne Clef d' Argent.
The circuit of the Citie Wals, are full of antique inscriptions, and one quarter of them raised with hard Stones, cut like pointed Diamonds. The Citie is watered with the Riuer of Aude (whereof we haue already related somewhat) named by the Romaines Atax, and the Inhabitants called by Mela, Populi Atacini, and Atacinorum Colonia; and by the Gaules, Volcae Arecomici. There are three Bridges on this Riuer of Aude, two at the ends, the Arches whereof are ioyning to the Walles of the Citie, and firmely fastened with Portcullises of Iron, which shut and open, for the entring in and issuing forth, of great Vessels of charge.

The Bridge in the middest, is couered with Marchants Houses, very neere in length and widenesse (equally) to the small Bridge at Paris. In the Citie is the Cathedrall Church, dedicated in honor of the Martyres S. Iustus and S. Pastour, whose bodies are on the high Altar, inclosed in a Shrine of Wood, couered with a Pall of cloath of Gold.
There is but the Quire remaining in this Metropolitane Church, which is accompanied with two great square Towers, and aloft vpon them (in a platforme) is the Beacon, Watch-Bell and Clocke, the Church and Chappels couered with Stone, according to the fashion of Languedocke and Prouence, or (without going so farre) like the platforme of the Tuilleries Pallace at Paris. In the midst of the Quire, is to be seene a rich Tombe, wherein are the bowels of Phillip the Hardie, third of the name, King of France, son to the King S. Iewes, who died at Perpignan, returning from the Warre against Dom Peter, King of Arragon, as it is obserued by William de Nangis,King L^wes the Hardy di^^ at Perig^^n in the life of the said King Phillip. Exequijs Regis expletis, and ossibus per excoctionem a carne seiunctis, carnem quidem, and viscera apud Narbonam in maiori Ecclesia s^ientes, cum redijssem Parisios, Barones, and Praelati ossa apud Sanctum Dionysium cum honere praecipuo iuxta Patrem suum Ludouicum Regem sanctissimum tumularunt. In one of the Chappels, on the South side of the Quire, I haue seene a great Table of the Resurrection of Lazarus, held for excellent.
Sergius P^^lus first Bishop of Narbona Acts 13.12.In the Citie is the Abbey Church of Chanons, and a Secular Abbot, dedicated in honor of S. Serg^u^ Paulus, first Bishop of the place, disciple to S. Paul, by him conuerted to the saith of Iesus Christ (as it is in the Acts of the Apostles) and by him destenied to be the Apostle of Narbona. Behinde this Church, and at the end of the Citie,The We^lor Foun^ai^e of S. Paul. (...) the R^mp^r^s, is the Fountaine S. Paul, the water whereof is very pleasing to (...) and admirable for Maide-seruants growing great (with some o^her Ingredien^. But such it is, that from this water of S. Paul, is deriued a Prouerb adapted to such as are forward and willing,
Narbona surprised by the Gothes and called GothiaThe magnificence which the Bishop of Auuergne obserued in this Citie, is no more: because it was ruined by the ^urious and cruell Attila. After whom, it fell (with Aquitaine) into the p^wer of the Gothes, by the donation formerly noated. Of them it was called Gothia, and to this instant vulgarly Languedocke: but to speake properly, Lands^^t, that is to say, Land of Goths, Lands kenet, a man of the Countrie. This name of Land^, signifie^h Ground or Earth in Alemaigne, and the Northerne Nations.
Beziers.THe first Bishopricke Suffragan of Narbona, is that of Beziers, eight Leagues from Narbona.The Wolfes passage. In the midway betweene these two Cities, is a dangerous passage, named Le Pas du Leup. Beziers is a pleasant Citie, where there is an excellent Ayre, as being exalted on the top of an high Mountaine, whence easily may be seene the Adriaticke Sea and the Pooles de Vendres, and other round neighbouring, with varied and spangled ^^ourie Fields, wonderfully delectable to be seene. Whereupon the Inhabitants say (as praising and emblazoning the pride of their Citie:) That if God should come to dwell, and conuerse againe with the World in his humanitie, hee would make choise of Beziers to be his abiding.
St Deus in terris,Vellet habitare Biterris.
The Armes of (...)It beareth for Armes, Faisse d'Argent, and de Gueulles de six pieces, au Chef de France, as all good Cities else doe. It is tearmed plurally Biterrae, and in the Geographers Strabo, Ptolomie, Aethicus, Bliterrae, Ciuitas Biterrensis. It hath for Patron S. Aphrodiseus, her first Bishop ordained by S. Paul of Narbona. At the foote of the Mountaine is the Riuer of Orde, called in Latine Obris. The second Bishopricke Suffragan, is
Agde.AGde, in Latine Agatopolis, Agata and Ciuitas Agathensis, remarkeable by a Councill there held, in the time of the King of the Vuisigothes Alaricus. This Citie is seated on the Adriaticke Sea, the Bishop whereof beareth the Title, and Circle of a Count.
CArcassone, in Latine Carcassona, deuided into an high and low Towne,Carcassona, a High and Low Towne. by an interiect and distance one from the other, by the Riuer of Aude, as also great Gardening and husband-able grounds; so that they seeme as two seperated Towns, yet adorned with very good wals. The Citie is exalted on the height of a Mountaine, beautified with a Cathedrall Church, wherein is to be seene a rich Tombe of Copper, with a faire Graue Stone all of one piece, standing before the high Altar, belonging to one of the Bishops, named Martin de S. Andrew: whose Armes were and are D' Azur a vn Chasteau somme de trois Tours d' Argent, le tout masonne de Sable, a trois Estoiles d'Or in Chef. This Citie bare in Armes likewise,The Armes of the Citie. D' Azur seme de France, and au mitan le pourtraict du Portail de ladite Cite hercee, and masonne de Sable.
The lower Towne is formed foure square, leuelled by the line,The low town consisting of foure great Streetes, hauing foure Gates. The Towne house is planted iust in the midst thereof, on a great goodly leuell; adorned with two Monasteries, and two Parish-Churches; namely of S. Vincent, where (in my time) was kept the Commissaries Court, and the other of S. Mighell.
This lower Town beareth for Armes Seme de France au Tourteau de Gueulles borde d Or, a vn Agnus Dei d' Argent. During the troubles of the League,The Armes of the low town^ the Parlement of Tolosa was transferred into this lower Towne, and kept at the Carmelite Friers; On the Gate of the Chapter-house of the said Monastery, hath bin seene (in my time) a long Stone, hauing this inscription engrauen vpon it.
Anno Domini Millesimo Quingentesimo Nonagesimo, Henricus, IIII.An Inscription engrauen on the Chapter-House.Dei Gratia Francorum and Nauarrae Rex Senatum Tolosanum huc Transtulit, Henrico Mommorantio Procurante.
After that the Leaguers had surprized this Citie, the said Parlement was transferred to Beziers.
AFter Carcassona followeth the Bishopricke of Nismes,Nisme. in Latine Nemausis, sometime called the Metropolitane Citie of the Auuergnacks, Nemausus Metropolis Aruernorum; and by Mela and other Geographers, Nemausus Arecomicorum. Strabo speaketh wonders. Caput Arecomicorum est Nemausus, longe inferior Narbonae, si peregrinam, and negotiantium turbam spetes; sin Rempublicam, multo praestantior. Nam viginti quatuor habet pagos popularium praestantes viris, quibus and Latij ius, ita vt Nemausi innenias Romanos qui Aedilitatis, and Quaesturae honorem sint consequuti, eamque ob causam gens ea cum Praefectis Rome missis nihil habet negotij.The Citie famous in the Romans time. So that this Citie enioying the right of Burgeship by the Romaines, was sometimes renowned aboue that which is called Aurigera, in the Countrie-language L' Ariege: And the other, by small graines of Siluer, called Graines d' Argent, it receiued the name of Argentaria, and the Countrey L'Arget. I haue seene them both many times. The second Suffragan is
MIrepoix, in Latine Mirapincum, Ciuitas Mirapicensis, a Vicountie,Mirepoix, a Vicountie. which depended heretofore on the Counts of Tolosa. But it was exempted by sentence of Condemnation; pronounced at Paris against Count Raymond the fourth, and last of that name. This Citie is watered with the small Riuer of Lers, in Latine Lertius, which descendeth from the Pyreneans, into the confines of France, and from Roussillion, it runneth and looseth it selfe in the Garonna.
MOntauban,Montauban. in Latine Mons-Albanus, and by the vulgar Montalba, seated on the Riuer of Tarn.
LAuaur in Lauragais, a Countie; in Latine Vaurum, Lauracensium Tectosagum Oppidum, seated on the Riuer De La-Gout, in Latine Acutus Fluuius.Lauaur in Lauragais. This is the Countrey of Woade, for the best dying of Cloathes, which is carried and vented in Spaine, and throughout all the Countries of Europe. This hearbe is called Glastum; it hath leaues falling like new Coleworts, that haue not bin replanted: and it is gathered at diuers times, from the beginning, vntill the end of Summer. It is

pounded, and made vpon lumps and clods, for the easier transporting it into strange Prouinces: And it is that which at Paris we call Guesde. Du Bartas in his Weekes, giueth it the name of Herbe Lauragaise.
Admired Woade, that being toucht without,Imparts thy tincture all the Corps about.
Rieux.RIeux, Ciuitas Riuensis; and Riuence, Riouz by the vulgar, seated on the little Riuer of the Rize, in Latine Riza, which rouling downe the Mountaines of Foix: after it hath engirt the small Citie of Rieux, runneth and dischargeth it selfe in the Garonna, neere to the Terrace.
Lombez in Comenges.LOmbez, Lomberia, and Ciuitas Lomberiensis, in the Countie of Comenges, a quarter of a mile from Semmathan. Frances Petrarch, the Italian Poet, was a Chanon of this Cathedrall. The last Bishopricke is that of
S. Papoull in Lauragais.SAint Papoul, in Latine Sanctus Papulus, a small Citie of the Countie of Lauragais, a mile distant from Castel-nau-d'Arry.
In auncient times, the Citie of Tolosa was Suffraganced by the Archbishop of Narbona.Tolosa made an Archbishopricke by Pope Iohn 22. Pope Iohn the two and twentieth made Tolosa an Archbishopricke, and gaue it for Suffragans Apamiers (which Pope Boniface, eight of the name, had made a Bishopricke in Anno 1296. without the consent and agreement of Phillip le Bell, fourth of the name, King of France and Nauarre. Which gaue subiect of bad intelligence betweene them, and whereof the Pope repented himselfe afterward: seruing as a mirrour and example to his Successours, not to preiudice the Kings of France) and these sixe other following. For of Abbeies, as they had bin before, he erected them to be Cathedral Churches, as appeareth in the fourth Booke of common Extrauagants of the said Pope Iohn.
The second Narbonois Prouince. Aix in Prouence.IN the second Prouince Narbonoise, otherwise called the third Viennoise Prouince, is the Archbishopricke of Aix in Prouence, called in Latine Aqua Sextiae, in the Itinerarium of Aethicus Aquae Sextae, in regard of Bathes, which now are no more in vse. It is honored with a Parlement, and a Chamber or Court of Accounts. The Metropolitane Church is named by the vulgar, Saint Sauuary, that is S. Sauiour, wherein I haue seene a very goodly Font, made Dome-wise, exalted vpon great Colomnes of Marble, at the South-side in the body of the Church. Behinde the high Altar is a painting of France, for the Sepulture of the great Prior of France, sirnamed of Angoulesme, Gouernour and Lieutenant Generall in Prouence. Aix hath fiue Suffragans, the first whereof is the Bishopricke
Apt.OF Apt, called in Latine Apta Iulia; followed by that of
Riez.RIez. Ciuitas Reiensis.
Freius.FReius, Forum Iulij, seated at the foote of the Maritime Alpes, according to the testimony of the Geographers, Mela, Strabo, and the Authour of the Itinerarium Aethicus: describing the passage from Italie into Prouence, by the Maritime Alpes, euen from the Citie of Rome, so farre as to Arles.
Gap^GAp, in Latine Vapincum, Ciuitas Vapencensis; and the last is
Sisteron.SIsteron, in Latine Sistaricum, and Ciuitas Sistariensis: This Citie is seated on the Riuer of Durance, called in Latine Druentia.
The first Viennois Prouince.THe first Prouince Viennois, is Vienna in Daulphine, tearmed by Caesar and other learned Geographers, Vienna Allobrogum, seated on the great and famous

Riuer of Rhosne. This City, heeretofore the abiding for the Emperours of the West, vpon the declining of the same Empire, and the Chancerie for the ancient Kings of Bourgongne; is distant from Lions onely fiue leagues. The Archbishopricke of Vienna hath in number fiue Suffragan Bishoprickes, the first whereof is that of
VAlencia,Valencia. in Latine Ciuitas Valentinensis; Valentia Segalaunorum: By Iustiue the Historiographer, and by the Chronicle of Prosper, it is tearmed Nobilissima Galliae Ciuitas: it is likewise seated vpon the Rhosne. Next followeth
DIe, a Burrough anciently dedicated to the Goddesse Fortune;Die. The City of Fortune. and therefore it was called Deae Fortunae Oppidum, during the Paganisme of the Romanes, afterwards dedicated to the Virgin of Virgins.
VIuiers, Ciuitas Viuariensis, and Viuarium, and the Country Viuarez.Viuiers. The vineyards of Viuiers. A Citie seated on the Riuer of Rhosne, and renowned in regard of her Vineyards; from whence Wine is conueyed through all the Seuenes and Auuergne, in Goates-skins, which they doe call Boucs. Sidonius Apollinaris, in his time commended a Bishop of Viuiers, whom hee calleth Patientius, because that the Vuisigothes hauing rauaged and ruined the Gaules, and reduced the people to Famine; that good Bishop succoured them with his fruites and Corne. Post Gothicam depopulationem, post segetes incendio ab sumptas, peculiari sumptu inopiae communi per desolatas Gallias gratuita frumenta misisti: cum tabescentibus fame Populis nimium contulisses, si commercio fuisset species ista non munere. Vidimus angustas tuis frugibus vias, vidimus per Araris, and Rhodani ripas, non vnum, quod vnus impleueras, horreum. Hee said that this good Bishop was another Patriarch Ioseph, for nourishing hunger-starued people. After Viuiers followeth.
GRanoble,Granoble. called Gratianopolis by S. Austine, and by Sidonius Apollinaris, in many of his Epistles. This City is seated on the Riuer of Ysere, in Latine Isara; honoured with a Court of Parlement, for the resort or Iurisdiction of Daulphine, the Principality belonging to the eldest Son of France, as we shall speake of elswhere. The last Suffragan is,
SAint Iohn de Maurienne,S. Iohn de Maurienna. in Latine Maurienna, a Bourgade at this present in the Estate of Sauoy; but heeretofore of the Prerogatiue, yea of the body of the Principality of Daulphine, as likewise the Bishopricke of
GEneua,Geneua. which was Suffraganced by the Archbishopricke of Vienna, and the Principalitie of Daulphine, whereby the Countes of Sauoy had formerly vsurped this Citie: but the Inhabitants became Masters thereof, to hold it as a separate Estate, for contrarietie in Religion. The Bishops seate had beene transferred to a place called Anicy in Sauoy:Anicy in Sauoy. and yet notwithstanding, the Bayliwickes of Geys, Baugey and Veromey (which almost toucheth the walls of Geneua, and of the said Bishopricke) are of the Crowne of France, and annexed vnto the Duchie of Bourgongne.
This City of Geneua hath many and sundry names,Many names giuen to Geneua. the most honourable whereof, is that of Knights, in Latine Ciuitas Aequestrium. As it very remarkeable by the Inscription engrauen on the Gate of the Treillis, neere to the Court, which they call
Imp. Caes. M. Antonio.Pio. Foel. Aug. Pontif. Max.Trib. Potes. Cos.Ciuitas Equestrium.
But to vnderstand the assured and certaine time, when she wonne this sir-name, I could neuer yet attaine vnto;No certainty of gaining this sir name. hauing beene at the place my selfe, and continued there three daies (with liberty of conscience among the Catholiques) yet all to no purpose. They say, that the Emperor Aurelianus was the restorer thereof, and of him retained name.
Moreouer, that of the Emperor they had daily sundry bookes, which they imprinted, to make them runne in apt disguises. Now, although these pretences issued forth of one and the same shop; yet had they still variety of names. One while of S. Geruase, which is the lesser Geneua, diuided from the greater by a large bridge of wood, vnder which runneth the Riuer of Rhosne: of Aureliae Allobrogum: and by another change, that of Augustae Allobrogum.
They contemne that which was remarkeable from the time of Caesar, and whereof himselfe speaketh the words. Extremum Oppidum Allobrogum, proximumque Heluetiorum finibus, Geneua. Their deuise is retrograde, and their Armes well enough emblazoned. This City of Geneua is a dependant on the principality of Daulphine, let the Dukes of Sauoy say what they will.
In the Court Registers of Parlement, there is an Order, dated the 13. day of Aprill,An Order of Court concerning (...). 1388. giuen between the Prince Daulphine, and Peter then Count of Geneua, whereby it was said, that the Countie of Geneua appertained to the Daulphine, and that the said Peter Counte of Geneua, should doe homage, and take the Oath of Liedge fidelitie, as he did to King Charles the sixth, at that time Daulphine of Viennois.
The 2. Viennois Prouince Atles the Metropolitane.The second Prouince Viennois, is the Archbishopricke of Arles, a City seated on the Riuer of Rhosne, and (as we haue formerly obserued) honoured with the title of Metropolitane, for the holding of many generall Councells, and hauing an admirable Amphitheater.
In Latine it is named Arclas, and Arelate, sometimes held and reputed for one of the dugs or sucking-teates of the Gaules; whereupon ancient Geographers called it Gallicam Rumam, and not Romam Gallulam, as the depraued passage of Ansonius speaketh. Wherefore this Mother-Citie had diuers appellations; as namely Constantina,Sundry names giuen to this Citie.The likeliest and truest opinion. of Constantine the Great, Author of new Rome; or of Flauius Constantinus the Tyrant, who had established his dwelling there, and where (after a long siege) he was taken, as we haue already said, and this seemeth to sauour of most truth. By the ancient Gaules it was called (...), and by the Romans Mamillaria; as Ausonius maketh it the Teat, Brest, and Nursing-mother of Aquitaine Gaule.
Praecipilis Rhodani sic intercisa fluentis,Vt mediam facias nauali ponte plateam,Per quem Romani commercia suscipis Orbis,Nec cohibes; Populosque alios, and maenia ditas,Gallia queis fruitur, gremioque Aquitania lato.
The store-house of Italy and Spaine.In regard that this City was the Magazine of Italy and Spaine, whether they carried all their Merchandises by Land (although they might haue done so by Sea) the great high way (which we tearme Royall) betweene Arles and Narbonna, and then so farre as to Tarragona, which is vpon the entrance into the Adriatique Sea. For it is a goodly roade way, namely from Arles to Narbona, the Waggons running at ease all the way. From the one of these two Metropolitane Cities to the other, is counted an hundred thousand paces. The Cosmographer Aeethicus.
The distance of way between Narbona and Arle.Iter ab Arelato Narbonae Milia plus minus, 100. sic.Nemensum. M. P. M......................13.Ambrussum. M. P. M.......................15.Sextatione. M. P. M.......................15.Foro Domitij. M. P. M.......................15.Ceserone. M. P. M............................18.Beternis. M. P. M.............................12.Narbona. M. P. M..............................12.
We vnderstand that they made it a farre greater length of ground,Difference of the olde Romane way. then at this present now they do, leauing the old way of the Romans, and taking the great road way French from Nismes to Margalides, Le Pont de Lunel, famous for her white thatched shelter, Lunel the olde, Mont-Pelier, Veruna, Pezenas, Cerignano, Beziers and Narbona.
In this Ci^y of Arles was borne the great Orator and Philosopher Phauorinus,The Orator and Philosopher Phauorinus borne in Arles. so much honoured by the Romanes, and renowned by Aulus Gellius; vpon whose so far famed Learning, he wrote his Atticke-Nights, as Plato did his Dialogues and immortall Tracts, on that of wise Socrates.
Heereby may the Spaniards learne to know, that they could neuer be Peered with the Gaules, famous in the Art Militarie, and all good Sciences, from one end of the world to the other, and in euery part thereof, as it is witnessed by the Romaine Salust, in the end of the warre brought against Iugurth. Vsque ad nostram memoriam Romani sic habuere, alia omnia virtute suae prona esse, cum Gallis pro salute, non de gloria certari. In that against Catiline (compelled to confesse the truth) hee saith: Gallos gloria belli, ante Romanos esse. Cranato, their owne ignorant Historian, in fauor of his Spaniards, maliciously abuseth the Gaules and French, against the Maximes of Warre. Cato giueth them these Titles of Honor in his Originalls. Pleraque Gallia duas res industriosissime prosequitur, Rem Millitarem, and Argute Loqui. They are ignorant in that which Iuuenall saith, concerning the Eloquence of the Gaules.
Gallia Causidicos docuit facunda Britannos.
They burie in silence their Studies and Colledges, more renowned then those of Athens, against the notable testimony of that worthy Father of the Church, Saint Hierome, who baptizeth them with these names, Studia Galliarum florentissima. They make them vnapt for Armes, contrary to the Rules Military, which instruct; Let no man misprize his enemy, but doubt him alwaies to be much stronger then he is not. And yet their owne Historians neuer spake of the Gaules and French, but with honour, esteeme, and reputation to command the whole world.
Cranato, your Historian Vopiscus, would haue taught you, if you had vnderstood Latine, that Galligens hominum inquietissima est, and auida semper vel faciendi Principis, vel Imperij. Goe to Schoole Cranato, goe to Schoole, to learne the naturall disposition of the Gaules and French. The Archbishopricke of Arles hath foure Suffragans, to wit:
MArseilles,Marseilles.Ciuitas Massiliensis, called Massilia by the Greeke and Romane Geographers, who make there a Colonie of the Phocenses, arriuing there out of Greece in their opinion, meerely ignorance. Whereas it was part of the ancient Gaules, which passed into Greece vnder the conduct of Captain Brennus:A mistake of some Historiographers. who (after his death) returned from Phocis into Gaule, and made their dwelling at Marseilles, and in the land of Languedock, where they were borne, and named Volcae Arecomici, and Tectosages. For all of that Prouence and Languedocke, were knowne by the names of the ancient Gaules, long before any speech of the Romanes.
Insinuant qua se Sequanis Allobroges oris,Excludunt Italos Alpina cacumina fines;Qua Pyrenacis niuibus dirimuntur Iberi,Qua rapitur praeoeps Rhodanus genitore LemanoInteriusque premunt Aquitanica rara CebennaeVsque in Tectosagas primaeuo nomine Volcas.
So spake the Bourdelois Poet Ausonius (to good purpose) in his Cities. Marseilles is a Key of France, on the Mediterranean Sea,Marseilles a Key of France. and one of the very goodliest Ports of Christendome. After this Bishopricke, next followeth in order that of
S. Paul,S. Paul. Ciuitas Sancti Pauli, and the men of this Diocesse are called Tricastini Populi, making a part of Daulphine, distant from Pont S. Esprit (a dangerous passage

ouer the Rhosne) two leagues only. This City tooke name by her first Bishop. The third Bishopricke is that of
Tolon.TOlon, a Port of the Leuant Sea, betweene the City of Marseilles, and the Isles of Eres, Lirinenses Insulae; Tolessensis Ciuitas: retaining the name of a Romaine Captaine,Telo Martius a Romane Captaine. called Telo Martius, who made there a Colony and Plantion. And the last Bishopricke is
Orenge.ORenge, or Orence, so named of her Cathedrall City, in Latine Aransio, Ciuitas Arausiensis, and by others Argenna, by the name of her Riuer D'Argent, tearmed in the Country Language Arceny. It was heretofore a Colony of the second Legion, and therefore it is called in the Geographer Pomponius Mela, Colonia Ara^sio. Secundauor. Coh. xxxiij. Without the gate of the said Citie, as men come from Lyons, is seene the remaines of a Triumphall Arche, which we may iudge by the eye to haue beene most magnificent,A famous ruined triumphal Arche. when it was whole and sound. And yet a Combat on horse-back may be discerned thereon, very admirably engrauen. They of the City say, that Marius the Romane was Author thereof, after hee had vanquished the Cimbres and Teuthones. Others doe beleeue, that it was made by Fabius Maximus, after he had ouercome (in a foughten battell) the Allobroges and Auuergnacs, as also their King Boduacus, called by the Romanes Bituitus, according to the testimony of Lucius Florus, one of their owne Historians.
Allobroges deinde, and Aruerni cum aduersus eos similes Aeduorum querelae, opem and auxilium nostrum flagitarent, Varus Victoriae testis, Isaraque, and Vndelicus (this ouerthrow happened on the Ri^ers of Gar, the Lisere, the Sorgue, and the Rhosne) amnis, and impiger fluminum Rhodanus. Maximus Barbaris terror Elephanti fuere, immanitati gentium pares. Nil tam conspicuum in Triumpho, quam Rex ipse Bituitus discoloribus in armis, argenteoque carpento, qualis pugnauerat. Vtriusque Victoriae quod quantumque gaudium fuerit, vel hinc aestimare potest, quod and Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabi^s Maximus ipsis quibus dimicauerunt locis saxeas erexere turres, and desuper exornata ^mis hostilibus trophaea fixere.
The portraict of a conquer'd King, led by Rome in triumph.There likewise is to be seene vpon this Arche, on the side towards Lyons, the picture of that King bound and manacled with chaines, his hands tied behinde him, according to the manner of a slaue, hauing vpon his breast this word written, Buduacus, with the Image of Rome, a Crowned woman, who with her right hand held the desolate King by the beard, to make him hold vp his head.
I should be ouer-long in relating all the particularities of this Arche, which I oftentimes beheld in nine or ten moneths time of my abiding in Auignion; and it is planted as in the middest of three Townes, of Orenge, Carpentras and Cauaillon, all three distant from Auignion by foure miles of the Countrey. So, Fabius Maximus was then the Author of this Triumphall Arche at Orenge, and not Marius; against the opinion of Sieur Iulian, in my time a Minister of the said place, one better acquainted with money,Fabius Maximus Author of this triumphal Arche. then skild in Antiquities.
As concerning that which was prouided for Domitius Aenobarbus, the ruines and remaines thereof is to be seene at S. Remy, neere vnto Tarascon in Prouence. The Romanes made the Gaules a thousand times more easie to be vanquished, then indeed they were,The insulting of the Romans ouer the Gauls onely to make themselues the more dreadfull to strange Nations, forming (many times) an Elephant of a Flye, and seruing their turne with a Foxes skinne, in stead of a Lyon. To make themselues great, they imployed all their purposes, like to the Spaniards; who notwithstanding all their Treaties and Alliances, neuer part from or forsake their praises. Practising the saying of the Confessor to the Emperor Charles the first:Asaying of the Confessor to the Emperor. In all doubtfull matters, it is much better to hold fast, then goe seeke. In obscuris melior est causa possidentis, quam petentis. As that Emperor practised on the persons of imprisoned Germaine Princes, on the Kingdomes of Naples and Nauarre; on the Duchie of Millaine, vsurped and vniustly with-held from the Crowne of France; and on other Cities of Italie, from their right and lawfull Lords.
In this manner the Romanes triumphed in pictures, and this poore King of the

Auuergnacs, Daulphinois and Prouencialls, and not by force of Armes, in regard they surprized him at an enter-view, notwithstanding the faith which Aenobardus had giuen, to let him come in all assurance. Neuerthelesse, this Roman Captaine brake his word brauely, by Equiuocation, and double meaning.
I will alleadge (for my warrant) Valerius Maximus, who freely discouereth the treason of the Romanes, in these tearmes. Iratus Betulto (hee should haue said Boduaco) Regi Aruernorum Cn. Domitius, quod tum suam, tum Allobrogum gentem, se etiam tum in Prouincia morante ad Qu. Fabij successoris sui dextram confugere hortatus esset, Per Colloquij simulationum accersitum, Hospitioque. Acceptum vinxit, ac Romam naui deportandum curauit. Senatus eius factum neque probare potuit, neque rescindere voluit, ne remissus in patriam Boduacus bellum renouaret; igitur eum Albae custodiae relegauit. Behold the instruction of Machiauells Prince.
In the same City of Orenge,An ancient theater and ruined temple. are likewise the ruines and remaines of an ancient Theatre and Circle; as also the great walls standing of an antique Temple, which the said Sieur Iulian told me had bin dedicated to the goddesse Diana, and her Wood-Nimphes; and that the Theatre and Temple had beene built by Marius. Wherein the good man followed vulgar opinion, which (very often) is not the most assured and certaine.
We learne the contrary by Strabo, who giueth the honour to Fabius Maximus: obserue heere the testimony of that ancient Geographer. Quo loco Isara, and Rhodanus fluuij confluunt prope Cemmenum montem Qu. Fabius Maximus XXX. millium non integrorum exercitu instructus, Ducenta Millia Gallorum concidit, ibique Trophaeum statuit ex albo lapide, ac duo Templa; Vnum Martis, alterum Herculis. So that there is the most appearance and likelihood, that this ancient Temple of Orenge, had beene dedicated to the Gaulish Hercules; to serue as a famous not of that memorable disrout and discomfiture of the Gaules in picture, rather then otherwise, of the Goddesse Diana.
As concerning this Citie of Orenge, it is a Principality lockt vp within the Countie of Prouence. The King of Sicilie Rene, sold the Homage,Orenge a Principality included in the Countie of Prouence. Prerogatiue and Soueraignty, to Lewis de Chalon, Prince of Orenge. William (sonne to the said Lewis) also Prince of Orenge; isold them to King Lewis the eleuenth, who submitted the said Principalitie to that of Daulphine; which happened in the yeere 1475. So that although the Princes of Orenge doe enioy in the said Principalitie, all Soueraigne Rights by the concession of our Kings; yet neuerthelesse it is so,The Kings of France hold Soueraigne power in this Principality. that if they intermeddle among Strangers Warres, the Kings of France make seizure of this Principalitie by Soueraigne hand. As in that of Charolois, appertaining to the house of Spaine, as we haue seene in our time, by the Treaty of Veruins, King Henry the Great (of glorious memory) raised his hand vpon the County of Charalois,A comparison concerning the Countie of Charolois, and Principality of Orenge. whereof he remitted the enioying to the King of Spaine, Dom Philip the second. The same he did on the Principalitie of Orenge, which he remitted (by making a marriage of Madamoiselle de Conde, with the Prince of Orenge) to her Prince returned from Spaine, and sent thence the Gouernour Bacon, who held Authoritie there for the King.
In the same second Prouince Viennois,Auignion an Archbishopricke in the second Viennois Prouince. is the Archbishopricke and Legation of Auignion, called in Latine Auenio, a Metropolitane Citie in the County of Venice; in Latine Comitatus Venuxinus, and Veniessinus, and Venesinus; and Auignion called Cauarum by the Geograper Pomponius Mela. This Citie and Countie is gouerned by a Vice-Legate, and the money thereof hath on the one side, the Picture of the Pope reigning, and his name for the Legend; and on the other side, the Armes and name of the Legate, or Vice-Legate, who is then Gouernour.
The Bridge of Auignion ouer the swift and violent Rhosne, containeth ninteene Arches, sixteene whereof doe appertaine to the King, and the rest to the Pope. To whom also belongeth Auignion, and the Accountate or County,Auignion and the Accou^tate belongeth to the Pope. by meanes of the acquisition which Pope Clement the sixt made of Ioane Queene of Naples and Sicily, and Countesse of Prouence, who ingaged them to the said Pope, for the summe of fortie thousand Crownes; with condition of perpetuall redemption by her, and her Successors, the Countes of Prouence: which engadgement happened in the

yeere 1360.The Riuer of Rhosne adiudged in Parlement to the King. Redemption was not made by the Countes of Prouence, Successors to the said Queen Ioane. King Lewes the eleuenth hauing caused the Riuer to be ruled in the Parlement of Tolosa, and adiudged to the King; was preuented by death, euen when the Offers and Moneyes were ready, for withdrawing the ancient parcells, dis-membred by engaging the Countie of Prouence.
The Kings, Charles the eight, his sonne Lewes the twelfth, and Francis the first, hoping the assistance, or the neutralitie of Popes, for recouering the Kingdomes of Sicilie, and Lands of Italie; brought the Redemption to a quite surceasing, which hath so still remained (euen to this day) to the Popes, being Lords of the Lands engaged by the Counts of Prouence.
Three Suffragans belonging to Auignion.Auignion within the enclosure of the Countie, hath three Bishoprickes Suffragans: namely,
Carpentras.CArpentras, in Latine Carpentoracte, and Ciuitas Carpentoractensis. Aboue which is the Windie Mountaine (as the Countie men call it) and which I haue seene from the foote, to the Pond on the highest part thereof. They are of opinion, that from thence blow the cruell and rigorous windes, which whistle into Auignion, and maketh it healthfull:Windie Auignion is venemous without winde. from whence grew their Prouerbe, Auenio ventosa, sine vento venenosa. In a word, the Prouince is very subiect to windes, and especially Auignion, where they are daily resorters. If it proceedeth from the neere neighbouring of the Alpy Mountains, or the Leuant Sea; let the Prouincialls defide the quarrell.
Vaison.VAison, in Latine Vasinense Oppidum, by Sidonius Apollinaris, and by the ancient Geographer Mela, Oppidum ^ccontiorum; a small City, seated neere to the Riuer of Durance, and watered with the Sorga, renowned by the same Mela, who calleth it Solgam. So doth Strabo likewise, who recounting the imaginary ouerthrow of the Auuergna^s King, before remembred, saith; that she runneth to lose her selfe in the Riuer of Rhosne, at the Towne of Vndale. Tertius est Sulgas fluuius, qui ad Vndalum Vrbem Rhodano miscetur. Quo loco Cn. Domitius A nobarbus ingenti pugna per multa Barbarorum fudit millia. This Riuer of Sorga (if I haue any good memory) taketh Originall from the fountaine of Vaucluse,Sourse of spring of the Riuer Sorg^. in Latine, Fons Clausae Vallis, neere vnto which, is to be seene the remaines of the Castle of Cabrieres, where was borne Madona Laura, so celebrated by her Louer Petrarch, as well as the Spring of Vaucluse, (which I haue many times noted) at the issuing forth whereof, the water is so bigge, that it sunders it selfe into two armes, which make an Iland, furnished with a Towne, bearing name of the Isle, at the lower point whereof (ioyning together againe) it passeth on to Vaison, and from thence to Auignion. There it is diuided into many branches and channells, for best commodity of the Citie, which hath seuen Bridges passing ouer it; seauen Ports or gates; seuen Colledges of Chanons; seuen Monasteries of Men; as many of Nuns; seauen Hospitalles: And to close all with a Rime: To behold
Trois choses rares en AuignonBeau Mur, belle Femme, and beau Pon.3. M^r^cles seldom seen in Auignion.Three things in Auignion very rare:A goodly Wall, a handsome Bridge, a Woman faire.
At entring into the Church of the Gray-Friers, on the right hand, in the first Chappell, named of the Holy Crosse; before the Altar is a long Tombe, in the middest whereof is engrauen a Crosse, thwarted with two boughes or branches of Laurell, in forme of a Saultour, and on the top of it a Rose: this is the Tombe of Madam Laura,The Tomb of (...) Laura, Petrarch his (...). and the deuise which she had during her life. In my time, vpon a little Table in the same Chappell, was written the Sonnet, which King Francis the first composed, in honor and memory of this Lady of Cabrieres; and the Sonnet is imprinted in the Frontespice of Petrarches workes.
At departing from Auuignion, the Sorga hauing rowled some extendure of the

Country, runneth and looseth it selfe in the Roze, as they call it in Auignion and Prouence.
The last Bishopricke Suffragan of Auignion, is that of
CAuaillon, in Latine Cabellicum, a little Citie, but well piled together, and within halfe a quarter of a League thence, men passe the Riuer of Durance by boates,Cauaillon. to the point of Orgon; which is the beginning of Prouence, and the great Roadeway of Marseilles, by Salon from Craux, Aquille, Francon, Aix, Ventabran, Marseilles, a goodly City, and beautifull Port of the Sea, so oftentimes attempted by the Spaniards. Heere it is where men take shipping for passage to Geneway and Liuorne,The excellent Port for passage of Marseilles. into Sicilie, and to Malta: yea, it is the very shortest cut and passage for the Leuant Sea, to the Port of Alexandreta, Amman, Damas and Ierusalem.
The fourth Prouence Viennois, containeth the Archbishopricke of Embrun, in Latine Eberodunum, the Metropolitane Seate of the Coctien and Maritime Alpes,Of the fourth Viennois Prouince. which hath sixe Bishopricks Suffragans, as namely;
DIgne,Digne. in Latine Ciuitas Diniensis, and by some Geographers, Dianium, and Dinia; which was sometimes a Metropolitane, as we may see in the first Councell of Orleans.
GRasse,Grasse. within the Maritime Alpes, three Leagues from Antibe, called in Latine Antipolis; a City of the Emperor Antoninus, a Port of the Sea, and a retreat (of^entimes) for Rouers and Pirates, Grassa and Grassensis Ciuitas.
VEnce,Vence. in Latine Vencesina, Vencesium, and Venciensis Ciuitas. Sancta Maria de Vence is her Cathedrall Church, as well as those of Grasse and of Freius.
GLandesue,Glandesue. in Latine Glandena, and Glandenensis Ciuitas, within the Maritime Alpes also. The Bishops Pallace, and the Cathedrall Church, are seated in a ^aire and pleasant Valley, named Entre-Vaux, Interualles in Latine, three thousand ^aces from Riez.
SEnez,Senez. in Latine Saniciensium Oppidum, and Senetensis Ciuitas, likewise seated in the Maritime Alpes. And,
NIce,Nice.Nicea, and Niciensis Ciuitas in Latine; a City and Port of the Sea, seated at the foote of the Maritime Alpes, and vnder the Homage, Authoritie, and ^isdiction of the Countie of Prouence, engaged to the Counts of Sauoy (as we shall ^eake elsewhere) and as it is so maintained to this present.According to the former engadgement. This place is beautified with a Castle, planted vpon the Mountaine, from whence may be discouered all ^e Adriaticke Sea. Beneath it is the City enriched with a goodly Hauen, where ^e Dukes of Sauoy haue their Gallies, serued by the Cheualiers of S. Maurice.
Such are the Metropolitane Seates and Diocesses of France, by the enumerati^ whereof, it is easie to iudge the greatnesse of the Kingdome,The measure of the longitude and latitude of Fra^ce. wherewith Spaine ^^nnot be compared. The length of France is measured from the Towne and Port (...) Callice on the Ocean Sea, so farre as to that of Aigues-Mortes on the Mediterra^ean Sea, the extendure of two hundred and eight Leagues, more or lesse. The ^edth or largenesse is from the Conquest in Bretaigne, vpon the Ocean Sea like^ise, vnto Pont de Bonuoisin, the Frontier of France and Sauoy; being an hundred ^rescore and twelue Leagues, more or lesse, at foure miles for a League:Foure miles allowed to a league. it is ea^ then to make the account. It cannot be found, that Spaine hath such bredth and ^ngth answerable to France; because Spaine in all her extendure, containeth no brethen seuen Prouinces, whereof doe make part the Kingdomes of Nauarre, ^rtugall, and Arragon; as also the Counts of Catalogna, Roussillion and Cardignia, ^ich appertaineth to the Most Christian Kings: and France containeth seuenteene, we haue formerly obserued.
So that like as the Kingdome of France, being in a temperate climate (betweene the excessiue heates of Italie and Spaine, and the cruell coldnesse of Germanie and England) is called by Mathew Paris, The sweete Kingdome of France, and the chiefe of Christendome; Dulce Regnum Franciae. Euen so, for deuotion and pietie; knowledge in Learning and Sciences; expertnesse in the Militarie Art; abundance and fertilitie of Soyle; mildenesse, politenesse and ciuilitie of the Inhabitants, it is not to be equalled by any. For they neuer liued in the barbarisme and rusticitie of the auncient Spaniards, who by a kinde of customarie behauiour, would wash and perfume themselues with Vrine, long time kept in Sinkes and muddie places, wherewith both men and women cleanse their teeth; an vnseemely fashion, yet common among the people of Spaine; like vnto those Indians of Malabar, that bathe and wash themselues in filthie muddie waters: Therefore well may France be tearmed The Kingdome of Kingdomes.
Matthew Paris, the English Historian, further saith. Anno etiam eodem, verno tempore arridente, insurrexerunt multi Magnates accincti ad praelium, vt bellum mouerent aduersus Regnum Galliae. Indignabantur enim quod Regnum Regnorum scilicet Gallia, consilio muliebri r^gebatur. He spake of Queene Blanch, Mother to the King S. Lewes, regent in France: who was thwarted in his Regencie by Messieurs Philip of France, Count of B^legne, and Thibault, King of Nauarre, Count Palatine of Ch^^pum and Erre.
The Order of the Monarchal Hierarchie.It is generally knowne, that in the Monarchall Hierarchie, the Emperour of the Romaines is the prime potentate. Yet so it is (notwithstanding) that the Kings of France doe neuer acknowledge him for Superiour: but, as his equall in dignitie, walke foote by foote. As daily is to be seene at Rome, when Ambassadours come from the Emperour, and from the King of France, at such time as he sitteth in the Chappell: their present and encensings are at one season, and the same day they haue audience of the Pope. But others doe follow them of Spaine, and so the other Kings and Potentates of Christendome.
In the yeare 1239. Pope Gregory the ninth, hauing excommunicated the Emperour Fredericke the second;Pope Gregory excommunicated the Emperor Frederick 2 he and his Cardinals, being assembled in the Conclaue: elected for Emperour Monsieur Robert of France, Count of Artois, brother to the King Saint Lewes. To which King the Pope wrote, and sent his N^^tios, with command to reade his Letters before him, and all the Barons of France, and let them vnderstand, that by vniuersall consent of the Cardinalles of the holy Church; the said Monsieur Robert was elected Emperour of the Romaines. Heere you may reade the tenure of the Popes Bull.
The Popes Bull sent to the King of France:GRegorius Episcopus, Seruus Seruorum Dei. Nouerit dilectus Filius Ecclesiae spiritual^ Illustris Rex, and totum Francorum Baronagium, nos deliberatione, and tractatu diligenti omnium fratrum nostrorum condemnasse, and a culmine Imperiali abiudica^^sse Fredericum dictum Imperatorem, and Robertum Fratrem Regis Francorum loco ips^^ elegisse substituendum, quem etiam omnibus nisibus Ecclesia non tantum Romans, sed vniuersalis, duxit non segniter adiuuandum, and efficaciter promouendum. Nullo igitur modo tantam sponte oblatam dignitatem apertis brachijs suscipere non pigritem^, ad quem opes, and operam, and opem abundanter effundemus consequendam. Scelera (...) praedicti Frederici multiplicia, sicut iam nouit Mundus, eundem irrestaurabiliter cond^^narunt.
The Ki^g of Fra^ce his ans^^^e to the Pope (...)S. Lewes, by the aduise and counsell of his Barons, vpon this nomination of the Emperor, returned this answere to the Pope. That by a spirit thirsting for reuenge, or else meerely in rashnesse, he had interdicted and fulmined against the Emperour Fredericke; not conuinced of such crimes as the Pope had obiected against him. And therefore, to no purpose hee had deposed him from the Empire, and left his Seigneuries as spoile and pillage, to the first that should attempt to inuade them.
But if the crimes whereof he accused the Emperor, were so execrable, as to deserue deposing from the Empire: the deposition ought to bee done by a Generall Councell, and not onely by the Pope, his capitall enemie, being both a Iudge and Partie in the cause. For my owne part (quoth he) vntill then,The Emperors good seruice in the Holy Land. I will acknowledge the said Fredericke both for innocent, and an honest good neighbour; for I neuer knew any thing in him, that sauoured of heresie from the Catholique faith, or perfidious dealing towards men.
Well know I that he hath fought valiantly for the Law of Iesus Christ, as well on firme Land against Heretiques, as beyond the Seas against the Sarazens, dreadlesse of all perills and hazards in Warre. Nor haue I found a zeale so feruent and deuout in the Pope, who is the man that ought to aduance the seruice of God, to loue, protect, and defend the said Fredericke against his enemies: whereas quite contrary, he endeuoured with all his power, to supplant and depriue him of the Empire, during the time of his absence, by cunning trickes, and very vnreasonable waies. It is no part of my meaning, to hurle my selfe headlong into such quagmires, by declaring War against Fredericke so potent; who hath, and can haue (at need) assistance of Kings and Princes, his neighbours and friends, and in a cause so iust as his is. It would be pleasure and contentment vnto the Romanes, to see Riuers and Streames prodigally sluced forth of our bloud, to satiate and glut their rage and fury, if by our owne meanes, and that of others, they could trample vnder their feet, the Kings and Potentates of the world, transported with an audacions and proud gale of winde: when so great an Emperor as is Fredericke, shall see himselfe trode downe, without all hope or meanes of rising againe.
Neuerthelesse, not to seeme or appeare disdaining,An article of inueterate malice, and whereof Princes had need to be sensible. or mis-prising the Popes message (though it be plainely euident, that it is done rather in hatred to the Emperour Fredericke, then any fauour which the Romane Church beareth to vs:) we will (for our part) send to the said Emperour Fredericke our discreet and well aduised Ambassadors, to vnderstand of him, what his credence is of the Catholique Faith; to the end, that we may be the more certaine and duly informed therein. For ^f nothing be found in him, that may subiect him to reprehension, why should wee make warre vpon him? If we finde the contrary, we will marche in open field; not onely against him, but euen against the Pope himselfe, if hee be offensiue to God; ^ea, against any other person liuing, whom we will valiantly pursue, and prosecute euen to the death.
The Popes Nuncios returned with this magnanimous and generous answere,The return of the Popes Nuncios to Rome, and Ambassadors sent to the Emperor Fredericke. quite contrary to that which the Pope expected. And the King (on his owne behalfe) sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor Fredericke, to acquaint him with the Popes good^y Letters. Which when the said Emperour had read; all amazed at the calumnies thus imposed on him, he made answer to the Ambassadors of France: That he was a Catholique and a Christian, and constantly beleeued all the Articles of the Orthodoxall Faith. O God forbid (quoth he) that I should euer forsake the beleefe of my most famous Grandfathers, to walke in the way of the wicked.The Emperors words to the Ambassadors. I call God to be ^udge betweene the Pope (who hath so wickedly scandalized mee through all the world) and my selfe. Then lifting his hands towards heauen, and his eyes streaming forth teares, his voyce being confounded with heart-breaking sighes and grones, he cried out; O God, thou God of vengeance, reward the Pope according to his deseruings. So turning to the Ambassadors, he said; Most deare friends,The Pope most maliciously addicted to the Emperour. and good neighbours, beleeue vndoubtedly, that whatsoeuer the vtter enemy to my bloud ^aith, who would depriue mee of all honor; that I beleeue as a Christian ought to beleeue. And if you be disposed to make warre vpon me, credit constantly; that I wil defend my self valiantly against them that presume to meddle with me. For my hope is firmly grounded on God (who is the protector and shield of the innocent) ^hat he will deliuer me from my enemies. God knoweth,The Pope ioyned with the Emperours Enemies. that the Pope (fauouring my rebellious subiects, the Millaine Heretiques) hath thus bandied himselfe against me. But I am obliged to render infinite thankes both to your King, and to the Ba^ons of France, that they would vnderstand and take knowledge what manner of man I am, before they gaue credit to the Popes perswasions.
Hereupon the Ambassadours imparted to him, these words concerning their

King,A remembrance of the Kings words to the Popes Nun^^os. deseruing obseruation. God forbid (quoth they) that it should euer enter into the heart and minde of the French, to make warre against a Christian Prince, without cause, and manifest subiect. Ambition cannot moue vs a iot, to aspire or make any pretence to the Empire. Because we beleeue, that the King of France our Maister, that the Ligne called of the Royall Blood, and made to mount on the Kingly Throne of the Noble Flower de Luce, death seazing his life: his neerest Heire to succeede him, is much more excellent then the Emperour, whatsoeuer he be, who commeth to that dignity but by a voluntarie election. It shall suffice then my Lord Count Robert, to be Brother to so great a King.
Ad hoc Legati. Nolit Deus vt vnquam ascendat in cor nostrum, vt aliquem Christianum sine manifesta causa impugnemus. Nec nos pulsat ambitio. Credimus enim Dominum nostrum Regem Galliae, quem linea Regij sanguinis prouexit ad Sceptra Francorum regend^, excellentiorem esse aliquo Imperatore, quem sola electio prouehit voluntaria: sufficit Domino Comiti Roberto fratrem esse tanti Regis. These are the very words of the Monke of England, Mathew ^aris.
Concerning the peaceful estate of France.On the peaceable estate of the Kingdome of France, dependeth the whole prosperity of the holy Seate, and of all Christendome.
In the yeare 1248. the King S. Lewes, setting on his voyage ouer the Seas, passed by Lyons, to visite Pope Innocent the fourth, who (by his permission) was retired thither for safety (as France hath bin at all times the Sanctuary, and the onely assured refuge for Popes, in the very strongest of their afflictions) against the Emperour Fredericke the second.The King of F^ance vi^^keth Pope Innocent the fourth at Lyons. In this parley or conference, the King most earnestly entreated the said Pope, to listen to some good agreement betweene his Holinesse and the said Emperour, the respect, reuerence and honour of the holy Seate reserued: to the end, that peace being granted to Christendome; passage to the Le^ Sea, and the Prouinces of Europe might thereby be kept open, free and safe for all Croisades, and for the affaires in the holy-Land. Because the wars of Popes against Emperours, serued but as a Bridge to the Sarrazins, to expell the Christians f^om their possessions in the holy-Land. And the King perceiuing, that the Pope le^^ but a deafe eare to his remonstrances: looking frowningly on him. I plainely perceiue (quoth he) that so soone as I shall be gone forth of my Kingdome: all disorder will step in, by Armes of strangers, through your peruerse and wilfull obsti^acie. If the voyage to the holy-Land be impeached, all the blame will be imposed on you.The words of King Lewes to the Pope. As for my selfe: I will keepe France, as the apple of mine eye; because the whole prosperity of you, and of Christendome, dependeth on the State of France, Custodiam Franciam vt pupillam oculi, a tatu ipsius, and tui, and totius Christianitatis dependet prosperitas. These are the words againe of the same Mathew Paris.
The Greeke Authors, speaking of the Church of S. Sophia at Constantinople, say (in vaine ostentation:) That it is fastened to a Chaine of Gold, which descendeth downe from Heauen. We may truely say, that God, who ballanceth the whole world with his three fingers; Qui appendit tribus digitis molem Terrae: holdeth the Crowne of France fastened to a Chaine of Diamonds in Coelum Empyrium, descending downe on earth. How many times hath it bin seene in great brandling, to be set vpon Strangers heads? And yet notwithstanding, when they supposed themselues neerest catching it; God gaue so strict a closure to their fingers, that they were glad to leaue it behinde them. How many tempestuous stormes hath France (in her own Kingdome) endured,The manifold afflictions of Fra^ce by strangers. one while by the English on the one side, and then by Spaniards on the othe, through the factions and practises of two furious and bloody Leagues? As often hath God comforted her in the very fiercest of her afflictions, protecting, maintaining and preseruing her by wayes meerely miraculous and out of all humaine apparance. A yong Damosell, of obscure birth, expelled the English out of France. An Angell of Heauen threw downe to the earth the Spanish Arm^s,(...) and conducted by the Arme of a victorious King; returned to the great C^u^ch of Paris, where (the very same day) the Strangers were beaten thence, couered with shame and confusion.
We haue (in our dayes) seene a yong Salomon, aged but fifteene yeares, calme and make smooth (in an instant the Kingdome of France, when it was in danger of totall ruine, by the small factions of two wretched Strangers; which moued the Monke of England Mathew Paris, to say in his History of England thus remarkably,
That God particularly saueth, guardeth, maintaineth and comforteth the Kingdome of France, which he loueth especially and particularly, aboue all Kingdoms of the world. Dominus, Regnum Francorum, prae omnibus alijs speciali complectitur dilecticne consolatur and tuetur.
The same Author, making a parallel or comparison of the Kings of France, with them of Germany (in those times, the elected Emperors had no other title, but Kings of Germany) saith excellently well. That the Kings of France were much more potent, then the said Emperours: Because the holy Kingdome of France hath alwaies beene in the especiall safeguard and protection of God. Hucusque auxiliatus est Dominus, qui semper opitulantibus Regni Sanctis, Francos sub alis refouet protectionis.
The same Historian, describing the stately Banquet and Feast, which was in the great Hall of the Temple at Paris, (it being without the City at that time) where were lodged the King and Queene of England, Henry the third of that name,A Royall feast in France, and the guests present at it. and a great Traine: he saith, that at this feast sate three Kings, two Queenes, fiue and twenty Dukes, twelue Bishops among these Dukes, eighteene Countesses; three whereof were sisters to two Queenes of France, and of England, as namely those of Aniou, Cornwall and Prouence, with the Countesse Beatrix, their Mother.
As concerning the sitting at the table of the said Kings, the same Historian saith, that for Honor) the King of France S. Lewis, was set in the middest, King Henry of England on his right hand, and on the left, Thibault King of Nauarre, Count Palatine of Brie and Champaigne: howbeit, the said holy King Lewes was pressed by Henry of England, to take his place in the midst. And the Author saith, that the most honorable place was granted to the said King Lewes:The words alledged by Mathew Paris in his history of England, An. 1254. Because the King of France is the King of Kings. Comederunt igitur sic ordinati. Dominus Rex Francorum, qui terr^strium Rex Regnum est, tum propter eius Coelestem inunctionem, cum proper sui potestatem and militiae eminentiam in medio sedebat; and Dominus Rex Angliae a dextris; and Dominus Rex Nauarriae a sinistris. Et cum interitur Dominus Rex Francorum aliter ordinare, vt videlicet Dominus Rex Angliae in medio, and in eminentiori loco sederet,The place of honor and precedency. ait Dominus Rex Angliae. Non Domine in Rex, decentis sedetius modo, scilicet in medio, and digni^us. So at the entrance into Paris, of rhe Emperor Charles the fourth, and his Son Wence^s^aus, King of Bohemia; the King of France, Charles the fift, rode betweene them, which is the place of Honour and Precedencie, hauing the Emperor on his right hand, and the King of Bohemia on his left: to shew, that the Kings of France are Emperors in their Kingdome, and acknowledge no Prince in the world to be greater, then they themselues are.
And like as the Kings of France are Kings of Kings, that is to say, they are the chiefest Kings of Christendome: by one and the same argument, the Queens Mo^hers* and wiues of our Kings, are Queenes of Queenes,Queenes of France Queens of Queenes. and Ladies of Ladies throughout Christendome. Matthew Paris speaking of the departure and death of Queene Blanch of Castile, Mother to S. Lewes, saith: Circa id quoque tempus, videlicet prima Dominica Aduentus Dominici, prima die Mensis, obijt Dominarum Saecularium Domina Blan^hia Francorum Regis Mater. The King of France, according to the testimony of the ^ame Historian, is the example and mirrour of Iustice, to Princes Strangers: as the Sunne, whose luminous and splendant beams are darted directly, to cleare the most obscurest darkenesse; For he is King of Kings.
In like manner, he speaking of the voyage made into England (to be there crow^ed King) by Lewis the 8 of the name, sonne to King Philip Augustus, writeth: that ^ot onely the English and French, but all Christendome generally, were entranced with feare, least some accident should happen to the Kings sonne of France, who was the Prince of Christendomes Princes, and in regard of the loue and honour, which he bare to the most Noble Kingdome of France.
The Relation of Denys de Corbeill, Iohn de Monstre-veue, and William de Limets, ^nights, Ambassadors from Monsieur Lewes of France, elected King of England, ^gainst K. Iohn without Land, to Pope Innocent the third at Rome, importeth; that the ^id King, eldest sonne to Philip Augustus, King of France, was the Arme of the Ro^ane Church. Behold here the true words of the Relation, reported by the said Mat^ew Paris, Dominus Papa statim finito sermone, percusso pectore suo cum magno gemitu,The words of the Relation. ^fremuit spiritu, and dixit. Heu mihi! quia in haec facto Ecclesia Dei non potest euadere ^sus^e^. Si enim Rex Angliae vincitur, in ipsius confusione confundimur, quia vassalus

noster est, and tenemur cum defendere. (The vassaile might enioy to himselfe his Fieffe or inheritance, vntill his demission. But it is a question, whether a Soueraign Prince can render himselfe vassail and Tributary to another Prince, or no, without the consent of his Vassails and Subiects.) Si Dominus Ludouicus vincitur, quod Deus auertat, in ipsius laesione laeditur Romana Ecclesia, and ipsius laesionem propriam reputamus, secure enim semper habuimus and adhuc habemus, quod ipse in omnibus necessitatibus debeat esse Brachium and Solatium in oppressionibus, and refugium in persecutionibus Ecclesia.
Pope Innocent the third might haue added heereto, that which the Neapolitane Doctor Viualdus saith in his Royall worke. That it was the common beleefe of the Church (Learne, Learne Cranato) that by a particular gift of Grace, the diuine Clemency elected the ancient Kings of France, aboue all other Kings and Princes of the habitable earth; as the proper Combatants, Champions and Souldiers of the Catholique Church. Credimus, and firmiter tenemus Diuinam Clementiam dono particularis gratiae elegisse veterantos Francorum Reges prae cunctis Principibus vniuersi orbis, quasi proprios pugiles Catholicae Fidei. This Italian Doctor (Cranato) deriued this beliefe from the vniuersal consent of the Church, and the writings of the learned Rabanus Maurus, in the Treatise which he wrote of Antichrist, inserted in the ninth Tome of S. Augustines works (whom some affirme to be the Author of that treatise,At what time S. Augustine died. but to none effect; in regard this Father of the Church, and the Mallet of hereticks in his time, departed from this life to heauen, in the yere of Grace 430. then being Consuls, the Emperors Theodosius for the 13. time, and Valentinian for the third.) The passage then is out of Magnent us Rabanus Maurus, a Natiue, and first Abbot of Fulda, and afterward Archbishop of Maguntia: he was Scholler to Venerable Beds, and died in the yeere of Grace, 856. Behold here what he saith in honor of France.
Dicit Apostotus Paulus secundo ad Thessalonicenses. Anti-Christum non antea in Ma^dum esse venturum, nisi venerit prima discessio, hoc est nisi discesserint omnia Leg^s a Romano Imperia, quae prius illi subdita erant. Hoc autem tempus nondum aduenit; qui^hcet videamus Romanum Imperium ex maxima parte destructum; Tamen quandiu Reges Francorum durauerint, qui Romanum Imperium integrum tenere debent, Imperij Roman^ dignitas non ex toto peribit; Quia stabit in Regibus suis (hee speaketh not of Kings of Spaine, Cranato) but continueth on still thus. Quidam vero Doctores nostri dicunt, Quod vnus ex Re^^bus Francorum Romanum Imperium, ex integro tenebit, qui in no^^ssim^ tempore Maximus, and omnium Regnum vltimus erit. Hic postquam Regnum s^^^ foeliciter administrauerit, ad vltimum Hierosolymam veniet, and in Oliueti monte Scept^i suum Ceronamque deponet, and hic erit finis, and consummatio Imperij Romanorum, and Christian rum; statimque secundum praedictam sententiam Apostoli Pauli, Anti-Christum decunt suturum.
The application of this Prophesie.Thi^ ancient Prophesie is grounded, on the deuotion and piety of the most Christian and most Sacred Monarchs of the Lilly; because of all them which haue reign'd in France, from the time of great Clouis, to K. Lewis the 13. of that name, now reigning, there is not found one King that hath wauered in Faith, or euer bowed his knee to Baall.
The faithfull Historian of the Spaniards Mariana, and all his fore-goers in the History of Spaine, doe informe vs, that Mauregat, 7. King of Ouiedo and Leon, who began to reigne in An. 783. because he would reigne; made himselfe Tributary to the King of Moores in Spaine, named Abdiramus, yeelding a Tribute vnfitting for any Christian Prince;A most dishonorable tribute to be payed. namely, of fiftie Damosels of noble extraction and linage, and as many other meaner mens daughters, which he sent yeerely vnto the Infide^l Moores, to satisfie their infamous and beastly lubricity, by the losse of their Christian soules. Whereas on the contrary, in all the three Lignes of our Kings with vs in France, we haue had some sanctified and canonized.
Vnder the first Ligne, S. Gontran king of Orleans and of Bourguignonne France. The Romane Martyrologe of the most learned Cardinall Baronius (whom the Spaniards affect not,Kings of Fra^ce sanctified and Canonized. because he speaketh the truth, concerning the kingdomes of Naples and Sicily, wickedly vsurped from the Crowne of France) vnder the eight day of March, saith. Cabilone in Gallijs depositio Sancti Gunthramni Regis Francorum, qui s^ritualibus actionibus ita se mancipauit, vt relictis Saculi pompis, thesauros suos Eccles^^s, and Pauperibus erogaret.
Vnder the same first Ligne, Saint Dagobert, King of France, the 23. day of December, according to the Breuiaries of France.
Vnder the second, Saint Charlemaigne, King of France, Ligne and first Emperor of the West; and Author of S. Peters Patrimonie, the 28. day of Ianuary.
Vnder the third, Saint Louis, the 25. day of August.
So that on behalfe of the Kings of France, may be said, as the subile Oratour in Ouid did.
Neque in his quisquam damnaeius, aut exul.
As much to say, that there was not a Mauregat among them all.
Cranato, you haue not spared to touch this string; and yet notwithstanding,Aliances made with the Turks and Moores. you talke of foure formes of Alliance, which King Francis, first of the name, made with the great Seigneur of the Turkes. But you trip silently ouer them which Charles the fift, Emperour, made with the Sophie of Persia, and the Moore-Kings of Fez and Marocco. Goe to Schoole Cranato, to learne this disticke.
Tollere qui curas festucam ex fratris ocello,Quae tua perturbant lumina, tolle trabem.
Successe of time hath verified that those of Charles the fift, were in mallice,Where intentions are different, the issues are discorda^t. for reuenge, and fruitlesse; whereas those of King Frances the first, returned to the benefit of Christendome. Who can tell, if God will serue himselfe by extraordinary meanes, for reducing the Turkes to the knowledge of one onely God, and to make profession of Catholique Religion? We see that this Alliance hath preserued to this very day safely, the holy Sepulcher at Ierusalem, and places of deuotion in the holy-Land, honored with the misteries of our redemption: which else had long since bin ruined and defaced, by furie of the Iewes; but by respect in the Kings of France, who (by that Alliance) conserued the poore Christians in Turkie,Other Nations made vse of the French mens confederacie with the Turke. and facilited the deliuerance of such, as remained captiues among the Turkes. The libertie which the English, Italians and other Nations deriued from this confederation, to trafficke and merchandise on the Seas, and in the Lands belonging to the Turke, vnder the banner of France; may one day auaile, to aduance there the Christian Standard of the Crosse.
Aghinardus, Secretarie of State to our King Charlemaigne, enstructeth vs in the life of this great Prince. That he sought, and obtained correspondencie with Aaron, King of Persia, who h^ld all the East (India onely excepted) to maintaine and conserue the holy Sepulcher of Ierusalem: And thereof ensued the renowne and knowledge of the French in the East parts, and other strange Nations; who baptized with the name of Franky, all the Christian Nations, and the Spaniards also, in the Indiaes East and West, and of China.
The said King Charlemaigne,The care great Charlemaigne had of the poore distr^ssed Christians liuing among the Infidels. sought (in like manner) the Alliance (and conserued it all his life time) of the Sarrazine Kings beyond the Seas; that he might haue the better meanes, for sending his Almes, to the poore Christians, which then dwelt in Syria, Aegypt, Affrica, Ierusalem, Alexandria, and Carthage. Vbi Christianos in paupertate viuere comperat (as Aeghinardus telleth vs) penurae eorum compatiens, pecuniam mittere solebat. Behold here the fruite of these confederations, by the onely great Prince of Christendome, with those Infidels. Ab hoc maxime transmarinorum Regum amicitiam expetens, vt Christianis sub eorum Dominatu refrigerium aliquod, ac rel^uatio proueniret. Because poore Christians, dwelling in their Marches, might be the more mildely gouerned and vsed. This Alliance then of the French with the Turke, is honest and profitable to all Christendome: and so by consequent, worthy of a most Christian King, against which Cranato impertinently speaketh. Returne we to our Precedencie.
If the Monarchs of the holy and sacred Lillies of France, are the right Arme,The French, the right Arme and Champions of the Church. and Champions of the Church, according to the testimony of strange Authors formerly alleadged (In this principall cause, we serue not our turne with our owne, who beare their blame vpon their foreheads.) They are likewise the Founders and sole Authours of the goods, which they possesse, or ought to possesse.
Petrus Pomponatius, an Italian Phylosopher, saith, That the great benefits to the Romaine Church, giuen by the Kings of France: hath wonne them the title of excellence and honor of Most-Christian Kings, aboue all Princes on the earth.
The donation made to Pope Syluester, by Constantine the Great, is falsely supposed by the Greekes (alwayes bold lyers) to arrogate it selfe to an imaginary Precedencie,The imaginary precede (...) of the Greeks. and Honour of the Romaine Church; from which being sequestred and dismembred, they are become the Fable and contempt of the Turkes, the Iewes, yea, euen of their owne Nation, captiue and miserable, without hope of any restoring. Also, the writings of Theodorus Balsamo, Patriarch of Antioch, and of Nom^canonde Ph^tius, Patriarch of Constantinople, are meere impostures, fomented by the enemies of France. For Augustinus Eugubinus, and the Grammarian Laurentius Valla, who would gladly counterfeit Historians, with all their borrowed Greeke: are learnedly contradicted by the iudicious Sigonius and Onuphrius, Italians.^a^^is conquered by King Pepin, and giuen to S. Peter^ patrimony And the Annales of Germanie report vnder the yeare 756. that in the second voyage of Ital^e, made by the King of France Pepin, against Astolphus, King of the Lombardes; he made a donation to the holy Seate, of Lands and Prouinces by him conquered. Namely, The Exarcate of Rauenna, which contained thirteene Townes; Pentapolis, Tescanie; the Seigneuries of Vrbin; Romaignia and Ferrara, of which Cities he sent the Keyes to the Confession of the chiefe of the Apostles S. Peter, by ^elrardus, Abbot of S. Den^s in France, Maister of his Chappell. Iterum P^pinus Italiam ingressus Haistulphum Papiae inclusum obsidet, Rauennam, cum Pentapeli reddere compellit, and per Folradum missum suum Sancto Petro Apostolo, and Stephano Pape V^^ario eius tradidit. Hee caused these to be surrendred at this second voyage, because at the first voyage of Italie, made before this, to wit, in the yeare of Grace 754. he had giuen to the Church the Lands before specified, by him conquered from the Kings of the Lombardes. That donation, made in the yeare aboue dated 754. was sometime engrauen in a long Table of Marble, in the Citie of Rauenna. Pipinus. Pius. Franc. Rex Christianiss. Primus. Amplificandae. Ecclesiae. viam. Apperuit. and Exarchatum. Rauennae. cum. Amplissimis. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
The rest is all eaten out with age.
S. Pe^^^ P^trimonie c^l^^g^d with Pro^^^c^^^ the Kingdome of Naples.Charlemaigne augmented S. Peters Patrimonie, with diuers Prouinces in the Kingdome of Naples: in retaining (neuerthelesse) to himselfe and his Successours, Kings of France, at euery change of the Lord, the homage and Soueraigntie, as well of the Citie of Rome, as of all Italie. Which to rule and gouerne, hee established twelue Iudges; reseruing in like manner to him and his Successours, Kings of France, authority and power to elect the Popes. So that, as we reade in Nithardus (yongest Sonne to the said King Charlemaigne, by reason of a daughter of his, named Bertha* in the life of Lewes the Debonnaire: three Popes came successessiuely into France, to make agreement for their Election in the Soueraigne Pontificality, with the said King Lewes the Debonnaire, and to excuse themselues, because they had bin constrained to accept it, without his permission.
Onuphrius* Sigonius and Platina, in the Historie of the Popes, doe hold, that the Prouinces of Naples, the Exarchate of Rauenna, Romaignia, and other Seigneuries before noated, are of the bounties of Pepin and Charlemaigne our Kings, and giuen by them to the holy Seate. It is the doctrine of the Archdeacon, on the Canon Ego Lud^uicus the 63. distinction; and of Volateranus in his Polygraphie.
Now, it is a matter very certaine, that Monarches cannot quit and alienate the ^ights of Soueraigntie, in those Lands and Seigneuries which depend vpon their Crown,(...) c^nnot (...) at are dependances on (...) Crowne. whereof they are but the Flourets. In like manner, it is from any apparance of credit, that the Kings of France, Successours of Charlemaigne, would acquit the rights of Soueraigntie, which they had ouer the Lands of Italie, giuen to the holy S^ate* no more then their power, for confirming the election of Popes. For, if this could haue bin done, to what purpose was it, that Lewes the Debonnaire should confirme to the holy Seate, the donations of his Predecessours, Kings of France, when the Popes themselues required the confirmation? It is an infallible noate, that

they acknowledged themselues: in regard of temporalities; men, and vassales to the Crowne of France. The learned Sigonius writeth, that he both saw and read the Confirmation of the said Lewes the Debonnaire: but it is a question to be demanded, whether it were answerable to that reported by the Monke Gratian, in the Canon before alleadged, which followeth in these words.
EGo Ludouicus Imperator Romanus Augustus, statuo, and concedo per hoc pactum confirmationis nostrae, Tibi beato Petro Principi Apostolorum, and per te Vicario tuo Domino Paschali summo Pontifici, and Successoribus eius in perpetuum, sicut a praedecessoribus vestris vsque nunc in vestra potestate, and ditione tenuistis, and disposuistis Romanam Ciuitatem, cum Ducatu suo, and Suburbanis, at Viculis omnibus, and Territorijs eius, Montanis, and Maritimis, Littoribus, and Portubus, seu cunctis Ciuitatibus, Castellis, Oppidis, ac Villis Tusciae partibus. And that which followeth after, for the remitment of Popes election to the Romaine people: with defence against the French and Lombards, for troubling them in this priuiledge.
We say in France, that the faith of this Canon is very suspicious,Obiections against the credit of Grauans alleadged Canon. and to be doubted. First of all, because Nithardus, who wrote foure Bookes, concerning the life of the said Lewes the Debonnaire, his Vncle (in regard of his Mother Bertha, sister to the said Debonnaire) which haue remarked perticularly, euen to the meanest actions of this Prince: hath not vttered one word thereof, which he would neuer haue let sleepe in silence, being an act of most high importance.
And secondly, Theganus Bishop of Treuers, who likewise wrote the life of this Prince, euen to his enterment, is so farre from making mention of this remitment, for election of Popes to the Romaine people, in the person of the said Pope Paschall: that on the contrary, you shall here see what he saith, vnder the yeare of Grace 817.
STephanus Papa tertio mense, postquam e Francia Romam redijt, vltimum diem clausit: and Paschalis pro eo Cathedram Romani Pontificatus subijt, qui post ex pletam consecrationem solemnem, Legatos cum Epistola Apologetica, and maximis muneribus Imperatori misit, insinuans non se ambitione, nec voluntate, sed electione, and Populi acclamatione, huic succubuisse potius, quam insiluisse dignitati. Huius Legationis baiulus fuit Theodorus Nomenclator, qui negotio peracto, and petitis impetratisque super confirmatione, scilicet pacti, and amicitiae more Predccessorum suorum, reuersus est.
The Debonnaire receiued these excuses from Pope Paschall vpon his election, and confirmed him in the holy Seate. There is not any speech,No words at all of Gratians supposed priuiledge. concerning the Priuiledge supposed by Gratian. For, on the contrary, the said Pope Paschall purged himselfe by an Apologie, that it was imposed vpon him, and he elected to the Pontificacie, not by ambition, or any manifest enterprise, against the royall authoritie of the said Debonnaire. The yeare before, the same Author obserueth the comming of Pope Stephen, into the Citie of Rheimes, two months after his election, to make his excuses to the Debonnaire. Praemissa tamen Legatione, quae super ordinatione eius, Imperatori satisfaceret.
It is then to small purpose, that the Philosopher Augustinus Eugubinus, and the Grammarian Laurentius Valla, either by grosse ignorance in the Romaine History,The ignorance or mallice of Augustinus Eugubinus and Laurentius Valla. or intended malignity; would referre the benefits and donation of the temporall demeanes, giuen to the holy Seate, rather to the Emperour Constantine, dying in his heresie; then to the most Christian Kings, who neuer erred, or stumbled in the Catholique Faith, from the time of great Clouis.
Constantine, sirnamed the Great (whom ignorants make Author of S. Peters Patrimonie) vpon the ending of his dayes;Constantine fel into heresie before his death. degenerated from the Orthodoxall Religion, which he had professed at his Baptisme. The Doctor of Doctors S. Hierome, in his Chronologie, enstructeth vs thus. Constantinus extremo vitae suae tempore ab Eusebio Nicomediensi Episcopo rebaptizatus, in Ariani dogma declinat, a quo, vsque in praes^ns tempus Ecclesiarum rapinae, and totius Orbis est sequnta discordia. This is obserued vnder the yeare of Grace 340. when Constantine was slaine neere to Nicomedia,

going against the Persians, hee being then aged, threescore and sixe yeares.
Seauen yeares before, hee had established his ordenary abiding at Bizantium, which (by his name) was called Constantinople, and, for a title of honor, New Rome; enriched with the spoyles of the old,Constantinople new Rome and of all the wealthiest Cities of the Romaine Empire, so saith the same S. Hierome. Ditatur Constantinopolis omnium pene v^bium nuditate.
Which passages may serue vs to approue, that this imaginary and pretended donation of Constantine, saw no light in the time of S. Hierome, who had bin as the soule and life of the Pope Saint Damasus. Eusebius his Predecessour, and the Chronicle, which he pursued during his life time, hath giuen vs to vnderstand some things.
The most-Christia^ Kings gaue originall to S. Peters Patrimonie.It is then the most-Christan Kings, Qu' Aurum habet Ecclesia, and vpon whose liberalitie, the Patrimonie of S. Peter receiued foundation and originall. At all times they haue bin the Conseruatours thereof, and of the Popes Authoritie. Semper pro Legibus, and Iuribus Ecclesiae Dei, summorumque Pontificum soli fideliter decertarunt. These are the words of the learned Doctor Viualdus.
These famous Offices, of the Monarchs of the holy and Sacred Lillies of France, rendred in all occurences to the Church and Popes* with whom at all times they haue held such correspondencie,The honorable offices of France to the Church and Popes, and their Pr^cedencie thereby won. of reioycing in prosperitie, and comforting in their afflictions, which they layed vpon their owne shoulders, to disburden the Popes) won them the right of Precedency, aboue all Kings on the earth, and namely of Christendome. Beside these Epithites of honor; Eldest Sonnes of the Church; The most Christian Kings; Best Benefactours; and Protectours of the holy Seate.
In the Oration of Pope Iohn, eight of the name, a Romaine by Nation, made at the assembly of Bishops of Italie, in the Citie of Pauia, at the Coronation of our King and Emperour Charles, second of the name, tearmed the Baulde; hee was called Christian^ssimus Princeps: these are the words. Inter has tempestates Clarissimum Sydus in diebus nostris apparuit. Ecce nobis Karolum Christianissimum Principe^ superna prouidentia praescitum a se, prae electum ante Mundi constitutionem, and praedestinatum, etc.
Anastasius, keeper of the Librarie to the holy Seate, in the liues of the Popes, Zacharie the first,Titles and additions of honot giuen to the Kings of France. Stephen, Adrian and Leo, neuer speaketh of our Kings, Pepin le Bres, Charlemaigne and Lewes the Debonnaire: but he addeth this Elogium of honor, Rex Francorum Christianissimus. And the like is read in the Decretall Epistles of the Popes, Stephen the second, Paul the first, Stephen the third, Adrian the first, and Iohn the eight: all which speaking of the Kings and People of France, say with one consent. That the Kings and People of France, doe shine and excell aboue all Nations (...) the World; as well for pietie towards the Church, as for Prowesse, Manhood and Valiancie.
A Bull for Legitimation granted by Pope Innocent the third.Pope Innocent the third, in the Bull of Legitimation for Monsieur Phillip of France, and of Madam Mary his Sister, Children (impeached from marriage by Iudgement of the Church) of Phillip Augustus, and of Agnes, daughter to the Duke of Mora^ia in Bohemia: The said Bull, giuen at the Castell of Agnano, dated the fourth of the Nones of Nouember, and the fourth yeare of his Pontificalitie, and of Grace one thousand two hundred and one, read published and registred in the Court of Parl^ment, at the Candlemasse following; beareth these words worthy of obseruation, for the deuotion, and pietie of the Kings of France, on behalfe of the holy Seate, and of the said King Phillip Augustus.
The words contained in the ^ul^tsc^ieNos igitur attendentes in eo deuotionis constantiam, and Fidei puritatem, quam a Prigeniteribus suis Regibus erga Romanam Ecclesiam, quasi quodam haereditario iure, c^^traxit, vt tam honori Regiae dignitatis quam vtilitati, and necessitati Regni Francor^^ prouide consulamus, praedictos puerum and puellam de speciali gratia, Legitimationis titul^, de communi Fratrum nostrorum consilio, decoramus.
And yet notwithstanding, the same Pope, in his Decretale directed to Willi^^, Vicount of Ment-Pelier, who vnder colour to relieue (in part) the Bishopricke of Maguel^ne: requested to haue a Bastard of his to be made Legitimate, had no other answere, but this. That he should shape his course to the King of France (the same

Phillip Augustus) to whom he was a seruant. And what he had done in this Legitimation, was, because the said Phillip Augustus had entreated him to doe it: and not as arrogating or attributing to himselfe, any power or right of Legitimation, ouer the Lands of the Kingdome of France, whose Kings and Monarchs acknowledged in their temporalities, not any other Soueraigne, but God alone. In temporalibus neminem superiorem agnoscunt. In the Decretale, Per venerabilem, Qui Filij sint legitimi.
Pope Honorius the third, saith in his Decretale. That the King of France is the inexpugnable wall of Christendome; the Quiuer or Arrow-Case, from whence God taketh his Arrowes, and shooteth them abroad, to attract, subdue and reduce strange Nations, to the knowledge of his name.
Pope Boniface the ninth, and his Cardinals, said. That the King of France is the Soueraigne King of Christendome, by whom the Church ought to be illuminated, more then by any other King or Prince on the earth.
Now, like as we reade in Suidas the Greeke Author, that by the word (...), the name of Great King, the sole Monarch of the Persians was designed, vnderstood and noated, and in speaking of other Kings, there was an addition, and sirname of the People, ouer whom they commanded, as King of the Macedonians, or Lacedemonians, and so of others: So in like manner, The Kings of France are designed and acknowledged, by the name of King onely, and without addition, for Antonomasia. Other Kings of Christendome are perticularized by the names of their People,Titles and additions of other Kings. as Kings of Spaine, of England of Scotland, Hungaria, Bohemia, Polonia, Denmarke, Sueden, Norwaye, etc.
This is the Doctrine of Doctors of Italie (not to alleadge any of ours, in our own cause. First of Bonifacius de Vitalinis, Auditour de la Rota in Rome, in his Preface on the Clementines, in these notable words. Dicendo simpliciter Episcopus, debet intelligi de Supremo, hoc est, Romano Pontifice, per excellentiam: Sicut decimus quod appellatione Regis simpliciter facta, Debet. intelligi. De. solo. Reges. Franciae. per. Excellentiam.
Ioannes Ludouicus Viualdus in his worke Royall, is of the same opinion. Rex Francorum per Antonomasiam Christianissimus appellatur, and hic titulus ponitur vice proprij nominis, significans personam Regis Francorum; quae quidem dignitas, Francorum Regibus data est, ob clarissimagesta, and admiranda prodigia, quae pro Catholica fide semper egerunt.
The same Doctor in another passage. Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantiam Iesus-Christus, per vniuersum Orbem statuit, and ordinauit Reges, and Principes in argumentum suae vnicae Maiestatis. Elegit autem prae ceteris Regem Christianissimum quafi Nobilissimum Athletam Ecclesiae suae, cuius officium est auctoritatem Ecelesiae Dei conseruare: Barbaras gentes, and Turcarum perfidiam expugnare: cultum diuinum, ac iura Christianae Religionis magnificare: Tyrannos debellare: atque maleuolos Principes infraena submittere.
He (saith this Author) who is pleased and delighted with taking this magnificent title of King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,Apoc. 19.16. Iesus Christ (in the Apocalypse) hath ordained and established in all Prouinces of the World, Kings and Princes, to shew the effect of his Almightie Power. But principally he hath chosen the Most-Christian King, to whom he hath giuen the Precedencie of Honor, before all Kings and Princes on the earth: as being the vnconquerable Champion of his Church, whose care and ordenarie effect hath alwayes bin, to conserue and d^fend the authoritie thereof. Warring against Barbarous Nations, and Turks; to plant and aduance the seruice of God, and reduce to tearmes of dutie and obedience, all such as would harme the holy Seate.
Nen^sanus, in his twelfth Councell, enclosed within those of Doctor Albertus Brunus, hath left written: That the Kingdome of France is the most excellent of all the Kingdomes in the World.
Corsetus, in the Booke which he wrote De Potestate Regia, saith. That the King of France is Emperour, and a more excellent Monarch and Soueraigne, then the Emperour of Germanie is.
Baldus, on the Law Exemplo, at the title De Probationibus the Code: on the Chapter,

Per Venerabilem (before obserued) Qui Filij sint Legitimi: In his Councell Peti^^ Venia 218. And in his reading on the first Chapter, first Paragraphe, Lib. de Prohibita Feudi Alienatione per Fredericum, and first Booke of Fiefes, saith. That the King of France glorieth and shineth, aboue all the Kings in the World, as the morning Star (...) in the midst of the Clouds. And that the Kings of France wore the Crowne of Glory, Ho^^^, and Freedome, aboue all the Kings that are in Christendome.
Ioannes Andreas, and the Panormitane, write. That the King of France acknowledgeth on earth, no Prince greater then himselfe, be it either in fact, or Right.
This doctrine (word for word) is held by the Cardinall Zarabella, and Guillelmus de Monte-Lauduno, both Romaine Doctors, in their Readings on the Vnita Clementina, De Iureiurando. Goe to Schoole Cranato, to learne what the King of France is.
The Canonists, and the Glosse on the Pragmaticall Sanction, In Capite Nouit. de Iudic. In Capite Solite, de Maiorit. The Glosse on the third Booke, De Off. Proc. ad Digest: And on the Chapter Per Venerabilem, qui Fil. sint Leg. doe hold and acknowledge with one consent. That the Most-Sacred Kings of France doe not acknowledge, either in Fact or Right, any one to be greater then themselues: That they are borne Emperours, and to them onely it belongeth, to weare the close Crowne, made firme according to the Imperiall manner.
Lucas de Penna, in his reading on the Lew Vnica, ad Tit. De Conductoribus, and Code.
Cursius the yonger, in his Treatise De Feudis; Part. and Quest. 2.
Andreas de Yseruia, on the Title De Vaessallo decrepitae aetatis, ad Feud, Cap. 1. And
Decius Cap. Nouit, de Iudicijs, on the decretales, write all with one accord,
That the King of France is the most soueraigne Monarch in his Kingdome, and more then the Emperour is in his Empire. And
That he is the most Excellent and Noble, of all the Kings in the World. Thus you heare what the Doctors of Italie say: Come we now to Englishmen.
Venerable Reda writeth, that before the comming of Anti-Christ, to appeare in the world, a King must come forth of France, that shall reduce all Infidell Nations to the Catholique Faith, and range them vnder his obedience. This opinion is followed by Rabanus Maurus, as wee haue said, and by Volaterranus, on the word Ante-Christ. Wee haue formerly related an infinite number of passages of Mathew Paris, the English Monke, to the Honor and Precedencie of the Kings and Kingdome of France.
Let vs now make Spaniards (our contraries) to march along in Field with the rest, and draw from their owne mouthes the confession of Truth, in whose eyes can no dust be cast, according to the Great Tertullian. Cui nemo praescribere potest, (...) spatia temporum, non longinquitas regionum, nec dignitas personarum. Cranato, beare of this blow, and stand on your guard.
Oldradus, a Spanish Doctor, saith. That the King of France weareth the Crowne of Excellencie and Glory, aboue all Kings on the earth.
Petrus Belluga* another Spanish Doctor, in his Mirour, ad Tit. 14. and Paragraphe Nunc videamus, Numero 29. writeth. That the King of France acknowledgeth in the world, neither in fact or right, any Prince greater then himselfe. Goe to the Schoole of your owne Spanish Doctors Augustine Cranato: but the glittering of Spanish Doublous hath blinded your sight.
The writings of ^abanus Maurus are filled with wonders, in behalfe and honor of the Kings and Kingdom of France. In the Treatise of Ante-Christ, he saith.
That the white Cloude, which couered all the rest, obserued in the Apocalips; designed and represented the Kingdome of France.
That he is the great finger, sustaining the foote of Iron, which is not to be bruised or broken:Dan 10.9.That the Fabricke of the world shall not perish by fire. In the Prophesie of Daniel, and as Lyranus expoundeth on the Apocalips. And
That the Scepter of the Kings of France, is the Rod, which must breake the Scepters and Crownes of Infidell Kings.
I let passe in silence an infinite number of goodly Tracts, deliuered on this excellent subiect, by Iohn Froissard, Eng^erra^ de M^nstrelea, Iean le Maire; Oliuer de la Marche, and other Historians; because they are Flemings, and Subiects to the Crowne of France, in regard of the Counts of Flanders, Artois, Henault, and other Seignuries in the Low-Countries, vnder Authoritie of the Parlements of Paris.
They that haue written, that the Sacred Kings of France, obtained this priuiledge from Popes, to stand exempted from sentences of Excommunication of the Bishops of France, and of Popes themselues: are ignorant in our Historie, erring both in fact and right.
For we in France doe hold,The constan^ opinion held in France concerning the power of Popes. that the Pope hath not any Iurisdiction in Temporall occasions, ouer the Kings and Princes on the earth; neither hath hee power to Excommunicate them; to deliuer their Subiects from the Oath of Allegeance; to giue their Kingdomes as preyes and spoiles, to the first Intruder, and their persons to the Knife and Sword, according to the new Doctrine of the Iesuites, mischieuously practised on the Sacred persons of our two last Kings, of holy and glorious memory.
Kings and Princes on the earth, haue no other Iudge, but God onely.None but God onely is the Iudge of Princes. If they decline, slip or swerue from the way of vertue (as they haue power by their Authoritie:) In case of this disease, the proceeding must be by faire Remonstrantes, milde, yet somewhat piercing, according to the occurrences, and not to step any further. Principes saculi a nemine iudicantur. Good or bad, they haue no Iudge but God: and such was the beliefe of the Gallicane Church, twelue hundred agoe.
Praetextatus Bishop of Rouen, was accused before King Chilpericke,The Bishop of Rouen accused by King Chilperick. to haue had some practise and medling with his enemies. Chilpericke assembled the Bishops of France, in the Church and Monasterie of Saint Geneuiefue at Paris. Saint Gregory Bishop then of Tours, had charge to deliuer the speech for them all, for ^nnocence of the Bishop of Rouen, hee composed this action of importance for the Church of France, in all honestie and modestie; and not in brauing tearmes, for ^eprouing the King, by attempting on the persons of Bishoppes: Because Kings ^n the earth haue no other Iudge, but God onely, and sinne not, but to God one^y. Tibi soli peccaui Domine, and malum coram te feci, so said the great Arnobius, on the fiftie Psalme. Saule the first King of Israel, was reproued of God for his wicked life; and Dauid, a better man then he, chosen. Neuerthelesse, the Priest Samuel, did alwayes giue him the honor and reuerence which were due vnto him, ^o make example for the like in the children of Israel, although hee had de^ounced the tydings to him, of his priuation from the Kingdome.1 Reg. 15.28.50. Scidit Dominus Regnum Israel a te hodie, and tradidit illud proximo tuo meliorite. Saule returned him ^his answere. Peccaui, sed nunc honora me coram Senioribus Populi mei, and coram ^srael, and reuertere mecum. I see well, that I haue sinned before God, who hath re^roued me, yet neuerthelesse, start not from me, to withdraw thy selfe from my o^edience: but follow me, and giue me the honor due vnto me, for good example ^o my People.
S. Gregory of Tours spake to the said Chilpericke (although he was a cruell Prince, ^nd addicted to all vices) in milde and gentle language, with all huour and re^erence beseeming his King, as is witnessed by his owne words. This Chil^ericke demanded Iustice against his Bishoppe. O Episcope, Iustitiam cunctis lar^iri debes, and ecce ego Iustitiam a te non accipio. Saint Gregorie answered. Si quis ^e nobis, O Rex, Iustitiae tramitem transcendere voluerit, a te corrigi potest: Si vero tu ^xcesseris, quis te corripiet? Loquimur enim tibi, sed si voluerit, audis: si autem ^olueris, quis te condemnabit, ^isi is qui se pronuntiauit esse Iustitiam? Sacred Maiestie, if any one of vs Bishops, doe swerue from the paths of Iustice; it be^ongeth to you to correct and punish him. But if by your absolute power,The answer^ returned by the Bishop (...) the King. you ^oe exceede the bounds; What is he that shall reproue you* We may giue you ad^onitions, but if it be not your pleasure to take them in good part* you lend a deafe ^are to vs, and who shall condemne you for it, but onely he, who giueth to himselfe

the same title, and the name of Iustice? Hee affirmed, that the King had no other Iudge, but God onely, and not the Pope, as the enemies of France (ouer-boldly) imagine.
Mathew Paris, vnder the yeare one thousand one hundred eightie eight, informed vs, that warre being moued betweene King Phillip Augustus, and Henry, King of England, second of the name, the two Princes met together at a place neere to Ferte-Benehart, to finde some meanes, of ordaining and setling a good peace betweene them, to the end, that the voyage intended for the Holy-Land might be forwarded, but they could not agree. Which being perceiued by Iohn d' Agnam, a Cardinall sent by Pope Clement into France as Legate, who had drawne the English out of England thither: hee threatned King Phillip, to Excommunicate him, and to set an Interdiction vpon his Land. The King made him answere, that he did not feare any such fulmination,The Kings roiall answere to the ouer-bold Legate. full of sinne and iniquitie. For (quoth hee) it appertaineth not to the Romaine Church, to Excommunicate Kings or Princes authorised on earth: And perticulerly, the King of France. Cui Rex Francorum respondit, se ipsius sententiam nulla tenus formidare cum nulla aequitate fulciretur. Addidit etiam; ad Ecclesiam Romanam minime pertinere in Regem aliquem, and maxime Francorum, per se^tentiam animaduertere.
The same Monke further telleth vs, that Monsieur Lewes de France, eldest Sonne to the said King Phillip Augustus, was chosen King of England, in right of his wife Madame Blanch of Castile, daughter to Alphonso, eight of the name, King of Castile, and of Madame Eleanor of England, daughter (and onely then liuing) to the King of England Henry, second of the name, by generall consent of the Barons of England.
Galo, Legate to Pope Innocent the third, came to France, to hinder the passage of Monsieur Lewes de France into England. In regard (saith hee) the Kingdome of England is part of S. Peters Patrimonie:England a parcel of S. Peters Patrimonie. because King Iohn without Land (to be absolued of his enormous sinnes) had cowardly, and through lacke of courage, and not in any deuotion, rendred the Kingdome of England Tributarie to the Holy-Seate, in a thousand Markes of Siluer, paiable yearely.
Galo Legate from the Pope to King Phillip Augustus and his Sonne King Lewes.For hinderance of this voyage, the said Galo came to meete with the Kings of France, Father and Sonne, at Lyons, fitting his turne with infinite perswasions and Prayers, which he perceiuing to faile: made his recourse, to the ordinarie threanings vsed by Popes, namely, of Excommunication. Monsieur Lewes arising before the King his Father, holding his hat in his hand, said to him in all humble reuerence. My Lord, although I am your Liege man, in those demeanes which you haue bestowed on mee, concerning the parts on this side the Sea: yet notwithstanding, you haue no reason to take knowledge of any thing in the Kingdome of England. Neuerthelesse, I submit my selfe to the iudgement of my Peeres, whether you ought, or no, to hinder me in the pursuite of my right, which is that belonging to my wife, for defence whereof I (...) fight, euen to death.
King Lewes his words to the Legate.But at departing out of the King his Fathers presence, hee told the Legate: The it consisted not in the power of the Pope, to Excommunicate him, or hinder him in the pursuite of his rights. Hee purposed to passe before him into England, there to haue him feasted and entertained by a Monke (who was a stoute Pirate on the Seas of England, named Eustace the Monke, Admirall of the Fleete belonging to Monsieur Lewes of France, for his passage into England.) of whom King Phillip Augustus* had aduised the Legate to take heede.The words of Mathew Paris Legatus rogauit Regem Francorum, vt s^l^^^ sibi conductum praeberet vsque ad Mare. Cui Rex respondit, per terram nostram proper am conductum tibi libenter praestabo: sed si forte incideris in manus Eustachij Monach^, (...) aliorum hominum Ludouici, qui custodiunt semitas Maris; non mihi imputes, si quid (...) stri tibi contingat, saith the same Mathew Paris.
The Kings of France not subiect to the censures of Popes.The Sacred Kings of France, are then no way Subiects to the Censures of Popes (as wee haue at large related vnder Phillip le Bel, in the Historie of N^ because their persons being Sacred with a Celestiall Balme, and so many Ceremonies, as are not any of the other Kings of Christendome: Co^^^^^^ externorum Regum facultatem excedit, neque enim Regum Francorum Pers^^^ prorsus est Laica, sed Sacerdota^is: So effectually speaketh the Neapo^^^^

Doctor Viualdus in his Royall Worke. And therefore the Sacred Kings of France, from the time of Clouis, receiued the Communion vnder both the kindes, which the Doctors tearme Communion Sacerdotale, as other Kings of Christendome doe not. Nithardus, Theganus, and the Authors writing the life of Lewes the Debonnaire, haue purposely obserued this King; that he communicated vnder both the kindes, of Bread and Wine, Iuxta morem Francorum Regum.
And for Excellencie and Dignity of their Person,Attendants on the Kings person free from Excommunication. such as are imployed in their seruices, as are the Peeres, Councellers, and Officers of their Parlements, Councels, house and Crowne of France; neither can, or ought to be Excommunicated.
And from the time of the first Ligne of our Kings, criminals and offenders,Pardon granted to offenders. of what qualitie soeuer they were, being called neere about their person, and admitted and receiued to their Table: were (by that meanes) remitted in their temporall goods, charges and dignities.
Vnder the King of Paris Chilpericke, Praetextatus, Bishop of Rouen, by iudgement of fiftie, and of as many Bishops, was confined and banished into the Isle of Ger^ey (opposite to the Towne of Coutance in Normandie, aunciently called Moritoni^m, and by Ammianus Marcellinus Campus Constantij; and this Isle of Gerzey sometimes Caesarea, in the Itinerarium of the Cosmographer Aethicus.) After ^he death of Chilpericke, Praetextatus (whom they of Rouen called S. Praetextatus) went to Paris, to meete the King Saint Gonthran, who welcommed him honora^ly, admitted him to his Table, and, notwithstanding his enemies, sent him againe ^o Rouen, to gouerne his Bishopricke, as he had done before his exile. S. Gregory of ^ours, in his Historie of France, saith. Sic a Rege susceptus, atque conuinio eius adscitus, ^d Vrbem suam regressus est.
The same S. Gregory, describing the entrance of Gonthran, King of France, into ^he Citie of Paris, where were met together most part of the Bishops of France: ^mong them was Palladius, Bishop of Xaintes, Suffragan to Bertrand of Bourdeux. Both these men had bin conuicted of Felonnie, and to haue followed the ^ction of Balomer, calling himselfe Gombauld, Sonne to a King of France, slaine at ^. Bertrand de Comenges, in the Pyrenean Mountaines, as wee haue already else^here said. Behold what is said by S. Gregory of Tours.The words of S. Gregory set downe in his Historie. Tunc Berchramnus Bur^galensis Episcopus, cum Palladio Sanctonico, valde Regi infensus erat pro susceptione ^ondobaldi: sed and Palladius Episcopus ob hoc maxime Regis iram incurrerat, quod ei ^pius fallacias intulisset. Discussi enim ante paululum fuerant, a reliquis Episco^s, ac Optimatibus Regni (The Parlements of France were not in elder times ^omposed, but of Bishoppes and Noblemen onely, they of the third Estate were ^euer receiued into such charges; where, thorow ignorance in the Nobilitie, they ^e made capable of obtaining the estates and dignities of the Kingdome) Cur ^ondobaldum suscepissent, cur Faustianum Aquis (of Daqs in the Lands of Bourde^x) Episcopum ad preceptionem eius leuissimam ordinessent. These are the heads of ^heir accusations.
Now it fortuned, that the Sunday following this Entrance, King Gonthran went (...) heare Masse in the Cathedrall Church, and the Bishops Seruants at the Altar,King Gonthan goeth to the Cathedrall Church. ^eceiued (with them) him of Xaintes, among the number of the Sub-Deacons. He ^en beginning to reade a Prophesie for the Epistle, the King demanded of the relates which assisted him, the name of the man that read the Epistle. So soone (...) it was told him, that it was Pallaedius: How (quoth the King) durst he be so bold, (...) to present himselfe before me, and appeare among you, most Holy Fathers,The words of the King to the Prelates. being the man ^at was the author of troubling my Kingdome by a strange League? How haue you admit^d and receiued him into your Communion? And he so audacious, as to pronounce out of ^s infidell and periured mouth, holy Prophesies, words of Truth? Qui mihi semper ^fidelis, and perfidius fuit, ille nunc sacrata verba praedicabit? Egrediar prorsus ab hoc ^cclesia, ne inimicum meum audiam praedicantem. (After reading the Epistles and ^ospels, they were expounded to the people and Catecumenists, in the time of the ^rimitiue Church, and very long after.) Et haec dicens, egredi coepit Ecclesiam.
The Prelates retained him, not by any threatning of Excommunication, or ^ocuring to haue it done by the Pope; but by this reason. That all criminall and

guiltie persons, whom the Sacred Kings of France honored with their table and reception, had generall abolition of all Crimes: and by the sole admission of them into their house and presence, they ought to be free, and absolued from all excommunication.
Vidimus enim eum (thus spake the Bishops of France to King Gonthran, in fauour of Bishop Palladius) conniuio tuo adesse: ac de eius manu te benedictionem accipere: and cur eum nunc Rex aspernatur? Si enim scissemus tibi exosum declinassemus vtique ad al^um qui haec agere debuisset. These words are indeede very remarkeable.
At the Councill of Orleans, held by command of Clouis, first Christian King of the French,A Decree set downe in the Councill of Orleans. it was ordained by the Gallicane Church; that the Officers and seruants of that great Prince, and of the Kings of France his Successours, should not be subiect to sentences of Excommunication, and that such as had encurred the same deseruedly, should be receiued and admitted into the Communion of the faithfull; in regard of the reuerence and honor, which Vassales and Subiects (without any distinction) should render and beare to the Persons of the Sacred Kings of France at all times.
The Decree of this Councill at Orleans, is inserted in the seauenth Booke of our Capitularies. Vt hi qui a Sacerdotibus excommunicantur, a Fidelibus vsque ad reconciliationem, nisi quibus permissum fuerit, semper vitentur.
Ex Concil. Aurel. sub Clodoueo. i.
Placuit vt his qui a suis excommunicantur Sacerdotibus, nullus Fidelium communice^, nisi quibus permissum fuerit, nec priusquam canonice reconcilietur, ad eos accedat, and s^ quis id facere tentauerit, fimili sententiae subiaceat.
Si quos autem culpatores Regia potestas mensae suae participes effecerit, ab obsequium saum, aut in Gratiam benignitatis acceperit, hos Sacerdotum, and Populorum conuentus s^scipere in Ecclesiastica Communione debebit: Vt quos Regia pietas recipit admittat-Ecclesia Dei; and inter Regnum atque Sacerdotium vna semper maneat aequanimitas.
This is the testimonie of the learned Bishop of Chartres, Yues de Beauuais, in his 62. Epistle. De Geruasio quoque non debet vestra Fraternitas mirari, vel indignari, quod eum ad Communionem in Paschali Curia suscepi. Pro Regia enim Honorificentia hoc fe^i fretus auctoritate Legis. Si quos culpatorum, etc.
The same Bishop saith moreouer. Si Raptores, and sacrarum rerum violatores isste a vobis a Communione separatos, sine satisfactione in Communionem recipitis offenditis legem,The Laws of the Capitularies, answerable to the Commandements of the Church. si in seperatione eorum ab Ecclesia, sicut dignum est, perseueratis, Offenditis Regem. Because the Law of the Capitularies, conformably to the Commandements of the Church, doe ordaine, that Excommunicate persons should be depriued of Communion with the faithfull, to the end that they should procure their speedier absolution. But the same Law doth except such, as are imployed in the Princes seruice. Which was practised in France, vnder the Reigne of the mirrour of all pietie Saint Lewes, according to the testimonie of the Lord de Ioinuille. Whereunto the Prelates of France supplicated, that the Excommunicate; might be bound and constrained by secular Iudges, to get themselues absolued wholly, at least within a yeare. But answere was made freely to the Bishop of Auxerre (who spake for all the Prelates of France) that it might not be permitted,The Count of ^retaigne Excommunicated by his Bishop. that Princes and Officers should be Excommunicated. Alleadging the example of the Count of Bretaigne, Excommunicated by the Bishop of the place; against whom the King tooke part, and maintained the Act of the Count his Subiect.
Sancta sunt corpora Regum Francorum, to very good purpose so spake Doctor Viualdus. And for the Sacred Kings of France onely (because the like is not done for the Kings of England, Spaine, and others of Christendome) the Popes and vniuersall Church haue ordained, that generall Prayers should be made for them, by all the rest of Christendome.
S. Thomas Aquinas, in the solution of the last Argument, writeth thus. That ^r^y^ ought to be made perticulerly to God: for the King of France.
In the third Councill of Arles, the second Chapter; the second Councill of Chaalon, Chapter 66. In that of Rheimes, Chapter 4. And in that at Maguntia, Chap. 7. it is expressely enioyned, to pray to God for the Kings of France.
Some mny alleadge, that all these Councils were French Councils.
Whereunto we make answere, that ouer and beside the said Councils:Pardons granted by Popes. Popes haue perticulerly giuen and granted Pardons throughout all Christendome, to men in all places, to pray for the Kings of France.
Innocent the fourth,Innocent 4. granted ten dayes of Indulgence, to euery one that prayed for them.
Clement the fift,Clement 5. granted an hundred.
Leo the tenth,Leo 10. granted a whole yeare. And
Clement the sixt gaue power to the Prelates,Clement 6. who should say Masse before them, to grant fortie dayes of Pardon to all such as gaue assistance to the Masse. We should neuer make an end, if we would here number the Titles of Honor and Precedencie, giuen to the Most-Christian Kings of France, by strange Authors, and Nations of the World. So that we will finish this Chapter, with the same Psalme which began it. Psal. 89.8. Primogenitum posui Regem Francorum excelsum prae Regibus Terrae. Because the King of France is as Excellent aboue the other Kings, as Royall Maiesty is aboue other men. So saith S. Gregory the Great, writing to King Childehert of France.
It remaineth yet (before we fully close vp this Chapter) to make knowne to Cranato, and them of his art, that the Precedencie of France,Precedency of France adiudged by Kings of Spaine. from Spaine hath bin adiudged by consent of the Kings of Spaine. And in this Spanish cause, we will serue our turne with none but Spanish Authours, whose testimonies are irreproachable. Afterward, wee will be tried by Strangers, with examples apparant to the eye, and practised in our time, both in the sight and knowledge of Spaniards themselues.
Hieronimus Surita, in his Annales of Arragon, speaking of Ambassadors of Spain, deputed to goe to the Councill of Basile, saith
The sixteenth day of the moneth of September, 1434. were (on the part of the King of Castile Dom Iouan, second of the name) nominated for Ambassadours, Dom Alphonso Carillos, Prothonotarie Apostolicall; Aluarez d'Isorna, Bishop of Cuenca, Iean de Sylues, Alfier Maieur de Castille, and Alphonso Garcia de S. Maria, Deane of S. Iacques; To whom was giuen in charge, to request and demand of the Councill, to be receiued, and to haue the place of sitting, next to the Ambassadours of the Royall King of France. Goe to Schoole Cranato, and to the resolution of the Spanish Councill. The King of Castile and Leon required the sitting, next to the King of France: Because in the Councill of Constance, held in the yeare of Grace 1414. the Ambassadors to the King of Arragon, had preceded them of Castile.
At the said Councill of Constance, finished in the yeare 416.The order of sitting in the Councill of Constance. the sitting for the Kings of Christendome, was in this manner. On the right side, being the most ho^orable, was Maister Iohn Gerson, Chanceller for the Vniuersitie of Paris, Ambassa^or for King Charles the sixt.
Beneath him, Dom Raymond Folcho, Counte of Cardonna; Ambassador for the King of Arragon, Dom Alphonso, fift of the name.
On the left side were seated the Ambassadours for the King of England, Henry, fift of the name.
Those for the Kings of Ierusalem and Sicilie, Iames of Bourbon, and Iane his wife.
After whom was seated the Ambassadour for Iohn (sir-named the Bad) Duke of ^^urgongne, holding the Standard and Banner of Bourgongne:The Banner of Bourgongn cast to the ground. which the Bishop of ^uenca, Ambassador for Castile snatched out of his hand, and cast it on the ground.
So that next after the Ambassadors of Ierusalem, tooke seating those for the King of Castile, Dom Iouan the second: which were Dom Diego d'Annaya, Bishop of Cuen^, and Dom Martinez Hernando de Cordua; according as it is set downe in the Acts of the said Councill the 22. Session.
Primo in primo loco sedebat egregius vir Ioannes de Gersono* Cancellarius Ecclesiae Pari^ensis, Ambasiator Francorum Regis.
Et post eum Dominus Raymondus Folchus, Comes Caudonae, Ambasiator Arragonu^ Regis.
Ad partem sinistram sedebant post Ambasiatores Regis Angliae.
Oratores Iacobi and Ioannae Regis and Reginae Hierusalem, and Sciciliae.
Quos sequebantur Dominus Didacus de Annaya Concensis Episcopus, and Dominus M^tinus Ferdinandus de Corduba Ambasiatores Ioannis Regis Castellae, and Legionis, loco Ambasiatoris Ioannis Ducis Burgundiae.
The rank and order obserued in the Councill of Basile.And as for the Councill of Basile, here you may behold the order and ranke, which the Ambassadours from Christian Princes there held; according to the testimonie of Pope Pius secundus, formerly named Aeneas Syluius, Pregnotarie for the said Councill.
Ego nequaquam timebo Nationum ordinem seruare, etc.
1. Ex Natione Italica recepti sunt Episcopi Guillelmus Vercellensis, Georgius Augustensis, etc.
2. Ex Natione Gallica quae and ipsa secunda est, Cuiusque in Ecclesiam Dei permaxim^ extant beneficia, nominati sunt ex Archi Pontificali dignitate Ioannes Tarantafie^. sis, etc.
3. Ex Natione Germanica, quae omnium est amplissima, recepti sunt ex Episcopali preeminentia Fredericus Basiliensis, etc.
4. Ex Natione Hispanica (quae and ipsa vaslissimos habet, ac pernobiles Campo, qu^^or Christianis Regibus, and vno infideli regnata) hi sunt ad electionem magni Pastoris accersiti Pontifices octo. etc.
The beginning and ending of the Councill.The Councill of Basile was begun in the yeare of Grace 1431. and ended in the yeare fortie. The verball Processe of Acts therein, reporteth, that the Archbishop of Arles, President of the Councill, tooke the opinion first of the Archbishop of Lubecke, chiefe of the Ambassadors from the Emperor Albert, second of the name.
In the second place, that of the Archbishop of Tours, chiefe of the Ambassadors from Kings Charles the seauenth.
And in the third place, that of the Bishop of Cuenca, chiefe of them from the King of Castile.
Ex Oratoribus Caesaris Lubecensis Episcopus and Georgius Miles.
Ex Gallicis Archiepiscopus Turonensis, Trecensis Episcopus, and Collegae alij.
Ex Castellanis Concensis Episcopus. etc. Who according to the memory of their enstruction, hath their sitting after them of France, as themselues had made their demand.
In the last Councill of Lateran, held at Rome, in the yeares 1513.14. and 15. the same ranke was kept for the Precedencie of France, before Spaine, as is reported by the Acts thereof, and the confirmatiue Bull of the said Councill, in the time of Pope Leo, tenth of the name, giuen at Rome in the moneth of March 1516. and whereof these are the words.
The Bull of Pope Leo the tenth, dated at Rome, Anno 1516.Charissimus in Christo filio noster Maximilianus in Imperatorem electus, Iulij P^p^ secundi Praedecessoris nostri; nostro vero tempore clarissimae memoriae Ludouicus* Fran^^rum, and ceteri Reges and Principes Christiani, summo cum omnium gaudio Lateranensi C^^cilio in Spiritu sancto legitime congregato, adhaeserunt.
In this Councill, Messire Lewes Forbin, Sieur de Sabiers, Counceller in the Parlement of Prouence, Ambassadour for King Lewes the twelfth, preceeded Hieroni^m Vicho, Ambassador for Ferdinand, representing the person of his daughter Dame Iun^ Queene of Castile and Leon, etc.
Nec minus continuis Principum Christianorum in Imperatorem electi, and Francisci Christianissimi Francorum, ac Caroli Catholici Hispaniarum, and ceterorum Regum illustrium. etc. Behold this precedencie adiudged in your Citie of Rome (Cranato) and yet you put it into compromise; either thorow grosse ignorance, or malice.
This Precedencie is witnessed by Italian Authors, first of all by Thomas Ch^peggius, Bishoppe of Feltro, in la Marche Treuisana, Patriarch of Aquilea. B^^ what will you say, Cranato, if by vniuersall consent of the Princes of Christendome, the King of France is the first of Christian Kings, before whom hee hath seating, yea, euen before the King of the Romaines? And at the Councill of Trent, where this Author was present, in the Session held the twentie nine day of

Ianuary, 1546. the Letters which were sent to the King of France, were read before those sent to the King of the Romanes?
Omnium consensu receptum est, Christianissimum Regem primum esse inter Reges: and primum ei deberi locum post Imperatorem.The words alleadged concerning the Letters.Et ideo si Romanorum Regi data sit solum Imperio successio, apertissimum est Regem Christianissimum prius nominandum, eiusque Oratores praeferendos Oratoribus Regis Romanorum. Et ita in Concilio Tridentino, dum illic essem, die vicesima nona Ianuarij, Anno Millesimo Quingentesimo Quadragesimo Sexto, prius recitatae fuerunt literae sacri Concilij mittendae Christianissimo Regi, quam aliae ad Romanorum Regem.
And from hence he concludeth, that if the King of the Romanes,The King of France precedeth the King of the Roma^s. who precedeth all other Kings of Christendome, be-fore-gon by the King of France: to small purpose then would he of Spaine precede or goe before him of France. But so many times as he laboured to doe it, as often was he defeated in his pretences, as well at Rome, as in Poland and Venice.
At Venice, in Anno 1558. Francesco de Vargas,A contention at Venice for Precedency. Ambassador in Venice for the King of Spaine, Dom Philip the 11. pretended, that he ought to precede Messire Frances de Noailles, Ambassador for King Henry the second. The Senate of Venice maintained the Ambassador from France in his Precedency, and excluded him of Spaine. The King whereof had no occasion at all to be discontented, or to complaine; in regard that the Kings his predecessors in the Generall Councell before named, had demanded their sedence, after the Kings of France.
This is affirmed by Menochius the Ciuill Lawyer, Counceller to the said King of Spaine Don Philip the second, in his Councell of Estate at Millaine. Serenissimum Dominum Venetorum aliquando declarauit obseruandam fuisse consuetudinem praeeminentiae sedendi, and ambulandi inter Regis Christianissimi, and Regis Catholici Legatos, Quo sane prudentissimo iudicio factum est, vt Rex Hispaniae conqueri non potuerit, cum id placuerit Dominio erenissimo, quod olim Hispaniae Regibus placuit.
Pedro Iustiniano, a Venetian Gentleman (descended of the ancient house of the Iustiniani, Lords and Princes of the Isle of Chio, vsurped by the Turke: (this famous house, which hath a Cardinall of the name, an honest Frenchman) beareth De Gueulles an Chasteau D'Or, au Chef de l Empire d' Alemagne,Armes of the Iustinians. c'est a dire d'Or a teste de l Aigle esploye de Sable, writeth thus. Veneta in vrbe controuersia inter Henrici Galliae, and Philippi Hispaniae Regum Oratores obort est. Vterque enim primum, and honoratiorem locum publice apud Principem Senatumque sibi exhibere postulabat. Diu id Patres decernere recusarunt. Nihil que antiqua priorique consuetudine, and quod omnium memoria semper obseruatum fuerat a Senatu immutatum est. Censuit tamen Senatus vt Gallus Orator Hispanum apud Principem publice praecederet. And,
Natalis a Comitibus, saith: Franciscus Vargas Hispanus legatione apud ^enetos tunc fungebatur, per quod tempus primum nata est controuersia de superiore loco inter Hispanum, Gallumque Reges.
The same Author further saith: Gusmanus Sylua Philippi Regis Orator, Venetios concesserat Ordinarius Orator futurus apud eum Senatum. Huius aduentu iniecta est opinio certa societatis belli constituendae, quoniam multos iam annos, ob illam controuersiam de praecedentia cum Rege Gallorum, nullus Orator Hispanus fuerat ordinaris Venetijs.
In Poland, in Anno 1573.Contention for Precedencie in Poland, in An 1573. the most part of the Christian Princes sent their Ambassadors thither, for preceding in the election of a new King, after the death of Sigismond.
King Charles the ninth sent thither as his Ambassadour, Messire Iean de Monluc, Bishop of Valence, to make election for King, his Brother Monsieur Alexander Henrie of France, Duke of Aniou, as accordingly he was.
Philip the second, King of Spaine, had there for his Ambassador,Precedency requested forthe K. of Spain against France. Dom Pedro Fa^^hardo, Marquesse of Velez, who demanded the Precedency for the King his Ma-Master, against him for France, as well in the Church, as in publique; and to this end he was heard the first after the Ambassadors from the Pope, the Emperour, and after him for France.
The States and Lords of Poland, being assembled at Varsouia, adiudged the Precedency to the K. of France. So that after the Ambassadour from Pope Gregory the

13. and from the Emperor Maximilian, the second were heard (for the Pope, the Cardinall Commendon, and for the Emperour Dom Guillame des Vrfins, Lord of ^^zembergue) he from France was heard, and then he for Spaine, to whom order (in ranke) was giuen to speake after him. But he, offended at this foyle, and in so notable an assembly; forsaking his Embassie, returned home from Poland with exceeping shame.
At Rome, which is the great Theater of the World, in Anno 1564. was Ambassador from King Charles the ninth, Messire Henry Clutin, Lord of Oisell. At the same time was Ambassador from the King of Spaine Philip the second, Dom L^ de Zunyga de Requesens,Contention for Precedencie at Rome, in An. 1564. great Commander of the Order of S. Iames of the sword in Castille, who laboured all he could possibly deuise with Pope Pius Quartus, to haue the Precedencie before him of France, or (at the least) to walke equall with him (for the Ambassador of France equalleth in Honours him from the Emperor,) and that at one and the same time, Incense might be giuen to him, and the Pax to kisse, as was done to the Ambassadors from France,The Precedency granted by the Pope to the King of France. and the Emperour. The Pope considered a long while, and ballanced this businesse in his braine; but in the end, hee maintained the King in his Precedency, and in his Chappell vpon the day of Pentecost.
The learned Onuphr^us Panuinius, and the Spaniard Morales, in the life of the said Pope Pius Quartus. Non longe post controuersiam de honoratiori in publicis concessibu^ loco inter Oratores Gallum, and Hispanum, diu ante Francisci Vargae opera Venetijs excitatam, alia re^^uata est* Pontifex post multas longasque tergiuersationes Summum Gall^^ Locum assignauit, cum concordiae forma multum consuluisset, nec vllam reperisset. Hispanus enim superiorem concessum Gallo negabat, and Gallus Hispanum aequalem recusabat: (...) eam rem Ludouicus Requesens magnus Castellae Commendator Hispanus Orator irritat^^, post publicam contestationem Regis sui nomine, Roma abijt.
Pedro Iustiniano saith againe. Pontifex circa ius Praecedentiae inter Gallorum, and Hispanorum legum Oratores priorem locum Gallo, vti semper obseruatum fuerat attrib^^, Ex quo Philippus Rex valde indignatus, Oratorem suum e Romana Curia statim reuocauit.
Cauitellus, in his Annales of Cremona, vnder the yeere 1564. saith. Orta contriuersia inter Legatos Hispaniae, and Gaelliae Regum Romae penes summum Pontificem, cum alter alterum praecedere vellet in Pompis, and alijs, quibus contingeret ibi adesse. Summus P^^tifex declarauit debere praecedere Legatum Regis Galliae, sub fundamento, vt creditur, quod praedecessores Regis Galliae statum Romanae Ecclesiae ac Religionis Christianae valde auxeri^ (goe to schoole to this man of Cremona, Cranato) and pro conseruando and ampliand^ multa Bella obierint, and praeclara facinora egerint aduersus Infideles and alios qui ipsum o^primere voluerint. Et Galliae Regnum sit antiquius Regno Hispaniae: Et Galli prius Hisponis fidem Christi receperint: and thereto he might well haue added this Clause, Et a Gallis Hispani Christianae Fidei notitiam acceperint.
These are (Cranato) those considerations which the Popes haue had, not to adiudge; but to conserue the Monarchs of the Lillies, in the Precedency which they had (from all times) ouer all the Kings and Princes of Christendome.
Precedency kept for the Kings of Fra^ce at Rome.A Precedency kept for the Sacred Kings of France euen at Rome, in the eye of all Nations of the World; and in an Act the most solemne that had beene seene* performed in fauour, pursuit, and at the charge of the King of Spaine, Dom Philip the second.
In the yeere 1588. Pope Sixtus Quintus then sitting at Rome (where the King of Spaine Dom Philip the second, had then the whole power; and where was the Fort and Dongeon of the bloody League, for rendring the French (as a prey) for the enemies pillage) Spaine caused a Religious Grey Frier, called in Latine Did^cus,The Canoni^ing of Diego D'Alcala, a holy Gray Frier and in Spanish Diego D' Alcala, to be Canonized, for the gift of Myracles which God had wrought by his prayers, and daily did, both during his life-time, and after his death. Namely, for the health of the Infant of Spaine Dom Charles, according as it is more at large set downe and contained, in the Acts of his Cano^ization.
Dom Henry de Gusman, Count d'Oliuares, Ambassador of Spaine, with Cardinalls

and others of the Spanish Nation, pursuing this act, wholly Spanish; performed what possibly they could, in an action so fauourable for them, now or neuer, to haue Precedency, and Prime place of Honour, before the Ambassador of France, Messire Iean de Viuone, Marquesse of Pisany, whom the Spaniards (in a brauery) wished to bee a Spectator of this Act, as to draw him a Iudge for Precedency, before France.
The Marquesse, who well enough knew these Spanish practises, and what they did at Rome against King Henry, third of that name of blessed memory, and his Master; stood stiffely to preserue the Precedency and Honor,The stout resolution of the Ambassador for Fra^ce. atchieued by the Sacred Kings of France, with expence of their bloud, for the state and maintenance of the Romane Church; and not to giue way to him for Spaine, by any of his supplications, which were, to giue no assistance in this Act and Solemnitie, altogether Spanish, or at this time, to yeeld or grant him any place.
To compound this difference of so great importance, the Pope Sixtus Quintus, made a Congregation of foure Cardinalls, by whom this act was balotted,The Pope taketh order to compound the difference. for diuers ouertures and waies of amity. Francis, Cardinall de Ioyeuse (who died a while after, Deane of the Cardinals) propounded one, which was. That the Ambassador for the King should absent himselfe, from the solemnity of Canonizing the Frier Diego D'Alcala de Henarez; on condition, that at the first Assembly that should be made in Rome, the Ambassador of Spaine should (as hee ought) take his place beneath him for the King of France. This offer, more then reasonable,The 4. Cardinalls gaue voyce for France. was refused by the Spaniards, and they iudged vncapable of this French courtesie by the Cardinalls of this congregation. So that that the Count Oliuarez forsooke and left the place, free and wholly to the Marquesse de Pisany S. Gouast, who was present at all this Ceremony, according to the testimony of
Cicarella, in the life of Pope Sixtus Quintus, Anno Dom. 1588. Occasione Canonizationis Didaci ab Alcala, orta est inter Legatum Regis Hispaniarum, and Legatum Regis Galliae magna contentio dicente Hispano in hoc actu Canonizationis sancti Didaci Hispani sibi deberi primum locum, cum is potissimum ad Regnum Hispaniae pertineret: praeterea sibi principales quasdam operationes in hoc actu incumbere.
Respondit Legatus Franciae, peractis ijs quae facienda Hispano erant, aut Sacello exiret, aut locum inferiorem occuparet.
Hispanus iterum, vt saltem Francus ille hac vice, Idque ex Gratia (of grace and French courtesie) primum locum concederet petijt.
Cui Francus, se quidem hunc locum illi concessurum, hac lege, ne quid derogaret iuri praecedendi, quod Galli habebant, and quod absque praeiudicio, primo quod habiturus esset Pontifex Sacello, Legatus Hispanicus (qui se inferiorem Francico semper ostendens, huc nun^quam accedere solet) praesens adesset, locumque inferiorem suo occuparet.
Respondet Hispanus, se nullo modo id facturum: hoc enim facto fateretur se illi cedere.
Dum sic inter se contendunt, subrepit paulatim ira, incaluit sanguis, adeo vt ad armae propemodum, and ad maximum tumultum ventum fuisset, nisi aliorum auctoritas interpo^ita esset.
Tandem negotium hoc modo compositum est. Legatus Hispanicus ad Sacellum non ve^^iret, sed Cardinalis Deca eius munere fungeretur, eaque faceret, quae fecisset Legatus. Gallicus vero Legatus consuetum locum retineret. His peractis, Canonisatio cum summa summa quiete, and modestia peracta est.



CHAP. XIIII. Of such Ceremonies and Orders as haue beene, and yet are still kept and obserued, at the Sacring and Crowning of the Kings Most-Christian.
A comparison of the Parisian Kings of Fra^ce with other Kings.AS there haue beene none but the Parisian Kings of France, which beare Armes of Azure with three Floures de Luces of Gold; and others, onely Colours and Mettalls, varied and diuersified as formerly we haue said: so in the same manner, there haue beene none but the said Parisian Kings of France, that were Sacred and Crowned at Rheimes with Celestiall Balme, kept in the Holy Viole or Bottell. The Kings of Bourgongne France, were ordinarily Sacred and Crowned at Sancta Crux of Orleans; those of Austrasia at Mentz; and those of Soissons at another place, with holy Oyles Sacred by Bishops; and not with that of the Holy Bottle.
Now it is to bee noted in our passing ouer the Kings, represented on the great Frontespice of the Church at Paris, which are XXVIII. in number: there is a knowledge necessarily required,Consideration of the 3 Lignes changes. concerning the changes of the three Lignes, and of them that were Sacred and Crowned at Rhemes or elsewhere.
Clouis the first Christian King.Clouis the first Christian King, is in the number of those XXVIII. Kings. His picture is to be seene without the Church on the North side, which answereth to the Cloyster, betweene S. Iean le Rond, and the North gate of the Church; where also are obseruable the pictures of King Philip le Bel, and of Madam Iane of Nauarre, his Wife, vnder whose Reigne the Portall was finished.
Childebert first of the name.The first King on the Frontespice is Childebert, first of the name, King of Paris, Restorer and Endower of the said great Church; as wee learne by the Bishop of Poictiers, Fortunatus.

Si Salomoniaci memoretur machina templi
Arte licet par sit, pulchrior ista fide.

And more lower.

Haec pius egregio Rex Childebertus amore
Dona sua Populo non moritura dedit.

23. Kings of the Ligne of Clouis, and all Kings of ParisAll the thirteene which follow, are of the Ligne of Clouis, as namely; Clothiore the first, Charibert, Chilpericke; Clothaire the second; Dagobert, first of the name, Restorer and Endower of S. Denys in France; Clouis, second of the name; Cloth^ire the third, Childericke the second; Theodoricke or Thierry; Clouis the third; Childebert the third, called the Iust; Dagobert the second, and Clothaire the fourth, all Kings of Paris, and Sacred in the City of Rheimes. The other Parisian Kings are not there represented; because they were but Maskes and shadowes of Kings, desti^^ted exalted and suppressed, when it so pleased the Maires of the Pallace, who (vnder them) gouerned France by absolute power.
Of such as were Kings of France, and Emperors.On this Frontespice, such as beside Scepters, hold Apples or Balles in their hands, are they that were Kings of all France intirely, vnder the first Ligne; and likewise others, that haue beene Emperours, or renowned for valiancie: Like as those Kings that were negligent, idle, and cowards, are presented with their Armes hanging downewards.
The second Line of Kings, beginning with Pepin le Bref.The second Ligne began at King Pepin le Bref, tearmed the Dwarfe for his little Stature, yet armed with inuincible courage, and that is the reason why he is figured mounted on a Lyon. He, his Wife and Sonnes were Sacred at S. Denis in France, by Pope Stephen, who came to implore his ayd and assistance against the Lomba^^^ Kings.
The said Pepin is followed by sixe Kings of France of his Ligne, as namely Charlemaigne,

first Emperor of the West, Sacred in the Church of Noyon; Lewis the Debonnaire, King and Emperor, Sacred in the Church of Rhemes, by Pope Stephen; Charles the Bald, King and Emperour, Sacred at Orleans by the Traytor Ganelon Archbishop of Sens; followed by Lewis the Stammerer, second of the name, King and Emperour; Charles the Simple; and Lewis of beyond the Seas. The other are ^ot presented there, for the reasons formerly alleaged, in speaking of the last Kings of the first Ligne.
The two and twentieth King was Hugh Capet, Author of the third Ligne,The third line beginning with Hugh Capet. reig^ing happily at this present; exalted to the Royaltie for his vertues, by vniuersall ^onsent of the generall States of the Kingdome, assembled at Noyon; but hee was Sacred at Rhemes, and his Sonne and Successor, Robert the Deuout, in the Citie of Orleans.
After Robert followed immediately, and by Order, these Kings; Henry, first of ^he name; Philip, first of the name; Lewis le Gros, sixt of the name; Lewis the se^enth, tearmed the yonger (to distinguish him from his father) sirnamed the Pitti^ull; and the eight and twentieth, King Philip, second of the name, called Gods-gift, ^he Conqueror Augustus, that is to say, Emperour: vnder whose reigne, and the ^ontificacie of Bishop Maurice, the goodly Church was finished, as now at this day it is to be seene.
Now, in regard that Lewis le Gros, sixt of the name,Lewis le Gros Sacred in the City of Orleans. immediately after the death of his Father, Philip the first, had beene Sacred in the City of Orleans, by Daim^ert, Archbishop of Sens, assisted by his Suffragans, to witet, Yues Bishop of Char^es, Iohn of Orleans, Giles of Paris, Manasses of Meaux, Hugh of Neuers, and Ym^ert or Harold of Auxerre: The Church and Archbishop of Rheimes complained of the Deed against the Archbishop of Sens, and his Suffragans, as of a manifest at^empt on their ancient Priuiledge and possession, held time out of minde, euer since great Clouis, for Consecrating the Kings of France: whereupon, the Archbishop of Sens was sued in the Court of Parlement.
Yues, the learned Bishop of Chartres, made answer to this complaint, as appea^eth by his Epistle, beginning Nouerint Sancta Romana Ecclesia, speaking in the name of his Comprouincialls, that this Act had not, neither was done by any enterprise on the Church of Rhemes:The time of Interregnum very dangerous. but onely to auoyd perills and dangers ensuing by long delay, after the decease of King Philip the first; in which respect it was thought ex^edient to Sacre Lewis le Gros in the City of Orleans. Erant enim quidam Regni per^urbatores, qui ad haec omni studio vigilabant, vt aut Regnum ad aliam personam trans^erretur, aut non mediocriter minueretur.
Moreouer, he alleadged for example, the Sacring of the Kings, descendants of Clouis, who were Sacred in Principall Cities of their Kingdome and Partage,Kings Sacred in diuers cities of their kingdomes, and not all of them at Rh^imes. as al^eady we haue said. Isti quippe Regis nullam a Remensi Archiepiscopo Benedictionem, vel Coronam acceperunt, sed a Saoerdotibus Prouinciarum quas regebant sublimati sunt, and sa^rati. And afterward, examples of the Kings of the second Line, and third, Sacred ^lsewhere, and not at Rheimes. Ex quibus exemplis manifestum erat, quod Francorum Reges non omnes in Remensi Ecclesia, vel a Remensibus Archiepiscopis fuerant consecrati, ^d multi in multis alijs locis, and a multis alijs personis consecrati fuerant.
In the last place, that it was impossible,Reasons no way to be answered. to haue Sacred King Lewis le Gros in the City of Rheimes; for reasons vtterly vnanswerable.
First, that the City of Rheimes was excommunicated, in regard of partialities and ^actions moued and raised therein, about the election of two Archbishops,1. Reason. chosen both ^one time; to wit, Geruase and Raoull, or Rhadolph, by the partakers of whom, Mise^^bilis, and mirabilis erat Remensis Ecclesiae status, Geruase renting all peace in peeces, by labouring to hinder the election Canonicall of Rodolph. Pissibilis non erat, quia ^secratio Regis Remis ab Archiepiscopo Ecclesiae nondum inthronisato, sine summa per^batione, and sanguinis effusione celebrari non poterat.
The second was taken from the place and time.2. Reason.
Of the Place. De Loco non conueniebat, quia Ciuitas sub anathemate posita erat.
Of the time. Because there was not any meanes for maintaining the State, by ^eferring and tardying the Sacring and Coronation. Tempori opportuna non erat;

quia si consecratio Regis differretur, Regni Status, and Ecclesiae Pax grauiter p^tur, and this reason of State was most pregnant,
Now, notwithstanding the defences of Yuo Carnotensis, by interuention of the Peeres of France, who likewise complained, that they were not called to the (...) Sacring and Coronation of Lewis le Gros: the number of Peeres were ruled by King Lewis the yonger, to the number of twelue, by Decree of the generall Parliament, held in the great hall of the Bishops Pallace at Paris, at the Feast of Pe^tecost,An Order determin'd by the Court of Parliament. Anno 1179. And by the same Order, the Prerogatiue of Sacring our Kings, which was in compromise, betweene the Archbishop of Sens, and his Suffraga^ Bishops, defendants against the Church and Archbishop of Rheimes, maintaines of the complaint; was adiudged to William de Champaigne, tearmed with the w^ hands, Cardinall by the title of S. Sabine, Archbishop of Rheimes, where the Sacring of our Kings was concluded on for euer after. And since the Sacring of King Philip Augustus,Philip Augustus the Conqueror. truely Augustus and Conquerour, performed at Rheimes on All-Saints day, in the said yeere 1179. all our Kings his Successors, haue beene the^^ Sacred.
The late King Henry the Great (of glorious memory) excepted, who, by rebellion of the City of Rheimes (a thousand times more accursed at that instant time, th^^ it was in the daies of Lewes le Gros, for fauouring an Vsurper against his lawfull Archbishop) had his Sacring and Coronation performed in the Church of Chart^^s.
Of Sacring and Anointing the Most-Christian Kings.Our Most Christian Kings are Sacred and annointed with holy Balme, in seauen parts and places of their body.
First, on the crowne of the head.
Secondly, on the brest.
Thirdly, between both their shoulders.
Fourthly, on the right shoulder.
Fiftly, on the left shoulder.
Sixtly, in the bending of the right arme.
And lastly, so on the left arme.
Sacring and Crowning of Queenes.Queenes of France are ordinarily Sacred and Crowned at S. Denys in France* with other oyle then that of the Holy Bottle: and on two places onely,
On the Head, and
On the Breast, but not elsewhere.
It is very likely, that Clouis, hauing bestowed such great benefits on S. ^hemig^* the said Bishop (no doubt) gaue part of them in the Inuestiture of Noblemen, (...) hold them in Fiefe of the said Abbey. And like as thorow all the Bishoprickes of France, there are foure Noble Fiefes, erected in the Title of Baronies, for which the Lords owe seruice to the Bishops: so in the same manner, this rich and ancient Arch-Monastery, honoured with keeping the Holy Bottle, hath (at all times) ha^ ^^ foure Barons and Knights of the said Holy Bottle.
Some Light heereof may be discerned, in many passages of the Ecclesiastic^^ History of Rheimes, written by Floardus: which yet may much more cleerely (...) seene by the Acts and Sacring and Crowning of our Most-Christian King, and Noble Augustus Lewis, thirteenth of that name, now happily reigning; performed (...) the Church of Rheimes, on Sonday the 17. day of October* and in the yeere (...) whereof I purpose to speake somewhat.
A briefe discourse of the Coronation of King Lewis the 13. now reigni^g.The Royall Ornaments being newly made, answerable to the age and statu^e of the King (he being then but nine yeeres olde) were prepared and brought vnto the City of Rheimes: and his Maiesty, accompanied with the Queene Regent his Mother, made his entrance into the City of Rheimes, the 14 day of October, in the booke (...) yeare of 1610.
The preparations for the Sacring were prouided in the great Church of our (...) (the same which we haue described for King Henry the Great, in the sixt (...) the History of Nauarre, vnder the yeere 1594. in the Moneth of February) his Maiesty on Saturday th 16. day, went to the Euening prayers: after which, he receiued the Sacrament of Confirmation, by the hand of Francis, Cardinall de Ios^s^, presented to his Maiesty by Q. Margaret, and Monsieur the Prince of C^e.
Which being done, the King offred to the Church of our Lady,The Kings Offering to the Church of our Lady. his gift or present. Which was a head of S. Lewes, carried by two Angels, all made of Siluer doubly guilded, weighing threescore and foure Markes. At the bottome whereof was enchased a bone of one of his armes, couered with Rockie Christall.
The Bases of the Shrine was supported by Cherubins, made forward Ouall-wise, and halfe circkled, whereon was the Image of the King, adorned in his Royall habits kneeling, his hands closed, and vp-heaued, and before him (on a Pillow) lay two Scepters, and two Crownes. About the Bases were to be read these words.
LVdouicus Decimus tertius Filius Henrici Magni Galliarum, and Nauarrae Regis Christianissimi, Parentis Imperio, eiusdem virtutibus succedens, hoc Toreuma ossis Diui Ludouici Regis eius initij prosapiae Monimentum Posteritati dedit Mense Octobri, Anno Domini Milesimo Sexcentesimo Decimo, in aduentu Regni, sede dicante, Deo dedicauit.
At the said Sacring, performed on Sunday the seauenteenth of October,The Ecclesiasticall Peeres present at the Sacring. the said Lord Cardinall de Ioyeuse, represented the Archbishop and Duke of Rheimes, Deane of the Peeres; the other Ecclesiasticall Peeres were all there personally present, to wit; Geoffrey de Billy, Bishop and Duke of Laon; Charles Des-Cars, Bishop and Duke of Langres; Rene Potier, Bishop and Count of Beauuais; Cosimo Clauisso, Bishop and Count of Chaalons; and Charles de Balsac, Bishop and Count of Noyon.
The ancient Lay Peeres, Dukes of Bourgongne, Normandie and Guienne, and Counts of Tolosa, Flanders and Champaigne, were represented; the Dukes with my Lords, Princes of the Blood, De Conde, de Conte and de Soissons: And the Counts, by the Dukes of Neuers, d'Elboeuf, and d'Espernon. My Lord the Constable was presented by the Marshall De la Chastre; my Lord the Chanceller was there in person. The Marshall de Lauardin presented the Great Maister, the Duke d'Eguillon, Great Chamberlaine; and the Marquesse de Versoy Roger de Belle-Garde, Maister of the Horse, and the prime Gentleman of the Chamber was there in person. The foure Barons, for fetching the Holy-Bottle, were the Marquesse de Sable, Beauuais-Nangis the Sonne, the Viscount de Rabat, and the fourth was the Baron de Biron.
Chesne Pouilleux, a Village in Rhetelois,Attendants on the Holy-Bottle. appertaining to the Abbey of S. Rhemigi^us, at all times yeelded ten or twelue of the Inhabitants, for attending on the said Holy-Bottle, carried by the great Priour of the said Abbey. Instead of twelue, all the Rustickes of the said Village, haue taken libertie of themselues, to be present ^t the Sacring of our Kings, and comming to Rheimes, (so many of them as are ^ble to beare Armes) they march thither, with beating the Drumme, and Ensigne displaied, wearing their best garments, and euery one an Oaken Leafe in his Hat. For three dayes space they are there feasted at Rheimes, and haue (more-ouer) as a ^ootie, the white Hacqueney which the King giueth, for bearing the said Holy-^ottle. These saucie companions would make it to be credited, that these priui^edges are granted them, because in the time of Charles the seauenth, they wonne ^gaine the Holy-Bottle; which the Bourgongnons had carried away from S. Rhemigius: which is altogether fabulous, and no truth in it.
The Bishops of Laon and of Beauuais being sent to fetch the King, demanded for ^im at his Chamber doore, saying: Lewes the thirteenth, Sonne of Henry the Great,The Bishops that are sent for the King. which is remarkeable, for remembrance of the dead, and may serue as a Spurre to ^he Sonne, for imitation of his Fathers valour. At Masse, the Cardinall de Ioyeuse ^eing the Officiant, was assisted by the Bishops of Acs and of Valence. The Bishop ^f Rieux sung the Epistle, and the Bishop of Boulongne the Gospell.The manner of carrying the Offering. The Cardi^all de Gondy brought the kisse to the King, first the Pax, and afterward the Agnus ^ei. The Offerings were carried on Cushion-cloathes of tawnie Damaske, frin^ed with Gold. The Lord of Montigny carried the Wine; De Ragny the Bread ^f Siluer; Beauuais-Nangis that of Gold; De Rambouillet the Purse, wherein were ^irteene Pieces of Gold, each of them valuing thirteene Crownes. The King re^^iued the Communion vnder both the kindes, with deuotion and humilitie, admi^d in such yong yeares.
Guests, and order of the sitting at the Royall Feast, with other obseruations.At the royall Feast, next to the Table of the King, and the Peeres Ecclesiasticks and Layicks; was that of the Officers of the Crowne, whereat were seated my Lord the Nuntio; the Ambassadours of Venice and Florence, my Lord the Chanceller and those which carried the honors of the Offerings, with Lords and Knights of noate. Roquemont Viole, Maister of the houshold, tooke the Table-Napkin, and presented it to the Marshall de Lauardin, from whose hand his Maiestie receiued it. Roquemont, as the most auncient Maister of the Houshold, had the honor that day, to Vsher and goe before the Dinner seruice. The Duke of Rouannois carried the first Dish, seruing as Great Pantler of France: the Lord of Crequy waited as Cup-bearer and Taster; and the Lord of Rhodes, Great Maister of the Ceremonies, and Caruer.
The King receiued the Order of the Holy-Ghost, and in what manner.On Monday, being S. Lukes day, the 18. of October, the King receiued the Order of the Holy-Ghost, by the hand of the Cardinall de Ioyeuse. He was conducted to the Altar by my Lords the Princes of Conty, and of Soissons, preceded by the Officers of the Order; tooke the Oath of Great Maister, and signed it; Chaste^^-Neuf, Chanceller of the said Order, holding the Euangelicall Booke. Which being done, De Rhodes, Great Maister of the Ceremonies, and Prouost of two Orders for the King; cloathed his Maiestie with the Great Mantle or Cloake of the Order, and Cardinall de Ioyeuse put about his necke the Coller of the Order, In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy-Ghost, making the signe of the Crosse.Kings are not Knights by their birth, but by creation. Which serueth to shew, that Kings are not borne Knights, and that receiuing the Order of Knighthood, is an act solemne, hauing perticuler Ceremonies thereto as perticulerly belonging.
After the Great Mantle of the Order was thus put vpon the King, the Cardinall tooke from the hand of Viscount de Pisieux, Great Treasurer of the Order, the Blew Riband,Other Ceremonies belonging to the Order of the Holy-Ghost. and a paire of Beades, which his Maiestie receiued. This done, and the Act of Ceremonie Registred downe by Aubespine Verderone, Pregnotane of the Order, and President of the Chamber of Accounts at Paris, the King remaining still by the high Altar: the Dukes of Espernon, and de Monbason, preceded by the Lord of Rhodes, the Herald and Vsher of the Order; conducted my Lord the Prince of Conde, chiefe Prince of the Blood, before his Maiestie, of whom he onely receiued the Order of the Holy-Ghost: to declare, that no per person in the world can walke as Peere, with Princes of the Noble Floures de Luce.
On the morrow, the King and the Queene his Mother, went walking to the Castell of Baron du Tour, who presented them with a Collation, and thence their Maiesties returned to Rheimes; from whence they departed on Wednesday the 27.The King cured the diseased of the Euil. to performe their Prayers at S. Marcoull, a Priorie, where the King touched the diseased with the Kings-Euill, which were a great number; Father Cotton receiuing them still from the King, who returned to Paris on Saturday, being the thirtieth of October, the Eeuen of All-Saints, and on the morrow went to heare Masse in the Church of Paris.
Thirteen pieces of Gold the Kings Offering.The thirteene Pieces of Gold, presented by the King at the Offering, and those of Gold and Siluer, which were throwne to the People by the Heralds, crying L^gesse, after the wonted manner; had on the one side, the Image of the King Crowned, and for the Legend, Ludouicus XIII. Dei Gratia Francorum and Nauarr^ (...) Christianissimus. And on the other side a Cloude, from whence issued a hand with long fingers, A Fuzelles, holding a Bottle, vnder which was the representation of a Cittie* as that of Rheimes, with a date of time, to wit, the XVII. of October 16^^. and for the Legend, Francis data munera Coeli: the deuise true, but the representation false, and which (in it selfe) argueth the Author guiltie of grose ignorance.
Of bringing the Holy-Bottle to S. Rhemigius.At the Sacring of our first Christian King, the great Clouis, it was not an Angell in humaine forme, which brought (from Heauen) the Holy-Bottle to S. Rhemigius the Bishop of Rheimes. Floardus, whose testimonie is without reproofe, authorized for more then eight hundred yeares; supplieth the defect, which some ^ad reformers haue enuiously imposed on Saint Gregory of Tours, our auncient A^list; whotelleth vs in his Historie of the Church of Rheimes: That on Saturday

^n Easter weeke, in the yeare of our Saluation fiue hundred, on which day Clo^is was regenerated by the Sacrament of Baptisme, and by the same Saint Rhemigi^is, with three thousand French. Clericus Chrisma ferens a Populo interceptus, ad Fontem pertingere penitus est impeditus. Sanctificato denique Fonte, nutu diuino Chris^ma defuit. Sanctus autem Pontifex Rhemigius, oculis ad Coelum porrectis tacite traditur ^rasse cum lachrymis. Et ecce subito Columba ceu Nix oduolat candida rostro deferens Am^ullam, Coelestis doni Chrismate repletam, cuius odoris mirabili respersi Nectare, inaesti^abili qui aderant, super omnia quibus ante a delectati fuerant replentur suauitate. Acceptus itaque sanctus Praesul Ampulla, postquam Chrismate frontem conspersit, species ^ox Columbae disparuit.
The great Seale of the Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius of Rheimes,Confirmation of the spassage recorded by Floardus. confirmeth this passage of Floardus, the Bishop is thereon figured, cloathed in his pontificall habits, assisted by his Cleargie, preceded with a Crosse, and two Candlestickes carried by two Children Quiresters: Clouis on his knees before the Font of Baptisme, attending for the Sacred Vnction, a Pigeon, white as Snowe, appearing on high, bringing in her beake the Holy-Bottle, which S. Rhemigius receiueth with his right hand.
The marke or stampe of this Seale, is presented in the midst of a Crosse,The Institution of this Order of Knigh^hood and manner of wearing the same. which is carried by the foure Barons and Knights of the Order, of the said Holy-Bottle of S. Rhemigius of Rheimes, instituted (as they stay) by the same King Clouis. About the necke is worne a Riband of Blacke Silke, whereto is fastened beneath a Crosse of Gold, cut and cornered, enamelled with white, charged with a Doue, holding in her bill the Holy-Bottle, receiued by a hand. And so ought the pieces of Gold and Siluer, at the Sacring of our Kings to be stamped; and on the other side the Image of S. Rhemigius of Rheimes. Behold here the figure of the Crosse, which they weare about their necks.




On their Mantles or Cloakes, they weare a Crosse angled and squared,The Mantles o^ Cloaks belonging to the Order. made of white Sattin, or Cloth of Siluer; in the midst, a round, containing the Seale aboue figured, the round Cantonned with foure Floures de Luces of Gold, the whole consisting of imbroderie. And because this memory hath not bin noated by any other, before vs: I hold it conuenient, that the iustifiable acts of this Order, their Hommage to the Church of S. Rhemigius, and the Ceremonie at the Sacring of our Monarches, were not amisse to be inserted in this place, according to their Originals, taken from the Records and Roules of S. Rhemigius of Rheimes, whereof here followeth the Tenour in the Countrey tearmes.




The receiuing of Faith and Hommage.
TO all such as shall see these present Letters, Rene the Burgesse, Licentiate in the Lawes, Bayliffe of Rheimes, and of the Abbey and Arch-Monasterie of

Saint Rhemigius of Rheimes, health. We make knowne, that by vertue of Letters of Commission,The true Copie of the Court Roule faithfully ^^anslated. to vs giuen by the illustrious and reuerend Lord, Lewes of L^raine, Arch-Bishop and Duke of Rheimes, first Peere of France, Legate borne of the See Apostolique, Abbot of the said Abbey and Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius, perpetually vnited and incorporated to the said Archbishopricke, dated the fourth day of the moneth of October 1608. Reade, published and Registred in the Roules of the said Bailiwicke of Rheimes, the 24. of the said Moneth of October: There appeared before vs the honorable Lord, Messire Thomas de Cauch^^ and Neuflize, Knight, Lord and Castillion of the said Neuflize, Baron de Chamlats, there dwelling. Who said and shewed to vs, that no long while since, the Land, Seigneurie and Baronnie of Terrier, amounted in full Fiefe to the late Lord Cl^^de de Cauchon, Esquire, Lord Dunchaire Hourges and de Courlandon his Father, by reason of which Land, Seigneurie and first Baronnie of Terrier, he had right to tearme himselfe the prime Seruant, Baron and Knight to my Lord S. Rhemigius, and so consequently had right, to beare and carrie (in the prime place of honor) the first and principall Staffe on the right side, of the Canopie or Pall, vnder which was carried from the Church of the said S. Rhemigius, vnto the Church of our Lady in Rheimes, the Holy-Bottle, wherein hath bin miraculously conserued, from King Cl^uis, first Christian King of the French, the holy Oyle and Sacred Vnction, wherewith haue bin annointed the most-Christian Kings of France, on the day of their Sacring and Coronation, euermore performed in the said Church of our Lady in Rheimes. Whereupon, he requested of vs, by vertue of our power granted by the said Commission: that we would receiue his Oa^h and Homage, for the said Land, Seigneurie and Barronnie of Terrier, with the appurtenances and d^pendances. Because hee is (next after the said Thomas de Cauchon) Lord of the said Neufliz and Teerrier, presenting himselfe there in person, and in presence of the venerable and i^dicious man, Dom Iohn the Spanyard, Priest and Doctor in Sacred Diuinitie, chiefe Vicare for the said Lord, as well in Spirituall as Tempo all affaires. Performing also such Oath and Hommage, as by reason of the said Land, Seigneurie and Baronnie of Terrier, he standeth bound to doe, the Solemnities requisi^e in such cases of custome, euermore kept and obserued.
We haue, in presence of Maister Laual, Exchecker Atturney for the said Archbishopricke and Abbey of the said S. Rhemigius; receiued, and doe receiue, the said Lo^d Thomas de Cauchon and Neuflize, vpon his Oath of fidelitie, for the said Land, Seigneurie and first Baronnie of Terrier, with the appurtenances and dependances: Alwayes reseruing the right of the said Lord, and of any other, without preiudice to othe^ rights which may be due, with charge to be giuen by the said Lord Baron de Terrier, his auouching and Inuentorie, within fortie dayes following, according to custome. In witnesse whereof, we haue signed these presents, and caused them also to be signed by the Ordenarie Register to the Bailiwicke, of S. Rhemigius; and thereto put the Seale of the Holy-Bottle, belonging to the Bailiwicke, with ours, which was done at Rheimes the eight day of the month of October, 1610.

Signed. Bourgeois Bailly, And Le Poyure, Register.



Acts of Notaries for the Sacring of King Lewes the thirteenth.
IN the presence of vs Peter Auger, and Thomas Roger, Notaries for our Lord the King, hereditarilie abiding at Rheimes, for the Bailiwicke of Vermandois, subsigned. This day, being Sunday, the eighteenth of October, one thousand sixe hundred and ten, being in the Church and Arch-Monasterie of my Lord S. Rhemigius of Rheimes, about the ninth houre in the morning, appeared in the same Abbey the high and mighty Lords, Messire ^hillip de Laual, Marquesse de Sablay; Nicholas de Brichanteau, Lord of Beauuais-Nangy; Henry Gaston de Foix, Viscount de Rabat; and

Armand de Biron, Baron de Chef-Boutonne, being at Rheimes: who said and declared to the venerable and Religious man Dom Iohn the Spaniard, Priest, Doctor in the facultie of Sacred Diuinitie, great Prior of the said Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius; and great Vicare both Spirituall and Temporall to the Illustrious Prince, my Lord Lewes of Lorraine, Archbishop, Duke of Rheimes, and chiefe Peere of France, Abbot of the Abbey and Arch-Monasterie of Saint Rhemigius; as also to Dom Iohn Rauinean, Sub-Prior, Iohn le Clerke, third Prior, Claude the Bishop, fourth Prior, Chanters and Treasurers, Nic. Vaurouart, and Oudar Bourgeous, Ouerseers of the Sicke, all the Religious Priests of the said Arch-Monasterie, and other Religious persons of the said Abbey. That they were sent on the behalfe of the King our Lord, Lewes the thirteenth of that name, to cause the bringing by the said great Prior of the said Arch-Monasterie, and the Religious persons, in all reuerend and honorable manner, the Holy-Bottle from the place at Saint Rhemigius, to the Church of our Lady, for holy seruice at the Sacring and Coronation of our said Lord the King, which is to be celebrated the 17. day of October, and in the foresaid Church of our Lady. The forenamed Lords offering and promising (on their faiths) to doe their vtmost duetie for securitie of the said Holy-Bottle, remaining as Hostages in the Church of S. Rhemigius, vntill the Ceremony be performed, and the Holy-Bottle brought backe to the said Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius, according as in the like cases hath bin accustomed.
Whereunto by the Lord Graund Prior, and Graund Vicare to the said Lord Abbot, with other of the Religious persons, answere was made: that they readily prepared, to obey the Kings good pleasure. Which being done, the said Lords deputed by the King, were transported before the Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius, with the Lord Grand Prior and religious persons, where they made Oath on the holy Euangelists, which was taken by the wise and honorable man, Maister Rene Bourgeois, Bailiffe to the Archbishop of Rheimes, and of the said Abbey at this present, promising to render and bring backe the Holy-Bottle, to the said Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius, according to their former offers. Neuerthelesse, entreating and requiring the said Lords, Grand Viscard Prior, and Religious persons, that it might be permitted them, to carrie from the Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius, the Holy-Bottle, to the said Church of Rheimes, by good conduct and assistance: with promise, the Sacring being done and accomplished, to bring it safely againe, to this abiding place of S. Rhemigius, which was granted to them by the said Grand Vicar, Prior and religious persons, vpon those solemne promises, and thereupon was deliuered to them the said Holy-Bottle on the high Altar, whereat were present a great number of people, and the said Lord Grand Prior, cloathed with a Coape of beaten Gold, taking the Holy-Bottle from off the said Altar: carried it vnder a Pall or Canopie of cloath of Siluer, fringed very richly round about. Which was supported by Messire Thomas de Cauchon de Neuflize, Knight, Lord and Castillion o^ the said place, Baron of the Baronnies of Terrier and Chamlats, remaining there: Raoul de la Fontaine Esquire, Lord and Baron of Belestre, Neufuizy, Vaurincourt, and Arsilement, dwelling at the said Neufuizy: Iacques de Haudresson, Esquire, Lord and Baron of Lonurecy, all three Barons and Kn^ghts of the Holy-Bottle, belonging to my Lord Saint Rhemigius, Oathe being taken by them. And in place of the fourth Baron and Knight, was Maister Rene Bourgeois, Bailiffe of the Arch-Bishopricke of Rheimes, and of the said Abbey: the Lord Grand Prior mounted on a white Haqueney, couered with a Foote cloath of Cloth of Siluer, and the other religious persons of the Abbey, with great deuotion, and in solemne Procession, hauing a Crosse carried before them, went singing all the way to the said Church of Rheimes, the Anthemes and Prayers meete for so holy a Misterie. After whom rode the Lords Hostages on horsebacke, hauing likewise before them riding foure men, that carried foure Banners or Ensignes of white Taffata, whereon were figured the Armes of his Maiestie, and those of the said Lords Deputies, with mightie crowdes of people, all the way to the Church of Rheimes. In the bodie whereof was my Lord the most reuerend and worthie Cardinall de Ioyeuse, accompanied and assisted with manie Prelates, and other

men of the Church, and a great number of the chiefest Lords.
To the Lord Cardinall de Ioyeuse, the fore-named Lord Prior o^ S. Rhemigius, offered, presented and deliuered the Holy-Bottle, for accomplishing and performing the acte of Sacring, speaking these words. Most Noble and most reuerend Lord, behold here the Holy-Bottles, containing the Celestiall licquor, wherewith are annointed and Sacred, the Most-Christian Kings of France: which I present and deliuer into your hands, to consecrate King Lewes the thirteenth, our Soueraigne Lord; with charge, to haue the same restored and rendered into my hands, the Sacring being perfected and accomplished. Whereto the Lord Cardinall thus answered, clapping his hand vpon his breast. So I make you faithfull promise to doe. Immediately, the said Lord de Ioyeuse, tooke and carried the Holy-Bottle into the Quier of our Ladies Church, accompanied with the Lord Grand Prior, as also the Lords Hostages, Barons and Knights.
When the Sacring was finished, and Masse being solemnely Sung three whole houres; the Lord Graund Priour departed, in the foresaid manner attended and accompanied, bearing the Holy-Bottle vpon his brest, hanging at a Riband about his necke, and so returned vnder the same Canopie, to the Church and Abbey of Saint Rhemigius, where the Bottle was set againe in the wonted place. Which being done, and the Lords Hostages hauing ended their Prayers; they left their Ensignes of Armes in the Abbey, for a perpetuall memorie of the said Sacring, and were quitted and discharged of their former Oathes and promises, made to the Grand Priour and Religious persons. As in like manner the Lords Barons and Knights, deliuered their Pall or Canopie of Clo^h of Siluer, into the hands of the great Vicare and Religious persons, to serue as an ornament in the said Church. In remembrance whereof, and of all the Ceremonies then performed, the Lords Hostages, Barons, Knights, Lord Graund Priour and religious persons, haue requested of vs an Act, which was respectiuely granted to them, to serue a^ a memoriall to future times. Done at Rheimes, the day and yeare before mentioned, and deliuered to the Lord Graund Priour, religious persons, Barons, Knights, and the Lord Bourgeois, Bailiffe, Signed according to the Originals, in the presence of these following.

Signed, Roger and Auger, Notaries Royal.



Acts of the Bayliffe, and discharge of the great or chiefe Vicare of the Holy-Bottle, and Pallium of Cloath of Siluer.
TO all such as shall see or reade these present Letters, Rene the Burgesse, Licentiate in the rights, Bailiffe in the Bailiwicke of Rheimes, and of the Abbey and Arch-Monasterie of S. Rhemigius in Rheimes, sendeth greeting. Wee giue to vnderstand, that this instant Monday, being the eighteenth day of the Moneth of October, at eight of the clocke in the morning, did appeare in our Hostell in person, Messire Thomas de Cauchon and de Neuflize, Knight, Lord and Castellaine of the said Neuflize, and of the Baronnies de Terrier and Chalants, there dwelling; Antoine de la Fountaine, Esquire, Lord and Baron de Bellestre Neufuizy, and de Varnecourt, there dwelling; and Iacques de Haudresson, Esquire likewise, Lord and Baron de Sonastrae and de Lonuresi, there dwelling; all Barons and Knights of the Sacred and Holy-Bottle. Which Lords de Cauchon, de la Fountaine, and de Haudresson, by the said remembred names in the presence of Maister Lewes de Lauall, Licentiate in the Laws, Exchecquer Attorny for the said Abbey, as also for the Bailiwick of Rheimes, declared, shewed and made appeare to vs, that in regard of the Baronnies of Terrier, Bellestre and Sonastre, which they held in full Fiefe, Faith and Hommage, vnder my Lord Abbot of Saint Rhemigius of Rheimes; they were, are, and did performe these Offices following.
A right belonging to them from all Antiquitie, each one of them to beare and carrie a Staffe (appertaining to the fore-said Order) of the Canopie or Pallium, vnder which is carried, from the Church of Saint Rhemigius, to that of Nostre Dame of the said Rheimes, on the day of holy Sacring and Crowning our Kings of France: the said Holy-Bottle, so farre as to the high Altar of the Church de Nostre Dame de Rheimes, which Bottle was miraculously sent from Heauen, and containeth the holy Oyle and Sacred Vnction, wherewith was annointed King Clouis, the first most-Christian King of the French, and successiuely to doe the like, to the most-Christian Kings of France in all times following.
At the end of which high Altar, they ought to stand as Assistants, vntill such time as the Sacring be finished, and high Masse said or celebrated in the Church of Nostre Dame de Rheimes; without being out of sight thereof, according as they stand obliged to doe: to haue the same with them at their returning, but in presence of the Lord Abbot of Saint Rhemigius, or he that hath the honor to beare it. They seruing as aides and assistants for conducting the same in safetie, to the body of S. Rhemigius, where it is, and hath bin (from immemoriall Antiquitie) kept and preserued in the same manner, as they haue vsed to accompanie it with all solemnitie, to the said Church of Nostre Dame du Rheimes.
Now know ye, that yesterday, being Sunday, the seauenteenth day of the Moneth of October, in the fore-said yeare, one thousand sixe hundred and tenne, the day of Sacring; in our presence, and of the said Lauall, Exchecquer Attorney; euery one of the said Barons, Knights of the Holy-Bottle, seruiceably came and performed their duetie, for carriage thereof the said day, at eight of the Clocke in the morning, in the Church of Saint Rhemigius: the said Barons and Knights being cloathed in habits of white Sattin, with Mantles or Cloakes of blacke Taffata, and on the left side of their Cloakes were embrodered the Crosse, belonging to the Knighthood and Order of the Holy-Bottle, framed of pure Gold and Siluer.
This was done in the presence of Dom Iohn the Spaniard, Priest and Doctor in sacred Diuinitie, high Vicare to my Lord Abbot of Saint Rhemigius, as well in spirituall as temporall occasions, and Graund Priour beside of the said Abbey, together with the Religious Brotherhood of the Abbey, the said Knights being placed in rankes, each after other, presented themselues before the high Altar in the Church of Saint Rhemigius, prostrating one knee each of them to the ground, in signe of Faith and Homage, to kisse the said Holy-Bottle, which was presented to them by the Lord Graund Priour, as it hung about his necke. The Graund Priour, after he had allowed them kinde acceptation, and deliuered them the Oath, in such cases required of faithfull seruice, each laying his right hand on the Booke of the holy Euangelists, for true and faithfull bringing the same backe againe: the said Lord Graund Priour, to each of them kneeling in ranke, did put a Crosse of Gold, enamelled with white about their necks, hanging at a large Riband of blacke Silke, the Crosse resembling that embrodered on their Cloakes, according to the order kept and obserued from Antiquitie, which they ought to weare during their life time, or shall enioy their said Lands and Baronnies, and neuer to be without the said Crosse about their neckes.
These Gentlemen, being thus come at the houre appointed in the morning, into the said Church of Saint Rhemigius: the honorable Lords, Henry Gaston de Foix, Vicount de Rabat, Phillippes de Lauall, Marquesse de Sablay, Iacques de Brichanteau, Lord of Beauuais Nangy, and Armand de Biron, Baron of Chefboutonne, all foure Lords Hostages, whom it pleased his Maiestie to send, to procure the bringing of the Holy-Bottle for his Sacring; they came and presented themselues to the Lord Graund Priour and vs, declaring; that it had pleased his Maiestie, to send them as Hostages for the Holy-Bottle, according to the custome obserued from Antiquitie, each of them holding a Lance in his hand, whereon hung an Ensigne of white Taffata, armed with the Armes of our Most-Christian King of France, according to the Orders kept in the Church of Nostre Dame de Rheimes, as also in the Church of Saint Rhemigius.
Moreouer, their suite was to the Lord Graund Priour, that he would be pleased, to honor them with the sight of the Ceremonies obserued in the Sacring, binding themselues duely before the Notaries, for the safe conduct, and returne thereof backe againe. Which being granted, the said Lords Hostages before named, laying their hands on the Booke of the holy Euangelists, tooke their seuerall Oathes, in presence of the Notaries Royall thereto called. Which being done, the Lord Graund Priour descended downe the steps from the high Altar of Saint Rhemigius, with the said Holy-Bottle hanging about his necke, the Graund Priour being cloathed with a Coope of rich Cloth of Gold. At the nethermost of the said steps, he was presented by the Lords Hostages, with a State Conopie or Pallium of Cloath of Siluer, sent by them from his Maiestie to the Lord Abbot or Graund Vicare, vnder which he was to carrie the said Holy-Bottle, from S. Rhemigius to the Church of Nostre Dame, according to custome. The Lord Graund Priour receiued it graciously, and presented himselfe to the three Knights of the Holy-Bottle, and to vs, by reason of the other Knights absence, to acquit them of their honorable charges. Vnder which Canopie the Lord Graund Priour stept with the Holy-Bottle hanging about his necke, and attired as before is said.
Before the Holy-Bottle went two of the said Lords Hostages with their Launces in their hands, and the other two behinde it, till they came forth of the Church. At the great Portall whereof, was presented by the foure Lords to the Graund Priour, a goodly white Hacqueney, harnessed all with white, and couered with a Foote-cloath of Cloath of Siluer, fringed with Siluer Fringe round about, which his Maiestie had sent him to mount vpon, for his easier carriage of the Holy-Bottle, and as it was the auncient custome. The Lord Priour receiued it very humanely, thanking his Maiestie, for so well following and maintaining good and auncient customes.
The Hacquency was led by foure Groomes belonging to his Maiestie, who assisted the Lord Graund Priour to mount thereon: two of them leading him by the Bridle, one on the right side, and the other on the left, the other two waited on the Stirrops, so guiding and conducting him in the decentest manner. Hereupon, the Knights and Hostages mounted on their Horses, the Knights supporting the Canopie of State, and the Lords Hostages riding two before it, bearing their Banners, and the other after the Holy-Bottle in the same manner, their Esquires also bearing Banners by them. All riding before the venerable Religious Brethren of the Abbey of Saint Rhemigius, attired in white Aulbes, with the Crosse and Torchlight, singing Processionally, and the two Chauntres cloathed in Coapes, each bearing a Staffe of Siluer.
All the Houses in the Streetes were adorned with Hangings of rich Tapistries, and before the chiefest religious men, went the Captaine, Lieutenant and Ensigne, with diuers Inhabitants Du Chesne le Populeux, subiects to the Lord Abbot, according as they were enioyned to doe, and had warning sent them by the Lord Graund Priour: Armed after their fashion, Drummes beating before them, and Ensignes displayed, thus marched they about the Canopie, some before, and some behinde it, attended by the Officers of the Escheuinage belonging to S. Rhemigius, Subiects and Vassailes to the Lord Abbot, and the said Religious Order in Armes, who were sent for, and enioyned to be there, for safer conduct of the Holy-Bottle, vntill it should be brought back againe to S. Rhemigius, according to the auncient custome.
The Lord Graund Priour, being accompanied as formerly hath bin related; arriued before the great Portall of the Church of Nostre Dame de Rheimes, and entred into the Church, attended on onely by the Religious Brotherhood, the forenamed foure Lord Barons and Knights, and foure Lords Hostages, together with the two Notaries Royall already named, with some other Officers, Captaine and Ensigne of the Companie Du Chesne. At enting into the said Church of Nostre Dame, there arriued the most illustrious and reuerend Lord Cardinall, in his Pontificall habits, accompanied with the Peeres of France, attired in such garments, as they vse to weare at such great solemnities, and many Prelates beside, for more serious receiuing the Holy-Bottle: which was deliuered by the Lord Graund Priour, into the hands

of the said Lord Cardinall de Ioyeuse, Officient in the absence of the Lord of Rheimes.
But yet notwithstanding, before receipt thereof, promise was made by the Lord Cardinall, for safe deliuering the said Holy-Bottle, to the hands of the Lord Graund Priour againe, when the Sacring should be accomplished. And thereupon, the Lord Cardinall went vnderneth the Canopie with the Lord Priour, attended on by the Prelates and religious Brethren, going some before, others behinde, and round about the Canopie, so supported by the Lords Knights, and vs, as we haue said, vnto the high Altar of Nostre Dame, the said Lords Hostages still assisting, and neuer par^ing from it, as was their especiall charge and duetie, the Lord Graund Priour, keeping also on the right hand, which is the South-side on the high Altar in the Church of Nostre Dame.
When the Sacring was compleated, which lasted about the space of three houres; the Holy-Bottle was redeliuered into the hands of the Lord Graund Priour, in our presence, by my Lord the Cardinall de Ioyeuse, the said Lords Knights and Hostages (with others) witnessing the same. And at issuing forth of the Church of Nostre Dame, the Lord Graund Priour mounted on his white Hacqueney againe, accompanied as already hath bin said, as well by the foure Lords Hostages, as also the Barons Knights, and we the Officers, who came according to appointment, for conduct of the said Holy-Bottle, and bringing it backe againe to the Church of Saint Rhemigius; the Streetes still remaining beautified and adorned, and all the peo^le praising God for his goodnesse, that the Sacring was so happily performed and ^nished.
Being come backe to the Church of Saint Rhemigius, the Holy-Bottle was there ^laced by the said Saints body, as from all Antiquitie it hath bin accustomed, and ^he foure Lords Hostages, and Barons Knights of the Holy-Bottle, requiring of ^s an Act of all before related: wee yeelded thereto, after that the foure Lords Ho^ages had deliuered into the hands of the Lord Graund Priour, their foure Liueries ^nd Banners, to remaine in the Church of Saint Rhemigius, as a memoriall for per^etuitie of his Maiestie, as formerly other Banners of our predecessours Kings haue in there preserued, for an honorable remembrance of them, as also of the Lords ^arons Knights of the holy-Bottle, who likewise left there their Staues and Pal^um of Cloth of Siluer, deliuered to the hands of the Lord Graund Priour, and ^icare of the Lord Abbot, to serue as Ornaments in the Church of Saint Rhemi^ius.
When the Exchecquer Attorney had hereon considered, and granted, that each ^f the foure Lords Hostages, together with the other foure Lords Knights, should ^aue an Act of this presentation of their duetie and seruice, according as formerly is ^xpressed: A rule was drawne, and afterward, their Patents fairely engrossed, to re^aine as a liuing testimonie of their worthy performance, as Law, reason and equi^e iustly commanded.
(...) witnesse whereof, wee haue hereunto affixed the Seale; belonging to the Holy-Bottle, together with that of the Bailiwicke of Saint Rhemigius: And caused it to be signed by Maister Iohn le Poyure, Ordenarie Register of the Bailywicke, the day and yeare aboue mentioned.

Signed. Le Poyure, Register.





WE let passe vnder silence, the Ceremonies obserued, and the Praiers which are said at the Sacring of our most-Christian Kings,

when they be sent for to the Church: The presentation of their persons to the Archbishop of Rheimes: The Oath which they make to the people, for obseruing the Lawes of State: The fashion of their habits and Royall Ornaments: The benediction of the Sword Royall, and of the Ring, wherewith they are espoused to their Kingdome: The consecration of their person, Coronation and enthroning: Because they are all exactly set downe in the History of Nauarre, at the Sacring of King Henry the Great, of most glorious memorie.

The end of the second Booke.



OF THE ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD, which haue bin Instituted by the Most-Christian Kings of France, and by Princes of their Blood. The Third Booke.

The Order of the Gennet, established by CHARLES MARTELL. Anno 726.
CHAP. I. The Order of the Gennet.
IN the time of the Merouingian Kings declining, the Successours of King Clouis; the Maires of the Pallace,L'Ordre de l^ Genette. Stewards of the Kings House, called since Seneschals of France, prime Officers of the Crowne of France, possessed themselues of the Gouernement thereof by absolute power: as we haue already said in the former Booke, and in the second Discourse or Treatise, concerning the Officers of the Crowne of France, where we haue obserued, what the power was of those Maires of the Pallace, and their diuers appellations, with the Genealogie of the Kings of the second Ligne, sirnamed The Carlouingians, of Charles Martell; wherefore it is needelesse to vse any more repetition thereof.
Cruell Ebrouin, Maire of the Pallace, in the time of King Clothaire, third of the Name, sayling with full winde, by ill-ordered fauour of the Kings, whom he gouerned; was the first that (abusing their facilitie) proiected to change and alter the State, grounded on his owne power. Charles Martell, following the steps of his

predecessours, Maires of the Pallace (all perishing in the pursuite of so perillous a^ enterprise) by his valour and good carriage, wonne the Crowne of France to th^ of his Ligne.
In the yeare of Grace, seauen hundred and foureteene, the eleauenth day of Nouember, the Moores of Affrica, hauing enfranchised the straight of Gibell-Tari^ ^therwise called Gilbrartar: possessed themselues of Spaine, by the death of King Rodericke, the last King thereof (issued from the Vuisigothes) slaine in a fought Bataile, on the plaine of Cherez de Medina Sidonia, a Bourgade called sometime Ass;id^nia, composed of two Villages; the one named Seritium Assidonia, and the other Caesarianum, on the Riuer of Guadaletta, called by the auncient Gaules (which inhabited this Prouince) in their Mother tongue, Lethos, which signifieth Ob^uion.
Now these Moores, not contented with their domineering in Spaine; conceiued (in their opinion) a conquest of the Gaules, which they thought would be as eas^ accomplished, as their winning of Spaine: but they had then no Count Iulian, (...) serue as their guide and conducter. Neuerthelesse, it came so to passe, that in the yeare seauen hundred and twentie, these barbarous people, setting free the Py^nian Mountaines,Languedocke ouercome by the Moores. on the side towards Narbona the warlike: threw themselues (like an impetuous torrent) into Languedocke, at that time called Gothia, and became Masters thereof, vsurping Narbona Beziers, Agda, Nismes, Auignion and Prouence, euen so farre as to the Mountaines of the Alpes.
This first passage hauing succeeded so well as they could wish; they concluded to goe into France the second time, inuited thereto by a Duke, who wonne them to it vpon this occasion.
The intent of Charles Martell for Aquitaine.Charles Martell, Duke of the French, and sole Maire of the Pallace of France; desired to re-vnite to the Crowne thereof, the Prouince of Aquitaine, held then by Eudes, Duke thereof, issued from the auncient Vuisigothes, Brother in Law, and Cosine to Garcia Ximenes, Count of Begorre, and first King of Nauarre. And to auert the Armes of Martell, and to expell the tempest of the French, ready to fall vpon his head: he practised the succour of Abdiramo, an Arabian Captaine, newly come forth of Affrica into Spaine, to the end, that he might enter on the Lands of France, being vnder the gouernment of Martell.
Abdiramo, with an Armie of foure hundred thousand Arabes, came thundring into Aquitaine, vpon the summons of Duke Eudes, and instead of well and milde vsing the Lands of the Duke; he rauaged the Prouince, pilled and put to spoile the Cities and Townes of Bourdelois, Xaintonge and Poictu, putting all to fire and sword, as if he had bin in a land of Conquest, and of his deadly enemie. This made Duke Eudes to acknowledge the fault by himselfe committed, so that falling into more familiar intelligence with Charles Martell; they agreed together, to giue a sudden gird ^o the Sarrazines, and to chastise them in such sort; that others (by their example) should loose all desire of euermore comming in^ France.
The number of men in Charles Martell Armie.The Armie of Martell consisted onely of thirtie thousand men, but all of them being choice Souldiors, actiue and braue spirited warriours, by whose assistance ^e assured himselfe, to haue the honor of a famous victorie. Grounding his hope on the God of Battailes, who giueth the aduantage of Armes to a small number armed in defence of a good quarrell: and in whose sight, men are not measured by number or multitude, or hugenesse of stature, but by valour and hardinesse.
Abdiramo and his maine troupes, hauing (like a deluge) ouer-flowne all parts from the Pyrenean Mountaines, so farre as to the Cittie of Tours, where he lay encamped: beleeued verily, that this wealthie and well peopled Citie, would serue him but for a breakefast, as all the rest before had done. There Martell gaue him Battaile, and the fight proued so successefull (seconded by Duke Eudes, who valiantly followed in the Rere of the enemies Army) that God bestowed the victory on him, famous by the death of Abdiramo,Abdiramo slain in the field, and the Armie ^oiled. slain in the fielde, with three hundred fourescore and fiue thousand Arabes: on the French-mens side were slaine but fifteene hundred onely.
The Chronicklers of Spaine write, that Pope Gregory the third, had sent to ^uke Eudes hallowed Spunges, which being cut into small morsels and pie^s, and dist^ibuted among the Souldiours of the Christian Armie on the day ^f Battaile; they warranted all such as had them, from being wounded and slaine. ^ut these are meere Fables, and tales of Spanish Romancers, wherewith their dis^ourses are vsually filled, as that of their King Bamba. For it was at the re^uest of Eudes, that this circumcised people had past into France, to backe him a^ainst Charles Martell. It were a sottish thing, to referre the miracle of this vi^torie to inanimate matters, or to the creature; instead of rendring the ^raise and honour thereof to God, by whose mercie alone it came so to ^sse.
Our Annalists set downe this Battaile on the two and twentieth day of Iuly, (...) the yeare of Grace, Seauen hundred twentie sixe, which memorable victorie ^btained of God, by the intercessions and prayers of Saint Martine of Tours, the ^cond Apostle of the Gaules: Charles, in signe of thanksgiuing, erected in the place ^f fight, an Oratorie, in honour and memorie of the holy Bishop, called S. Martine (...) the battaile, and by corruption of speech, The Oratorie of S. Martin le Bel, Oratori^n sancti Martini de Bello. And Charles of Austrasia, as a noate of his great ^alour, was sir-named Martel, Tudes Saracenorum, The Hammer of the Sar^zins.
Among the spoyles of the enemies Armie, there was found great store of ^ch Furres of Gennets, and many of the creatures themselues were there aliue, ^eing presented to Martell: who made such estimation of them, for the beau^e of their Skinnes, and pleasing smell, somewhat neere to that of the Ciuit-Cat; ^hat for excellencie, he gaue diuers of them, to the Lords and Princes of his Armie, ^ho receiued them of him in very thankfull manner.
The Gennet is a Beast, almost like to the Foine or Wood-Martine,A description of the Beast, called a Gennet. in bignesse and ^orme like to the Cattes of Spaine: it hath a snout or muzzell long and slen^er, the necke and body sleeke, supple, and it is as quicke and readie as a ^atte. It is represented (according to nature by Petrus Belonius, Physition, in ^s Obseruations, where hee saith. That this Beast is gentle, and make it selfe (...) domesticke as a Catte, hee hauing priuately seene of them at Constantino^e, and other places in the East. Messire Iohn de Bourdigne reporteth in his Hi^orie of Anion, that good King Rene of Sicilie, residing in his Countie of Pronence, ^e King of Portugall (being his intimate friend) sent him for a rare present, an ^lephant, two Dromodaries, two Ciuet-Cattes, two Gennets, with Marmosets ^nd white Apes, beside many other strange Beasts comming from the In^aes.
There are two kindes of Gennets, the rare, and the common.Concerning two kindes of Gennets, the rare and the common. The common (...) Graye, spekled and spotted with blacke. The other, which is excellent and ^re, hath a blacke Skinne, and shining like to Sattin, or blacke vnihorne ^eluet; and it is marked or freckled with flat red spottes, which doe giue (...) the rest a wonderfull beautie. The Skinne of this Beast, being rubbed ^d chafed, yeeldeth a delicate sweete sauour or smell, like vnto Muske. ^nd therefore Princes and great Lords delighted (in elder times) to weare their ^ownes, Surcoates or Sotanes Furred with Gennets Skinnes: Nor is it aboue ^reescore yeares since, that the vsuall wearing of them ceased. For, as the Er^ne, and the Letice next thereto, are prized and esteemed for their rare whitenesse; ^en so was the Gennet for her shining blacknesse, and being most spotted with red ^eckles.
But because this second kinde of Gennet was so exquisite, and difficult to be ^und; the Martines Zubelines, which came from Russia and Moscouia, vn^er-went the others place; and is now held for the verie richest Furre. So that (...) time, Skinners and Furriers will loose all knowledge of the Gennet, as they ^ue done alreadie of other rich Furres, which had their full course in the time (...) our good King Saint Lewes. At his returning from the Holy-Land,

hee cloathed himselfe more simply then any man in his Kingdome, so saith the Lord of Ioinuille in his life. For he would no longer weare Minneuer, Gra^ nor Estoilettes (they were Gennets) in his garments, neither did hee euer after vse Stirrops or Spurres that were Guilded. His daily wearing cloathes were of L^^sey-wolsey, and on Feast-dayes, of Chamlet, Lile-Grograine or Wosted, Blacke, Blew, or Watchet, and the Furre of Garinthes, or Legges of Hares. The auncientest Skinners in this Citie, know not the Estoilettes, nor the Garinthes: but thinke men speake Flemmish or base Brittish, when they talke of such Furres. The Gennet, as well as the Puthois, or Fullmart, is brought from the Indiaes, Affrica and Prouinces in the East, from whence come the richest Furres.
The passage of Charles Martell into Languedock.After the Battaile of T^urs, Charles Martell went into Languedocke, to fight against the Moores, who vnder the conduct of Athinus, entred the third time into France, being sollicited so to doe by Hunauld (whom the vulgar called Huon of Bourdeaux, whose fabulous gests and voyages are written in his R^mant) eldest Sonne to Eudes, Duke of Aquitaine, deceasing within a while after. Athinus, this Amirant of the Sarrazins, was long time besiedged in Aruignion, from whence stealing secretly, he got into Narbona, and was vanquished at the foote of the Mountaine De la Courbiere, with his companion A^rheo. Aghi^^rd maketh mention of these two Battailes, famously wonne against the Affricanes. Carolus Tyrannos per totam Franciam dominatum sibi ^^dicantes oppressit, and Saracenos Galliam occupare tenantes, ducbus magnis praelijs, vno in Aquitania apud Pictauum Ciuitatem, altero iuxta Narbonem apud Byrram f^um ita deuicit, vt in Hispaniam eos redire compelleret.


 The first Order of Knighthood knowne in France.
NOw to preserue the memorie of this famous Battaile to posteritie, so happily wonne against Abd^mo: hee instituted and deuised the first Order of Knighthood, which had bin seene in France, and which hee named Of the Gennet, in regard of the Beast before described. He composed this: Order, (...) consist of sixteene Knights onely, hauing caused so m^ny Collers of Gold to be made, with three Chaines interwouen or lincked, of enamelled red Roses. A^ the end of which Coll^ hung a Gennet of Gold, (...) amelled Blacke and Red, as at the Collor of France, bordered with Gold, vpon a Terrasse or ban^ of Floures, fairely ^melled.
The first persons honored with this Order, next to him that declared himselfe the Chiefe thereof, and the Maires of the Pallace after him, of his Blood, Princes of Au^rasia, were
1. Childebrand (Sonne of Martine) Colonell of the French Infanterie, Prince by ^rname of Austrasia, Cousine-Germaine by Father and Mother, and Brother in Lawe.
2. Eudes, Duke of Aquitaine, and his two eldest Sonnes, who had followed him, ^nd fought brauely,
3. Hunaud, And
4. Gaifier.
5. Carloman, Prince of Austrasia, and of Thuringe, eldest Sonne of Mar^ell.
6. Pepin le Bref, his yonger Son, afterward chosen King of France.
7. Luitprand, Prince of Lombardie.
8. Odilon, Duke of Bauaria, And
9. Lanfrede, a great Prince in Alemaigne.
The other afterward honored with the same Order, are not named.At what time this Order of Knighthood flourished in France. This Or^er we^t vnder full sayle in France, so long as the second Ligne of our Kings issued and descended of Pepin le Bref, and of Charles the Great his Sonne) ^eld, and possessed the Crowne of France, worne onely by her Princes; ^ntill King Robert, who hauing instituted the new Order of the Starre, in ho^our of the Virgin Mary. The Starre of the Sea; that of the Gennet became vtterly a^olished.
Wee haue said, that Martell appointed the first Order of Knighthood, which ^ormerly was vnknowne in France; and which is to be vnderstood of a distinct ^rder, and acknowledged by a perticuler title. For, from all Antiquitie, Prin^es, Monarches and Common-weales, haue knowne and confessed the valour and ^agnanimitie of their Subiects and Citizens, by noates of worth and reward, as we ^aue formerly said.
As our Kings of the first Ligne gaue the Bauldricke, that is to say,The Bauldrick or Golden Girdle. the Gir^e of Gold (one of the markes or noates of Chiualrie) to their Vassailes and ^ubiects, chosen into Offices of most Fame vnder their obedience. Wee haue ^finite examples in Saint Gregory of Tours, the most auncient of all our An^alists, and namely, where hee speaketh of one Leonardus, made Knight by ^hilpericke, husband to Fredegonde. Quae furore commota iussit eum in ipsa Ecclesia ^arisiaca (in the Church of our Lady in Paris) spoliari, nudatumque vestimentis, (...) Baltheo quod ex munere Chilperici Regis habebat, discedere a sua iubet praesentia. ^he same Author saith in another place. In Lib. 10. Cap. 21. Macone Comite eunte, vt ^bitum Fisco seruitium (this was not the Annuall right of Offices, but the re^ipt of the Royall Monies, whereof the Counties were accountable) solite de^ret inferre, Filij Vaddonis praesentiam expetunt Regis, and eo coram offerunt Bal^eum magnum ex Auro Lapidibusque pretiosis ornatum, Gladiumque mirabilem, cu^s Capulum ex Gemmis Hispanicis, Auroque dispositum erat. These passages doe ^ew vs, that this degree of honor and Knighthood, calleth it selfe properly, (...) Gift Royall, which cannot be giuen but by the King himselfe, and these ^nights are distinguished from the Nobilitie, by perticuler habits of great ^hes.
Now, that these Bauldricks were not any common wearing Girdles, the same Au^or maketh it very plaine and apparant to vs. For the Nobilitie, that is to say, all ^e French in generall, vsed to weare the Golden Girdle, from whence ensued our ^ncient Prouerbe, vsed among vs.

Bonne, and commune Renommee,
Vaut mieux que Ceinture doree.
Good fame, and common Renowne,
Is more worth then a golden Girdle.

Whereas Knights wore such as were garnished with great Buckles, Studdes and Rings of pure Gold, being of great price and value: as is witnessed by the same S. Gregory of Tours.
We haue formerly obserued, that Collers giuen to Knights, were all composed of triple Chaines of Gold: such was the auncient custome, not to exceede the tri^e or ternarie number, full of misteries, noated by the Aegyptians.
Charles Martell caused those Chaines of Gold to be interwouen with Red Roses: And here you may behold a reason for it.
The auncient Gaules and French, hauing embraced the Demonomanie of the Romaines,The pretended Gods of the Gaules and French. chose for their Gods of pretention; such as corresponded best with their nature, and according to their Martiall and Militarie inclination, answerable to the knowledge of Arts and Sciences. Wherefore among all other Deities they honored perticulerly those of Mars and Mercurie: for the rest, it was but subsidiarily, and by way of superabundance. But they represented these pretended Deities, not after the Romaine manner; but according to their Philosophie, much more exalted then that of the Romaines.
The Idole of Mars, the pretended God of Warre, was mounted on a strong Pedestall of Brasse (with a round Colomne) armed at all points, the Caske or Helmet on his head, slowing with Lambrequins, and leaues of Achantha, like an antique Plume, his broad Sword in Pall naked in his hand, with Ballances vnder it. In the other hand he held a Pennon or Banner, charged with a red Rose, as the deuise and Blazon. Close by him, and as it were vpon his left thigh, leaned his Shield, made according to the French fashion, broade aboue, and finishing in a point for the end: Blazonne d'un Lyon Rampant bien Arme, and Lampasse. Au d^uant de la Cuirasse estoit de relief vn Ours en colore and f^rie. Such was the presentation of this pretended God Mars in his Temples, as well at Mont-martre, as elsewhere. As also in Germanie, on Le Mont d'Eresberg, that is to say, Mont de Mars, adored by the auncient French and Germaines, vnder the name of Erminsull, in this Temple (the most remarkeable of Germanie) a^ Merspourg, destroyed by our Emperour Charlemaigne, in the yeare of Grace, Seauen hundred seauentie two, according to the testimonie of our best and auncient Annalists. Carolus Saxoniam bello aggressus Eresburgum Castrum cepit, and Idolum Saxonum, quod vocabatur Erminsull, destruit.
The Temple of Mar^ on Mont-martre neere to Paris.Now, as concerning the Temple on the top of Mont-martre neere Paris, buil^ (as is beleeued) in the Reigne of Augustus, successour to Iulius Caesar: it contin^ed in full and firme condition, vntill it was thunder-smitten from Heauen, and left in such estate, as was to be seene in the yeare Nine hundred fortie foure, and as we learne by Floardus in his Chronicle. Tempestas nimia facta est in agro Parifiaco, and turbo vehementissimus quo parietes cuiusdam antiquissimae domus, qui validisi^ constructi cemento, in Monte qui dicitur Martyrum diu perstiterant immoti, fundit^ sunt euersi.
Some are of opinion, that this Temple of Mars aboue Paris, was the same* whereof mention is made by Vlpian the Lawyer, at the Title of such as should be instituted Heires, next to the Code Theodosian. Deos haeredes instituere non poss^mus, praeter cos quos Senatusconsulta constitutionibus Principum instituere concess^ est, sicut Iouem Tarpaeum: Apollinem Didymoeum: Sicuti Martem in Gallia; Minerua in Meliensem; Herculem Gaditanum; Dianam Ephefiam; Matrem Deorum Cybelem, quae Smyrnae colitur, and Coelestem Salinensem Carthaginis. So that it is not to be wondred at, if (during the Demonomanie of the Romaines) the Temples of these Idoles were full of riches, seeing they were capable to be instituted as Heires.
The Ballances vnder the Sword of this Idoll Mars, represented the doubtfull

^ccidents and euents of warre; victorie oftentimes inclining to the weaker side, ^or to the part of least iustice, as in the times of Caesar and Pompey.

--Quis iustior arma
Tulerit, scire nesas:

For in outward appearance, the side of greatest iustice was that of Pompey, who yet was vanquished.
Causa Victrix Dijs placuit, s^d victa Catoni.
The Red Rose emblazoned in his Banner, signified, That like as that faire Flower,The meaning of the Red Rose in the Ba^ner. pleasing to the sight and smell, lo^seth his sweet sauour and beautifull red colour, from this day to the next morning: euen so it falleth out in the successes of warre, to day fauourable, to morrow vnfortunate; because such as march vnder the ensigne of Mars, are said to haue no morrow at all, for their life stands on the instant daies determination.The Lyon is the ripe of Valour, as the Beare is of crueltie. It behoueth them therefore to be armed with exalted cou^^ge, like to the Lyon, the symbole of Valiancie, as the Beare is of crueltie, as declaring; that Warre is voide of mildnesse and pittie, carrying along with it murders and massacres, according as Homer excellently figureth it, in the Shield of his Prince Achilles.
Now for his Shield, charged with a Lyon Rampant, on a banke or hillocke of variable flowers: it represented the auncient Armes of the Gaules, as also their na^urall and martiall disposition, they hauing no other delight and contentment, but ^n Armes, search of aduentures, broiles, encounters and battailes; being alwaies Armed, at their meetings, in their Temples, yea, and at their feeding. So saith Ta^tus in his Germania: and Caesar in his Commentaries; Strabo, with other Geographers; and Atheneus, as already we haue else-where said.
Charles Martell, hauing all his life time followed the exercise of Armes,Atheneus de Coena Celt^. and ^de his memorie acceptable to the French: died in the yeare of Grace, Seuen ^undred forte and one, so saith the Chronicle of Lauresheim, vnder the said yeare. H^can^ Carolus Maiordomus diem obijt, tres filios haeredes relinquens,The death of Charles Martel. Caroloman^um, Pip^, atque Grifenem. He liued, died, and was enterred as a King among ^he Kings of France at S. Denys, the Mausolus for the Monarches of the Noble Fl^ure de Luce, and this inscription is about his Picture, as the obseruation of his power.

Dux, Dominusque Ducum, Regum quoque;
Rex sore spernit.
Non vult regnare, sed Regibus imperat ipse.

So would he ordinarily speake among his followers, That it was a more glorious ^hing to command Kings, then to Reigne himselfe.
But his renowne (otherwise immortall) became soiled with a blemish, which ^ould not be wipt off; namely, in laying his hand on the goods of the Church,Errors committed by Charles Martel. which he gaue to his Soldiours that followed him in Armes. For he was the Authour of the impropriation of Tithes, on the goods of the Church, for dischar^ing the actuall seruices of his troupes, so that these impropriated Tithes holding ^lace, and in the case of Fifes; the possessors of them were restrained and made ^ubiect to the Ban, and Arrierban, as we tearme it in France. That if they be be^ueathed, giuen or left in Mort-maine, Et ad primaeuam naturam redierint, to the Churches from whence they proceeded, by want of seruice, or in case of dutie ^o the King; they are not then only impropriations, but the detainers bound to ^he Tithes. This vsurpation brought into France by Charles Martell, and his fol^owing Kings of the second Ligne, was the cause that it reigned very little time, ^assing but as a flash of lightning, continuing only Two hundred thirtie seuen ^eares: yet this vnhappinesse lasted afterward in France, the Princes and great

Lords declaring no conscience at all, in maintaining their houses on the Churches reuennues, and with such licence, as they were not ashamed, to stile themselues Abbots of Abbeyes, which they possessed.
A garment like a Petticoate with body and skirts.So the Father of Hugh Capet, was sirnamed Hugh the white, because he pleased to goe attired in a white Gonnelle. Our Historians commonly tearmed him, Hugh the great Abbot, because he possessed the Abbeyes of S. Denys in France, of S. Germaine des prez at Paris, and of S. Martine at Tours. So in our Annales, and those of Flanders, we see that the Counts of Vermandois and of Flanders fought in ranged battailes, for the Abbeyes of S. Vuast, S. Berthin and S. Omer, titling themselues by the names of Abbots. In like manner the good Abbot of Fleury, and hee of Ferriers Loup complained, that they had threescore Religious persons to feede, and yet neuerthelesse, they had no more then the halfe part of their Abbeyes reuennues, their great Abbots enioyed all the rest. For, Abbots by profession and habite, were called but the lesser Abbots, and Princes and great Lords, were named great Abbots, who (of the Churches goods) maintained both their horse and foote Souldiors; oftentimes for troubling the repose of France, and bandying themselues against their Soueraigne Prince, in prescribing Law to him. And thus by the meanes of so many rich Abbeyes, Hugh the great Abbot, prepared the way for his Sonne Capet, to make himselfe King of France, vtterly exterminating the Ligne of the Carlo^i^gians.
The condemnation of Charles Martell.The manuscript Chronicle of the Counts of Foix, speaking of Dagobert, and of Martell, saith. We reade in Chronicles, that the said Martell is-condemned; because hee laid hands and impositions on the Tythes of Churches: as it was miraculously reuealed to (...) holy man.
Our Auncestours gaue the most part of their goods to the Church, to the end, that the poore might be nourished, and such as serued at the Altar. Churches rendered the same inheritances, to the poore kindred of the donors, as in Fee-Farme, and improuement. These Farmes of inheritance, are called in our Capitularies Praecariae, Quod praecario Laicis ab Ecclesia vtendae fruendae concederentur.
Charles Martell, Pepin le Bref, Charlemaigne, and Lewes the Debonnaire gaue these heritages in all proprietie to their Leudes, as they tearmed them; that is, to their Francs, men of Armes and Soldiours, to enioy for perpetuitie, and still as Bishopricks came to be voide, beside the impropriated Tythes.
Charles the Baulde laboured to take away this abuse, introduced for ruine of the Church, as is to be seene in the fift Booke of our Capitularies. Nemini Regum, (...) cuiquam Hominum liceat Praecarias in proprium tradere, vel commutare, vel quocunque nostro coniato (conge) vendere. And in the ninth Chapter hee ordained, that from fiue yeares to fiue yeares, description should be made to him, of the Lands appertaining to the Churches of France; because they should not come to be lost in following time, and Noble-men should not appropriate them perticularly to their owne vsurpation.
The vsurpation of the Churches goods, was brought out of Italie, long time before Charles Martell, for Pope Symmachus, first of the name, who held the Seate from the yeare fiue hundred, to the yeare fiue hundred and fifteene (vnder the reign of our great King Clouis) in the Councill which hee held at Rome, consisting of a hundred and two and twentie Bishops, complained of this disorder, and bemoaned the miserie of his time, in these words. Communis dolor, and generalis est gemitus; q^^d intra Ecclesiam, nostris, and retroactis temporibus, de inuasione rerum Ecclesiasticarum, and Sacerdotum vexatione cognouimus. For, vpon the declining of the Romaine Empire, as well in the East as West, the Emperours, hauing their wealth greatly exhausted* vpon necessitie possessed themselues of the goods of Churches, which they gaue to their Captaines, to recompence their trauailes taken in Warre, hauing no other meanes, whereby to resist against strange Nations, who in enuie one to another; hurried themselues (like an impetuous and frightfull torrent) into all Prouinces of the Empire, there to canton themselues as best they pleased, displuming (feather by feather) the poore Romaine Eagle.
Charles Martell imitating this example, possessed himselfe of the Churches

goods. The fragment of the Chronicle of Fleury, in the Tract De Maioribus Domus Franciae, speaking of the same Martell, saith. Carolus Tudes Maior Domus, and Princeps Austrasiorum, res Ecclesiarum propter assiduitatem bellorum Daicis tradidit. And Floardus, Arch-deacon of Rheimes, in his Chronicle of France, saith. Hic Carolus, cunctis, qui ante se fuerant, audacior Regibus, non solum ipsum Archiepiscopatum Rhemensem, sed etiam alios Regni Episcopatus Laicis hominibus, and Comitibus dedit. But behold here his more ample Historie and discourse, as it is recorded in the second Booke of the Historie of Rheimes, and the twelfth Chapter, in this manner.


A briefe Discourse concerning the Life and Actions of Charles Martell.
CHarles Martell, so soone as by force of Armes he was become Prince,Rigobert Archbishoppe of Rheimes expelled by Martell. and sole Maire of the Pallace of France; spoiled and expulsed from his Archbishopricke of Rheimes, the blessed Rigobert, his Godfather. For it is auouched, that hee held Charles at the Font of Baptisme, and he gaue the said Archbishopricke to one named Milo, a simple Priest, that had followed him in the Warres. This Charles, borne out of lawfull marriage, of a woman of seruile condition, as we reade in the Annales of France; was the most audacious and boldest of all the Kings his predecessors. For he haue not onely thus the Archbishopricke of Rheimes;Martell borne out of lawfull marriage. but likewise all the other Bishoprickes of France, to Countes and Laye-men: so that the Bishops were bereft of all meanes, for exercising the workes of Charitie, not hauing whereupon they might well liue.
But he was chastised by the iust iudgement of God, for the euill by him committed, and perpetrated against the holy man Rigobert, as also the Churches of Iesus Christ, whose iust displeasure fell vpon his head. For we learne by an Historie and true Relation, that S. Eucherius, sometime Bishop of Orleans, whose body is buried in the Monastery of S. Treudon; this holy Bishop being (on a day) in feruent prayers, was rapt into an extasie, and carried into the other world. Where, among other wonders which he saw there, God gaue such permission, that he beheld Charles Martell tormented in eternall flames.
S. Eucherius meruailing at an accident so strange, and demanding the subiect of the Angell his conducter; he receiued this answere.A strange vision seene by S. Eucherius. That this Prince was condemned for euer into Hell fire, beuause he had laid hand on the goods of the Church, which he had abandoned to his Souldiours, and imployed for the vse of prophane persons. S. Eucherius returning againe into this world, sent (in writing) this vision to S. Boniface, Archbishop of Maguntia, Legate then in France: and to Folrardus, Abbot of S. Denys the Areopagite, neere Paris, Arch-Chaplaine and Apocrisiarie, that is to say, great Almoner to King Pepin le Bref. And to assure them of his Relation, he sent them to cause the Tombe or Sepulcher of Charles Martell to be opened, for he dyed at Vermene, neere to Yssoire in Auuergne, and was brought for buriall to S. Denys in France. To which place Boniface and Folrardus being come, they procured the Tombe to be opened, and found it so blacke with smoake, as if fire had bin burnt in it, and a very dreadfull Serpent, but no bones at all.
At the end of the workes of the learned Bishop Yues de Chartres, is a Chronicle added by an ignorant Author (for it fauoureth nothing, neither commeth neere the learning and stile of Yuo Carnotensis) who vnaduisedly attributeth this admirable Historie to King Charles the Simple, where as it is onely meant of Martell. And yet his testimonie may serue vs to second Floardus.

Karolus Ludouici Filius Rex Francorum Vicesimus quartus, regnauit Annis XXXVII. Huic Tutudis, quod Martellus dicitur, nomen est inditum, and quia in Regno suo vix, aut raro pacem habuit, ideo res Ecclesiarum suis militibus in stipendium contulit maxima ex parte. Qui mortuus, in Ecclesia beati Dionysij Martyris sepultus a sinistra parte Altaris maioris, visus est noctu in specie Draconis, effracto sepulchro, per vitream Ecclesiae, cum magno terrore exijsse.

Atheists and pretended Reformists of our Age, doe make a mockerie of this Historie, and say, that it is a meere Fable, inuented by the Monkes; who ordenarily place in the Catalogue of Saints, such as are beneficiall to them, and when any such matter happeneth; it must not be held or reputed for a miracle. Because it is the vniuersall Doctrine of Hippocrates, and the Schoole of Physitions; Angue^ gigni ex medulla spinae hominis. Of the marrow in the hacke-bone of men, Serpents are engendred. So saith ^^inie, following the opinion of Pythagoras, and reported by the amourous Poet Ouid.

Sunt qui cum clauso putrefacta est spina sepulchra,
Mutari credunt humanas Angue medullas.

And that likewise out of the Graue of Anchises, Father to Aeneas, issued a great Serpent, according as Virgill writeth.

Dixerat haec: aditis cum lubricus Anguis ab imis.
Septem ingens gyros, septena volumina traxit,
Amplexus placide tumulum lapsusque per auras.

These are naturall reasons, which neuerthelesse hinder not the effects of miracles, and things monstrous; as is testified not onely by our auncient Annalists, but Strangers also, namely Rhegmon, and other writers of good noate. And in the reading of this Historie, Kings and Princes of the earth may learne, and feare the iust iudgements of God, who forbiddeth the throwing of precious Stones to Swine; that is to say, giuing Church Benefices to prophane persons. For, oftentimes we see them to be possessed by enemies to the Church, and of contrarie Religion; by Bawdes, Strumpers and Panders, to the great scandale and dishonor of Princes, which so basely bestow them
Charles Martell hauing bin but Maire of the Pallace, and Duke of the French; had for Successour his Sonne Pepin le Bref,The ceasing of the O^der of the Gennet exalted King of France, as wee haue said: And this Order of the Gennet was in maine strength then, and during all the length of the second Ligne, without proceeding any further.


A new Order of Knighthood in fauour of the Frizons, called, The Order of the Crowne Royall.
^ Ordre de la Coron^e R^yal^.CHarlemaigne, to honour them of Friezland, who had carried themselues valiantly in his Armies two and thirtie yeares, during which time, hee made warre on the Sesnes (which were the auncient Saxons, against whom the warre had beginning, from the time of the descendants of Clouis, and namely, vnder Clothaire the second, Sonne of Chilpericke and Fredegonde) who had ouercome them in a ranged Battaile, not leauing any one aliue, longer then his Sword: made them Knights of a new Order of Knighthood, which he established in the fauour of them, called The Order of the Crowne Royall. Because the Knights of this Order, vsed to weare on their breasts a Crowne Royall, in embroderie of Gold. The Gouernour of the Countrey, whom they called Potestat, after the manner of Italie, had power to giue this Order of the Crowne, to such as (for a certaine time) had followed the Armies of France, and warfared for our Kings, as well in Italie, as in Germanie.The (...) this Order. And we vnderstand, that in those times when our Kings made Knights, they gaue them a blow or cuffe on the eare; as Bishops vse to doe, in conferring the Sacrament of Confirmation. Martinus Hanconius, in his Historie of Frisia* reporteth the Pragmaticall Sanction of our King Charlemaigne, touching the Institution of this Order of Knights of the Crowne, in these words.

I^super statuimus vt si ex ipsis sustentationem habuerint, vel militare voluerint, dicta Potestas eis Gladium circumcingat, and dato eisdem, sicut consuetudinis est, Ma^^

Colapho, fic Milites faciat, eisdemque similiter iniungendo praecipiat, vt deinceps More Militum Sacri Francia Regni, vel imperij incedant armati, eo quod consideramus si prae^icti Frisones secundum staturam corporis and formam ei^ a Deo, and Natura datam sic mili^auerint, cunctis in orbe terrarum militibus sua fortitudine, ingenio, and audacia (dummo^o vt praedictum est sint armati) facile praecellent, and praeualebunt. Qui Frisones signum suae ^ilitia a dicta Potestate recipere debent, in quo Corona Imperialis insignum suae libertatis (...) nobis concessae debeat esse depicta. Datum Romae in Lateranensi Palatio, Anno Dominicae Incarnationis Octogentissimo secundo.

The said Charlemaigne wondrously enlarged the Kingdome of France. For, as Aeghinard saith in the life of this Prince, In foure and fortie yeares space (which he ^eigned) he added double thereto so much, as king Pepin his Father had left him, ^nd that was Gaule, limited by the Riuers of Rhine and Loire; of the Ocean Sea on the one side, and that of Maiorica on the other; that part of Germanie, which is comprised between Saxonie and the Riuers of Rhine, Danubie and Salas, which make the deuision betweene the Turingeans and Sarabes, from the Orientall French, wh^ch is Franconia from Germanie, and the Kingdome of Bauaria,How greatly Ki^g Charlemaigne enlarged France. whereto Charlemaigne annexed Aquitaine and Gascoignie, withall the bounds and ^kirts off and from the Pyrenean mountaines, so farre as to the Riuer Iberus, which ^unneth thorow Spaine, taking sourse or originall in the Kingdome of Nauarre, and ^fterward watering Arragon, looseth it selfe at Tortosa in the Sea of Maiorica. He conquered likewise all Italie, from Thurin so farre as the lower Calabria; Saxonie ^he great Prouince of Germanie; the two Panoniaes, that is to say, Hungaria and Austria; Denmarke from beyond Danubie; Sclauonia and Dalmatia, the mari^ime Cities and Townes only excepted, which he left (in courtesie) to be possessed ^y the Emperours of Constantinople. From thence he proceeded to the conque^ing of barbarous Nations, which inhabited betweene the Riuers of Rhine, and of Vistula the Ocean Sea, and wide spreading Danubie: speaking very well the same Languages, but their humours and customes being contrarie, he made them his tri^utaries. The principall People of those strange Nations, were then nominated and ^alled Veltabes, Soraues, Abotrites and Boemes, against whom he fought valiantly, ^o ranke them vnder his obedience: the rest (in farre greater number) voluntarily ^ubmitting themselues to be gouerned by the French Empire.
Charles Martell, Pepin le Brefe his sonne (of whom it is said,The three valiant Princes, of the French. that
Maior in exiguo regnabat corpore Virtus)
And Charlemaigne, were valiant Princes: but their Successours more peaceable, ^hen warriors. And the Crowne of France* (with diuers successes) was held by ^he descendants of Charles Martell, euen as before him, by the same accidents, it had beene gouerned by the Merouingians. For like as the Ligne of Meroueus failed in ^he person of Childericke the third, the last of nineteene Kings descended of Clouis, (which Childericke was shorne a Monke in the Monasterie of S. Hemerian of Reganespourg, at this day called Ratisponna, in the Duchie of Bauaria, as is recorded by Auentine in his Annales:) So in the like manner, of Charles Martell failed the Ligne at the eleuenth King, in the person of Lewes the fift, tearmed, Doe nothing,Lewes the loiterer, or Doe nothing. or the Hartlesse loiterer. Being so named, because the Annalists of the time obserued all his Reigne, and comprehended it vnder these three words; Ludouicus nihil ^ecit. Likewise he reigned but one yeare, deceasing at Compeigne, (where he is buried in the Abbey of S. Cornille with King Lewes the Stammerer, Emperour) the ^2. of Iune, in the yeare of Grace 988. And so the race of the Carlouingians continued but two hundred thirtie and seuen yeares; and that of the Merouingians reigned in France three hundred yeares continuance, to wit, from the yeare of Grace 450. when Meroueus assured his conquest on this side the Rhine in the Gaules; vntill the yeare 749. So that according to the Chronicle of Lauresheim, which I haue, Bouchard, Bishop of Wirtzbourg, and Folrard Priest, afterward great Almo^ner to Pepin le Briefe, were sent to Rome to Pope Zacharie, to haue his aduise. Because it had beene called into question, for proceeding to the new election of a

King, and they made choice of Pepin le Brief, Maire of the Pallace of France, who supported all the burden of the Warres, reiecting the descendants of Clouis, without vertue, voide of courage and sprightly valiancie. Zacharie gaue his opinion, answerable to the deliberation of the States.The Popes answer to the message. Melius esse illum eligere Regem quod quem summa potestatis tota consisteret, quam qui Regis nomen tantum, sed null^ virtute Regie potestatis haberet. Whereupon, the yeare following, the same generall States assembled at Soissons (called by Athicus, Augusta Suessonum) and Pepin le Brief was there declared,Lewes the fift last King of the second Ligne. elected, and crowned King of France.
So by the cowardlinesse and negligence of Lewes the fift, last King of the second Ligne; by resolution of the Generall States of France, met together at Noyon, in the remarkable yeare, obserued in the last Chapter of the former Booke; Hugh Capet, a valiant and wise Prince, was elected first King of the third Ligne, which only hath continued (euen to this present day) more then both the two former.
Indeed Lewes the Debonnaire, sonne to Charlemaigne, was his Successour in the French Empire; but not in his good fortunes. He left three sonnes, namely, Lathaire, Lewes, and Charles, called the Baulde, of diuers natures, bandying and contending each against other, for enuie and desire of Reigning, without companion.
--Omnisque potestus impatiens consortis erit.
We finde the Salique Law to be in practise vnder the said Debonnaire. Because the said Emperour had by his first Wife Ermingarde three sonnes; to wit Lothaire, who was Emperour; Lewes King of Germanie, and Pepin King of Italie. This Pepin had espoused the daughter to the Count of Mastric,The issue of Pepin King of Italie. Thiebert, of whom he begat two sonnes, and two daughters, married to the Counts Reginard and Girard. The sonnes were Pepin, King of Aquitaine after his Father, and Charles: but these two Brethren (for their w^cked gouernment) were shorne Monkes; the one, namely Pepin, at S* Mard of Soissons; and the other at Prum in Flanders. And by the ciuile death of th^se two brethren Princes, the Kingdome of Aquitaine, (which then contained Guienne* Gascoigne, Biscaye, Arragon, Catalogna, and Cerdaignia) were by Charles the Baulde re-vnited to the Crowne of France; with exclusion of the two Sisters to the said Princes Pepin and Charles, as is obserued by Aimonius the Monke.The French Empire deuided into three portions.
The three sonnes that remained liuing, of Lewes the Debonnaire, to wit, Lothaire; Lewes, and Charles, sirnamed the Baulde, after many furious and bloudie fight^; accorded themselues, in the Assembly made at the Citie of Verdun, in the yeare of Grace 643. And there they deuided the French Empire (left by Charlemaigne) into the extendure before noted, and into three portions, which yet were vnequall.
Lothaire, the eldest sonne, had for his part, with the Title of Emperour (which after his death came to Charles the Baulde) Rome, Italie, Prouence, and the Lands which marched on the parts of the Baulde; and of Lewes of Germanie, afterward, the said portion was called Lotaringia, and now Lorraine, affer the name of the said Lothaire.
Lewes had Orientall France, which comprehended the most part of Germanie, and finished at the great Riuer of Rhine.
Charles, King of ^rance, tearmed the Baulde, had in his Lot and portion, Occidentall France sometimes called Neustria, and Westria: which extended from the O^ean Armori^a, so farre as the Riuer of Meuse. This is that which is properly called France, without any other addition.
(...) the (...) Kingdom.This deuision was the total ruine of the French Empire, and the depressing of her prime Greatnesse; to verifie the Oracle of Truth it selfe, that Omne Reganus (...) se deuisum desolabitur: Euery Kingdome deuided against it selfe, shall be desolated. And the deuision of the same Kingdome, by the sonnes of Clouis, might haue enstructed those three French Princes, in the misfortunes which fell vnto them, and to the Subiects, bandied and deuided one against another, by many bloudie ciuill warres.

Hereof (by good and iust cause) complained Hincmarus, Archbishop of Rheimes, ^n the Epistle which he wrote to the Emperour and King of France, Lewes the Stammerer, second of the name, Sonne to the said Charles the Baulde. Mortuo Lo^hario post multas controuersias, facta est diuisio inter Patrem vestrum Ludouicum, and ta^e deuenerunt miseriae, sicut vobis sunt nota; and hoc Anno talis pronenit lugenda infeli^itas, quae per vniuersum pene Mundum, and per futura tempora merito erit in oppro^rium.
Giuing Councell by this Epistle of his, to take example by the mischiefes,How dangerous the dismembering of a State is. hap^ening through the meanes of this Deuision. For, to dismember a State into diuers ^etrarchies, vnder pretence of Natures Law, and aduancement of the Sonnes: ^s, as if we should from the body of man, cut off a legge or an arme, which maketh ^t altogether impotent and deformed. But the acknowledgement of these passed ^normities, gaue foundation to the Law of the Kingdome, wisely and religiously ^rdained by Hugh Capet, Authour of our Kings of the third Ligne.

That in following times, the Title of King should not be giuen, but to the Eldest Sonne ^f the Kings of France, Who hath right and Soueraigne power ouer his other Brethren, and ^ho ought to reuerence him as their Father and Lord, not hauing any assured portion or part^ge, but by his grace and fauour. If he giue them any Lands and Seigneuries, in title of ^ounger Bretherens portions: the said younger Sonnes shall hold and redeliuer them to the ^rowne of France; and they are not to be giuen them, but with charge of Hommage, ^urisdiction, and Rights Royall, and as reuersions of the said Crowne, deceasing without ^eires mayles, begotten and borne in loyall Marriage.




The Order of the Starre: Instituted at Paris by King Robert, sirnamed, The Deuout. In the yeare 1022.
CHAP. II. Of the Order of the Starre.
WEe haue seene in the precedent Treatise, the Crowne of France to change from the Ligne of the Merouingians, into the Ligne of the Carolouingians. In this whereof we are now to speake, we shall behold it fastened to a chaine of Diamonds in Coelum Empirium, and placed fixedly on the head of Hugh Capet, Father of Robert (the ^biect of this discourse) to continue, euen to the Worlds end, as proper inheri^^nce to them of his Bloud and Ligne.
Most part of Moderne Historians doe put to Compromise,The originall and descent of Capet questioned. the Originall and ^escent of the said Hugh Capet: because they would deriue him from that badde ^ranch Vitichinde, or Witikind the Sesne, that is to say, a Saxon by Nation, against ^hom our Emperour Charlemaigne made warre so long a time. And that of ^im descended Robert the Saxon, Graund-father to the said Capet; who by force ^nd violence possessed himselfe of the Crowne of France, against Charles of Lor^^ine, Vnckle to Lewes the fift, last King of Charlemaignes descendants, as ^ey say.
This his muddie and rustie opinion, worme-eaten with age,Fables numbered only to disturbe the peace of France. yet raised vp in ^ur times, by infinite mercinarie pennes, to trouble the peace of France with

their mustie pretensions. In like manner, that a certaine Bourgonguon, named of S. Iulian, (by a new Paradox) would make it to be credited, that the same Capet receiued birth of an other Hugh, the published bastard Sonne of Lothaire the second, whom Sigibert vnder the yeare 886. writeth to haue his eies pluckt out, and was then shorne Monke in the Abbey of Prum in Flanders, where he ended his daies, without leauing any issue. Hugo Filius Lotharij Regis ex Waldrada pellice, paternum Lotharingiae regnum rebellando assequi sperans, ab Henrico excoecatur, and nouissime in Monachum Prumiae attondetur. If Hugh Capet had beene borne of this Bastard to King Lothaire, and of Waldreda his Concubine: the said Capet neuer would (so soone as he saw himselfe established in the Kingdome of France) haue published the Decree against the Bastards of our Kings, obserued yet to this day, without any contradiction.
An exact Order set downe against the bastards of Kings.Capet hauing obserued the faults in the State, concerning Kings his Predecessors, that the aduancement of their Bastards had alwaies beene the cause of troubles in France, hauing equally taken part with the Legitimate; yea, and exalted to the Royall Throne, as Lewes and Carloman, Bastards of the Stammerer: he ordained,

That thence-forward, Euery Bastard should not only be reiected from the Crowne: but likewise from auouching the Sir-name of France.

And to manifest the obseruation of this holy Ordinance, it is sixe hundred yeares and more since it was published; and it is not read, That any Bastard of France, or issued or descended from the Sonnes of France, hath been legitimated and allowed. But Iohn Count of Dunois, Bastard Sonne of Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, who for his great and worthie seruices done to the Crowne, was by the Generall States of France (assembled by command of King Charles the seuenth, called the victorious) declared Legitimate, and he and his descent proclaimed Princes, and all their rancke assigned immediatly after the Princes of the Bloud.
The same Authour of S. Iulian (supported by the Arch-Deacon of Verdun, misled with the same Doctrine) hath continued the descent of the Illustrous house of Lorraine,Concerning the descent of the House of Lorraine. from Father to Sonne of the said Charles of Lorraine. And yet notwithstanding, it is a matter most certaine, that Otho, only Sonne to the said Charles of Lorraine, died without Children. Which hath made a great Ligne, desciphered at large by the Authour of the Genealogie of S. Arnoull of Mentz, who liued vnder the Reigne of the good King S. Lewes, as it is described by himselfe. But returne it to the Originall of Hugh Capet, according to truth.
The Fragment of Maires of the Pallace of France, deriued from the Abbey of Ple^ry; Paulus Diaconus, in his Treatise of the Bishops of Mentz; Theganus, Coad^tor to the Arch-Bishop of Treuers, and all the auncient Annalists of Germanie and France, by a common consent doe instruct vs: That the two famous Families of the Carlouingians, and of the Capets, are descended of Ansbert the Senatour, Lord of the Auncient House, and whose Predecessors, at such time as the Romaines gouerned the Gaules, had beene Senatours and Gouernours of Au^sia, afterward named Orientall France. They erre then, that make this A^ the Senatour to be Auberon, the Graund-sonne to Clodion, King of France: F^ this Ansbert was of the Gaules Nation, sirnamed (but very vnconueniently) the Romaine.
This Ansbert was issued from an House so Auncient, that to know the pri^ Originall thereof,Anchises the father of Aeneas. and to gratifie the same: it is referred to the Troyan Anchiser, the Father of Aeneas, the pretended Founder of the Romaines. All these Fables, let vs leaue them.
The truth of this Genealogie speaketh, that this Ansbert, sirnamed the Senatour, was Maire of the Pallace of Austrasia, who had to wife Blitilda, daughter to the King of all France (as well Westrienne, as Neustrienne, and Bourgongne.) Clothaire the Great, second of the name, only Sonne to Chilperick and Fredegonde. It is the same Clothaire,Clothaire the Great King of all France. represented on the Frontispiece of the Church at Paris, holding an Apple or Ball in his hand (according as the Romaine Emperours are figured) to shew, that he was the only King of all France.
Of this Marriage of Ans^t

and Blitilda, was borne ^nauld, Maire likewise of ^e Pallace of Austrasia, Fa^er to S. Arnoull, Bishop of Mentz.
The said Saint Arnulph, be^re hee became a Bishop,Arnulph restorer of the Abbey of S. Denis in France. ^as Gouernour to King Da^bert, first of the name (Re^rer of the Abbey of Saint ^enis in France) to whom ^e was Cousine Germaine, regard of his Grand-mo^er Blitilda, and by him ^eated Maire of the Pal^ce of Austrasia; in place Sadragesilus, made Duke ^f Aquitaine. Saint Arnulph ^d to wife Doada, daugh^r to a Duke of Saxonie, ^ter whose decease, hee ^oke holy Orders, and so ^came Bishop of Mentz. ^he Fragment of Maires (...) the Pallace, saith; Fu^unt Maiores Domus ex qui^s Generatio Regalis proces^. Primus quidem Ansber^ Senator, qui ex Blithilde ^undi Clotharij, genuit Ar^dum patrem Sancti Arnulphi, tandem Metensis Episcopi, qui genuit Anchisem ^trem Pipini.
Saint Arnulph had three Sonnes by Doada the Sesne, or Saxon, to wit, An^ises, Walachises, and Clodulphus; according as we learne by Paulus Diaconus, ^fore alledged, in these words. Arnulphus ex nobilissimo, fortissimoque Franco^m Aemmatestortus, ita Dei Ecclesiae praefuit, vt and Palatij moderator sub honore Ma^ Domus existeret. Hic iuuentutis suae tempore ex legitimi matrimonij copula tres ^lios procreauit; Anchisum, Walachisum, and Clodulphum.
Ansegisus, eldest Sonne to Saint Arnulph, had to wife Begga, sister to Saint ^rtrude de Niuelle in Brabant, daughter to Pepin Heristell the Auncient, a great ^d powerfull Lord in Austrasia. Of which marriage was borne Pepin, Maire of ^e Pallace of Austrasia, called le Gros (for then and in those times,The reason of sir-names in elder times. men had no ^her sir-names, but of their imperfections, or vertues, as well of the minde, as bo^e) by reason of his fat and great corpulence.
Pepin the Auncient, had beside two daughters, a sonne named Grimoald, Maire the Pallace to Sigibert, King of Austrasia, which he possessed by his Maire. And ^ing himselfe without Children; he adopted (as his Sonne) Hildebert,Hildebert son to Grimoald. Sonne to (...) Maire Grimoald.
After this adoption (which was done in the West parts, by handling the ^ard and Haire of the adopted Sonne, and in the East, by putting on his ^irt) Sigibert had a Sonne, named Dagobert, whom Grimoald and his Sonne ^ldebert (after the death of the King his Father) excluded forth of his Coun^y into Scotland, where he was shorne a Monke, so that no more speech was ^rd of him. And in his place, Hildebert was elected King of Austrasia,Hildebert chosen king of Austrasia. a King^me whereof he had no long enioying: because Archambauld (Ercebaldus) ^ire and Count (that is to say, Gouernour of Paris, Founder of the Chapell

of S. Christopher in the Citie) vnder King Clouis, second of the name, wer^ against those pettie Kings and Tyrants, slew Hildebert in the field, and brough^ Grimoald prisoner to Paris, where he was executed for his fellonies. And so, (...) whole ample succession of Pepin Heristell, fell to his daughter Begga, wife (...) Ansegises. For this cause Paulus Aemilius calleth her the only daughter; as she was from the death of her Father, and of the profession of her holy Sister (...) Gertrude.
Pepin le Gros, sonne to Ansegises and Begga, was Maire of the Pallace of Austrasia,The two sons of Pepin le Gros, and their portions. after the death of Martine, his Cousine Germaine by the Fathers side* He espoused Plectrude, and of her begat two sonnes, Drogo, that is Dreux, dying young; and Grimoald, whom he made Maire of the Pallace of Neustri^ that was Occidentall France, whereof, Paris was the Capitall Citie, and portion of the eldest; as Orientall France, called Westria, was that of the youngest.
Moreouer, he had by Alpaida, his Concubine, sister to Dodon (who stil^ himselfe Maire of the Pallace of Austrasia, and who caused Saint Lambert (...) Liege to suffer Martyrdome) Charles, sir-named Martell (subiect of the Discourse of the Order of the Gennet) who hauing exterminated the legitimate sonnes of his Father, and published (as King) Theodorick de Cheeles, incapable to hold the Crowne of France: was made Duke, Prince of the French, and their King in effect.
Charles Martell maried Bertha, sir-named with the Great or Polte foote, daughter to Martine, Maire of the Pallace of Austrasia, his Cousine, sister to Childebr^^^ and Colonell of the French Infanterie, as we haue said in the precedent Chapter. In this marriage he had Pepin le Bref,The birth of Pepin le Bref, sir named the Dwarfe or little man. called and sir-named the Dwarfe, or little man, in regard of his small stature: And Carloman, who yielded himselfe to be a Monke at Mont Cassin in Italie, being frghited with the report of his Fathers damnation. The Auncient Annalist saith; Carolus Martellus genuit Pipinum Nanum, and Carloman^ post Monachum.
The marriage and issue of Pepin le BrefPepin the Dwarfe, otherwise called the little man, married Bertrada, daughter (...) the Emperor of Constantinople Heraclius, by whom he had two sons and one daughter named Gisla, Abbesse of Argentueil, in Latin Gemes, about two leagues from Pari^, of whom A^ghinard speaketh. He had by a Concubine other Children, among which were Gilan, Arch-bishop of Rouen, and Grifon, whose eies were caused to be plock out, by his Brethren Charles and Carloman; because he would not liue in peace, but raised still new troubles in France. Theganus, in the life of Lewes the Debonnair, saith. Sanctus Arnulphus cum esset in iuuentute Dux genuit Ansegisum Ducem; A^segisus Dux genuit Pipinum Seniorem and Ducem (the word Senior in our Auncient Annalists, is not alwaies to be vnderstood the auncient or elder, but signified Lord also. In the Oathes of Hommage and fidelitie; Seniori meo Regi (...), etc.) Pipinus Senior, and Dux genuit Karolum Seniorem, and Ducem: Karolus Se^^ and Dux genuit Pippinum quem Stephanus Pontifex consecrauit, and vnxit in Rege^ Pippinus Rex genuit Karolum quem Leo Papa Romanus consecrauit and vnxit ad ^peratorem.The true Genealogie or descent of Charles Martell. Ansegises was Father to Pepin le Gros, Father of Charles Martell, Father of Pepin le Bref (sacred the second time by Pope Stephen, at S. Denys (...) France) Father of Charles the Great, and of Carloman, who after the death of King Pepin their Father, were elected and Sacred Kings of France; to wit, Charles in the Church of Noyon, at the entrance whereof (on the North fide) is to be seene an auncient Table, which representeth the said Sacring: and Carloman at Soissons. The Chronicle of Lauresheim, saith; Pippini Regis (...) Carolus, and Carolomanus consensu omnium Francorum Reges creati, and Carolus (...) N^uiomago Ciuitate, Carolomanus in Suessiona insignia Regni susceperunt. The (...) of Carloman became in short time to be quite extinct: But for
Charlemaigne, he had a Sonne, Lewes the Debonnaire, first of the name, King and Emperour, Father of
Lothaire, Emperour, King of Italie.
Lewes, King of Bauaria; And
Charles the Baulde, King of France, and Emperour, Father of
Lewes the Stammerer, second of the name, King of France, and Emperour, who marrying in the concluding of his daies, had by Adeleida, that is Alix,Charles the Simple borne after his Fathers death. sister to the King of England, a Sonne Posthumus, named Charles the Simple, third of the name, King of France, in whom ended the Greatnesse of the House of Charlemaigne. The said Stammerer had by Ansegarda, his Lady in amorous embracements (before they were married) two Bastards, Lewes and Carloman, who being ^ome to age at the death of their Father; vsurped perforce the Crowne of France, and stiled themselues Kings.
Charles the Simple, so named in regard of his deiected spirit, had to wife Ogina,Why he was called Charles the Simple. daughter to Elstan, King of England, and of her begot Lewes, sir-named of Be^ond the Sea, because he was nursed in England. This Lewes the fourth, espoused ^he eldest daughter to the Emperour Otho the first (eldest sonne to Henry,Henry the Bird-catches. the Fow^er or Bird-catcher, Emperour, and Duke of Saxonie) named Herberga: by whom ^e had two Sonnes, Lothaire, King of France in number, and Charles who was Duke of Lorraine, making himselfe Tributarie to the Emperour, and a mortall enemie to ^he French.
Lothaire left Lewes the last, fift of the name, but last King of France, of the de^endants of Charlemaigne; whose Ligne failed in the said Lewes, blamed with the ^r-name of Loyterer, or Doe nothing, who reigned but one yeare. Et hoc mortuo sine ^beris translatum est Regnum ad Hugonem Capetum Filium Hadeuuidis, so saith our ^ncient Annalist. You behold here the descendants of Ansegises, eldest sonne to (...) Arnulph of Mentz: Let vs now speake of the younger Sonne, of whom are de^ended the most Christian Kings of France, in the third Ligne, which reigneth hap^ly at this present.
Clodulphus the third sonne (for the second was of the Church) of S. Arnulph ^f Mentz, had to wife Amalbertha, daughter to a Count of Brabant, and of her ^egat many Children. After whose decease (following the steps and example ^f his Father) he yielded himselfe to the Churches seruice, and was Bishop of Mentz.
His eldest sonne Martin was Duke, that is to say,Martin, eldest sonne to Clodulphus Duke of Austrasia. Gouernour of Austrasia (as his ^ather formerly had beene) intimately affected for his vertues, by Sigibert, King of ^ustrasia, sonne to Dagobert the first. After whose death, and of his Maire Grimoald, ^nd his sonne Hildebert, the people of Austrasia deuided the power of the Maire of ^e Pallace into two parts, in sted of one: electing Martin, sonne of Clodulphus, ^nd Pepin le Gros, both Cousins Germane by the Fathers side. These two Maires ^ere summoned by Ebrouin, Maire of the Pallace to Theoderick, King of Neustriae ^nder colour (and his Maire in effect) to obey him. Vpon their refusall, he met ^em in Armes, neere to Laon in Laonnois, where the two Cousins were vanqui^ed, Pepin saued himselfe by flight; but Martin remaining Prisoner, was slaine (in ^ld bloud) by Ebrouin, who would needes be sole Maire in all France. As he did ^e like to Lendegisilus, Maire of the Pallace, and Count of Paris, after the death of ^rchembauld, Founder of S. Christophers Church in the Citie of Paris. After^ard, Ebrouin was slaine by Hermenfroy, a French Gentleman: as a iust punish^ent inflicted on him, for so many cruelties by him committed, on the Princes ^d great Lords of France, from time to time.
Martin, eldest sonne to Clodulphus, espoused Beatrix, daughter to the Count and ^ouernour of Ardenne, who was named Ebo, and by her he had diuers Children, ^e eldest whereof was
Childebrand, Duke of Austrasia, Cousine Germaine to Pepin le Gros, Father Charles Martell, and Mary de Bertha, sister to the said Childebrand, which is ^e reason, why the Continuer of Saint Gregorie Victor of Tours,Errors committed by some Historians concerning Charles Martell. and Gagui^s, doe call Childebrand, Father of Charles Martell. And this gaue subiect to (...) Tillet, to mistake himselfe, and say, that the fore-named Childebrand was ba^rd Brother to Pepin le Gros; and to Nicholas Gilles in his Annals of France, (...) call him Vnckle by the Mothers side to Charles Martell. If hee would be ^edited, he should say, that this Bertha, sister to Childebrand, was wife to

Pepin le Gros, which he can no way finde: because he had none but Plectrude, and therefo^e he should not reade him Maternall Vnckle to the Children of Martell, to whom he was Brother in Law, and Cousine by the Fathers side. This Childebrand succeeded in the honours of his Father, as well as in his valiancie. For he is renowned by all our Historians, for his dexteritie in managing Armes, whereof he made good apparance in the battaile of Tours, against the Sarazine Abdiramo, where that great Thunderbolt of warre Martell (as Paulus Aemilius saith) ordaining and disposing his Armie; vndertooke himselfe to conduct the horse-Troupes, and gaue that of the French Infanterie to Childebrand his Cousine and Brother in Law, Colonell of the said Infanterie. Also, he had the honour of that victorious day; and, for recompence of his vertue, was first honoured (after the Chiefe) with The Order of the Gennet. After the said battaile, the same Childebrand was sent against Athinus, the Sarrazine Ammirant, who had possessed himselfe of Gothia and Prouence. He shut him vp in the Citie of Auignion, famous in those daies, for the strength of her Scituation; he made it French, and constrained Athinus to saue himselfe by the Roze (so did they call the Riuer Rhosne in Auignion and Prouence) and flie to Narbona.
Thierry Count and Gouernor of France.Thierry was the only Sonne to Childebrand, nourished from his youngest yeares, in the Court of his Cousine by Father and Mother, Charlemaigne, by whom he was made Count, and Gouernour of France.

The Voiage into Spaine of Charles the Great.
DVring the voiage of Charles the Great into Spaine, the Sesnes (according to their wonted manner) reuolted from their obedience sworne to the Kings of France: being incited to doe so, by Witichind, a Danish Lord, dwelling in Saxonie. Charlemaigne at his returne, in the beginning of Summer, held his Parliament in France (which is to be vnderstood of Orientall France, in the Annales of Germanie) hauing past the Rhine at Cologne, he came to the Spring of the Riuer of Leppe,A Parliament helde by Charles the Great in his Tents. where his Tents and Pauillions were erected. And there he held his Generall Parliament, in the yeare 782. which being ended, and the Ambassadours of Denmarke and Hungaria dispatched; he repassed the Rhine, and returned into the Gaules, the Neustriau France.
Vpon this his returne, the Sesne witichind, who the yeare before had sheltred himselfe in Denmarke, his naturall Countrey: came backe againe into Saxonie, once more to make the people reuolt against Charles: to whom (at the same time) news were brought, that the Sclauonians and Sorabes, inhabiting betweene the Riuers of Saltz and the Elbe, were entred into Armes, to forrage the Marches and confines of Saxonie and Thuring, fiering euerie where.
Speedily he expedited thence Adalgisus his Chamberlaine; Geilon, Count of his Stable;The Sacred Pallace an ancient name in France. and Conrard, Count of his sacred Pallace (so in auncient times were called the Court and Castle of our Kings, as well during the first as second Ligne of our Kings, Why then should not we vse the same now?) Hincmarus, Arch-bishop of Rheimes, in the Epistle which he wrote to the King and Emperour Lewes the Stammerer, for ordaining and ruling his Court, speaking of the Pallace of our Kings, vseth these tearmes (Sacrum Palatium, Sacrum Regnum) whom he commanded to take with them the Orientall French, and the Sesnes vnder his obedience, to checke the forwardnesse of the Sorabes.
When they were entred on the Confines of Saxonie; they found all the Sesnes in Armes, conducted by Witichind, and readie to run vpon those parts of France, which were the gouernment of Thierry of Austrasia. Wherefore, they were constrained to leaue the Sorabes in peace, to deale with a much neerer enemie, and (...) marched with the Orientall French, to encounter the Sesnes where they were the encamped.
Thierry met them at the entrance of Saxonie.At the entrance of Saxonie they met Thierry, who came with his forces before the Emperours Lieutenant, of whom Paulus Amilius termeth him to

be a neere kinsman, and to whom (in qualitie of a Prince of the Bloud) appertaine the command of the Armie. The Annalist of Lauresheim, vnder the ^eare before dated, saith, Quibus (Legatis) in ipsa Saxonia obuiauit Thedericus Co^es, Propinquus Regis cum ijs copijs quas audita Saxonum defectione, raptim in Ripu^ia congregare potuit. Thiery gaue them councell to send first, and (with all di^gence) to discouer by Spies, in what place the Saxons were, to the end they ^ight the better assaile them, if commodiousnesse of the place, and his owne sea^ng, would well permit it. The Councell being allowed for good,The discretion of a prouident Commander. the chiefe ^eaders went in companie so farre as to the Mountaine of Sontall, on the North ^de whereof, the Sesnes had planted their Campe. Thierry hauing ordered his Campe, in the same place where he was arriued; Adalgisus, Geilon, and Conrard to engirt this Mountaine) passed by another way beyond the Riuer, where they ^ncamped with their Squadrons. And there calling a Councell, they concluded ^mong themselues; to set vpon the enemie, without any knowledge giuen to Thi^rry (to whom the Constable Geilon bare deadly enuie, for the intendence and supe^oritie of Commanding) as fearing, least the glory and honour of victorie, which ^hey accounted sure in their owne possession, should be attributed to him.
Ambition and enuie hauing made these Chieftaines resolute for battaile, they ^repared themselues for fight: marching (neuerthelesse) in very bad order, as if ^hey were to meddle with an enemie full of despaiting feare, ready for retreate ^nd flight; and not encamped on firme footing, or resolued to sell his skinne (...) a deare rate. On the spurre they galloped into the enemies Armie, and there ^repared themselues for pillage: whereas, on the contrarie, the enemie atten^ing them with a setled determination; enclosed them on all sides in such sort; ^hat the most part of them perished by the edge of the sword, very few re^ained, who got into the Campe of Thierry, which was on the other side of ^he Mountaine.
In this Battaile the losse was very great, in regard, that the chiefe Comman^ers lost their liues, to wit, Adalgisus and Geilon, foure Counts, and many great ^ords, to the number of twentie. Vpon these sad tidings, Charles himselfe mar^hed immediatly to the Field, with the Armie of Thierry; entred into Saxo^ie, called before him the principall Persons of the Sesnes, and made enquirie ^or the chiefe Leaders of the Rebellion. All laid the fault on Witichind, who ^fter this ouerthrow) fled for safetie into Denmarke, according to his wonted ^anner. Charles, in reuenge of this dishonour done him, discharged his anger ^n foure thousand and fiue hundred Sesnes, attainted and conuinced of disloyaltie, ^l which were beheaded in one day. Cum Witichindum tradere nequirent, eo ^uod re Perpetrata ad Normannos se contulerat, caeterorum, qui persuasioni suae mo^m gerentes, tantum facinus peregerunt vsque ad quatuor and quinquaginta millia ^aditi, and super Alaram fluuium in loco qui Ferdi vocatur, iussu Regis omnis vna ^e decollati sunt. After this reuenge so taken, Charles went and passed the Win^er, as also the Feasts of Christmas and Easter at Thion-Ville, on the Frontiers of ^uxembourg: giuing the gouernment of Saxonie to his Cousine Thierry,The Gouernment of Saxonie giuen to Thierry. who ^fter that time) was Sir-named the Saxon. Yet with this condition, that foure ^eares after, to wit, An. 786. (Witichind, and the most part of the Sesnes being sub^itted to Charlemaigne, and embracing the Christian faith) the said Thierry should ^ke to wife Iutha, the only daughter to Witichind, sir-named the Saxon:The descent of the Saxon Dukes. who thence^orward liued peaceably with his two sonnes, of whom are descended the Dukes of ^axonie, which reigne to this day.
Charlemaigne sent the same Thierry (as his Lieutenant Generall) into Hun^aria, to warre vpon the Hunnes, in the yeare 792. For, hauing deuided his ^rmie into two parts, Partem Exercitus Thederico Comiti, and Meginfredo Cubiculario (...) (marke how the Annalist of Lauresheim maketh this Prince of the Bloud, to ^arch before Meinfroy the Great Chamberlaine, and other Officers of the Crowne ^f France) committens, eos per Aquilionarem Danubij ripam iter agere iussit: Ipse cum ^arte quam secum retinuit, Australem eiusdem fluminis ripam Pannoniam petiturus ^cupauit.
Ansbert the Senatour, his Predecessours and descendants, hauing borne for Armes De Gueulles a trois Aigles d'Or, colour and mettall of the Romaine Empire: Pepin le Bref, whom the Genealogie of S. Arnulph of Mentz calleth Pepinum N^num, hauing bin exalted and Sacred King of the French, by vniuersall conse^^ of the States of the Kingdome (that is to say, of the Church, and of the Nobilitie) tooke them of France, that is to say E'Escu d'Azur seme de Fleurs de Lys d'Or, colour and mettall of France, forsaking the three Eagles, which his Predecesso^ had carried.
And the same Charlemaigne permitted to Prince Thierry, by sir-name of Austr^sia,The Armes of Prince Thierry permitted by Charlemaigne as his Predecessours were; to forsake the auncient Armes of the Familie, and to beare De Gueulles au Raiz pommette and florence d'Or, a la bordure de France: Armes which were retained from the time of Hugh Capet, who bare De France sans n^^bre; so followed by the Kings his Successors, euen to Charles the sixt, Qui les re^ a Trois Fleurs de Lys.
In the marriage of Thierry, Count of Saxonie (that is to say, Gouernour) with Iuth^ were borne a Sonne and Daughter; to wit, Hermingarde, first wife to our King and Emperour Lewes the Debonnaire;Issue of the marriage of Thierry with Iutha. and by this marriage was renewed the alliance, betweene the descendants of the two Brothers Ansegises and Clodulphus. The Son was named
Robert, called the Strong and Valiant, also sir-named the Saxon, because hee was borne in Saxonie. Our King and Emperour Charles, second of the name, and nicknamed the Baulde (The People is the ordenarie Godfather of Princes, whom they baptize with a Sir-name of their perfections and vertues of minde or body; as the Wise; the Valiant or Hardie; the Great, etc. as contrariwise, with imperfections; the Simple; the Stammerer; the Lame or Crookt backt; the Leaprous; the Good or Bad; the Blacke; the White; the Wrie-neckt; the Lewde; the Wretch; the Sullen or Dogged, and such like.) Sonne to Lewes the Debonnaire, and I^dith his second wife; caused the said Robert the Strong to come into France, to serue as a Bulwarke or defence against the Danish and Norman Rouers or Pirats, who issuing from Scandinauia, spoyled the coasts of the Ocean Sea, all along Piccardie, Normandie, Bretaigne and Aquitaine.
This Nation (then being Pagans and Infidels) began to shew themselues (immediately after the death of our Great Clouis) vpon the Marches and confines of Austrasia, conducted by a Leader, whom the Archbishop of ^ours S. Gregory Victor, in his Historie of France, calleth Cochilarius: who hauing carried his businesse but badly in this first proceeding, continued some while afterward in quiet, without seeking his fortune any where else.
Vnder the Reigne of Charles the Baulde, those Normans, that is to say, People of the North, (acknowledged vnder the name of Danes) returned to roue on the coastes of France, with most barbarous cruelty. They presumed principally on the Marches of Bretaigne, wonne the mouth of the Riuer of Loire, and vpon a Saturday, in the yeare of Grace, Eight hundred fiftie three, they surprized the Citie of Nantes,The inhumain cruelty of Pirates and Rouers massacred inhumainely the Bishop and Priests, sacked the Citie: and in the same furie, put to fire and pillage, them of Angiers and Tours, returning loade^ with most wealthie booties to their Countrey in the North. So they left France as then for a time in quietnesse; yet troubled afterward againe by the same wicked Nation, who miserably forradged the Prouinces of Tourraine and Poicton.
The reason why Prince Robert was called into France.For assurance whereof in following times, and to represse these Norman Pyrates, enemies (and riciprocally hated) of all Nations: our King Charles the Baulde, caused to come from Saxonie into France, this Prince Robert his Cousine, then esteemed (so saith Paulus Aemilius) for the most valiant Gentleman, among all the other of his time. Hee came accompanied with his three Sonnes, Thierry, Eudes and Robert; beside a good number of Gentlemen and Saxon Souldiours. The Baulde gaue him Aniou, in title of an hereditarie Countie, to him and his descendants, and the name of Marquesse on the Coastes of Bretaigne. Fecit eum Praefectum littoris Armorici, say the Annalists of those times. And concerning this

Countie of Aniou, it is to be noated, that Aniou had (in former times) bin deuided ^nto two Gouernments, by title of Counties, to wit, the Countie of Aniou beyond Maienne, whereof Angiers was the capitall Citie,Aniou deuided in two Counties. and the ordenary dwelling of ^he Count; and the other on this side Maienne, the principall place whereof was ^hasteau-Neuf. The Annales of Aniou (stuffed with Fables and old wiues tales, as well as ours) doe say, that to the Countie of Aniou beyond Maienne, belonged Counts from all antiquitie. But that on this side Maienne, was held by the Kings of France, and giuen by our King Charles the Baulde to Robert: who afterward ^so saith Iohn de Bourdigne) for defence and tuition of the Kingdome, against ^he furie and infidelitie of the Normans, then Pagans likewise, was made Count of Paris.
This Riuer of Maienne, which passeth by Laual, Chasteau-Gontier and Angiers, ^nd which it thwarteth in the midst; is called by the Poet Lucane in his descrip^ion of the Gaules, Maduana, in these fiue Verses, which are not found in the ^mpressions of Paris and Lions, but in a Manuscript, as wee haue said in the former Booke.

Pictones immunes subigunt sua rura: nec vltra,
Instabiles Turones circunsita castra coercent,
In ripis Maduana tuis marcere perosus
Andus, iam placida Ligeris recreatur ab vnda.
Inclita Caesareis Genabos dissoluitur alijs.

In the yeare eight hundred seauentie fiue, the same Normans (being lickorishly ^onging after more French booties) made another new apparance on the Coastes of Bretaigne. For resistance whereof, Marquesse Robert of Aniou, hauing to aide ^nd succour him the Duke and Gouernour of Aquitaine Lord Ranulphe, gaue them Battaile: but the said two Commanders were slaine, and massacred in the Field by ^he Normans, who well mannaging their Victorie, went and surprized the Citie of Angiers. There were they as suddenly inuested by Odo, that is, Eudes, second Sonne to the Marquesse Robert, and compelled to yeelde to the mercy of Charles the Baulde; who (in ouer-much abounding clemencie) permitted, that they should re^urne againe into Dania.
Thierry, eldest Sonne to Robert, following the Court and fortune of Lothaire,The fortunes of Thierry following Lothair King of Italie. King of Italie, eldest Sonne of the Debonnaire by his first wife Hildegard (by whose death he was Emperour, and after him so was Charles the Baulde:) This Lothaire established Thierry his Cousine, Duke and Gouernour of Bourgongne: which then (with Prouence) made part of the Kingdome of Italie, by the vnhappy partition of the Debonnaire. The Riuer of Saone deuided the French Bourgongne from the Italian, which since then hath bin named and called The French Countie, euen to this present. This Thierry left two Sonnes, to wit, Richard, Duke of Bourgongne who was Father to Raoull, or Radulph, Duke of Bourgongne, and King of France, after Eudes and Robert his Cousins by the Fathers side) and Richard also, Duke of Bourgongne, whose onely Daughter was married to Otho (Brother of Hugh Capet) to whom she brought in marriage, the Duchie of French Bourgongne,
Eudes, otherwise called Odo, second Sonne to Robert of Aniou, succeeded in the honours and titles of his Father, but with farre greater happinesse. For his valiancie, he was intirely affected by Lewes, the Stammerer, second of the name, King of France and Emperour; who gaue him the Citie and Countie of Paris, with the title of honour and preheminence of Duke of the French, and Seneschall, that is, Great Maister of France. And because Charles le Gras, Sonne to Lewes King of Bauaria, in a brauado, and to despight him, had procured himselfe to be crowned Emperour: the Stammerer lying on his death-bed (by his last will and testament) ordained and instituted the said Eudes, his Cousine by the Fathers-side, Regent of the Kingdome of France,Eudes made Regent of France. and Tutour or Guardian to the fruite which should issue from the wombe of his wife Adelaida (that is, Al^ce) of England, she being conceiued with childe foure or fiue moneths, if shee should be deliuered of a Sonne.

Declaring manifestly by this gift of Gardian and Regent, that he did not acknowledge any other Prince in his Klngdome, neerer to succeede in the Crowne of France, then the said Eudes of Aniou.
The birth of Charles the Simple.Adelaida was deliuered of a Sonne Posthumus, which was Charles, called the Simple, because he had slender endowments of minde. In regard of his minoritie in yeares; Lewes and Carloman, Bastards to the Stammerer (whom he begat of a meane Damosell,The Stammerers Bastards. named Ansegarda, that had the fauours of his youth) entitled themselues Kings of France: Reigned for a time, and are denominated in the List and Catalogue of Kings.
By the death of these two, Charles le Gras, Emperour, was called to the Kingdome by some French Lords: but being excluded by want of Iudgement* Arnoull, or Arnulph,Arnulph the Bastard Son of Carloman. Bastard to Carloman, Son to Lewes King of Bauaria, was elected Guardian for the person of the said Charles le Gras his Vnckle; in place of whom he tooke the title of Emperour. Arnoull seeing himselfe Emperour; pretended the Regencie and Tutelage of the Simple, and stiled himselfe King of France.
No stranger King of France although a Prince of the Blood.Against this Arnoull, the Noblemen of France opposed themselues, who neuer would acknowledge a strange Prince for their King, although he were of the Blood of France. So that by common consent, the French ordered with one accord, that Eudes Count of Aniou, should Reigne ouer them, during the minoritie of Charles his Pupile. According to this agreement, Eudes was Sacred King of France, by Gautier, Archbishop of Sens. Against this Sacring, young Baldwine, Count of Flanders, made opposition, who maintained his right of preferrence, as being descended in direct Ligne from Charles the Baulde, Father of Iudith his Mother, Sister to Lewes the Stammerer. Notwithstanding all his reasons, he was payed with the money of France; from the Crowne whereof all Daughters are excluded, although they be naturall and legitimate; according to the fundamentall Salique Law of the Kingdome.
The Text of the Salique Law.Successor Imperij Francorum Masculus esto.
Vnder the first and second Lignes of our Kings, Bastards haue rather bin admitted to the Crowne, then Daughters, and their legitimate Sonnes. Eudes dying, left the Crowne to the Simple, to whom it appertained by right naturall and diuine.
Robert, second of the name, Count of Paris and Aniou, brother to Eudes, maintained against the Simple, and his pertakers; that the Crowne appertained to him, by the death of his Brother, as a Prince of the Blood, legitimate and naturall Heire to his Brother. Nor did the last words of Eudes hurt or preiudice him, for acknowledging Charles the Simple, to be by (good right) excluded from the Crowne, as well for his imbecilitie, as by consent of the generall States of France, who had adiudged to the said Eudes, that there was no right or due, to depriue the hereditarie rights of Succession, by renouncing them for the profit of a person, who had formerly bin sentenced as vnworthy and vncapable. Vpon which words,Robert Sacred King of France Robert ioyning effects to them, was Sacred King of France by Herue, Archbishop of Rheimes, and made so strong a League with his kinred and friends, that death it selfe could not alter nor dissolue it. For those which proceeded of his Linage, remained (very speedily) peaceable possessors of the Crowne of France: Robert hauing (as it were) sealed it with his death, and signed it with his Blood, being slaine (to maintaine his title) in a foughten Battaile, neere to Soissons, in the yeare of Grace 922. Charles the Simple (alwayes keeping that Sir-name) deriued but small benefit from this Cadmean Victory, being hated and despised of his owne people, for his little care of gouernment, in aduancing to the height of Fortunes-wheele, his Minnion Aganon, of base and meane qualitie, preferring him with the greatest Lords of France. Who forsooke him in such sort, that keeping him prisoner at ^^ronne, he died within foure yeares after his surprizall; compelled by old Hebert, Count of Vermandois (that kept him prisoner) to resigne his Crowne to Ra^^ll or Rodolphe, Duke of Bourgongne, his God-sonne and Kinseman, who reigned some

time. Robert the second espoused the Sister to old Hebert, of whom he left a Sonne, named
Hugh the great Abbot, otherwise called the white Abbot, for reasons noated in ^he precedent Tract. Hee tooke to wife Haunida (that is Auoya) yongest daughter to the Emperour Henry the Bird-Catcher, Sister to Otho, Emperour, first of the name, and of Gerherga, wife to Lewes of Beyond the Seas, sonne of the Simple: so that the King and his Subiect were Brothers in Law by alliance. Hugh (neuerthelesse) did not forbeare to maintaine the right, which he pretended to the Crown of France. This Hugh, had by his first wife Auoya, three Sonnes; as namely,The issue of Hugh the great Abbot. Hugh Capet; Odo Duke of Bourgongne, and Henry, who by the decease of his brother Odo, became Duke of Bourgongne. In second marriage he espoused a daughter to Edward, King of England, sister to Ogina, wife to the Simple: and by her hee had a daughter, married to the Duke of Normandie, Richard sans Poeur, Sir-named Long-Legges.
Hugh, Sir-named Capet, or Capouche,Of Hugh Capet or Capouche and his arising to be King. because he was wilfull and obstinate (eldest Sonne of Hugh the white Abbot, because he delighted to weare a white Gon^elle, and white Cloake) was by consent of the generall States of France, declared, published and Sacred King of Rheimes, in the yeare of Grace 987. as we haue elsewhere said.
And so the Crowne of France passed from the Ligne of Charles the Great, descended of Ansegises, eldest Sonne to S. Arnulphe of Mentz; to that of Martine,The passage of the Crown of France from the Lign of Charlemaigne. Maire of the Pallace of Austrasia, descended from Clodulphe, yongest Sonne to the said S. Arnulphe, and was rendered peaceably to his Family (which reigned happily) in the person of the said Hugh Capet, who rendered it firme and stable to Robert the Deuout his Sonne, and to his descendants: God appearing well pleased with this translation to the Ligne of Hugh Capet, which hath already continued in ^t selfe longer time, then both the other together.
And this is the reason why William de Nangis, stopping the mouthes of the new Writers of our times (badly informed in our Historie, or purposely desiring to disguise truth, and obscure it with the vaile of lying) discourseth effectually, speak^ng of Hugh Capet: That hee was no Vsurper of the Crowne of France, but a legitimate Lord, and possessour thereof. Sed nec iste Hugo Regni inuasor, aut vsurpator aliqualiter est ^udicandus, quem ad tantam dignitatem Regni Proceres elegerunt, and euexerunt.
I let passe (vnder silence) the testimonie of the same Author, speaking of Pope ^nnocent, who In Decretali suo Ludouicum sextum (that is Lewes le Gros) qui descendit ^b isto Hugone adstruit processisse de progenie Caroli Magni, quod stare non posset, si iste Hugo de eadem progenie non descendisset.
The same Author writeth in his Chronicle of Hugh the great Abbot, Father of Hugh Capet, who hauing caused to be brought into France, the bodies of S. Riquier ^nd of S. Valery, to the Townes called by their names, and who, also to auoide the furie of the Normans, had transported them to S. Omer, in the Abbey of S. Berthin; S. Valery appeared to this Prince, and told him,The apparition of S. Valery to Hugh the great Abbot. that for the remembrance he had acknowledged of them; His Sonnes and Descendants should reigne in France vnto the seauenth Generation, that is to say, to infinite Ages. Ipsi Hugoni magno post hoc factum ^er visionem a sancto Valerico dictum fuit, quod propter hoc quod fecerat, eius Generatio ^st ipsum in Regno Francorum vsque in septimam Generationem, id est, in perpetuum reg^aret.
Very idlely then doe those Writers (enemies to the peace of France) vse their ^ercenarie tongues, and corrupted pennes, to lay a false imposition vpon truth against which no one can iustly write, so saith the great Tertullian) affirming by ^heir writings in our time: That Capet the Stranger (the Florentine Poet Dante de^erueth no answere) vsurped the Crowne of France against Charles of Lorraigne,Dante the Florentine Poet. legitimate and naturall heire thereof. And that this vsurpation made contrary to all rea^on, of a Subiect against his Soueraigne Prince, could not hold any auaileable ti^le of prescription, or lawfull possession; whatsoeuer immemorable length of time may be alleadged for it. Impertinent Iurists, well chosen and tried, to sustaine so ^ad a cause.
What better title can all the Princes of the world haue, whereby to maintaine the possession of their Estates, then vniuersall consent of their Subiects? That is a valuable title, which maketh prescription against all such as can call it in question:He is no vsurper or inuader that is called lawfully to the Crowne. being ioyned and annexed to an immemorable possession and enioying, which is another title of good fidelitie, yea, euen to a Stranger Prince, were he called from the remotest parts of China. Non est vsurpator and inuasor, quem ad Regiam dignitatem Regni Proceres euexerunt.
Impertinent is it by writing, to call Capet and his descendants, strangers, thereby to bring Strangers into France, and so to fasten the Crowne thereof vpon their heads. And much more shamelesse impudence is it, to make him (contemptibly) descended of a Bastard, Hugh, the Sonne of Lothaire the second, who gaue him the Dukedome of Bourgongne the higher, that is, La France Counte; and that this Hugh came to dwell in France, where hee was married, leauing a Sonne, named Robert, sent by the Emperour Arnulphe, to defend the Kingdome of France against Norman Pirats: by whom (say those vnnaturall French Writers) he was slaine in a foughten Battaile. And that the said Robert was Sonne to Eudes, Duke of Bourgongne, who vsurped the Kingdome against Charles the Simple, and his Sonnes. These are the tearmes of a pretended Plea, made (say some) by Lewes, eleauenth of the name, on the pretences of Mary of Bourgongne, eldest daughter to Charles the last Duke, brought to light at the beginning of the troubles excited in this Realme (vnder name of the Holy League, mad and furious) by a Bourgongnon, named of S. Iulian.The troubles of the vnholy League. Which discourse is without approbation, and namelesse of any Aduocate or Proctor Generall, belonging to the said Lewes the eleauenth, but truely worthie, and capable of the name of a Paradoxe, which it beareth for a frontespice. Neither is there any matter of truth in it, but where he saith in two passages, that this Hugh, the Sonne of Lothaire the second, was not reputed legitimate, and from thence should ensue a consequence, more then most dangerous, against the honor and person of our Kings, descending from Capet. But in those times then, was the reigne of false Prophets, wherein the Prince of darkenesse exercised his power on those sale-able soules; to the end, to cut and deuide in pieces (by Strangers Coyne) the Crowne of France.
Very true it is, that in the yeare of Grace, eight hundred and tenne, Godfrey, a Danish Prince,Godfrey a Prince of Denmarke. came and coasted on Friezland, with a Fleete of two hundred Shippes, burning and destroying the Islands thereof; so saith Meier in his second Booke of the Annales of Flanders. In the yeare Eight hundred thirtie seauen, the Normans, neighbours to the Danes, made the like descent into Zealand, and the adiacent Islands, where they put all to fire and sword. So that the Emperour Charles the Baulde, for assurance of the Coasts on the Sea, in the yeare 863. erected Holland to be a Countie; and the first Count thereof was Thierry, who was likewise Sir-named the Frizone.
Yet notwithstanding all this, the Normans left not their former courses, but returned againe into France,Another returne of the Norman into France. in the yeare Eight hundred eighty foure, after the death of the King and Emperour Lewes the Stammerer, at such time as Lewes and C^man his Bastards, tooke the title of Kings of France. These two (being well fa^ted with money) bought of the Normans a Truce for twelue yeares, so that leauing France at rest for a time: the said Normans ioyned themselues with the Danes, conducted by their chiefe Commanders Godfreye and Sigefroye. Being thus accompanied, they entred on the Lands of the Emperour Charles le Gras, and after they had pilled Piccardie, Cambresis, Therouenne, Artois, Cleues, Gueldres and Brabant: they tooke (by force) the Cities of Liege, Vtrecht, Tongres, Tr^* with Aix la Chappelle, from whence they set towards Mentz, to doe the (...) there.
Charles le Gras foiled in Battaile by the Normans and Danes, and forced to seeke their frendshipTo checke these insolent courses of theirs, Charles le Gras marched in person against them, and gaue them Battaile, wherein he was vanquished. So that (...) was constrained and forced, nor onely to desire their friendship; but also to giue them certaine parcels of Land, to make firme their dwelling in. And for the better assurance of these his new Guests, he gaue as wife to Godfrey, a choise (...)

named Gista, the Bastard daughter of his deceased Cousine Germaine, Lothaire the second; and for her Dowrie, he gaue the Countie of Friezland, so speaketh our Annales, and them of Flanders.
This Lothaire the second had married Thiethberga, a wise and vertuous Princesse, ^ssued from the Blood of Charlemaigne. But she distasting him, beeause hee kept a Concubine, called Waldrada: he grew mallicious against her, tearming her barren and vnfruitfull. So that hauing won to his part Gautier, Archbishop of Magunce, and Thietgauld, Archbishop of Treuers: they pronounced sentence of separation, betweene Lothaire and his wife Thiethberga, he being permitted to marrie againe,Lothaire married his Concubine Waldrada. as (very soone after) he did, espousing his Concubine Waldrada. But the Pope then ^itting, declared a Nullitie of that marriage, excommunicating Lothaire and his Concubine; deposing also from their Archbishopricks Gautier and Thietgaulde, who had time and leisure enough, for better performance of their penance, so are the words set downe in our Annales.
Lothaire had by this Waldrada, the same Gista,Gista married to Godfrey the Dane. which was married to Godfrey the Dane, made Count of Friezland; and Hugh, of whom our great Writers will haue ^o descend, Robert the Strong, Count of Aniou, and our Hugh Capet.
This Hugh possessed himselfe of a part of Lorraine,Hugh vsurped a great part of Lorraine. in those times of farre grea^er eztendure, then it is at this present. And to maintaine himselfe in this vsurpa^ion, and (by little and little) to impeach the French, from forcing him to leaue his prize; he moued his brother in law The Husband to his Sister Gista Godfrey, to send and demand of the Emperour Le Gras, farre greater matters, then (by his owne knowledge) was likely he ^ee would yeelde vnto. Which serued him as a new subiect, to forrage France and Germanie againe, and better meanes for himselfe, in the conseruation of ^is Conquest, whereof hee promised to bestow a part vpon his Brother in Law.
Le Gras discouering the mallice and perfidious dealing of the Bastard; made answere to the deputies sent from Godfrey; that he desired to see their Prince, to the ^nd, he might the more sufficiently content him. Godfrey set forward on the way,Godfrey slaine treacherously by the Emperors procurement. ^nd the Emperour hauing prouided an ambush for him, by a Saxon Lord, named Henry; by the principall of his Court, being fallen in among them, was slaine in ^he place. Which wicked deede was reuenged on the same Henry, for he being ^ome to the succour of the Citie of Paris, besiedged then by the Normans; was taken by them in a charge, and there instantly slaine, as is more at large declared in the Booke of the same Siedge.

Saxonia vir Ainricus fortisque, potensque
Venit in auxilium Gozlini Praesulis Vrbis.

And a little lower speaking of his death.

En and Ainricus Superis crebro votitatus,
Obsidione volens illos vallare, necatur.

And as for the Bastard of Hugh, being forsaken of his owne followers;Of the Bastard Son of Hugh. he was betrayed, and brought before Charles le Gras, who caused him to be shut vp in a Monastery, his eyes being first pluckt out of his head. The Annales of Germany, and Sigibertus Gemblacensis, vnder the yeare Eight hundred eightie sixe. Hugo filius Lotharij Regis ex Waldrada pellice paternum Lotharingiae Regnum rebellando assequi ^perans, Godefrido Normannorum Duci, cui Soror sua Gisla nupserat, medietate affectati Regni promissa persuadet, vt ab Imperatore Imperiales fifcos ad libitum suum sibi addi ^eteret. Per hoc vtrimque Imperatorem circumuenire putans: si daret Normanni hostes Regni in visceribus regni immitterentur: Si negaret iustam rebellandi causam habere viderentur. Ad hoc tractandum iussu Imperatoris, Henrico duce, and Godefrido in Bata^ia ex condicto conuenientibus, inter agendum Godefridus cum suis punitur. Nec ^ulto post etiam Hugo ab Henrico excoecatur, and nourissime in Monachum Prumiae at^ondetur.
Hugh Capet then was not issued of Witichind the Saxon Stranger, nor of this bad^red Bastard, as ignorants say: But a Frenchman by extraction and originall, as also

a Prince, of the Noble blood of France, issued from the Counts of Aniou and M^, who made their abiding at Chasteau-Neuf in Aniou, whose Tombes and Sepulch^^, are yet to be seene, with their Armes and Banners De Gueulles au Raiz pou^mette, and Fleuronne d'Or, de huit pieces, a la Bordure de France, as we haue already said elsewhere.
Of three seuerall meanes, whereby the Crowne of France belonged to Hugh Capet.Now concerning the Crowne of France, it appertained to the said Capet by three meanes.
First, because he was descended of Eudes, brother to Robert, Count of Aniou, Sacred and Crowned King of France; whereof he was Regent, and Guardian (...) King Charles the Simple, as well by the Testament of the late King Lewes the Stammerer, Father of the said Simple; as by the consent generall of all the States of the Kingdome, by reason of want of gouernment in the Simple.
Secondly, because he was Son to Hugh the Great, Brother to Robert; Sacred likewise King of France, in the Church of Rheimes.
And thirdly, because he was issued of the auncient Princes of the blood, Cousin^ (in many degrees, as well by Father as Mother) from Pepin and Charlemaigne, and their Sonnes and descendants, as we haue said. So that being the prime Prince of the Blood; Charles of Lorraigne (meerely became a Stranger) the Crowne appertained to him.
Adde we hereto, that he was the wisest, and most iudicious Prince of all them in his time. And, for his rare vertues, he was wished, desired and requested of all the French people, as a sacred blessing sent of God from Heauen, to calme the tempests, troubles and disorders, which ouer-whelmed all France: whereof, by consent of the whole world, he was proclaimed King.
The Kings of the first Ligne, had begunne the Monarchie of France by franchise and libertie,The beginning of the French Monarchie. retained it (very long time after) on the tearmes of duetie and obedience. But these bounds and limits were out-stept and changed, into all impunitie of doing euill. This first Franchise was supported, made firme and enabled, by sinceritie of Religion; which saw it selfe disformed by abuse and Simonie.
Charlemaigne the reformer of Religion.Charlemaigne the true Sonne of the second Race, by holy Ordenances (reported in his Capitularies) reformed the franchise of Religion; seruing as a Glasse or Mirrour to all them of his descent, for imitation of his example. But when they began to contemne it; it fell to the ground, without hope or meanes of restoring. For, leading dissolute liues; they abused Religion, possessed themselues of the Churches goods, to bestow them on their Haganons, Women and Minnions. Yea, God did so farre suffer it, that the greatest men in the Kingdome, had the very best and richest Benefices: and, on their Reuenewes, they payed Armies, to make wa^ with their Kings, and (in the end) to suppresse them.
The wise and worthy gouernment of Hugh Capet.God raised miraculously Hugh Capet, who, to become wiser; made profit of the later Kings bad behauiour; so that from the very entrance of his Reigne, hee appeased all troubles and disorders in the Kingdome. Yet not by Fire or Ca^terizing, but by a farre milder way, that is to say; by politticall Lawes, and, through the obseruation of them, hee brought all (at the first) to former obedience.
He made the Law of Reuersions, and yonger Brothers portions; and that also, against alienating the demeanes of the Crowne. And, being able to doe no otherwise, he confirmed the Dukes and Counts in their Gouernements, which (of themselues) were become hereditarie to them; but yet with charge of seruice, and of continuing Liedge-men; and by these meanes he contented the Lords of the Kingdome.
A truely Noble minde in a King.Hee discharged the people of all new Subsidies, and expelled from his Court dissolutions, superfluitie of habites and Feastes, corruption and selling of Court Offices, Flatterers, Bawdes, and councell of yong heads without experience.
In his time, his Court, and chiefely in himselfe, shined most wise and modest carriage in all actions. Power was maintained in the King; Iustice ruled euery

^here, fastened with a knot and bond (more then Gardian) of Peace. Religion was ^^refully kept, and the State affaires were mannaged by iudgement, and aduise of the ^^st aged and wisest Councellers, with speedie expedition, the onely noate of ad^rable experience.
Hee forgot all reuenge, and pardoned the offences committed against him ^^d his Predecessours. From him grew the remarkeable Apothegme: That the ^^gs of France will not meddle, in reuenging the enmities of the Counts of Paris, and of ^iou.
Hee caused his Sonnes to be educated among them of the Nobilitie of the ^^ngdome; to the end, that being inured to the good and happie ayre of the ^ourt, as also the obedience and seruice which they owe to their King: by ^grees they might be nourished vp in Religion, which shined principally in (...) Court. For, to shew an example, among others, hee restored to the Ab^yes of Saint Denys in France, of Saint Germain des Prez, and Saint Martin (...) Tours, the fruites and reuennues, whereof, hee, his Father and Grand^^thers had (against all right) vsurped. So that hee serued as a Lanthorne or ^ide to the great Lords of the Kingdome, for doing the like, to the great ^od of the Gallicane Church. Whereto hee also caused to be restored, the ^ods of the Pagans Idoles, giuen by Charlemaigne, and whereof euery Gentle^an (in his place of dwelling) was made Maister by right of correspondencie. And ^re you may behold the very words of his Ordenance, published throughout all the ^rouinces of France.
^N Dei nomine, omnibus praesentibus and futuris. Hugo Dei Gratia Francorum Rex.The Proclamation published by Hugh Capet. Cum sit dignum Deo omnia bona referre, and quae sunt Dei Deo dare, vt diuina bo^as multiplice semen Regale nostrum in sui honorem, and vtilitatem gentium, omnes ^clesiarum libertates, dona and priuelegia firmiter and deuote confirmamus. Volumus ^tem vt Carta gloriosae memoriae Caroli Francorum Regis de possessionibus Dijs genti^n quondam dicatis, and diuino cultui applicandis, in omnibus obseruetur. Qui au^m de his aliquid subtrahere voluerit, vel aliquo tempore Cartam hanc Regalis rescrip^nis violare praesumat, sentiat in omnibus rebus suis detrimentum, and partem habeat ^m Sathanae principe tenebrarum. Pactum hoc ad Aram beatorum Apostolorum Pa^sius (which at this present is Saint Geneuiefue of Paris) sub sigillo nostro, and infra^^scriptorum. S. Roberti filij nostri. S. Roberti de Nogeria. S. Genselini Syluanectensis Bu^ularij. S. Martini Cam^rarij. S. Genserici Referendarij.
The great Officers of the Crowne had abused their charges, and made profit of ^em, to the preiudice of the Kings their Maisters:Abuses committed by great Officers of the Crowne. so that being become more ^owerfull then they, euen in an instant, not onely they possessed themselues of ^e Prouinces of France; but also of their Kings persons. As was put in pra^ise on those Kings, Charles the Simple, prisoner at Saint Quentin, and Cha^au Thierry, and his Sonne Lewes of Beyond the Seas. Hugh Capet therefore made ^stinction of the Officers of the Crowne, from them about the person of Kings. ^ee suppressed the Maires and Counts of the Pallace, burying their Offices ho^orably in the Royaltie, and in place of the Officers of the Houshold, Pallace ^oyall, and person of the King, preceding all other dignities; he caused them (...) be preceded by the Officers of the Crowne, whom hee instituted, to the end, ^at such as possessed the Kings person, might not also possesse the State.Offices doubled on euery man in his degree. So that (...) this meanes, he planted an opposition or contradiction in his Court, to main^^in (as it were by a counterpoize) the said Officers seuerally in their duties. He made ^e Maister of the Horse, chiefe Commander in his warres, and of his Armies: the ^hancellor was the prime Officer of Iustice, and Pollicie in the Kingdome, as if he ^ere the Lord chiefe Iustice.
On behalfe of the Nobilitie, and men of warre, which swarmed thorow France,The Peoples tranquilitie especially respected. (...) daily it happened during, and at the returne of the inciuile Warres, hee or^ined and established Marshals in all the Prouinces; to haue a vigilant eye ^t the peoples tranquilitie, and roughly to chastise Theeues and Robbers

on the wayes, pursuing them from one iurisdiction to another, with^ any regard of the territories. Henry, first of the name, yongest Sonne of Cap^ gaue ranke and title to Officers of the Crowne, and Marshals of France, (...) power to command in the Armies, as also to leade and conduct them to wa^ This was the first of the Kings of France, that submitted himselfe, as well to (...) Iustice of his Parlement, as of his subalternate Iudges; establishing an Attorne^ Generall, to exercise in his name, and vndergoe iudgement and condemnation, (...) well in causes which concerned his State, as in those of the subiects agai^ him. By this meanes, great men, and the Nobilitie were (by little and little) ^ly disarmed, and made familiar with Iustice; whereas before, all their actions (...) no other gouernment, but by force and violence, like to wilde beasts, and vo^ of reason.
The birth and originall of Leagues and factions in France.And in regard that these great Lords of France, had the principall cha^ and superintendencie, for assembling the Nobilitie vnder their Banners, at (...) times, and as often as they should goe to the warres, and that from the^ grew the originall and birth of Leagues, factions and partialities in the land: C^pet wisely ordained, that Bayliffes and Stewards of Prouinces (to whom it appe^tained, to giue and lend the strong hand of Iustice) should likewise haue the charge for assembling the Nobilitie, and people of the Ban and Arriere-(...) of France, and conduct them to Gouernours or Lieutenants Generals of the Prouinces. So that by this meanes, the Noblemen, Barons and Lords could not leuie a Banner, without leaue of the said Bayliffes and Stewards, who, vnder the shaddow of exercising Iustice, resided in the Prouinces of their Iurisdictions, and thereby contained the Nobilitie within compasse of due^ie, cutting off the spurres of all their complottings,The meanes of preseruing power in the Kings hand. and causing power to remaine in the Kings owne hand, without whose command, the Bayliffes were not permitted to make any Muster, or leuye of Armes. So that (in time) the Baro^ became subiected to the Stewards and Bayliffes, and so (consequently) to Iustice Royall.
France was in a wofull condition when Hugh Capet recouered it.And thus Hugh Capet (by admirable wisedome) redressed the affaires (...) France, when all was in decadence and confusion, hauing the sadde countenance of Warre, as in a Chaos and commixture of infinite Lords, without any rule or pollicie. Hee solemnized principally the Feast of the three Kings, and ordenarily hee wore a Starre of Gold in his Bonnet; in memorie of that Starre, which guided and conducted them from the Easterne Indiaes, so farre as to Bethlehem, there to take knowledge of, and to worship the most Sacred Bread of Life.
Robert the Deuout, Sonne to Capet.Robert, the onely man of that name, a wise and deuout Prince, succeeded after his said Father Capet, and following his steppes; hee serued as an example and mirrour to all the Princes of Christendome. For hee addicted himselfe to Pietie, and to erect and builde Churches, one in emulation of another; so saith (very notably) Glaber Rodolphus, in the Life of the said Robert.
EGo regnante contigit in Vniuerso pene Terrarum Orbe, praecipue tamen in It^l^, and in Gallijs innouari Ecclesiarum Basilicas, licet pleraeque decenter loc^tae (...) me indiguissent. Aemulabatur tamen quaeque gens Christicolarum aduersus alter^ decentiore frui. Erat enim instar ac si Mundus ipse excutiendo semet reiects (...) tustate, passim candidam Ecclesiarum vestem indueret. Tunc denique Episcopali^ Sedium Ecclesias pene vniuersas, ac caetera quaeque diuersorum Sanctorum monasteri^, (...) minora Villarum Oratoria, in meliora quique permutauere Fideles.
The great Saint Denys Areopagita arriuing at Paris, had his first dwelling (...) the Port of Saint Iacques (then this place was nothing but Woods, from Petit Pont, so farre as to the Suburbs of Saint Iacques, at this present) at the (...) by him named, The Schoole of the Greekes, Schola Graecorum, but now Saint Stephen^ the Greeks; the whole Vniuersitie being then a fielden and wooddie Wildernesse

^it for solitude. During the space of twentie yeares, the time of his abiding at Paris; hee prouided diuers places of deuotion, at Saint Ben^ist le bien tourne, ^n the Chappell of Saint Nicholas, Dedicated by him in honour of the most Sacred Trinitie, tho ineffable misterie whereof hee had learned by hart, of ^he Apostle Saint Peter, and of his Tutour or Scholemaister Saint Paule. In memorie of whom hee builded a small Oratorie, frequented soone after by Saint Geneuiefue, Tutelarie Patronesse of the Parisians, at whose request our ^irst Christian King Clouis caused a Church to be erected, where hee chose a ^uriall place for him and his, neerely ioyning to his Pallace, and on the foundation where he built the Abbey, at this day called of Saint Geneuiefue du Mont ^e Paris. Whereof S. Denys had (before) dedicated to the first Martyre S. Stephen, ^he place of his abiding; wherein he enstructed the youths of Paris, to take know^edge of the Faith of Iesus Christ.
The fourth Oratorie was built by Saint Denys,The ^dole of Mercury ouerthrowne. in the same place where stood the Temple of Mercurie, whose Idole he ouerthrew by the signe of the Crosse. It is at his present Nostre Dame des Champs.

Hic errorum cumulus, hic omnis spurcitia,
Hic infoelix Populus gaudet idolatria,
Adorabat idolum fallacis Mercurij,
Sed vicit Diabolum fides Dionysij.

For this Temple of Mercurie was the principall of all them which were at Paris:The Temple of Mercurie the chiefest at Paris. (...) hauing his actions reported by the fictions of Poets, most proper and commenda^le to the Parisians, who (among all other Nations of the World) euen of their ^wne naturall mindes, were capable of the Arts Liberall, Mechanicall, and the ^est Sciences, ouer which (by opinion of our Auncients) Mercurie is said to haue redominance.
The Temple of whom was by the great Saint Denys (being prophane before) ^nuerted and changed to a Church, and, for holy deuotion,Conuersion of Mercuries prophane Temple to a Church. dedicated in honor of ^he Virgin Mary, said to be the Queen of Angels, and Princesse of heauen and earth. ^nd such was the happinesse of Saint Denys, to see her mount vp to Heauen on ^he day of her Assumption; and by conference with her before her passage, ^e learned those admirable secrets, which are reuealed in his rare and diuine Writings. Hereof himselfe beareth testimonie, in the Tract which he wrote De ^iuinis nominibus. Concerning the change of that prophane place to Sacred, the ^rose of S. Denys speaketh thus by conuersion.

Hic constructo Christi templo
Verbo docet, and exemplo
Coruscat miraculis;
Turba credit, error cedit
Fides crescit, and clarescit
Nomen tanti Praesulis.

By the portraiture of the Virgin Mary, holding her Sonne vpon her knee ^s it had formerly bin figured in the Primitiue Church, and not standing vpright,Concerning the Picture of the Virgin Mary. (...) ignorant Painters and Caruers haue represented her) S. Denys caused another to be ^awne, on a small Stone, about a foote square in Diameter (Peint d'vn esmail de di^ses couleurs d Or, and d'Azur) which was to be seene not aboue two yeares ^ee, fastened without the Church of Nostre Dame des Champs, on the North-^e of the lesser Churchyard. But since, by reading the Antiquities of Pa^, newly re-imprinted (by the dilligence of the deceased Brother Iac^es du Brueil, Monke of Saint Germain des Prez; the light for Lear^ng to the Monasteries of France) the Intendant or Ouer-seer of this Church, ^derstood the Antiquitie of this excellent piece, and passed it from one

extremity to another, causing it to be brought from a prophane place, and enclosed in the Conuent of the Carmeline Sisters. And instead of fastning it to (...) Piller of the Church; either by grosse ignorance, or mallicious enu^e, the knowledge of that rare piece is taken from the Publique. This Stone is castellated with another of farre greater compasse, on the Basis whereof are engrauen these Verses in the Latine.

Siste Viator iter, Mariam reuerenter honora,
Nam fuit haec saxo primum depicta minori,
Quod medium spectas. At sculptum primitus, aedes
Et basilica tenet tanto de nomine dicta.

The Bishops See of Dionysius Ar^opagitaSaint Denys hauing purified this Temple of Mercurie, dedicated and consecr^ted it (as we haue said) to the Queene of Angels; and there he established his Episcopall Seate, and made his dwelling there all the remainder of his life, which was an hundred and twelue yeares. For Fescennius Sisinnius, perceiuing the fro^ which this great Apostle made by his Preaching; after infinite torments and inflictions,The Martyrdome of S Dionysius, Eleutherius and Rusticus. which he caused him to endure, hee commanded his Braine-pa^ to be cleft with a Coopers Addis (as hee did the like to his Deacons Eleutherius and Rusticus) before the Idole of Mars, to whom they would not sacrifice and offer Incense.
This Martyrdome happened at Mont-martre at Paris, in the yeare of Grace One hundred twentie and one, in the Pontificalitie of Pope Alexander the first, and Empire of Adrian the second: Auiola and Pansa, being then Consuls, according (...) the calculation of Cassiodorus. Cuspinian in his Annotations vpon the said Cassiod^rus, reporteth this out of an auncient Annales, which he affirmeth to haue read. Anno Domini Centesimo Vigesimo primo apud Parisios Dionysius Episcopus Marty^ satur.
Some while after this martyrdome, the Parisians obtained the point of their (...) of the Romaines, where they erected a Church, the chiefe or high Altar whereof they raised iustly on the same place, where S. Denys, their Apostle and first Bishop had bin roasted on a Gridiron,S. Denys roasted on a Gridiron. and where (at this present) is the little Church of (...) Denys du Pas: so named by the vulgar ignorant, but it is truely called Sanctus Dionysius de Passione.
The first Church was (the second time) rebuilded by King Childebert, first of the name (Son to great Clouis) by the name of The most holy Trinitie of Paradise. (...) the second building it was enriched with great Pillers of Marble:
Splendida marmoreis attollitur aula columnis,Et quia pura manet, gratia maior inest.
So saith Fortunatus, Bishop of Poictiers, who describeth (in Verse) all the particularities of this Mother Church, which he preferreth (by good right) with the Temple built by Salomon.

Si Salomoniaci memoretur machina Templi,
Arte licet par sit, pulchrior ista fide.

Translation of the Bishops See to the Isle of Paris.And speaking of the translation of the Bishoppes Seate, from Nostre Dame d^ Champs, into the Isle of Paris, and of the deuotion of the great Prince Childeb^ who is the first of our eight and twentie Kings, to be seene on the front of (...) great Church (Clouis his Father is onely alone without the Church, on the North side) he saith
Hac pius egregio Rex Childebertus amoreDona suo populo non moritura dedit.
It is held by tradition, that the Pictures of this King Childebert,The pictures of King Clouis and his Sonne Chaldebert. and of Clouis his ^ather, which yet are to be seene on the toppe of the Meridionall Portall (vnder which is the Image of S. Marcell) on both sides of the Virgin Mary, before whom ^louis standing vpright, presenteth his Sonne Childebert on his knees, the Virgin ^ting, with her Sonne on her lap, after the auncient manner (as she is depicted at ^ostre Dame des Champs) accosted with two Angels: It vrgeth beliefe, that Great ^louis had (in his life time) begun the building, and that it was ended by his Sonne ^hildebert.
The first Church, hauing bin dedicated in honour of the most blessed Trinitie;The misterie of the Trinitie taught to the Parisians by S. Denys. ^he ineffable misterie whereof had bin enstructed to the Parisians by the great S. De^is. The second was (by Childebert) dedicated to the Sacred Virgin, S. Stephen, and ^. Denys. And from that time, it had the name of Saint Maries Church, vulgarly ^lled of our Lady; vnder whose protection and assured safeguard, the Parisians ^henceforward) committed their Citie, as it is obserued by Abbo, in his first Booke ^f the Siedge of Paris by the Normans.
Vrbs in honore micat celsae sacrata Mariae.
And from thence it proceeded, that Our Lady day in August, is in the Citie of Paris, solemne Festiuall day; when, on the morrow following, the Sheriffes and Prouost des Marchants (instituted by the great King Clouis) are elected in Scrutinie, by plurality ^f voyces among the Bourgesses of Paris.
The Church built by Childebert held firme footing, vntill the declining of Charle^aignes Children; but then it was long time without any repairing, by reason of the ^nciuile wars, and troubles in the Realme of France.
Deuout King Robert, keeping his Court and ordenary abiding at Paris, and at S. Martin des Champs; rebuilded most part of the Churches in Paris, and elsewhere:Robert the Deuout a famous reedifier of Churches in diuers places. ^t Paris, the Churches of S. Nicholas des Champs, and Nostre Dame des Champs. At ^rleans, the Churches of Nostre Dame de bonnes Nouuelles, and the Abbey of S. Ag^an. At Poictiers, S. Hilarie: S. Legier in Yueline, that is to say, in the Forrest of Paris, ^alled Aquilina Silua. S. Mary at Vitry, and the Castell of the said place. At Estampes, ^he Church of Nostre Dame, and the Castell. At Senlis, the Church of S. Rieull. At ^oissy, the Church of Nostre Dame. At Autun, S. Cassin, and other Oratories in di^ers places of the Kingdome.
The Church of Nostre Dame des Champs at Paris, was rebuilded by the said King ^obert, in the same estate and manner, as at this present is to be seene, the foundation ^udged to be intire and sound, when the Carmeline Sisters, or Nuns were there esta^lished. On the top and pinnacle before the said Church, is yet to be seene the I^age of the Arch-Angell S. Michaell, the tutelarie Angell and Guardian of the most Christian Monarchie of France, ensculpted after the antique forme, holding a Bal^nce in the one hand, and a Crosse in the other; on his Head, and toppe of his Wings, are fixed and cramponned strong Pikes of Iron, to keepe the Birds from ^earching thereon. The ignorant vulgar conceiued in their opinion, that this was (...) Crown of Eares of Corne, and thought it to be the Idole of the Goddesse Ceres, a ^atter wherein they are much deceiued: for Isis and Ceres being but one and the ^ame thing, her Temple was at S. Ceour, and S. Germain des Prez. The Pagans coue^ed the heads of their Idole Priapus, their Hermes or Mercurie (planted at the ends or ^uarters, as well of Fields, as in Townes and Bourroughes, as Guards of Gardens, and ^eautifying the wayes) with Roundels of Wood, or of white Latten, because Birds should not soyle their Visages. Hereof there are infinite passages in good Poets.

In me veniant mictum atque cacatum,
Quidquid Coruorum est.

And elsewhere.

Merdisque coinquiner albis.
Coruorum.

Those Rondels were named by the Greekes, as we finde (...). Aristophanes in Auibus. Wherefore the Painters and Caruers doe fondly deceiue themselues in placing those Rondels (which in grosse ignorance they tearme Diadems) on the heads of Saints, as well raised, as in flat painting; applying (very absurdly) prophane things to sacred.
As for the Mother Church of Paris, King Robert making his residing at Paris, as his Predecessours had done, Eudes, Robert, Hugh the great Abbot, and Hugh Capet his Father, all inscoffed Counts of Paris: caused it to be wholly new builded, and his will was accomplished, as now you see it at this present.
In elder time, and when it was built by King Childebert; it was more aduanced towards the point of the Isle, so that the Quire and high Altar thereof, was in the same place, where at this present is the Church of Saint Denys du Pas, and the entrance of the Church was then, where now is the great Gate of the Cloyster, but yet further inward; and the Bishoppes house was at S. Landry, and the Hostel des Vrsins.
The Counts of Paris succeeded the Romain ProuostsNow, concerning the house belonging to the Counts of Paris (who succeeded after the Romaine Prouosts, for gouernment of Iustice and Armes) it was, where at this instant is the Hospitall; the circuit contained from the old Bishopricke, where at this present are the Bishoprickes Stables, ioyning to the Vestrie or Treasurie, which is now the Bishopricke; cutting through the body of the Church of Nostre Dame, and returning along the North side thereof, from the Churches of S. Christopher, and S. Geneui^fue des Ardents, so far as to the end of the lesser Bridge, where is the Portall of the Hospitall, rebuilded by the Cardinall Du Prat, in the time of King Frances the first.
The gift of Archambauld Count of Paris.Archambauld, Count of Paris, and Maire of the Pallace of France, vnder the declining of the descendants of Clouis, slaine by Ebroin the cruell, Maire of the Pallace to Thierry; gaue the said Counts house of Paris, with all the extendure thereof, and S. Christophers Chappell, which he caused to be builded for the place of his buriall, with his Village De Chresteill on Marne, about three Leagues from Paris, to the Chapter of the Church of Paris. The words of the said donation by Archambauld, Count and Maire of the Pallace of Paris, vnder Clouis, second of the name, are set downe thus. Ercembaldus dedit Ecelesiae Sanctae Mariae d^mum suam, cum Cappella sua de Sancto Christophero, and villam suam de Christolio super Matronam, ita tamen vt in dicta sua Cappella de sancto Christophero nullus inhumaret^r nisi sit de linea, and Familia sua.
By meanes of this donation, the Foundations of this Mother Church, Mauris Ecclesiae, were by the said Robert laid further on this side, to the end, of being neerer to the great Bridge of Paris, where heretofore (according to the testimonie of S. Gregory of Tours, in his Historie of France, and namely, in the time of Saint Lewes (as saith the Lord of Ioinuille in his life) dwelt the Merchants of Silkes, or Mercers, Goldsmiths, Iewellers, and Money-Bankers of Paris.
The said Foundations were continued by the descendants aed successours of Robert: to wit, his eldest Sonne Henry, first of the name: Phillip the first: Lewes le Gras, sixt of the name: Lewes the Pious, tearmed the yonger, seauenth of the name, and Phillip Augustus, called the Conquerour, and Gods gift, second of the name,The figure of Phillip Augustus and 28. Kings. vnder whose Reigne it was finished: the Histories and figures (both within and without the worke) onely excepted. The Picture of the said Augustus, vnder whom the Church was compleated, is the last of the twentie eight Kings his Predecessours, which are to be seene on the forefront of that admirable and sumptuous building.
The descendants of Clouis, residing at Paris, their partition; dwelt at the Pallace of S. Geneuifue du Mont; afterward at the Louure, built on the banke of Seine by Childebert, first founder of S. Germaine des Prez (where he lyeth with his wife Vltrogotha) and of S. Germaine de l'Auxerrois, Churches founded vnder the name of the Martire Saint Vincent.
Lendegisilus, Sonne and Successour to the honours of his Father Archambauld,Archambaulde sonne and successour to Lendegisilus. ^aire of the Pallace, and Count of Paris; caused the dwelling for the Counts of ^he Pallace to be erected, at the other point of the Isle and Citie of Paris. A buil^ing whereof we haue seene the foundation, at the end of the Kings Garden; but ^ow the end of the Daulphines Pallace.
The Counts that descended of Robert le Fort, made there their Hostell, and the ^escendants of King Robert enlarged or encreased it. But Lewes Hutin, tenth of ^he name, vnder the conduct of the Intendant Generall, for the Finances or Reue^ues of France, named Enguerran de Marigny, Count of Longue-Ville,Engueran de Marigny, Count of Longue-uille. caused it to be (...) builded, as you see it at this present: except the holy Chapell, the Greene Cham^er, where the Chauncerie is, and that of the Audience De la Tournelle, built by the ^ood King S. Lewes. And at all times, the Church of S. Bartholmew was the Orato^e for the Countes of Paris, and Parish Church of our Kings.
Robert the Deuout,A Chappell erected by Robert the Deuout. in the same place where this admirable building of the holy Chappell is, caused an Oratorie to be builded (for the benefit of him and his Dome^ickes) called (at this present) the lower Chappell, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, ^nder the name of Nostre Dame, or Saint Mary of the Starre: because he called the ^irgine Mary, Stellam Regni sui: hauing ordinarily in his mouth these two Verses, ^f his owne composition.

Alma Redemptoris genitrix, Mundique salutis
Stella maris fulgens, cunctis praeclarior astris.

And as he was one of the most excellent Latine Poets in his time; so,King Robert an excellent Latine Poet. in honour ^f the same Virgin, he composed the Antiphonalles or Anthemes, and their An^wers, which the Church of Paris, and those in his Diocesse, sung on the day of the Natiuitie of our Lady, the eight of September. A feast day not instituted by Pope ^nnocent the fourth, in the yeare of Grace 1250, as is ignorantly written by Platina, ^n the life of the same Pope: but celebrated from the beginning of the World (and ^amely by our wise Druides) as is learnedly obserued by the Authour of Fascicu^us Temporum. For solemnitie of this Feast, he made these following Antipho^alles.


I.
Solem Iustitiae, Regem Paritura supremum
Stella Maria maris hodie processit ad ortum;
Cernere diuinum lumen gaudete fideles.


II.
Stirps Iesse Virgam produxit, Virgaque florem,
Et super hunc florem requiescit Spiritus almus:
Virgo Dei genitrix virga est, flos Filius eius.


III.
Ad nutum Domini nostrum Ditantis honorem,
Sicut Spina Rosam genuit Iudaea Mariam,
Vt vitium Virtus operiret, gratia culpam.


Being gone on Pilgrimage to Rome,The Pilgrimage of King Robert to Rome. he presented on the confession of the Prince of the Apostles, the Answers which were sung on the Feast day of Saint Paul, by Cornelius Centurio, in his manner. Fulbert, Bishop of Chartres, and Chauncellour of France, maketh mention of this voyage, in his hundred and ninth Epistle.
Constance his wife, Daughter to William, Count of Arles, a proud and disdainfull Ladie, (who by her vnnaturall Ambition, would preferre to the Crowne of France,Constance, the proud Queene of France. her youngest sonne Robert, before the eldest, Monsieur Henry of France, hardly corresponding with the milde and gentle humour of her husband;) entreated him, because he was a singuler good Poet, to compose somewhat in her praise. To content



her, he made an Hymne in honour of holy Martyrs, and began the same with her name.
O Constantia Martyrum mirabilis.
Gracious humilitie in a King.This great Prince held it no vnworthie thing, or vnbeseeming Royall-Maiestie: to sing Psalmes and Anthemes, among the Priests and Chaunters in his Chappell.
We reade of the same King Robert, that marching in person against Landry, Co^^ of Neuers,King Robert his besiedging the Towne of Aualon. who had entred into the Dukedome of Bourgongne, to possesse himselfe thereof: the King laid his Siege before the Towne of Aualon, reputed to be impregnable. He continued there three Monthes, without any likelyhood of taking it by force: but when the good King began to sing Psalmes in his Tent, according as he was wont to doe; the most part of the Wals of the besieged Town fell down to the earth miraculously. In which manner it was taken, and al the Dukdome of Bourgongne; which the King gaue (as a portion) to his second Sonne Henry, who being crowned King in the Citie of Rhemes (by the death of Hugh the Great his elder Brother) he estated (as inheritance) the said Dukedome of Bourgogne, to his younger Brother Robert; with reseruation of Hommage, and right of Reuersion to the Crowne of France, through defect of masle children, issued and borne in lawfull marriage.


The Order of Knighthood instituted by King Robert, in Anno 1022.
The Order of Knighthood instituted by King Robert, in Anno 1022Robert putting all his hope in God, by assistance of the sacred Virgine, St^rre of the Sea, the guide and Lanterne of his Kingdome: in honour of her, he erected and instituted a new Order of Knighthood, which he would haue to be stiled and named, The Order of our Lady of the Starre.
This Institution was in the Month of August, the yeare of Grace, One thousand twentie two; which was two yeares after the Institution and creation of the Peeres of France.
The Order was composed of thirtie Knights, comprehending therein the King of France, as chiefe and Soueraigne Master thereof.
The said Knights wore Cloakes of white Damaske, the Mantelet and lyning of light Carnation Damaske, and the Cassock or Gonnell of the same. Whereon, vpon the left side of the Brest, was embroidered a Starre, wrought in pure Gold, with fine rayes or pointed beames.
The great Coller was made of a round Chaine of Gold, with three linkes or chaines inter-wouen with enammeled Roses, inter-changeably white and red.
The Oath and daily duetie of the Knights.The said Knights stood obliged by Oath, daily to say (in honour of the Virgine Mary) a Corona or Chaplet, composed of fiue Tennes of Aue Maries, and fiue P^ter Nosters: as also the Anthemne before remembred, with the Answers, Sicut Spi^a Rosam, and so following to the end of the Anthemne.
Next, this Prayer composed by himselfe, according to his owne meaning, and for the Kings his Successours, Soueraignes of the said Order of the Starre.
A Prayer of the Kings own making.Regum Princeps, atque Virtus, cuius nutu Coelum gyrat, Terra perstat, disponunt^r S^cula, Regi Roberto nato stirpe nobilissima, sic domare des Superbos, and Subiectis parcere, Vt hic regnans gloriosus, quondam viuat in Aethere. Amen.
The Ceremonies of the said Order, began on the day of the Natiuitie of the Virgine Mary, being the eight day of September, in the said yeare 1022* in the Chappell of his Pallace, called Our Lady of the Starre, which is the lower Chappell.
The first men that were honoured with this Order, next vnto himselfe, were his three Sonnes, as Namely;
1. Hugh the Great.
2. Henry, Kings in the life time of their Father.
3. And Robert, Duke of Bourgongne.
4. Richard, second of that name, Duke of Normandie, and of Britaine.
5. William, third of the name, called Stuft-headed, Duke of Aquitaine, Count of Auuerngne, and also of Poictu.
6. William the third, Count of Tolosa.
7. Baldwin with the goodly Beard, fourth of the name, Count of Flanders.
8. Hebert, the old Count of Troyes.
9. Odon, Count of Beauuais.
10. Geoffrey Grise Gonnelle, Count of Angiers.
11. Amauray, Count of Noyon.
12. And Baldwin of the Isle, Count of Henault, Sonne to Baldwin with the goodly Beard, Count of Flaunders. I haue seene an old Romant, made by a King of Armes, called Brabant, written in the time of Phillip de Valois, the Father of Chiualrie, wherein the Knights of the said Order of the Starre, were set downe in order, ^es before hath beene related (together with their Blazons of Armes, and Collers,Knights of the Star all Peeres of France. who according to the auouching of the said Brabant) were all Peeres of France, ordained and created by the said Robert. In number of which Peeres, there was neither Bishop nor Arch-bishop, which giueth vs sufficiently to vnderstand, that at the the time of this Institution at the first, the number of Peeres was not then reduced to twelue, sixe of the Church, and sixe Layicks: as it was vnder Lewes the seuenth, called the Pious, and younger, at the Sacring of his Sonne Phillip Augustus, Gods Gift, as we haue already said.
The said Phillip Augustus,Phillip Augustus crowned King, and made Knight of the Starre. being Sacred King of France in the life time of his Father, and in the Church of Rheimes, on the day of All-Saints, 1179. was made Knight of the Starre by the King his Father, at his Coronation at S. Denys in France on Ascension day 1180, he being then aged foureteene yeares, or little more.
The same Phillip Augustus, in Anno 1200, being in the Citie of Gournay in Normandie, gaue the Order of the Starre, and made Knight Arthur, inuesting him in the Counties of Bretaigne, Aniou, and Poictu; and Regnauld, Count of Bologne, by meanes of his wife: As we are instructed by Rigordus, Monke of S. Denys in France, Phisition and Chronicler to the said Augustus.
King Lewes, eight of the name, termed of Mont-Pensier, was after his Sacring in the Church of Rheimes: made Knight also on our Lady day in August 1224.
His Sonne and Successour, the good King S. Lewes, was made Knight likewise of the same Order of the Starre, on the day of his Sacring in the Church of Rheimes, the first Sunday in Aduent, Anno 1226.
The same King S. Lewes, making Knight his Brother Monsieur Robert of France, on the day of Pentecost in Iune, Anno 1237, at Corbeill: ouer and aboue his Appennage, he gaue him for euery day of his life time, to grace his Order of Knighthood of the Starre, twentie pounds Parisian to dispend; A die Militiae.
In the yeare 1246, at Mid-August,Other Lords honored with the same Order of the Starre. A most royall and sumptuous Feast. in the Towne of Saumur, the same S. Lewes gaue the Order to Monsieur Alphons, his third Brother, Count of Maine and Poictu: to Peter, Count of Bretaigne: as also the Counts of Dreux, and of March. At which Solemnitie he held his great State pompe, that is to say, his Court and Table open to all commers, with such Royall magnificence, as neuer had beene seene the like, for the great plentie and aboundance of all things, and riches there present; which Feast continued eight daies together.
At the Kings owne Table fedde the Counts of Poictieres, Bretaigne, Dreux, and De la March, newly made Knights; in Cassocks, Mantellets and Collers of the Order of the Starre.
At an other Table, on the side by the Count of Dreux, sate alone Thiebault,Thi^bault first King of Nauarte. first of the name, King of Nauarre, and Count Palatine of Brie and Champaigne (fift of the name) who was very richly attired in Cloth of Gold, Coat, Cloake, Girdle, the Buckles and Studdes all of pure Gold. Before whom waited the Caruer or Squire for the mouth, Iohn, Lord de Ioinuille, Steward (that is to say) Grande Maistre de Hostel de Champaigne.
Before the King S. Lewes, waited his two eldest Bretheren, the Lo^^^, Robert Count of Artois, and Charles, Count of Aniou* And the Caruer was the good Co^^^ of Soissons.
As Guardes to the Kings Table, were appointed Messires Imbert de Be^i-^^^, afterward Constable of France: Honorat, Sire de Coucy, and Archambauld de Bou^^^^, c^^led the Great, Father in Law to the King of Nauarre.
Behinde these three Noble Barons, attended aboue thirtie Knights, in Casso^^ of Cloth of Gold, and to backe them, stood a great number of Vshers of Armes, and of the Hall: who were for the Count of Poictiers; Portant ses Armes bat^^s de Sandail.
The King was most sumptuous in his garments, as it was a thing wonderfull to behold, and would require a tedious time to relate: For neuer had beene seene (so saith the Lord of Ioinuille) so many Surcoates, Cloakes and other garnishments of Cloth of pure Gold, as he wore, during the time of this Feast.
Phillip le Bell Knight of the Starre.King Phillip le Bell, King of France and Nauarre, was made Knight of the Starre, the day of Mid-August 1284. And on the morrow he espoused Madame Io^^^, Queene of Nauarre, and Countesse Palatine of Champaigne and Brie. The Fea^^ endured eight daies, the Streetes of Paris being richly hung with Tapistries, the Shops shut vp, and Tables prepared in euery Streete, readily furnished for all commers, the neighbours feasting their friends with all ioy and gladnesse.
In the yeare 14^8, the Month of August, in the Citie of Vendosme, King Charles, seuenth of the name, instituted Peere of France, Gaston, fift of the name, Infant of Nauarre, otherwise called Prince of Viana, Count of Foix, and Lord of Beame, being put in place for the Count of Tolosa, all the Peeres there assembled, only he of Bourgongne excepted.
Prince Gaston made Knight of the Starre.From Vendos^^ the Court went to lodge at Tours; where the said Gaston de Nauarre was affianced to Madame Magdalene of France, the last daughter to King Charles the seuenth, termed the Victorious, and on the morrow following, was made Knight of the Starre, with great magnificence.
To solemnize this Feast of Knighthood, the Count of Foix lodged at S. Iulian of Tours, where he entertained the King, the Princes and chiefest Lords of his Court, to a most magnificent Feast: which we will describe, according as it is set downe in the manuscript Chronicle of Foix.
The famous and memorable Banquet made b^ the Prince Gaston de ^oix.Prince Gaston made the most triumphant Banquet, that euer had bin seene before. In the great Haule of Saint Iulian at Tours, were prepared twelue Tables; each of them containing seauen Elles in length, and two and an halfe in breadth.
At the first Table was seated the King, and the chiefe Princes of the Blood; as also the Queene, and daughters of France.
At other Tables were seated other Princes, as well of the Bloud, as of strange Prouinces, and the principall Lords of France, according to their ranke and dignitie; as also the Princesses and great Ladies in like manner.
The Maisters d' Hostell, were the Counts Gaston de Foix; De Dunois; De la Marche, and the great Seneschall or Steward of Normandie.
1. The first Seruice was made with white Hypocras and Toasts.
2. The second Seruice consisted of boiled well fatted Capons, and Gammons of Bacon;The Seruices a^ they c^me to the Tables. accompanied with seuen kindes of Brothes or Pottages. All these Seruices were in dishes of Siluer, and each Seruice for the seuerall Tables, had an hundred and fortie Siluer Dishes.
3. The third Seruice was of meates Roasted; yet not any other, but Pheasants, Partridges, Conies, Peacocks, Bittors, Hearons, Bustardes, Greene-Geese, Woodcockes, Swannes, Teales, and all kindes of Foules of the Riuer, that could be thought on. Beside* in this Seruice was likewise Wilde Goats, Harts or Stagges, with all manner of Venisons, and the Seruice for each Table had an hundred and fortie goodly dishes of Siluer.
A (...) Castle se^^ed in (...) enter^uiseAfter which Seruice, twelue men brought in (as an entercourse) a Castle with foure goodly Towers at foure corners, erected vpon a Rocke. In the midst of the

Castell stood a great Tower, in forme of a Donion, which had foure Windowes, in each whereof was placed a beautifull Lady, richly apparelled. At other foure Windowes stood foure gallant yong Boyes, singing most sweetly before the Presence. And to speake truely, this entercourse seemed a terrestriall Paradise, for on the tops and pinacles of the Towers and Donion, where fixed the Escutchions and Banners of France, richly painted and emblazoned in colours; as also the deuises of King Charles the seauenth, and Order of the Starre in White and Carnation.
4. The fourth Seruice consisted of Foules, as well great, as small, the whole Seruice being sumptuously guilded: And on euery Table were placed an hundred and fortie Siluer Dishes, according as in all the other Seruices.
After this Seruice was brought in (for an enter-course) the shape of a Beast,The second Entercourse a Tiger. called a Tiger, which (by cunning Art) disgorged Fire from his mouth and nostrils. About his necke was a rich Coller, whereat hung the Armes and deuises of the King, very costly and curiously formed. This enter-course was carried by sixe men, each of them hauing a Mandillion and Bonnet, made after the fashion of Bearne, and they danced before the Lords and Ladies, according to the manner of the Countrey; which moued much mirth and laughter, and this Entercourse was commended aboue all the rest, in regard of the new dauncing.
5. The fift Seruice was of Pies, Tarts, dishes of Creame, Orange-adoes and Citrons confected; each Table being likewise serued with an hundred and fortie Siluer dishes.
After the said Seruice, was carried another Entercourse, which was a great Hill,The third Entercourse was a great Mountaine. or Mountaine, borne by foure and twentie men. In the Mountaine stood two faire ^rteficiall Fountaines: From the one flowed (abundantly) Rose-water; and from the other Muske-water, yeelding an admirable smell ouer all the Haule. From diuers quarters and parts of the Mountaine, issued forth yong liuing Conies and sundrie kindes of small Birds. And in hollow places of the said Hill, stood foure yong Laddes, and a Damosell, attired like Sauages, who came forth at a passage in the Rocke, dauncing (by good direction) an excellent Morisco, before the assembly.
This being thus done, Count Gaston caused to be giuen to the Heralds and Trompets, who waited and sounded all the Dinner time, two hundred Crownes of the Sunne: beside tenne elles of Veluet, to the King of Armes of the Order, to make him a Roabe.
6. The sixt Seruice was of red Ipocras, with Wafers of diuers sorts.
And then came carried (as an other Enter-course) a man mounted on Horseback,The fourth Entercourse a man on Horsebacke. very artificially formed, and attired in Crimzon Veluet, but the whole consisting of Gold-Smiths worke. In the midst was a small Garden, and therein stood a Poet, gathering all kindes of Roses and other Floures, made of Waxe; which he deliuered to the Ladies, who made high esteeme of such presents.
7. The seuenth Seruice was of Spiceries and Confections, made in the forme of Lyons, Swannes, Harts, and such like: and on each of them were the Armes and deuises of the King.
After which was carried a liuing Peacocke in a goodly great Ship. The Peacocke caried about his necke, the Armes belonging to the Queene of France,The fift Entercourse a Peacock in a Ship (daughter to the King of Sicilie, Duke of Aniou, Lewes, second of the name, such as are to be seene in the Order of the Crescents, or Halfe Moones) round about the Shippe hung Banderols, containing the Armes of all the Princesses and Ladies of the Court; who were not meanely proud, that the Count had so highly honored them.
In the midst of the Haule was a Scaffold, whereon were Consorts of singuler voyces, with all kindes of Instruments.
After the Banquet, Count Gaston caused to be openly proclaimed, a Iouste for all commers, on the eighteenth day of Iune, then next following, with Articles and conditions, such as are vsed in Iousts and Tournaments.
This Order of the Starre (being intermitted in the time of Phillip de Valois, by reason of the Warres and losses of Battailes, against the enemies of the Crowne) was againe set on foote by his Sonne King Iohn, heire to the misfortunes of his Father. Yet notwithstanding, very valiant and couragious of his person, and one that assuredly maintained his word with all the Princes of Christendome, for so it is auouched by Froisard, after this manner. Albeit Faith were banished from the World; yet neuerthelesse, it ought to be kept inuiolably in the mouth of the Prince; although hee cannot be enforced to hold his Word, or had any iust occasion to breake it.
Establishing of the Order of the Starre by King Iohn.King Iohn hauing obtained of Madame Mary of Spaine, Countesse of Alans^n and D Estampes, and of Charles Count of Alanson her Sonne, the eight day of Iune, Anno 1356. the House called S. Ouyn, were to S. Denys in France, sometimes called the Pallace of Clichy: He established in that House, the principall Seate for the Order of the Starre. And at a Chapter held in the Palace of Chichy, on our Lady day in September 1356. he haue the Order of the Starre to
Knights created of the Star by the King.1. Messieurs Phillip of France, Duke of Orleans, his Brother2. Charles of France, first Daulphine of Viennois, Duke of Normandie, the eldest Sonne to King Iohn.3. Lewes Duke of Aniou.4. Iohn Duke of Berry.5. Phillip Duke of Touraine, his other Sonnes.6. Charles, King of Nauarre, Count of Eureuz.7. Peter, Duke of Bourbon.8. Iames of Bourbon, Count de la March, these three being Brethren.9. Charles of Spaine, Count of Alanson.10. Arnoul d'Endreghan. Marshals of France.11. Iohn of Clermont. Marshals of France.12. George, Count of Chargny, great Chamberlaine of France.13. Charles, Count of Tancaruile.14. Gautier de Brenne, Duke of Athens.15. Iohn d Artois, Count d Eu.16. Charles d' Artois, Count of Longueuile, both Brethren.17. Iohn, Vicount de Melan.
^^. Knights of the Order of the Starre.Being eighteene Knights, comprehending the King, Chiefe of the Order: the rest of the number were to be made perfect, at other Chapters of the said Order.
It is a popular errour, to say that this Order was instituted by King Iohn or that he changed it to the title of the Virgin Mary, by calling it the bright and cleare Starre, which appeared to the three Kings of the East, for guiding them to the place, where was borne the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And that he tooke for his deuise Royall, a Starre Crowned, and for Soule thereof;
Monstrant Regibus Astra Viam.
Contradictions concerning the Order of the StarThat hee transferred the Ceremonie of the said Order, from the eight day of September, to the sixt of Ianuarie, the Feast and solemnitie of the Kings. That Charles the fift abolished the Order; whereas others say, that it was Charles the seauenth, who vtterly abolished this Order. And not hauing any meanes, whereby to recompence those Captaines that had done him seruice, hauing spent his Reuennues: he gaue them the Coller of his Order of the Starre, which formerly had bin the noate of honour and excellencie, for all the Princes and great Lords of France. But now the communication of this Order, to such meane Gentlemen and Souldiours, became so distastefull; that they hated to weare the Order any longer, and so aduertised King Charles the seauenth. Who hauing assembled the last Chapter thereof at the Pallace of Chichy, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fiftie fiue, in presence of the Knights of the said Order; hee tooke from his necke a Riband of blacke Silke, at the end whereof hung a Starre of

Gold, and put it about the necke of the Captaine, appointed for the night-watch in the Citie of Paris, called there Cheualier du Guet. Ordaining beside,Knight of the Watch for the night time in Paris. that in following time, none but he should weare the Order of the Starre, and that the Cassockes or Mandilions of the Archers, attending on the Knight or Captaine of the Watch, as well on Horsebacke as Foot; should haue both on the brests and backes, a Starre of white embroderie, which hath so continued to this day. And according to the Kings example, the Princes and Lords left the said Order to the Captaine of the Watch. This is (I say) a popular errour, which I my selfe sometime beleeued for a truth: but reading hath instructed mee in the contrarie.
If Charles the fift had abrogated this Order; Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, his youngest Sonne, had neuer worne it. As is to be seene in his Picture (according to the life) at the Celestines of Paris: as we shall further relate, in the Tract concerning The Order of Orleans, called, Of the Porcupine.
If Charles the seuenth had abolished this Order of the Starre, in the yeare 1455. he had not giuen it to the Prince of Nauarre, Gaston de Foix, his Sonne in Law, in the yeare 1458. And Porte Bordeille, called at this present S. Marceau,The death of King Charles the seuenth. newly builded in the yeare Foure hundred sixtie and one (where the said Charles the seuenth deceased) should neuer haue carried on the Frontispiece, the Image of the Virgine Mary, on the Pedestall whereof is yet at this present discerned, a Shield Azure, wherein is figured a Starre of Gold.
I haue seene some Letters of King Charles the fift, whereby he made Knights of his Order of the Starre, Viz. the Lords Iohn de Roche-Chouard, and Iohn de Beaumont, very famous houses in Poictou. This Iohn de Beaumont had in the said Prouince great Seigneuries, by meanes of his Wife Lucie de Bressuyre. And for Iohn de Roche-Chouard, otherwise called (by old titles) De Rupe Cauardi, he was Brother ^o the Vicount de Roche-Chouard, which House most nobly beareth for Armes D' Argent trois Viures de Gueules. Heere you may reade the Letters of the said King Charles the fift.




The Letters Patents of Charles the fift, King of France.
CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of France, To all such as shall see these Our present Letters, Salutations. Wee make knowne, that in regard of the good relation, which hath beene made vnto Vs, concerning the Lords Iohn de Roche-Chouard, and of Iohn de Beaumont, Gentlemen of our Chamber:The Starre Royall, or Royall Order of knighthood. Wee haue this day (in a good and gracious houre, Wee hope) giuen and graunted, and by these presents, doe giue and graunt, of Our especiall Grace and fauour, leaue, licence, and authoritie; that hence-forward, they may, and at their pleasure, beare La Royale Estoile in all Battailes, Tourneies, and Combates, and in all Fields, Places, Feasts, and Companies (as they shall thinke fit) to carrie the same. Giuen at Paris the fouretenth day of Ianuarie, in the yeare of Grace, 1376. And of Our Reigne, the eleuenth.

Signed by the King. De Scepeaux.





What Ceremonies were obserued in the times of the first Kings of the third Ligne, ^re liuely described by Ioannes Monachus Maioris Monasterij, in the life of Geoffrey, Duke of Normandie, Count of Aniou, Touraine, and of Maine. This Monke of Maire-Monstier, liued vnder the Reignes of Lewes le Gros, and Lewes the younger, Fa^her and Sonne of one name.
Foulques* King of Ierusalem, in right of his second wife, had by his first, a Sonne named Geoffrey, who maried with Madame Mahaulde, or Maulde of Eng^and, daughter to Henry, first of the name, King of England (youngest Sonne ^o William the Bastard, called the Conquerour, because hee Conquered

the Kingdome of England) and Madame Mahaulde (that is Mathildis in Latine) Daughter to Macolme,Mauld twice married, and to whom. King of Scotland. This Maulde of England was twice ioined in marriage. First, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred and nine, to the Emperour Henry, fift of the name: who being deceased in the yeare One thousand one hundred twentie sixe, Maulde returned into England, and then re-married in the yeare One thousand one hundred twentie seuen, with this Geoffrey (sir-named Planta-Genest,A Planter of Broom ^hrubs. because he tooke delight in planting that Shr^b) but by his enemies hee was called the Red, in regard his haire was of that coullour.
This Duke of Normandie, and King of England, Henry, first of the name, hauing assured the marriage of his daughter Maulde (who during her lifetime, was sir-named the Empresse) would make Knight (according to the Ceremonies the^ obserued in France) his future Sonne in Law Geoffrey of Aniou, who as yet was but a meane Gentleman, and whom the Monke of Maire-Monstier, by a Periphrasis of time, nameth ingenuously Nudum Militem. In super ex praecepto Regis Henrici exactum est a Comite Fulcone vt filium suum Nudum Militem ad ipsam imminentem Pentecostem Rotomagum honorifice mitteret, vt ibidem cum coaqu^^ suis Arma Suscep^urus Regalibus gaudijs interesset.
A matter worth the obseruation.It was obserued for an auncient custome, that young Gentlemen, as namely, the Sonnes of Princes and great Lords, were neuer admitted to the Table of their Fathers, if they were not made Knights. As we learne by Iohn, the Deacon of Aquil^ia, in the Historie of the Lombardes. Apud Longobardos ea c^nsuetudo est, vt filius Regis cum Pater non prandeat, nisi prius a Rege gentis exter^ Arma Suscipiat. Such a custome was generall to the Germaines and the French, as we haue noted in the first Booke, according to the testimonie of Caesar and Tacitus. To this purpose is to be obserued, that Princes and great Lords, who were not made Knights; at solemne Feasts, when Kings held full and open Courts: had no honour of sitting with them at the Table, that were Knights. Returne we now againe to our Knights.
Geoffrey of Aniou made Knight by king Henry of England, in Anno 11^7.On the day of Pentecoste, in the said yeare One thousand one hundred twentie seuen, when the King of England should giue the Order of Knighthood to his intended Sonne in Law: the said Geoffrey of Aniou, appeared in person at Rouen, accompanied with fiue Gentlemen and Barons of his owne age, to be made Knights with the Sonne of Foulques their Lord: to wit, Iacquelin de Mailly, Robert de S^mblensay, Ard^uin de Sainct Mard, Robert de Boloy, and Payen de Claire Vaux, attended on by fiue and twentie Esquires of their age (for each Knight in this Ceremonie, ought to haue two Esquires, at the least about his person, and especially to bee presented at the Altar) with many Sericants and Officers.
The auncient manner and custome of making Knights.On the euen of the Feast, the Knights to be made were bathed and washed according to the Auncient custome. And the day being come, the King commanded, that Count Geoffrey and his Assotiates should be brought before him. At comming forth of the Bathes, Geoffrey by his Esquires and Chamber-Groomes, had a fine Shirt put on him, and ouer it a Wastecoat of Crimzen Silke, embrodered with Gold; whereon hee had a Surcoat or Cassock of fine Scarlet, all ouer embrodered with Gold. His Breeches were of the same Stuffe, his Stockings of Silke, and his Shooes curiously wrought with small golden Lyons. His Companions were likewise cloathed with fine Linnen and Scarlet, departing so from their Garderobe to come to the Pallace. To these young Gentlemen were brought gallant Coursers, and glittering Armes, especially to the Angeuin, a good Iennet of Spaine, so fleete and swift, that his pace equalled the flight of the ayrie Birdes. He was armed with a H^bert, double mailled, and made of such a temper, as it could not be pierced with the steele of a Launce, nor any Darts or Arrowes. The Greaues for his legges were likewise of Maile, curiously gilded, and so were his Spurres* about his necke hung a Shield, charged with Lyons of Gold, and an Helmet on his head, enriched with many precious Stones, and of so sound a temper,

that the stroakes of the best Sword could not enter it, and then was brought him a Launce of Ashe, the head whereof was fordged at Poictiers. To make vp the close of his Arming, they deliuered him a goodly Sword, brought forth of King Henries rich Armorie, Damasked and gilded, with diuers Histories engrauen thereon, by the industrious cunning of the Master of Master-Engrauers, in that time, named Galan. The new Knight mounted vp brauely on Horse-backe, without putting any foote in the Stirrop, and the Solemnitie lasted seuen whole daies, in Feasts, Tourneis, and Mascaradoes. But on the eight day, were performed the Nuptials of the Royall Daughter, with the new created Knight, in the Citie of Mans. Here follow the words of the Auncient Authour.
Illucescente die altera, Balneorum vsus Vti Tyrocinij Suscipiendi Consuetudo Expostulat, paratus est. Comperto Rex a Cubicularijs quod Andegauensis, and qui cum eo venerant, ascendissent de Lauacro, iussit eos ad se vocari. Post corporis ablutionem ascendens De Balneorum Lauacro Comitis Andegauorum generosa proles Goffredus, bysso retorta ad carnem induitur, cyclade auro texta, super vestitur, Chlamide conchilij, and muricis sanguine tincta tegitur, caligis holosericis calciatur, pedes eius s^tularibus in superficie Leunculos aureos habentibus muniuntur. Eius vero Consoda^es qui cum eo militiae suscipiendae munus expectabant, vniuersi bysso and purpura in^^euantur.
Talibus itaque, vt praetaxatum est, ornamentis decoratus Regius gener quasi flos Li^ij candens roseo superfusus rubore, cum illo suo nobili collactaneo comitatu de Secreto Thalami processit in publicum. Adducti sunt Equi, allata sunt Arma, distribuuntur singulis, pro vt opus erat. Andegauensi vero adductus est miri decoris equus Hispa^ensis, qui tantae, vt aiunt, velocitatis erat, vt multae aues in volando eo tardiores essent. ^nduitur Lorica incomparabili, quae maculis duplicibus in texta, nullius Lanceae, vel ^aculis cuiuslibet ictibus transforabilis haberetur. Calciatus est caligis ferreis, ex ma^ulis itidem duplicibus compactis. Calcaribus aureis pedes eius astricti sunt Clypeus Leonculos Aureos imaginarios habens, collo eius suspenditur. Imposita est capiti eius Cassis multo lapide pretioso relucens, quae talis erat temperaturae, vt nullius ensis acumine incidi, vel falsificari valeret. Allata est ei Hasta Fraxinea, Ferrum Pictauense praetendens. Ad vltimum allata est ei Ensis de thesauro Regio, ab antiquo ibidem fignatus, in quo fabricando Fabrorum superlatiuus Galannus multa opera, and studio desudauit.
Taliter ergo armatus Tyro noster nouus Militiae postmodum futurus, mira agilitate, absque stasi gratia, in velocitatis Equum prosilijt, etc.



The Order of the Broome-Floure, in the Cod or Huske: Instituted by the Holy King Saint Lewes, Ninth of that name; In the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred thirtie foure.
CHAP. III. The Order of the Broome-Floure in the Huske or Cod.
THe good King Saint Lewes (the Mirror and Example of worthie Princes) Instituted two Orders of Knighthood.Two Orders of knighthood instituted by King Lewes. That of The Broome-Floure in the Cod or Huske, called by some the Broome Huske: And that of The Ship and Double Cuescents, or Halfe-Moones.
This worthie King, Sonne to Lewes, eight of the name (tearmed of Mont Pensier) and to Blanche of Castille (a most wise and vertuous Lady, whose reigne may well be a patterne,The birth of King Lewes. not only to the Queenes of France, being Widdowes, but likewise to all Princesses of Christendome) was borne on S. Markes day, being the fiue and twentieth day of the Month Aprill, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred and fifteene.
By decease of King Iewes, eight of the name his Father which happened on Sunday, in the Octaues of All-Saints, Anno, One thousand two hundred twentie sixe,His young comming to the Crowne. he came to the Crowne of France, at the age of eleuen or twelue yeares: and was Sacred and Crowned King the first day of December, in the said yeare, One thousand two hundred twentie sixe. All Regencies are perillous, and subiect to procure troubles and deuisions in the State: but especially that of Women, whose rule and command the French haue euermore detested.The Regencie of Women alwaies hatefull to the French. So Queene Blanche, being ordained Regent, by the last Will and Testament of the King her Husband; perceiued in a moment, that the great Lords of France banded themselues against her, vnder the Standard and conduct of Monsieur Phillip of France, Count of Bologne, and prime Prince of the Bloud, who pretended right to the Regencie, during the minoritie of the King Saint Lewes his Nephew.The worthie life and wisedom of Queen Blanche. But the wisedome and holy life of Queene Blanche, calmed all those commotions, wonne the malcontented Princes, as Thibault, King of Nauarre, Count Palatine of Brie and Champaigne, and the rest by force of Armes.
In the eight yeare of his Reigne, of his Age nineteene, and of Grace, One thousand two hundred thirtie foure, Queene Blanche deliuered vp the Gouernment of the Kingdome to her Sonne,Queen Blanch resigned her Regencie to the King her sonne. who the same yeare sent Gautier, Arch-Bishop of Sens, and Iohn de Neelle, Knight of the Starre, as his Ambassadours, to the Count of Prouence Raymond Berengarius; to demand in mariage Margaret his eldest daughter, a beautifull and wise Princesse, who was brought into France to the King Saint Lewes, and he espoused her in the Citie of Sens* where the Arch-Bishop of the place Sacred and Crowned her, according to the accustomed manner.

The Institution of this new Order of Knighthood.
AT this Sacring and Coronation, were performed many magnificent Triumphs, and for their further enlarging, the King ordained a new Order of Knighthood. For, ouer and beside that of the Starre (which continued in honour to the Reigne of King Lewes the eleuenth, who vtterly abrogated it, by the Institution of that of Saint Michael, and caused it to bee alwaies after worne by the Cap^aine of the Watch;) he instituted the Order of the Broome Flower, which endured in France, vntill the death of King Charles, fift of the name.
Genista Hispanica, Spanish broome. Humilis, wood waxen, Base broome. Sp^esa Syluestris Whi^nes or Futtes.Euery one knoweth, that there are diuers kindes of Broome, called in Latine Genista, which is the name of the true kinde. There are two sorts altogether full of thornie prickles; but in order next to the Hou, a Tree that hath the smoothest leaues in the World: there is a Broome which in France they tearme Genest porte-Raues; the Broome of Italie; the greater and the lesser Broome, called by the Greekes (...), and (...), according as the Latines. Also, two kinds of Herbes which carrie the same name: and lastly the same Broome, called Genist^lla. This Shrub is very common, and is to be seene in all hilly and mountainous places and Forrests, especially in meager and barren lands. All the Plaines of Bourdeaux,Broome is alwaies said to prosper best in s^ragie and leane grounds. from the Riuer of Andaye (so named of the last Village of France, seated on the banke of the said Riuer, called by the Spaniard Gostabar, and in Latin Vedasus, which maketh the seperation of France from Nauarre, whereof Font-arabie is the first Towne, watered with this Riuer, which is all in the Kingdome of France) are full of Broomes, which the Hidalgos, Pilgrimes of S. Iames in Galicia, gather and bind vp in knots as they passe along the way, to obserue

the turnings and windings of


pathes, with heapes or piles of Mercurie, and where each Hidalgo casteth his Stone or Flint, according to the Paganish Idolater, as quite bereft of iudgement and reason.
Broome beareth little greene leaues, of very small extent, and the Floure is yellow,A description of the Broom with long Cods or Huskes, which flourish in the Spring time, and in Autumne. This Shrub is much affected by the Gascoins, who haue made a Song thereof, beginning in their gibberish speaking:
A la hou m'en son auade:
And at each couplet, a double bearing or reitterating.

La hlour dou Genest m'agrade,
La hlour dou Genest.

The King Saint Lewes chose this Shrubbe to be his Embleme, and added thereunto these two words, Exaltat Humiles,The great and admirable humilitie of the holy and religious King. as holding it for the marke and Symbole of Humilitie. Which was so great in the person of this holy and deuout King, that in going to Saint Denys in France; hee followed the Religious men, and the Abbot of that Arch-Monasterie Royall, in their Chapter, and tooke his place last of the sixe degrees, euen on the lowest that ascended to the Abbatiall Seate. Tam humiliter cum ipsis in Capitulo residebat, quod nec locum Pueri ^oliti sunt sedere, vt de loco Abbatis, and ceterorum Monachorum taceam, sed gradum in^riorem, de sex Gradibus, per quos ad Abbatis Sedem ascenditur, sibi elegerit.
Hee would not seate himselfe in ranke among the sillie Nouices, but a great ^eale lower, and beneath them. So saith William de Nangis, a Monke of the said Ab^ey, in the Life of the same King Saint Lewes, the sixtie sixe Chapter.
It was likewise said in his time,His exaltation to the Kingdome by his humilitie. that God (in his vnsearchable prouidence) had exalted him to the Throne Royall of the French Empire, onely for his Humilitie; instead of his elder, Monsieur Phillip of France.
This great King was remarkeable, aboue all the Princes of his time, in regard of ^is taule and goodly stature, as also his valiancie. The Seneschall of Champaigne, Iohn Lord of Ioin-Ville, writing his life, and speaking of the day at Massourre in Aegypt, ^ith thus.

Le Roy s'arresta sur vn haut Chemin, and fit arrester toute sa Gent aussi, and commenca de ^s enhorter, and prier de bien faire. Son Heaume estoit tout dore, and en sa main tenoit ^e Espec d' Alemagne toute nue, and vous promets que ie ne veis oncques si bel Homme ^mme il estoit, car il apparoissoit par dessus tous les autres depuis les espaules.
The King made a stand vpon the High-way, and caused all his people to make a stand ^kewise, and beginning to exhort and encourage them; entreated them to performe their ^est behauiour. His Helmet was richly guilded, and in his hand he held a Sword of Allemaigne,

wholly naked. And I protest vnto you, that I neuer beheld so goodly a man, a^ he was; for he appeared (in taulenesse) aboue all the rest, euen from the shoulders.
Le mesme Historien en parlant de ladite Iournee: Soyez certains que celle Iournee le Roy fit de plus grands faicts d' Armes, que iamais i'aye veu faire en toutes les Batailles ou i^ fus onques. Et disoit on apres la Bataille, que si n'eust este sa personne, nous eussions este tous perdus, and morts a celle Iournee: and ie croy qu'a l heure sa Vertu, and Force luy fust doublee par la grace de Dieu: car il ne se feignoit point de se mettre aux dangers, and perils de la Bataille: and la ou il voyoit ses Gens en detresse, il se venoit frapper parmy pour les secourir, and tant donnoit de coups d Espee, and de Masse, que les Turcs nosoient approcher de luy. Et me compterent vn Iour le Sire de Courtenay, and Messire Iean de Salonay, qu'ils auoient veu que Six Turcs s'estoient addressez au Roy celuy Iour, and l'auoient pris a force par le frei^ de son Cheual, and l'emmenoient: mais le vertueux Prince voyant le danger ou il estoit s'euertua de tout son pouuoir, and par grand courage'frappa sur les Turcs qui le tenoient, en maniere que luy seul se deliura de leurs mains.
The same Historian, speaking on further, concerning the same day, saith. Beleeue it for certaine, that the same day, the King performed the very fairest actions of Armes, that euer in my life time I beheld, in all the Battailes that I haue seene. And it was told me after the Battaile, by one of no meane creadit, that if himselfe (I meane the King) had not bin there in person, wee had bin all lost, and slaine that day. I am perswaded, that euen in the instant houre, his hie vertue and strength became redoubled, meerely by the grace of God. For he failed not, to thrust himselfe into the greatest dangers and perils of the Battaile, and where hee saw his men in any distresse, he laid about him lustily, to succour and relieue them, deliuering so many valiant stroakes, both with his Sword and Battle-Axe, that the Turkes durst not aduenture to come neere him. And it was related to me the same day, by the Lord de Courtnay, and Messire Iohn de Salonay, that they saw sixe Turkes, who addressed themselues against the King that very day, and forceably caught hold on the bridle of his Horse, leading him so away with them. But the vertuous Prince, perceiuing in what perill he was; endeauoured to make knowne his Royall resolution, and meerely by admirable courage, so laid vpon the Turkes which led him; that he deliuered himselfe quite out of their hands.

Concerning the Coller of the Order, with the Emblazon.The Coller appointed for this Order of the Broome-Floure, was composed of such Huskes or Coddes, as naturally doe grow on the Broome, wrought and enaminelled to the true shape by Art. Entrelassees de Fleurs de Lys d'Or, encloses dedans des Lozanges Chechees (c'est a dire toutes ouuertes a Iour) esmaillees de blanc, enchainees ensemble, and au (...) vne Croix Florencee d'Or. According to that which is in the Kings Chappell, and following the auncient custome.
The King Saint Lewes, first of all receiued the said Order, by the hand of Gautier Arch-Bishop of S^ns, on the Eeuen before the Coronation of Queene Margaret of Prouence his w^fe.
Concerning the Knights of this Order, they vsed to weare Coates or Cassocks of white Damaske, with violet Chapperons. The number of them was not fixedly concluded on; but depended onely on the will of our Kings, who were heads and Soueraignes of this Order. William de Nangis, Monke of S. Denys in France, obserueth in the life of Saint Lewes, noated vnder the yeare One thousand two hundred thirtie eight, that he gaue the said Order to Monsieur Robert of France, his brother (to whom hee gaue for Appanage the Countie of Artois) in the Abbatiall Church of S. Cornille de Compiegne,Marriage of the Count of Artois to the Duke of Brabants daughter. on the morrow after Marriage of the said Count of ^rtois with Mahauld, daughter to the Duke of Brabant. At this Solemnitie assisted all the Nobil^tie of France, as well women as men, two thousand Knights Bannere^s, with their Seriants and Varlets on foote, in so great number, that the Emperour Fredericke, who had entreated a Parlee with King Lewes, and their meeting appointed at Vau-Couleurs, the Marches and Frontiers of France and Lorraine; sailed of comming to the Parlee, for feare of the French.
The same Kings Saint Lewes, assembled the generall States of the Kingdome at

Paris, in the yeare One thousand two hundred threescore and seauen, the Feast of Pentecoast, and in the Church of Paris;An assembly of the Kingdomes general Estates at Paris, for giuing the Order. where he gaue the Order of the Broome-Floure, to Monsieur Phillip of France, being his eldest Sonne; to his Nephew Robert, Count of Artois, (Sonne to Monsieur Robert of France, his Brother, who dyed at Massourre in Aegypt) and to many Barons and great Lords of France. The So^emnitie was great, and the Court most magnificent, and the Feast continued eight whole dayes. Moreouer, the Streetes of Paris were all hung with Tapistries, the Shoppes shut vp, and Tables readily prepared in the Streetes, to banquet all commers, according to the auncient custome. Which is obserued by the Monke of S. Denys in France, William de Nangis, in the Life of the said King Saint Lewes, in these words.

ANno Domini, M.CC.LXVII. in Pentecoste, Praelatis, and Baronibus fere totius Regni Franciae, Parisius congregatis, Ludouicus Rex Franciae videns filium suum primogenitum Philippum iuuenem fortem, and probissimum, atque Robertum Nepotem suum filium ^oberti fratris sui Attrebatensis Comitis, quondam apud Massorram interfecti, eos, cum pluribus alijs, Milites nouos Genistellae fecit: vbi tanta fuit laetitiae solemnitas, quod Populus Ciuitatis Parisiensis ab omni opere vacans, solummodo laetitiae, and exultationi intentus, per Octo dies and amplius Ciuitate per totum cortinis pannorum varij coloris, and ornamentis pretiosis mirabiliter palliata, cibisque publicis solemnitatem protenderent.

And thus doth the ignorance of Painters and Caruers make it selfe manifest, who taking the Image and representation of the said King Saint Lewes, as well high-raised or embossed, as in flat forme of painting, haue figurde him without any Order on the Cloake ouer his Royall Mantle. Whereas (indeede) hee had two Orders, as namely, that of the Starre, and (beneath it) that of the Broome-Floure, which two Orders held in full currencie, vntill the Reigne of King Lewes the eleauenth.
I haue seene and read the Letters, granted by King Charles the fift, Sir-named the Wise, concerning the Order of the Broome-Floure, and by him giuen to one of his Bed-Chamber, Messire Geoffrey de Belle-Ville, of a most auncient House in Poictu: Qui portoit Gironne de Gueulles, and de Vaire. Behold here the tenure of those Letters.




A Copie of the Kings Letters Patents.
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of France. To all such as shall see and read these our present Letters; Greeting. Wee make knowne, that in regard of the good relation, which hath bin made vnto vs, of Geffrey de Belle-Ville, a faithfull Gentleman of our Bed-Chamber, concerning his good and Noble generation: Wee haue (of our especiall grace and fauour) giuen and granted to him, that he may, and hath free leaue and licence, at all Feasts and Companies, to weare The Coller of the Broome-Floure, without any manner of checke or reprehension. Giuen at Tours vnder our Seale, the sixt day of Iuly, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and eighteene; and of our Reigne the foureteenth.




At the entrance of Queene Isabell of Bauaria into Saint Denys in France, the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and nine; to the same place also came the Queene of Sicilie, Mary de Blois, Widdow to Monsieur Lewes of France, King of Sicilie, first of the name. There she presented her two Sonnes, Lewes, second of the name, King of Sicilie, and Charles, Prince of Tarentum, to King Charles the sixt; who made them Knights of the Starre, and of the Broome-Floure, with great magnificence and solemnitie, in a most ample Assembly; because they were Cousins to the King, and very goodly Princes, so saith the Chronicle of Monsieur Iohn of France, Duke of Berry.
Le Viel des Montaignes a tyrannous ki^g of the Arsacides and Beduins.William de Nangis, obserueth in the life of the same Saint Lewes, that one teaming himselfe Le Viel des Montaignes, King of the Arsacides and Beduins, abiding on the Confines and Frontiers of Antioch and Damas, in Castles which were impregnable, seated on the tops of Mountaines; sent certaine of his Assassins or murderers into France, to massacre and kill the said Saint Lewes. This Tyrant, who commanded ouer fortie thousand men, made himselfe greatly feared, both of Christians and Sarrazens, because he nourished, and gaue education in strong Castles and places,Schollers trained vp in a most deuilish Doctrine. to Children of the Countrey vnder his obedience, who were instr^cted in most horrid and abhominable maximes (renewed in France within fortie or fiftie yeares of these times, for the killing and murdering of our Kings) and that they merited the ioyes and glory of Paradise; if they shewed themselues readily obedient, to a blind-folded dutie which this Prince commanded them, to murder such Kings and Princes as he would haue them, and in the places where he appointed, be it in any Kingdome whatsoeuer.
Such as died in those enterprises, were adored by the people of the Countrey, and reputed to be Angels: as a new kinde of Doctrine, authorised, maintained, and practised at this day, subborning Subiects, to murder Kings and Princes of the Land, and afterward, to Canonize those murdering Assassins and Rauillacks, among the blessed number of Martyres.
Quosdam Pueros de terra sua faciebat in Palatijs educare, et ibi addiscebant Idiomat^, and docebantur Dominum suum super omnia timere, eique vsque ad Mortem obedire, vt sic possent ad gaudia Paradisi peruenire. Quisquis in obedientia moriebatur, a gentibus terrae pro Angelo colebatur, so saith Nangis.
God the preseruer of Kings and Monarches, altered the heart of this Viell des Montaignes, who repenting, that he had proiected the death of the said King Saint Lewes: sent him new. Arsacides in all diligence, to aduertise him for care of himselfe, because there were Gallants come to his Court, that verily purposed to murder him.
King Lewes his Guard of an hundred Gentlemen.Saint Lewes amazed at these strange tidings; according to the aduise of his Councell, tooke for the Guarding of his person, an hundred Gentlemen, well qualified; and of Noble extraction, bearing the title of Escuyers des Corps, and in the language then vsed, called De Serients Ly Roys.
Each of the said Serieants wore a long Cassocke, and white sleeuelesse Iacket, reaching downe so low as beneath his knees, embrodered and thickly spread with Butterflies of siluer embossed, and both before and behinde was likewise embrodered the Shrubs of the Broome-Flowre, wi^h a Hand aboue, as descending out of Heauen, holding a Crowne, and for the expression of the deuise, there were three Roules plaited with these words, Deus Exaltat Humiles.
Originall of the Kings hundred Gentlemen.They caried Battle-Axes of Copper, so saith Nangis. Rex salubri consilio vsus, corpus suum Per Homines Nobiles Cupreas clauas assidue deportantes, fecit diligentissime custodiri. From thence, some haue deriued the sourse and first Originall, of the hundred Gentlemen of the Kings house; and others, that of the Scottish Guard.
The hundred Gentlemen of the Kings house, heretofore carried nothing but Battle-Axes, of such shape and fashion, as is seene engrauen on many Tombes, which are in the Church, and at the Cloyster of Saint Katherine, du Val des Escoliers a Paris, and else-where. In following time, ouer and beside the said Battle-Axe; they carried Le Bec de Corbin. And heretofore, at their enterment, (with their other Armes) was carried before the body, the Battaile-Axe, and the Bec de Corbin: And on their Tombes, the same Armes were engrauen En Saultour, beneath the Escutchions of their owne Armes.
Guardes to the Predecessours of S. Lewes.Nor doth this so alter the case, but that our Kings, of the first, second, and third Ligne, Predecessours of S. Lewes, had in like manner their ordinary Guardes. For S. Gregory of Tours, in diuers and sundry places of his Historie of France, doth there auouch vnto vs the contrarie. And namely, speaking of the King of Orleans, Saint Gonthran, in his Historie of France.
King Phillip Augustus, called the Conquerour, had some feares and affrights, as well as Saint Lewes his youngest sonne. For the great Chronicle of S. Denys in

France reporteth, that the said Augustus being on a day at Pont-Oise; newes were brought him from parts beyond the Seas, beside Letters sent from some of his friends, containing, that Le Vieil de la Montaigne had sent two Arsacides into France, at the request, or rather command of King Richard of England. For hee had newly slaine the Marquesse, who was a Noble and puissant Knight in Armes, and gouerned both prouidently and vertuously his Land, before the comming of the two Kings. At these newes the King became much moued and troubled, so that presently he departed from Point-Oise, and thence-forward was very curious and carefull, for safe-guarding of his body, because his heart was greatly dismaied at these tydings. And in regard his feare and doubt encreased daily more and more, he was councelled by his familiar friends, what he should doe in this case.What ensued on the great feare and dismay of King Lewes. By their aduise, he sent to Le Vieil de la Montaigne, who was King of the Arsacides, to haue more plaine and certaine information. And while the Messengers were gone about the businesse: Hee established Serients, who alwayes carried great Battle-Axes of Copper before him, as Guards to his Body; and in the night time they watched by him, some after other, and so distinguished the seuerall houres of the night.
This is that which Rigordus hath obserued, in the life of the said King Phillip Augustus, vnder the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and twelue. Allatae sunt Philippo Regi apud Pontisarum literae de trans-marinis partibus, quod ad suggestionem, and mandatum Regis Richardi Angliae mittebantur Arsacidae ad Philippum Regem Interficiendum. Interfecerunt enim eo tempore Marchisum Regis consanguineum. (This is vnderstood of Conrard, Marquesse of Montferrat, Prince of Tyre, and King of Ierusalem, by meanes of his wife, murdered by two Arsacides, by conspiracie of the Templers, enuious against the valiancie of this Prince, who was the scourge of the Sarrazins) in trans-marinis partibus Virum in armis strenuum, qui viribus suis, and potentia Terram Sanctam, antequam Reges illi illuc venirent, mira, strenuitate regebat. Rex vero Philippus auditis literis, ira inflammatus, statim ab eodem castro recessit, and plurimum sollicitus multis dicbus permansit. Et quia animus ipsius Regis pro huiusmodi rumoribus multum turbabatur, and sollicitudo magis, ac magis crescebat in dies, habito cum familiaribus, consilio misit Nuntios suos ad Vetulum Arsacidarum Regem, vt per ipsum rei veritatem diligentius, and plenius cognosceret.

Interim tamen instituit Rex ad maiorem cautelum Custodes Corporis sui, Clauas Aereas semper in manibus portantes, and per totam noctem alternatim circa eum vigilantes.




The Order of the Ship, called; Of beyond the Seas: And of the double Crescents or halfe Moones: Instituted by the King Saint LEVVES, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred threescore and nine.
The Order of the Shippe, etc.
HEE that was the first among men, disdaining the furie of the Windes, drying vp wholly the Desert Lybia,Concerning the first inuenter of Nauigation. euermore counterbanded, opposite and contrary to his Brethren the Windes of the North, North-North-East, and North-East; who without apprehending the Raynie sweltie heates, and tempestuous Windes of the South, aduentured himselfe on the inconstant billowes of the raging Seas, chusing a Barke or Vessell of

Wood, containing the estimate of three or foure fingers in thicknesse, to serue as a Iudge and Arbitratour of his Life; Without all question to the contrary, was indued with an inuincible courage, and his heart so armed, as with a triple Brest-pla^e of Brasse. Be it, that he was thereto incited, to tame the furious Lyon the Ocea^, thorow auarice and desire, to enrich himselfe with strange spoyles; or by ambition, to conquer new Prouinces, and command ouer them; or else by a desire truely generous, deseruing to haue a well seated soule, to know and vnderstand the wonders of the world.

Illi robur, and as triplex
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci
Commisit Pelago ratem
Primus: nec timuit praecipitem Africum
Decertantem Aquilonibus:
Nec tristeis Hyadas, nec rabiem Noti.

Very excellently said the Lyrique Poet, in the first of his Verses.
The reason of King Lewes his two voyages into the East.Ambition, for conquering new Prouinces, nor desire to enrich himselfe with Gold, and the precious Stones of Mexico and Peru, or the Spiceries in the Isles of Sonda; had any power to instigate the good King Saint Lewes, for making his passage into the East two seuerall times. But it was the onely desire of Gods glory, aduancement of the Catholique Faith; and the conuersion, or extirpation of people, that were Infidels and miscreants.
Of the Kings of the first and second lign in their voyages.The Kings of the first and second Ligne, did make diuers voyages into Germanie, Italie and Spaine, as well to winne conquests there, as to fight against their enemies. But there was not one of them, that attempted to passe ouer the Seas, for to plant there the Faith of Iesus Christ. Vnder the third Ligne, the Seas serued as Galleries and ordenary walkes, for the Princes and great Lords of France, euen into Palestine and A^gypt, to vn-nestle the Sarrazins; yea, and into Thrace, to chastise the Grecian Emperours for their perfidie and disloyaltie, on behalfe of the Christians that were Latines.
The third lign exceeded both the other in length of reignAnd like as our Kings of the third Ligne, did surpasse the two other in deuotion and Pietie, euen so did their Reignes continue much longer, then the first and second together. In regard, that long life is promised as a recompence to such, as honor our Mother the Catholique and Apostolique Church (out of which there is not any to be saued) defending and protecting her from her enemies.
Vnder the Reigne of Phillip, first of the name, was made that famous enterprise, for Conquest of the Holy-Land; whereto the Kingdome of France (alone) furnished and contributed more Princes, Noblemen, and worthy Warriours, then all the rest of Europe together. In like manner, it had the honour (farre aboue all Nations else, for giuing Kings to the holy Citie of Ierusalem; yea, Princes to the best Cities in the Lands of Idumea, Armenia and in Cyprus, and Emperours to Constantinople.
The Kings of France voyagers to the Holy-LandThe Kings, Lewes the seauenth, tearmed the yonger (in regard of the difference betweene him and Lewes le Gros his Father) otherwise called the Pittifull; Phillip Augustus his Sonne, tearmed the Conquerour, and Gods-Gift; and his yongest Son Saint Lewes (the subiect of this discourse) made the voyage in person ouer the Seas, with most part of the Princes of their Blood, and S. Lewes two seuerall times.
The first voyage of King Lewes to Aegypt and Palestine.His first voyage into Aegypt, and into Palestine, was in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred fortie and eight. After he had set downe his firme resolution to doe it; all the remainder of his life (which was two and twentie yeares) hee cloathed himselfe more meane and simply, then all the rest of his Court. For he would not weare any costly or sumptuous garments; neither would hee weare Furres of Mineuer or Gray, nor Scarlet cloath, or Stirroppes or Spurres guilded. His garments were of Cammels haire of Persia, being of Watchet or Blew-Celestiall-colour, and they were furred with the skinnes of Garintes, and the legges of Hares, so saith the Lord of Ioinuille in his Life. Hee made no

more vse of Greene, Red or fine Murrey or Violet, nor exquisite Furres, as the Ermine and Letice. His Spurs, the Bridles of his Horses, and his Stirrops were plaine white, or a water-colour, without any guilding or embrodery. Ab illo tempore quo ^iter transmarinum arripuit, nunquam indutus est, Squaleto, vel panno viridi, seu Bru^eta; nec pellibus varijs, sed veste nigri coloris, vel Camelini Persei. Similiter ex tunc nunquam vti voluit calcaribus vel fraenis, nisi omnino albis and ferreis absque aliqua aura^ura, nec cellis ad equitandum nisi albis, sine omni pictura: These are the words of William de Nangis, Monke of S. Denys in France, writing his Life.
In those times the Kings of France had not any Port of the Sea belonging to them, where they might take Shipping for long Voyages,The Kings of England Dukes of Guyenne and Normandie. and the Hauens to remaine in their owne power: For the Kings of England (being Dukes of Guyenne and Normandie, vnder the hommage of France) possessed all the Ports of the Ocean Sea, from Boione, so farre as into Piccardie, which the Counts of Vermandois held, and the Counts of Flanders the rest of the Sea. The Counts of Prouence and Tolosa, had in Languedocke and Prouence, the Ports of the Mediterranean Sea (which is the very shortest cut for passage into the Leuant Sea) vnder their subiection. So that Saint Lewes was constrained at his first voyage, to borrow of the Count of Prouence his Brother, the Port of Marseilles, from whence hee lanched forth his Armie (which consisted of two and thirtie thousand men) the fiue and twentieth day of August, in the yeare One thousand two hundred fortie and eight, shaping his course for Cyprus, where hee arriued in the Moneth of September fol^owing.
William of Nangis, in the life of the same Saint Lewes, more at large declareth, that he did set forth from the Port of Aigue-Mortes; Tandem Rex ad Portum Aquarum Mortuarum veniens die Martis in Crastino beati Bartholomaei Apostoli nauem cum suis intrauit. In which passage he hath failed. For I haue learned in the Towne of Aigues-Mortes, that the Port thereof was not finished, till the yeare One thousand two hundred fiftie two, a yeare after the death of the last Raymond, Count of Tolosa, who is said to decease in the yeare One thousand two hundred fortie nine. And Mathew Paris, who wrote his Historie of England at the same time, and dyed when the same S Lewes did, obserueth notably; that the said King disanchored from Marseilles, and not from Aigues-Mortes. Rex igitur Francorum vale dicto Papae (Innocent the fourth, who then held a generall Councill at Lyons, against the Emperour Fredericke) and accepta ab eo remissione peccatorum post factam cum morosa deliberatione confessionem, cum Papali benedictione recedens a Lugduno, versus Marsiliam Lora direxit, and Vexilla. And a little lower.
Progrediensque Christianissimus Rex Francorum multa maiora apud Marsiliam (his Armie had bin greatly iniuried in Auignion, and so was much more at Marseilles, saith this Authour, who noateth all the seuerall particularities, whereof Nangis speaketh nothing t^lerauit detrimenta, ita vt Francorum Primates prouocati, nisi discre^a, ac sancta Regis modestia retardarentur, istam Ciuitatem cum magna instantia, and indignatione obsedissent.
When Lewes the seauenth vndertooke the Voyage beyond the Seas,The Iourney of King Lewes the seauenth to Ierusalem. which pro^ed fruitlesse and vnprofitable, by the disloyaltie of Emanuell Emperour of Greece, happening in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred fortie seauen, the second weeke after Pentecoast. He made the said Voyage by Land, trauersing with his Armie the Countries of Bauaria, the higher and lower Austria, Hungaria, Bulgaria, and both the Thraces, arriuing at Constantinople; from whence they passed the straite of Galipolis, otherwise called the Arme of Saint George, as also Bithinia, which is the first Prouince of Asia, pitching their Campe at Chalcedon, from whence at length they marched to Ierusalem, and thence to the Siedge at Damas, as we shall (by Gods assistance) declare in the ninth Booke.
The returne of the said King Lewes the seauenth, was by Sea;The Kings returne by Sea. hauing hired Ships for passage of the Genewayes and Pisanes, and taken for his Guide George, Lieutenant ^o Roger, King of Sicilie.
Phillip Augustus, his onely Sonne, made his voyage of the Holy-Land, in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred fourescore and ten, at the Feast of Saint

Iohn Baptist: and from Vezelay in Bourgongne, he set on towards Italie, to ta^^ Shipping at Geneway. Naues, and ea quae erant victui necessaria, cum Armament^^ diligentissime parari fecerat, Ianuam venit. All the Fleete was gouerned by the ^^newayes, with whom he must of necessitie serue himselfe, because he dis-anchored from their Port. And as for the King of England, Richard, he had made his ^^nishments at Marseilles; in regard he had not any Port on the Mediterranean Sea, which was vnder his obedience, So saith Mathew Paris, the Monke of Saint Albanes in England. Duo Reges, Francorum videlicet, and Anglorum conuenerunt ap^^ Vizeliacum, vbi corpus beatae Mariae Magdalenae requiescit, in octauis Sancti Ioannis Baptistae. Deinde ^eges venerunt ad Lugdunum ad Rhodanum, postea diuisi sunt ab inuicem, Vnde Rex Francorum versus Genuensem Ciuitatem iter arripuit; and Rex Anglorum versus Massiliam. In this Voyage, our Augustus, as well as King Richard of England, was constrained to be at the mercie of the Genewayes and Prouencials, inured to sayling continually on the Adriatique Sea.
The returne of King Phillip Augustus back againe.At his returne, Phillip Augustus made vse of the Genewayes seruice, for landing in Apulia. Ventis, and Mari se commisit, cum tribus tantum Galeis, quas Rufus de Volta ^^nuensis ei parauerat ad partem Apuliae, Deo volente transuectus est. Vbi recuperata qu^^tulacunque sanitate, quamuis debilis cum paucis iter arripuit, and transitum faciens per Romanam Ciuitatem, visitatis Apostolorum liminibus, and accepta benedictione a Roman Pontifice Celestino, in Franciam redijt, ciraa Natiuitatem Domini, quam apud F^nte^ Eblaudi (Fontaine-^laud) celebrauit.
Concerning the Co^quest of Constantinople by the French BaronsIn that memorable enterprise of the Conquest of Constantinople, made in the time of Phillip Augustus, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred and one, by the Barons of France; Bauldwine Count of Flanders; Lewes, Count of Blois; Stephen, Count of Perche; the Marquesse of Montferrat, and other great Lords, named in the Historie of that voyage, described by Geoffrey de Ville Harduin, Marshall of Champaigne. The said Barons were constrained, to goe and Shippe themselues at Venice, and to pay the Venetians for their passage to Constantinople; which they conquered from the Greekes. It was not then knowne in France, what benefit redounded by Ports and Marine prouisions; because our Monarches, contenting themselues with their owne demeanes, and hauing no enemies of strangers to meddle withall had nothing to doe vpon the Seas.
Yet we learne by Rigordus, in the life of Phillip Augustus, that that great Prince hauing resolued to conquer England, from King Iohn without Land, his mortall enemie, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred and thirteene, prepared a Fleete of a thousand and seauen hundred Shippes. But this Fleete was commanded and gouerned by the wadged Genewayes And that for Monsieur Lewes of France his Sonne, elected King of England; was ruled by an English Pyrate, Sir named the Monke, according as we haue declared in the former Booke.
Enguerrand de Ba^lleu^^, first Admirall of France.And the first Admirall of France, or that euer had bin there by title of Office^ was Enguerrand de Bailleul, whom Feron in the Catalogue of the Admirals of France, maketh Lord of Coucy, of Oizy, Montmirell, Marle, La Fere, and other Seignuries; which were falne to the Royall House of Bourbon, to the King of Na^re Anthony, first of the name, Grand-Father to King Lewes the thirteenth. Hee was created by Phillip le Hardy, Sonne and Successour in the Kingdome of France to Saint Lewes, in the yeare One thousand two hundred fourescore and foure, to command the Fleete, prouided by the said King Phillip, for the Conquest of Cathalogue, Roussilli^n and Cerdaignia, from King Peter of Arragon; as we are enstructed by William de Nangis, who wrote the Life of the said Saint Lewes. Ibidem captus fuit d^ Arragonijs Classis Amiralius Ingerrannus de Baillolio Miles Egregius, and alius quidam in armis Arenuissimus Aubertus de Longua-valle interfectus, qui supra Arragones vlterius quam debuit pertransiuit. Istum Aubertum, vt tradunt aliqui, cum p^t^isset eidem in instanti succurrisse, occidere permisit Ioannes de Hardi-Curia Franciae Marescallus. Returne we to Saint Lewes.
His first voyage beyond the Seas into Aegypt, was (as we haue said) in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred fortie and eight, and not hauing any Port or Hauen on the Adriaticke Sea in his power, that is to say, in the Prouinces of 

Languedocke or Prouence; he was compelled to borrow of the Count of Prouence, that of Marseilles. From whence he set forward with his Armie, which consisted of two and thirtie thousand men, the fiue and twentieth day of August, the yeare aforesaid.
At his second Voyage,The Hauen of Aigues-Mortes made by the King S. Lewes. he would be no more be beholding to anothers courtesie, but the Prouince of Languedocke being reunited to the Crowne, by decease of Iane, the last Countesse of Tolosa: Saint Lewes caused to be builded the Towne of Aigues-Mortes, ingirting and entowring it with very strong Wals, with a goodly Port and large Hauen, for the receipt of Shipping, which (to this day) called by his name, La Grau Louis. And it was from this Port of Aigues-Mortes, that S. Lewes set to Sea, for sayling into Affrica, with an Armie of men, being fortie thousand in number, on Tuesday after the Feast of the Prince of the Apostles, in the yeare of Grace,A new Order of Knighthood instituted by King Lewes. One thousand two hundred threescore and nine.
S. Lewes, for the greater animating and encouraging the Nobilitie of France, in attempting this voyage ouer the Seas with


him: As a new recompence and prize of honor (beside the two Orders of France, then in full pride and request, Of the Starre, and Of the Broome-Floure) he instituted a Third, particularly for this last Voyage; the subiect and circumstances whereof, were represented by the Coller of this Order, called Of the Ship, and hanging at the lower end thereof. The Coller of this Order was interlaced with double Scallops, which figured the sandy Shore and Port of Aigues-Mortes; in like manner as the Ship and double Crescents, enterwouen and passed En Saultour, made manifest declaration; that this enterprize was to fight with Infidell Nations, which followed the false Law of Mahomet, who bare the Crescent.
It is not vnknown, that this false Prophet began to appeare, at the time of the Emperor Heraclius, in the yeare of Grace, sixe hundred twenty three. But when he published his detestable Law, intermixed with Christianity, Iudaisme and Paganisme, was in the yeare six hundred twentie and foure, some say one. And then he would haue his false and detestable doctrin to be receiued and embraced, by blood, murder and slaughter of such as refused to allow it.
He ordained, that the yeares of his Egire, that is to say,Ordenances deuised and appointed by Mahomet. Of his comming for^hin Armes, should be gouerned and accounted by the courses of the Moone: That the Moneths of them also should be Lunarie: That his Armies, Squadrons and Battalions should br ordered, raunged and disposed in a Lunarie forme, and of a Crescent. And that his Successours should carrie for their Armes (as he had done) the Crescent and halfe Moone. Which Orders haue bin carefully kept by the Grand Seigneurs of the Turkes, the Othomans; who in their Standards and Banners beare the said Crescent.
Nor was this the cause concerning the Citie of Constantinople (which the Turkes in their language call CZARIGRADE and STAMBOVL, that is to say,How the Turkes do call Constantinople in their Language. The Royall Citie, conquered from the last Constantine by Mahomet, second of the name, King of Turkes, on tuesday the seauen and twentieth day of May, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred fiftie and three) that the Great Turke carried the said Crescent in Armes, as some haue written; and that the puissant Citie of Constantinople carried for her Armes the Crescent, or halfe Moone, because it was seated on a Port, made naturally in the forme of a Crescent. Like vnto the Citie of Bordeaux, the chiefest of Guienne: Qui porte d'Or au Lyon passant de Gueulles,

soustenu de la forme de leur Hostell deVille d'Argent massonnee de Sable a la Tour de mesme, chargee d'vne Cloche d' Azur, porte d'uvn Pont basty sur vne Riuiere ondee d'Argent, and d' Azur, au Croissant d' Argent eu poincte, au Chef de France.
This opinion hath not any apparance of truth, for from the time that Constantine the Great established his Imperiall Seate in this new Rome, which hee called by his owne name: Hee gaue for his Armes the Mettall and Colour of rhe Romaine Empire, as well for the East as West. C'estoit de Gueulles a l'Aigle d'Or esploie a deux Testes. Hee gaue (I say) for Armes to the said Citie, L'Escu de Gueulles a la Croix d'Or, cantonnee de quatre B. Grecs, which some call Fuzils, adossez d'Or. This second Letter of the Greeke Alphabet, should represent the name of Bisantium, in remembrance and memory of her first Founder, Bisas, and Constantine the Great, hauing made it become Royall, by reason of his ordenary abiding there; was esteemed as the second Founder, according as the Poet Claudian hath obserued.
Hoc Bizas, Constantinusque videbunt.
Some there are, who haue interpreted Ces quatre Fuzils adossez d'Or, to be the proud titles of the Emperours of the East, Successours to the said Constantine the Great, for a Greeke Cipher or Monogramme. (...). Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium; King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,The Emperors of the East their presumptuous tit^es. a title of loftinesse, pride and arrogancie, vainely vsurped by the Kings of Assyria, and by Nabuchodnozor, in the Prophet Ezekiel, by Cyrus in Esdras, and by Phraates, King of the Parthians, by the report of Dion. A Title of honor and preheminence, which appertaineth to none but God onely (in the Apocalips) vnto whom is giuen the power, to establish and vnthrow Kings and Princes on the earth, according as it seemeth best to him.
We will say of the Crescent, that it hath bin (from all times) the Symbole and noate of Nobilitie, through all the Nations of the world, yea, euen in them furthest off from our knowledge.
The Crescent the signe of the High-Priesthood, and Royall Dignitie.The high-Priest of the Iewes wore his Tyaras and Mitre, in the forme of a Crescent, as the noate of his Priest-hood, and (by the same meanes) the marke of Royall dignitie. Regale Genus Sacerdotium. It was the figure of the Church, compared to the Moone, which receiued her light from the Sunne of Iustice or Righteousnes; her vertue, her ornament, and all her power.
Apoc. 12 1.In the Apocalipse, to demonstrate the excellencie and Nobilitie of the Church; Saint Iohn exalteth her aboue the Moone. Mulier amicta Sole, Luna sub pedibus ei^^, and in capite eius Corona Stellarum duodecim. A woman cloathed with the Sunne, and the Moone vnder her feete, and vpon her head a Crowne of twelue Starres. Hee placed the Crescent vnder her feete, because the Iewes Children of the Synagogue, vsed to weare it on the instup of their Shooes, for a signe of Nobilitie, which they beleeued to be the chiefest in the world; as being descended from the Patriarches Noah, Abraham, Isaac and Iaacob. In which respect, the Church hauing the Moone vnder her feete, and not on the instuppe of her Shooes: gaue it for publique notice and demonstration, what was foretold of her by the Wisedome Diuine. Abinitio, and ante saecula fuisse creatam: That she had bin created before the World itselfe.
The Prophet Esay, prophesing to the Iewes, that they should be vsed like slaues and pezants,Esay 3.16.17 18.19.20. despoiled of all their honor, and titles of Nobilitie, be miserably led into bondage and seruitude by Infidell Nations; telleth them. That in those deplorable times, wholly conuerted into sorrow and bitternesse: Their Crescents shall be taken from them,A Prophesie against the proud Iewish Women. their Chaines, Rings and other noates of Nobilitie. Dominus auferet ornaments calcea mentorum, Lunulas, Torques, etc.
The night before that Guye of Bourgongne (Sonne to William, Count of Bourgongne) was elected or created Pope, vnder the name of Calixtus the second; in his Dreame hee saw an Angell, who set a Crescent on his knees, to aduertise him; that in a short time, hee should be the vniuersall Head of the visible Church of God, liuing on earth, and that all the Princes and Monarches of Christendome, should yeelde him submission, and render him all honour and obedience.
The people of Arcadia, a Prouince of Greece, esteemed themselues the very Noblest Nation of the world, as Ouid saith.


Orta prior Luna (de se si creditur ipsis)
A magno tellus Arcade nomen habet.

And they did weare Crescents and halfe-Moones on their Shooes; like as the Athenians did weare Grashoppers Cig^les on their Shooes, to shew thereby, that they were naturally Natiues of the Countrey, and not come from any other place. Because the Cigales doe liue and dye in those parts, where they first receiued life. Whereupon, by way of mockerie, the Athenians were called by the other Grecians their neighbours, Porte Cigales, Cigale-wearers (...) The great Doctor Tertullian, in the Treatise which he wrote De Velandis Virginibus, mocking the curiositie of men in his time, to sing their Nobilitie, saith. Debebant and ipsi aliqua insignia sibi defendere, aut Pennas Garamantum, aut Cicadas Atheniensium, aut Cyrros Germanorum. That they did either decke themselues with Cigales or Grashoppers, after the Antique manner of the Athenians, who did weare them on their Shooes: Or couered their heads with great Tufts, or Perriwigs of Horses-haire, like the Germaines; Or else shadowed themselues, as with an Helmet of Armes, hauing Plumes and Pennaches spreading abroade at the top, in imitation and example of the People of Libya, adioyning to the Psyll^. Garaman^es, a People farre enouge off from any commerce with men.
The Romaines likewise (as well as others) vsed for a noate of Nobilitie, Crescents vpon their Shooes and feete: And vpon this occasion they were tearmed Lu^ati calcei, saith Martiall.
Lunata nusquam pellis, and nusquam toga.
Statius in his Boscages, saith.
Primaque Patritia clausit vestigia Luna.
And hereupon it was, that Iuuenall mocked a Minnion of Couchette, Caruer to a Gentleman, who ware Shooes of blacke Leather (Shooes beseeming a Villaine, and men of base condition) yet fastened at the instup with tyes of Silke, and Crescents of Siluer.

Foelix, and sapiens, and Nobilis, and Generosus
Appositum nigrae Lunam subduxit Alutha.

It is held for certaine, that our first Christian King Clouis, carried three Crescents for his deuise, and by this meanes, the opinion of Du Tillet should be war^antable, speaking of a Fief or Knights Fee, assessed in the Citie of Antwerpe, by Phillip le Bel, King of France and Nauarre, and granted to one named Adam de Ville^onde; with dutie at change of the Lord; of two Arsons for a Horses Saddle, the ^ne with the Armes of France, and the other with them of King Clouis.
The figure or representation of King Clothaire, first of the name, and buried at S. Mard de Soissons, by him builded, is yet to be seene; hauing his Dalmatique gar^ent couered with Crescents.
The house of Angolesme, issued from that of Orleans,Concerning the house of Angolesme, beareth D'Orleans au Lam^au d'Argent, charge de trois Croissants, de Gueulles: As is to be seene in the Glasse-windowes of the Chappell of Orleans, at the Celestins in Paris, and in many other ^laces. And King Henry the second, Sonne to King Frances the first, Duke of An^^lesme, bare for deuise, Trois Croissants d'Argent entrelassez ensemble, to make ^n intire Round, and for the Legend or speaking part thereof; Donec totum impleat ^rbem.
Nations furthest off from vs, and which we Baptise with the name of Sauages;Kings and great Lords of the Canibals. do acknowledge the Crescent for the Symbole of Nobility. Kings and great Lords of the Canibals, vpon their Iouiall and solemne dayes, doe decke and circle their neckes with Collers, composed and made with Crescents of boanes, well polished and ^hining, as white as Alablaster. In their language they call Crescents Yaci, by the ^ame of the Moone, which they entitle so: As Ville-Caignon writeth in his voyage ^f America, as also of Brazile.
The industrious people of China, representing the principall God which they adore: holdeth in one hand a Crescent, and a Pony and in the other: as appeared by relation of the Hollanders, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred foure-score and fifteene.
The Armes of the Turkes.Likewise the Turkes, in imitation of their Prophet Mahomet, haue taken the Crescent for their Armes: as saying themselues to be descended of Abraham. For (...) Children had the assured promise, to encrease and multiple into innumerable people, exceeding the sands of the Sea.
This Mahomet hauing ordained for soueraigne happinesse, to all such as embraced his damnable Doctrine, the voluptuous desires of the flesh, seruing himselfe as their guide and module, marching vnder the Standard of Venus: tooke the Esmaile and Colour of that wanton Goddesse (according to the Theogonia of the Pagans) and her very Liuery, that is to say, Greene, which Martiall describing, by the posture of an amorous Gallant, calleth the Colour of Hearbes.
Herbarum fueras indutus, Basse, colores.
The Loue-token of Husbands to their Wiues.The Colour and Liuerie, which Husbands (louing their Wiues) sent them for New-yeares-gifts, on the first day of March, the beginning of the yeare in their Ombelle and Parasoll. In remembrance of that which the Romaine Ladies obserued, betweene the Romans and Sabines, fighting against each other, and falling to agreement. Which Iuuenall hath well noated.

En cui Viridem Vmbellam, cui Succina mittas
Grandia, Natalis quoties redit, aut medium Ver
Incipit, and strata positus longaque cathedra
Munera Foemineis tractas secreta Kalendis.

Which he tooke from Plautus in Milite:
Da mihi quod Kalendis mittam, Martia cum venerint.
And those Iewels or Gifts, sent by Husbands to their Wiues, were not set down in the Inuentarie, after the Husbands decease, according to the modicitie of the price, or small value of the things then giuen. So saith the Lawyer Pomp^nius, in the Law Sed si vir, at the eight Paragraphe. D. de don. int. vir. and vxor.
Mahomet vsed alwayes to weare Greene colour.Now, according to the Histories of the Turkes, the false Prophet Mahomet we^^ daily cloathed in Greene, a Colour so highly esteemed among the people, subiected vnder the Turkish Empire, as no man had the sufferance or permission, be hee whatsoeuer (except the Grand Signeur, and such as were issued and descended of the Ligne of the false Prophet Mahomet) that durst weare an Emeralde, Sotane, or any other greene thing. Such was the Colonelle and Liuerie of the Turkish Empire,The Turkes greatest fauor to his best friends. with the Crescent d'Argent. And the very greatest honour that the Turkes could hope to receiue from their Prince, was onely permission to weare Greene. The greatest noate of fauour, which he could afford to his Grand Vi^er, and to the Pachats, was to send them a Greene Banner, with a Golden Staffe: which are markes of absolute power, in actions of Iustice, and managing Armes.
The loue of King L^wes to his followers in his last voyage.Saint Lewes, for leauing a memoriall of his passage into Affrica to posterity; gaue permission to his Lords and Gentlemen, which followed him in his last voyage* to qualifie themselues with the name of Knights of the Shippe, and of the Double Crescents, and to beare about their Armes the Coller of the said Order, composed (as we haue already said) of double Crescents of Siluer, and double Scallops of Gold, fastened together with double Chaines of Gold. The Coller finished Ouale-wise, wherein was presented an Armed Shippe, Frette d'Argent en Champ de Gueulles, (...) le pointe ondoyee d'Argent, and de Synople.
Hee gaue permission likewise to such as would; to take the Shippe for Armes or

^rest, and the enquirie thereof was as a title of honor and prerogatiue, D'Or au Nauir^ (...) Argent aux Banderoles de France. We let passe vnder silence, the name^ and qualities ^f the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, which accompanied the said King S. Lewes in ^s two Voyages beyond the Seas: because they are perticulerly discoursed in the ^racts of those Voyages.
This good Prince being dead of a Dyssenterie, at the Campe of Carthage in Af^ica, the fift day of August, One thousand two hundred threescore and tenne;The death of King Lewes before Carthage in Affrica. his ^ody was boyled in Wine and Water, vntill that the flesh was neately diuided ^^om the bones. His flesh and entrailes were giuen to the King of Sicilie, Monsieur ^harles of France, brother to the King, who caused them to be interred in the Mo^^sterie of Mont-reall, of the Order of Saint Benedict, neere to the Citie of ^dermo in Sicilie. But the bones, wrapped vp worthily in Seare-cloath and Silkes, ^^cellently embalmed with most precious perfumes; were carried to S. Denys in ^rance. And with them, those of his Sonne Monsieur Iohn of France, Count of ^euers, dying in the Campe, and of the same disease; As we learne by William of ^angis, in the liues of the said S. Lewes, the threescore and fifteenth Chapter, and of ^hillip the Hardie, the first Chapter.
Concerning this Order of the Shippe and Double Crescents,The decaying of this Order in France. it continued not long (...) France, after the death and buriall of the good King S. Lewes, there being none ^ft but the Noblemen, that bare him companie in this his last voyage, who kept the ^emorie thereof on their Armes and Collers.
But it held full power in the Kingdome of Naples and Sicilie; because Monsieur ^harles of France, brother to the said King Saint Lewes, Count of Aniou, Maine,The continuance of this Order in Naples and Sicilie. ^c. King of Ierusalem, Naples, and Sicilie, first of the name, and Count of Prouence, ^oke the same Order for himselfe, and his Successours the Kings of Sicilie, it be^^g retained by the first Ligne of the said Kings: And vntill such time as the Kings (...) Arragon vsurped the same Kingdome, against the second Ligne of Aniou. It was ^euiued againe, vnder name of the Order of the Crescents, by the good King Rene of ^icilie, Duke of Aniou, and Count of Prouence, according as we shall declare else^here.
We learne the Ceremonies obserued in the time of S. Lewes (and how the Kings ^onferring and giuing the Order of Kdighthood,Of the Ceremonies obserued in this Order. were then in their chiefest and ^ost pompous State:) by Mathew Paris a Monke, in his Historie of England, in the ^me of King Henry the third, who liued in the reigne of the said King S. Lewes, the ^eare of Grace One thousand two hundred fortie seauen: when the said Henry ^ewly made Knight the Count of Valence, a Poicteuin, William of Lazignan, his Bro^her by the Mothers side.
Dum tanto solemnitas in Ecclesia West-Monasterij magnifice continuaretur, Dominus ^x veste deaurata, facta de preciosisimo Baldekino, and Coronula Aurea, quae vulgariter ^rlanda dicitur, redimitus sedens gloriose in solio Regio iussit aduocari fratrem suum v^inum Willelmum de Valentia, cum suis sodalibus quam plurimis, qui cum eo sta^im fue^nt arma, prout decuit, fastigiose suscepturi. Ipsumque Dominus Rex, cum alijs Con^mi^onibus Baltheo Militari Gaudenter Insigniuit. That which this Author calleth Bal^quin, or Baldakin, should be vnderstood of a piece of Curled Cloath of Gold, ^hereof the Kings Roabe or Garment was made, crowned with a Garland, and a ^ukes Wreath, or Circle of Pearles and precious Stones; which then Kings, Princes ^d Princesses ware at solemne Festiuals, and on dayes of delight.
In the Chronicles of Flanders, vnder the yeare One thousand two hun^^ed fortie seauen, William, Count of Holland, was elected King of the Romaines,William Cou^t of Holland chosen King of the Romans, and created Knight. ^ing but a yong Gentleman, made Knight before he was crowned at Aix la Chap^e in Germanie. After the Gospell, the King of Bohemia, one of the Electors of ^^e Empire, presented the Knight (which should be made) to Pedro Capuccio, Carnall of Saint George Au Voile d'Or, vttering to him these words. Vestra Reueren^a, Pater Almiflue, praesentamus hunc electum Armigerum; deuotissime supplicantes, ^atenus vestra Paternitas votiuam eius professionem suscipiat, vt militari nostro Collegio ^scribi valeat.
Vpon this demand, the Cardinall represented what qualities a Knight ought to

be endued withall: That he must be generous and magnanimious, honest and ^uile in conuersation, and of singuler integritie and vprightnesse.
Afterward, he gaue him to vnderstand, what the Ordenances and S^at^es o^ Knighthood were, and how practised from all times.
Ordenances belonging to the Order of Knighthood.First of all, to heare daily the Office of the Passion of our Sauiour.
To expose his person couragiously, for defence of the Catholique Faith.
To deliuer the Holy Church and her Ministers, from all such as would (...) them.
To defend and protect Widdowes, Orphanes, and miserable or distressed pe^sons.
The auncient Order and manner of making Knights.At the end whereof, the Cardinall hauing made his demand to the Gentle^^^ there present; If he would be a Knight; Receiuing his answere and consent, as (...) his Oathe: then he said after the Cardinall as followeth. Ego Willelmu^ Hollan^ sis militiae Princeps, iureiurando profiteor regulae militaris obseruantium, il^ prase^ Domini mei Petri ad velum aureum Diaconi Cardinalis, and Apostolica Sedis leg^ ti, per hoc sacrosanctum Euangelium, quod manu tango. Whereto the Cardinall ma^^ this answere;
Haec deuota professio sit peccatorum tuorum vera remissio. Amen.
And after he had giuen him a blow on the cheeke, and caused him to guird o^ his Sword; then he proceeded in this manner:
Ad honorem Dei omnipotentis te Militem Ordino, ac in nostro Collegio t^ grat^ accipeo. Et memento quoniam Salicator Mundi coram Anna Pontifice pro te colaphicatus, and illusus est; coram Pilato praeside flagellis caesus, ac spinis coronatuc; coram Her^ chlamyde vestitus, and derisus est, and coram omni Populo nudus, ac vulneratus in Cr^ suspensus est. Cuius approbria memorari te suadeo, cuius Crucem acceptare te consulo, and mortem Christi vlcisci te moneo.
It was the custome in auncient times, to receiue the Order of Knighthood at the Prelates hands.The Kings of France made Knights by Prelates. And so it was long time kept and maintained among the French, as holding it no meane principle of Christian Religion, to fight for the Church^ and such as were the holy and reuerend Fathers thereof. Yea, Kings themselues were euer thereto deuoutly affected, as neuer disallowing their graue aduise and counsell, in the most serious affaires concerning their Kingdomes, and for prop^tion of their Common-weales.
Examples are numberlesse in this case, and would be ouer-teadious to the Rea^ if they should be set downe, according to the testimonie of many learned and i^cious Authors. It shall therefore serue as a sufficient and warrantable proofe, (...) our most-Christian Monarches, after they were Sacred and Crowned; rece^ the Order of Knighthood at the Prelates hands, which had Sacred and Crowne^ them. As (in our time) King Henry the Great, by Messire Nicolas de Thou, (...) of Chartres; and King Lewes the thirteenth, now reigning, at the hands of the (...) Illustrious Cardinall, Deane of the Cardinals, Frances, Duke of Ioyeuse, Peere (...) France, Archbishop of Rouen, and Primate of Normandie.



The Order of Saint Michaell; Instituted in the Citie of Amboise, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand foure hundred threescore and Nine.
CHAP. V. The Order of Saint Michaell.
LEWES King of France, Eleauenth of the name, following the designes and will of his Father Charles the seauenth, tearmed the Victorious: after the Order of the Starre was abolished, instituted the most famous Order of Knights, called Of Saint Michaell.
Kingdomes, Prouinces, Cities and Townes, yea, and men perticulerly, haue each one their Tutelarie Angell and Guardian. Varios custodes Vrbibus cunctis Mens Diuina distribuit: Vt Animae Nascentibus, ita Populis fatales Genij diuiduntur. So saith Simmachus.
It is the Doctrine of Mercurius Trismegistus, and of Iamblicus, de Mysterijs Aegyptiorum; conformable to the sacred Scriptures.
In Daniell the tenth and twelfth Chapters, the Arch-Angell Saint Michaell fought against the Angell-Guardian of the Persians Empire.Dan. 10.13. Dan. 12.2. Princeps Regni Persarum restitit mihi vno, and viginti diebus: and ecce Michael vnus de Principibus primis venit in adiutorium meum. The Princes of the Kingdome of Persia withstood me one and twentie dayes: but loe, Michaell one of the chiefe Princes came to helpe me. That which the Prophet spake there, concerning the Princes of the Persians and Grecians; is vnderstood of the Angels-Guardians and Tutelaries of the two Monarchies.
Wee reade in Iosephus, Aegesippus, and other Ecclesiasticall Writers, that (some indifferent while) before the Emperours Vespasian and Titus, Father and Sonne,Voyces in the Temple of Ierusalem. besiedged and tooke the holy Citie of Ierusalem; there were heard in the Temple thereof, the plaine and articulate voyces of Angels-Guardians thereof, saying; Let vs depart from hence.
The Romaines were of the selfe same beliefe. So that with solemne Sacrifices, they celebrated daily the memory of the Tutelarie God of their Citie of Rome,Romanessus the Tutelarie God of Rome whom they stiled by the name of Romanessus. Which name they accounted to be so sacred, as it was prohibited to pronounce or discouer it, vnder paine of death. In this respect was it, that a Romaine Knight had death inflicted on him; because (by mischance, or some other light meanes) he had vttered the name of this their Tutelarie God, as it is obserued by Alexander ab Alexandro, in his Geniall Dayes.The reason why the Romans feared to haue the name of their Tutelary God knowne. And the Romaines prohibited this the more rigorously, as fearing least the name of their Genius, being made knowne to such Nations as were their enemies; he might be called away, and drawne to their Citie, which would haue bin the losse and vtter ruine of their State. For, in besiedging a Citie of their enemy, the Romaines (by certaine Sacrifices and Enchantments) called to the Genius or Demon-Guardian thereof, entreating and coniuring him, that if he would come thence to Rome; he should there haue a much more stately and magnificent Temple, and be a thousand times much more honored, then he could be in that poore besiedged Citie. As verily beleeuing, that by such Ceremonies, those Penates and Dij Patrij, would forsake their former abiding Cities, and goe with them to Rome.

Excessere omnes aditis, arisque relictis
Dij quibus Imperium hoc steterat.

So effectually speaketh the Latine Poet.
The Tyrians being besiedged, would needes enchaine Hercules (their Tutelarie God) with Chaines of Gold, for feare least he should leaue them, so obserueth Plu^arch. And vpon this Subiect Nations of the Gentiles and Pagans, ^ai^ed fast in their Temples, those Idols which were their pretended Guardian-Gods: to whom, (on a certaine day yearely) they performed diuers Sacrifices, with humble and deuour prayers; to the end, that they would continue firme and immoueable in their Cities and Townes. Others inuoked (in generall) all the Tutelane Gods, and would not haue any in particular: because they would not be at the perill, either to make them fast, or loose them, by being called thence, and coniured to some other place.
Nations most barbarous, and furthest off from our knowledge, haue done the same. For the Yngas of Peru, in their Royall Citie of Cusco, had a goodly and magnificent Temple, built after the fashion of the Romaines Pantheon. In this Temple did the West Indian Kings, place the Gods of such Nations and Prouinces, as were by them Conquered and subdued: being most constantly perswaded, that they should keepe those Prouinces vnder tearmes of (...) and obedience; because they held (as Hostages) their Tutelarie Gods and Protectors. As is written by Iosephus Acosta, in his naturall Historie of the Indies.
S. Michael the Tutelarie Angell of France.Saint Michael, the most excellent of the Order of Angels, hath beene celebrated by the French, as being the Tutelarie Angell and Guardian of all France, the most noble Monarchie of the World, and therefore he is called Princeps Imperij Fran^^rum. A title which this Angell tooke, when (vnder the Reigne of Childebert, King of France, called the Iust, and third of the name) he appeared in the yeare Seuen hundred and nine) to Aubert, Bishop of Auranches; commanding him to prepare and build a Church, vpon a Rocke in his Diocesse, called the Tombe, otherwise named Tombe-Helene, and The Perill of the Sea, as Sigibert writeth in his Chronicles Childeberto Monarchium Regni Francorum tenente, Archangelus Michael apparens A^berto Abricantensi Episcopo, monuit eum semel, and iterum, vt in loco Maris, qui propter eminentiam sui Tumba vocatur, fundaret Ecclesiam in sui memoriam. And since that time the Mount Saint Michael hath beene frequented with Pilgrimages, which are yearely made thither, from all the parts and quarters of France.
The Feast day of S. Michael in France.Also since that time, the French haue honoured yearely (with a solemne Feast and rest from all labour) this Apparition on the same day as it was done, namely, the nine and twentie of September: a day dedicated to the Arch-Angell Saint Michael, in remembrance of his Apparition on the Rocke Tombelaine. Commanded to be kept most strictly, with those which are specified by our King and Emperour Charlemaigne, in the second Booke of his Capitularies, at the three and thirtieth Title, De Festiuitatibus Anni.
Festos dies in Anno celebrare sancimus, hoc est, Diem Dominicum Pascha, cum (...) honore, and sobrietate venerari: simili modo totam hebdomadam illam obseruare decre^mus. Diem Ascensionis Domini pleniter celebrare. Pentecosten similiter vt in Pasch^. In natali Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli diem vnum. Natiuitatem Sancti Ioannis Baptista. Assumptionem Sanctae Mariae. Dedicationem Sancti Michaelis. Natalem Sancti ^^migij, Sancti Martini, Sancti Andreae. In Natali Domini dies quatuor. Octabas Natalis Domini. Epiphaniam Domini. Purificationem Sanctae Mariae. Et illa^ festiuita^et Martyrum, vel Confessorum obseruare decreuimus, quorum in vnaquaque Parrochi^ Sancta Corpora requiescunt.The yeares beginning with the Auncient French. We vnderstand by this Capitularie and Ordinance, that the yeares of the Auncient French, began at the Feast of Easter, the Feast whereof continued the whole weeke; and the like at Pentecoste. For Christmas had foure Feast daies only: which we haue obserued to this day.
Now although the Celestiall Hierarchie, diuided into nine Orders, containe an innumerable number of Angels, as is written by the great S. Denys Areopagi^a, first Bishop of our Citie of Paris: yet notwithstanding, the Church being alwaies illum^nated by the Holy-Ghost, receiueth no more but three names of those most blessed Spirits: Michaell, Gabriell, and Raphaell. All those whereof an addition is made, are the supposed names of Deuils, and not of Angels: which was determined in

^he Romaine Councell, held vnder Pope Zacharie,The decree determined in the Romaine Councell. in the cause of Adebert and Cle^ent, accused of Witchcraft. Cumque per ordinem legaretur, peruenit ad locum vbi ^t. Precor vos, and coniuro vos, and supplico me ad vos Angele Vriel, Angele Raguel, An^ele Tubuel, Angele Michael, Angele Adimis, Angele Tubuas, Angele Sabaoth, Angele Si^ihel. Dum vero hac oratio sacrilega vsque ad finem perlecta fuisset, Quid aliud ^gendum est, nisi vt omnia quae coram nobis lecta sunt igne concrementur? Octo enim ^mina Angelorum que in sita oratione Adebertus inuocauit, non Angelorum, Praeter Michaelis, sed magis Damonum nomina sunt. Nos autem, vt a vestro Sancto Apo^olatu edocemur, and Diuina tradit auctoritas, non plus quam trium Angelorum nomi^a agnoscimus, id est, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael.
Wherefore our King and Emperour Charlemaigne, conformably to this, which ^ad (long time before) beene determined in the Councell of Laodicea, prohibi^ed by his Ordinance, the introducing into the Churches of France, any other in^ocation and names of Angels, but the three aboue named: In the first Booke of ^is Capitularies, at the sixteenth Title, De ignotis Angelorum nominibus.

In eodem Consilio praecipitur, vt ignota Angelorum nomina nec fingantur, nec no^inentur, nisi illorum quos habemus in auctoritate; hi sunt Michael, Gabriel, Raphael.

Among those most blessed Spirits, Saint Michael is numbred the first and chiefe,Of the two seuerall deliuerances of France. ^onoured from all times (as we haue said) for the Tutelarie Angell and Guardian ^f France: in the protection whereof, he hath alwaeis shewne himselfe succour^ble, euen in the very greatest stormes and torments, that could be threatned against (...). Wee will only make obseruation of two memorable examples, happening in ^wo the most miserable Ages, when this flourishing Monarchie was (almost) with^ two fingers bredth of her vtter ruine.
While the Englishmen marched thorow all the quarters of France,The first example concerning the English in France. euen as chal^ing out which way they pleased to take, by the daungerous and dismall faction of ^he house of Bourgongne: they besiedged (with all their power) the auncient Ci^e of Orleans, then thought most dreadfull to the French, in the Month of October, ^ne thousand foure hundred twentie and eight. The Englishmen being perswa^ed in their owne conceit, that they (by a generall assault) should surprize it, and ^o become Masters thereof: the Arch-Angell Saint Michael, appeared visibly vp^n the Bridge of the Citie, fighting against the Englishmen, and ouerthrowing their ^tandards, Banners, and Penons, looking Red with Leopards and Dragonned Li^ns, according as is said by Monstrelet.The English driuen from their besiedging Orleans. So that the French (thus holpen by Diuine ^ssistance) beat backe the English, foiled and constrained them to raise their Siedge, ^ith a notable losse of their men. A most worthie victorie, whereof was then ^id (by way of thanksgiuing) as in the twelfth of the Apocalypse. Factum est pra^um magnum in Coelo; Michael, and Angeli eius, praeliabantur cum Dracone: and Draco ^ugnabat, and Angeli eius, and non valuerunt, neque locus eoruminuentus est amplius. ^nd there was Warre in Heauen, Michael, and his Angels fought against the Dragon, ^nd the Dragon fought and his Angels, And preuailed not, neither was their place ^nd any more in Heauen. For to speake truly, this ouerthrow was the beginning ^f the ruine of the English in France, and, that King Charles the seuenth wonne ^o himselfe the title of Victorious.
Our other memorie is that happy day, Tuesday, the two and twentieth of March,The second example, the^ vtter ouerthrow if the bloudy League and recouerie of Paris. ^n the yeare One thousand foure hundred foure score and foureteene, when that ^rious and bloudie monster of the League, was beaten downe to the earth by our ^aulish Hercules, in reducing the Citie of Paris, to the acknowledgement and ser^ice of her Monarche, the valiant and wise Pilot of his Ship, Henry the Great, fourth ^f that name, of eternall memorie. On the day of his entrance thereinto, this great Prince, rendering thankes to God for this reduction, peaceably vpon his knees, ^n the Quire of our Lady Church: there was visibly seene by all then pre^ent (being an vnspeakable number) neere vnto his Maiestie, S. Michael the Arch^ngel Guardian of his France (in the shape and forme of a young childe, aged about ^ixe or seuen yeares, most gracious for excellencie in beautie; and cloathed all in ^hite, according as Painters doe ordinarily figure Angels) who during all the time of Ceremonie, stood on the right side of the King, and it being finished, he vanished

immediately, before any could perceiue how, or which way he went. The King who had fixedly noted all the Masse time this strange apparition; had such a capture of ioy and gladnesse in his soule, with further hope of subduing the (...) of his enemies: that with a loud voice (so audibly as all the assistants might heare him) he said: Our enemies must needes be foiled, when God sends his angels to assist vs.The ioyf^ll words of King Henry the fourth.
After the Apparition of the Arch-Angell Saint Michael, on the Bridge of O^leans; King Charles, seuenth of the name, and in whose Reigne this miracle h^pened, tooke for his Ori-flambe, the Image of the Arch-Angell Saint Michaell, with these two deuises, deriued from the Prophecies of Daniel. Ecce Michal vnus (...) Principibus venit in adiutorium meum.
And the other:
Nemo est adiutor meus in omnibus, nisi Michael Princeps noster.
The Vow made by King Charles the seuenth in honor of S. Michael.And euen then he made a vow, that being at peace and quiet in his Kingdome, he would create a new Order of Militarie Discipline and Knighthood, a honour of the said Angell-Guardian of the Kingdome of France, whose Image he he would beare alwaies in his Great Standard: ouer and beside the Banner of France, Parsemee de Fleurs de Lys sans nombre; euermore caried before our Kings, when in Person they marched to any Warre.
Berry, King of Armes, describing the entrance of the said King Charles the seuenth into his Citie of Paris, reduced vnder his obedience on Fryday after Easter, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirtie and sixe (in memorie whereof on the like day yearely, the Court of Parlement, Chamber of Accounts, Court of Aydes, and Towne House, or Guilde-Haule of the Citie of Paris, goe to heare Masse in the Cathedrall Church) informeth vs; that this entrance was made on the Monday, being the day of S. Martin, the twelfth of Nouember, One thousand foure hundred thirtie seuen. And that before the King marched eight hundred Archers, well appointed and Armed, conducted by the Count of Engoulesme, a Prince of the Bloud, and descended of the House of Orleans.
The Royall entrance of King Cha^les the seuenth into the Citie of Paris.The King went alone, wholy Armed with gilt Armour, the Helmet excepted; in stead whereof he wore a pointed Cappe or Bonnet of white Beauer, doubled and lined with Carnation Veluet, the Band of rich precious Stones, and on the knot of the Band, a massie tuft of Gold. Vpon his Cuirasse he wo^ a rich Coat of Armes, of Carnation Veluet, crossed with Gold and Siluer, and thickly embrodered with Pearles and precious Stones. His Horse was couered with a Foot-cloth of Veluet, of blew Celestiall coullour, dangling downe to the ground, all curiously ouer-spread with great Floures de Luces of Gold. The Chanfraine or Front-stall of fine Steele, and aloft on the Horses head a rich Plume of Austridge Feathers.
Before him, and next to his Person, went Pothon de Sainct Treille, who vpon a Truncheon, (painted with Azure, and thickly powdered with Golden Flo^res de Luces, aduanced on his right thigh) carried the Kings Helmet, Crowned with a rich Crowne, made close with a double Flourae de Luce. The Horse of the said Pothon (led by Iohn d' Olon Gentleman, going on foot) was couered with fine white Cloth, charged with Goldsmiths worke of flying Hearts. Before him rode the King of Armes Mon-Ioye, attired in his Coat of Violet Veluet, hauing thereon three Floures de Luces of Gold, and embrodered with great goodly Pearles.
After his Maiestie rode Monsieur le Daulphine, Armed with Armes (in all respects) like vnto the King his Father.
After him followed the Pages of the Kings Chamber, as also those belonging to his Sonne the Daulphine: the said Pages and their Horses cloathed in the Liueries of their Masters, richly embrodered with Gold-Smithes worke.
Before Pothon rode the Constable of France, and the Countes of Vendosme and Tancaruile.
After the Daulphine, rode the Lord Charles of Aniou, his Vncle, on the right hand, ^ith the Countes De la Marche, and de Perdiac on the left.
And after followed the Bastard of Orleans, himselfe Armed at all points, and ^s Horse courred with Gold-Smithes worke, and a ribh Chaine of Gold, trailing ^ong the Horses backe, made like great Oaken leaues, each weighing fiftie Marcks. ^his man conducted the Kings Batalion, consisting of a thousand Launces, Armed (...) all points, and their Horses barbed.
Behinde him rode a Querrie of the Stable,The Standard of Saint Michael the Arch-Angell. who carried a Vermillion coloured ^aunce in his hand, painted with Stars of fine Gold: and on the top thereof a Stan^ard, of Crimosine Silke, thickly powdred with Starres of Gold, and in the midst, ^e Image of my Lord Saint Michael the Arch-Angell.
The same King Charles the seuenth, after he had conquered Normandie,King Charles his entrance into Rouen. and dri^en the English-men thence; he made his entrance into the Citie of Rouen (at large ^escribed by Enguerran de Monstrelet, Continuer of the Historie of M. Iohn Frois^d) on Monday, being the Vigile of Saint Martin, the tenth of Nouember, in ^e yeare One thousand foure hundred fortie and nine.
Behinde and after the Victorious King (saith Monstrelet) rode the Lord De Cu^nt, Maister of the King his Houshold, and with him Rogerin Blosset, chiefe Quer^e of the Kings Stable: Who caried the Standard Royall of Crimosine Sattine, with an ^age of S. Michael in the midst of the Standard, thickly flourished all along with Flowers (...) fine Gold. And after followed Iohn de Scanauille, called Hauard, Bayliffe of Dreux, ^arlet Caruer to the King: who carried the Penon, which was of Azured Veluet ^hat is Celestiall Blew) with three Floures de Luces of Gold, embrodered with Gold, ^d the same Floures de Luces, likewise embrodered with great Pearles.
King Charles the seuenth had a perticular deuotion to this Arch-Angell Saint Mi^ael, so that we reade in the Historie of his Reigne,The Kings perticuler deuotion to S. Michael. and in the yeare One thousand ^ree hundred fourescore and foureteene, the twelfth day of Ianuarie; Queene Isa^l of Bauaria, his Wife (sirnamed Le Grand Gorre, for her pride and pompe) lying (...) Child-bed, and deliuered of a goodly Daughter,The Kings daughter named Michaelle. he caused her to be named Mi^aelle. And the King also commanded, that the Gate of Paris, whereby we passe to the ^harter-House Monkes, to Vannes, and many other Villages, formerly called the Gate (...) Hell; should be named, Saint Michaels Gate, causing it to be enlarged, and made great deale wider then it was before. This Street of Hell became so named,The Streete and Gate of Hell, the name of them altered by the King. in re^rd that none durst passe thorow it, by reason of wicked Spirits, which were can^onned in the Palace of Vauuerd, a place of pleasure, built in the time of King Ro^rt, as well as Nostre Dame des Champs, and giuen to the Charter-House Monkes by ^e King S. Lewes, to chase the Deuill out of Vauuerd. A Prouerbe which (to this ^ay) is attributed by the Parisians, to wicked vnthrifts, not hauing the feare of God ^efore their eyes, nor any discipline whatsoeuer. By order also giuen from the same ^ing Charles the seuenth. the Image of S. Michael was placed on the Pinacle, of the ^hurch of Nostre Dame des Champs: as yet it is there to be seene at this day.
Whatsoeuer King Charles the seuenth could not effect, and bring to passe; King ^ewes the eleuenth, being his Sonne, brought to perfection, conformably to the will ^f his Father, executing his designes, and instituting The Order of Saint Michael the ^rch-Angell, of which Order, we haue thought good to set downe the Statutes, thus ^ollowing.



The Orders appointed by King Lewes the Eleuenth: For the Institution of the Order of Saint Michael. CHAP. VI.
A Copie of the Letters Patents.LEWES, by the Grace of God, King of France: To al^ present, and to come, Greeting. Wee make knowne, that for the most perfect and sincere loue, which Wee beare to the Noble Order and estate of Knighthood, whereof (in most ^dent affection) Wee desire the honour and encrease, that according to Our heartie wish, the Holy Catholique Faith, the blessed condition of Our Holy Mother the Church, and Posteritie of the publique Weale, might bee kept and maintained as they ought to be: Wee, to the glory and praise of God, Our Almightie Creatour, and reuerence due to the glorious Virgine Marie, as also in the honour and reuerence of Saint Michael, the prime and chiefe Knight, who (in Gods quarell) fought against the auncient enemie of Mankinde, and made hi^ fall from Heauen; who hath likewise alwaies kept his place, preserued and desended his Oratorie, named the Mount Saint Michael, without suffering it at any time to be taken, subdued, or brought into the hands of this Kingdomes auncient enemies: And to the end, that all good, high and Noble courages should be incited, and moued the more to vertuous actions.
The first day of August, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred three score and nine, and of our Reigne the ninth, in our Castle of A^boise. Wee constitute, create, and ordaine, and by these presents doe constitute, create, and ordaine, an Order of Brother-hood, or louing Companie of certaine number of Knights, which Wee will, shall be named, The Order of my Lord Saint Michael the Arch-Angell, in and vnder the Forme, Conditions, Statutes, Orders, and Articles, as hereafter are set downe.

Heere follow the Satutes and Constitutions of the Order.
The number of Knights 36. the King the chiefe.1. FIrst of all We haue ordained, and doe ordaine, that in this present Order there shall be sixe and thirtie Knights, Gentlemen of name, and o^ Armes, without reproach: whereof Our Selfe will be one, the chiefe and Soueraigne, during Our life, and after Vs Our Successours Kings of France. The Brethren and Companions of the Order, shall be bound to leaue and forsake all other Orders, at their entrance into this, if they be of any other, ^e he a Prince or otherwise: except such Brethren shall be Emperours, Kings, or Dukes, who (with this Order) may beare that whereof they are chiefe; hauing the accord and consent of Vs and Our Successours, and Our Bretheren of the said Order. In like manner, We and Our Successours, Soueraignes of this Order* may (if it shall so please Vs) take the Order of any the said Emperours, Kings or Dukes, with Our owne, for the better demonstration of loue one to another, and hope of future good to ensue thereby.
2. And because We desire


^othing more, then that in this ^resent Order, there should be ^he best, most renowned, ver^uous and Noble Knights, ^hereof Wee can receiue ^nowledge, as well in them ^f Our owne Bloud and Li^age, as of any other King^ome from Ours: Wee, be^ng well and duly informed ^f the good Parts, Valour, Wisedome, Vertues, and ^ther commendable qualities, ^n the Knights which are ^eere-under named, and ve^ily perswading Our Selfe, ^f their sound loyaltie, hope ^f continuance therein, with ^bsolute perseuerance in all ^onorable and worthie works: ^aue named, and doe name Our Bretheren and Companions of this Order, whereof We and Our Sucessours, Kings of France will bee Soue^aignes, as before is said. To wit:
Our most deare and intirely ^ffected Brother, Charles, Duke of Guienne.
Our most deare and beloued Brother and Cousine, Iohn, Duke of Bourbonnois and Auuergne.
Our beloued Brother and Cousine, Lewes of Luxembourg, Count of Saint Paule, and Constable of France.
Andrew de Laual, Lord of Loheac, and Marshall of France.
Iohn, Count of Sancerre, Lord of Bucil.
Lewes de Beaumont, Lord De la Forest, and Du Plessis.
Messire Lewes d' Estoute-Ville, and Lord de Torcy.
Lewes de Laual, Lord de Chastillon.
Mathewe, Bastard of Bourbon, Count de Roussillon, Admirall of France.
Anthonie de Chabannes, Count de Dammartin, Great Master of the Houshold of France.
Iohn, Bastard D' Armaignac, Count of Comminges, Marshall of France, and Gouernour of Daulphine.
George de la Trimouille, Lord of Craon.
Gilbert de Chabannes, Lord of Curton, and Seneschall of Guienne.
Charles, Lord of Cursol, Seneschall or Steward of Poictou.
Tanneguy du Chastel, Gouernour of Roussillon and Cerdaigne.
And the rest, seruing to perfect and make vp the number of sixe and thirtie; we ^eserue to be placed by election of Vs, and of Our said Bretheren, at the first Chap^er and Conuention: according as by Vs, and them aboue named (or the most part of them) shall be aduised in following Conuentions and Chapters.
3. For better knowledge of this Order, and the Knights honoured therewith;The Coller of the Order giuen by the King and how to be worne. We will (for once only) giue to each of the said Knights, A Coller of Gold, made of Scallops,

enterlaced one within another, and doubly banded, fastened on small Ch^nets or Mailes of Gold. At the midst of the said Coller, vpon a Rocke shall be an Image of my Lord S. Michael, which must hang downe vpon the breast. Which Coller, we and our Successours Soueraignes, and each Knight of the said Order, shall be bound to weare daily, and openly about his necke: on paine of causing a Masse to be said, and to giue (for Gods sake) to the summe of seauen Sols and (...) Deniers Tournois: which must (in conscience) be done by the defailant, at all times, and as often as he shall misse of wearing it. Onely in Armies excepted, where it shall suffice to weare the Image of S. Michael, hanging at a small chaine of Gold* or at a riband of Silke, which himselfe pleaseth.
How and when wearing the great Coller is to be excused.4 And likewise, when the Soueraigne, or any of the said Knights shall iourney thorow the Countrey, or shall be in their houses among their priuate Familie, i^ hunting and other places, where they shall not haue any company, or assembly of men or people of degree: then he or they shall not be so neerely constrained, to weare the great Coller; but onely the said Image, and in such manner as hath bin said.
5 And when it shall so happen, that the Coller hath neede of some repairing; he may not put it into the Goldsmiths hands, except the Knight to whom the Coller belongeth,Of what weight in gold the Coller ought to be. is not to pay any thing for the amending. Or if he vndertake some long voyage; Or must leaue the Coller for securitie of his person. Which Coller must containe the weight of Two hundred Crownes of Gold, and not vnder, without being enriched with precious Stones, or any thing else. And the Knight may not engage it, nor alienate it vpon any necessitie, for any cause, or in any manner whatsoeuer: but it must alwaies appertaine, and remaine intirely to the said Order.
6 At the entrance whereinto, all Knights thereof shall promise, to abide in loyall loue to vs, the Heads and Soueraignes of the said Order, as also one towards another.For propagation of loue and amitie in the Order. And we to them will procure and encrease their honour and benefit, for the auoiding of dishonour and damage to any of the Order. If any one heare such matter published, as may redound to the preiudice and detriment of any of the Order: he standeth obliged, to excuse the same in the best manner he can. And if the defamer perseuere still in the publication of those words; then, by the Oath which he hath taken concerning the said Order, he is bound to reueale them to his Breth^en and Fellowes, whatsoeuer was heard spoken against their honour and benefit. And after the said Remonstrance, if the euill speaker persist still in the same, they must signifie those speeches to the Knight, against whom the scandalous words were so openly published.
7 Moreouer, if any practise to offend, hinder or endamage vs, or our Successours Soueraignes and Heads of the Order,Against iniurious offending Militarie attempt^ vpon honorable occasions. or our Kingdome, vassailes and Subiects; when we, and our Successiue Heads and Soueraignes of the Order, attempt some enterprise in Armes, for defence of the Christian Faith, Reestablishment, or libertie of the Church of God, maintenance of the Crowne of France, the publique good of our Kingdome, and against our auncient enemies, or any other iust quarrell: In such cases, the said Knights of the Order shall be bound to serue personally, if they be able to doe it. And such as are impuissant or vnable, shall send reasonable and competent wages; except a lawfull excuse, and euident impeachment, doe pleade on their behalfe to the Soueraigne of the Order.
8 We in like manner, to expresse the great affection we haue, and doe intend to our Brethren and Companions of the Order, and for the better and more firme preseruing them in a perfect vnion: doe promise, as the like shall our Successours, Chiefes and Soueraignes of the Order, to keepe, defend, support and maintaine all the said Knights, Officers and Supporters of the Order, and euery one of them; in all their Estates, Dignities, Preheminences, Prerogatiues,

Countries, Lands, Seigneuries, and other rights. To defend them likewise against all such, as would attempt any thing against them, and to preserue them as our own proper right by our power; yea, and so long, as by right we and they may doe it, like good Heads, Brethren, Companions and Officers of the Order.
9 Moreouer, we will not vndertake any wars, or any high and dangerous businesse; without making it knowne to the greater part of our fellow Knights:No warres or danger to be vndertaken without aduise of the knights. As willing herein to haue, and vse their best aduise and counsell. Prouided and excepted neuerthelesse, all hastie matters, and such as require celeritie, the reuealing whereof may be preiudiciall to the said enterprises. And the Knights and Brethren of the Order shall promise and sweare, not to disclose the enterprises of their So^eraigne, nor any thing which shall be deliuered in counsell before them: in ac^nowledgement of the obligation and faithfulnesse, for the grace and fauour done ^hem by the Soueraign, in not vndertaking, or presuming on any occasion of weight ^nd consequence, without their counsell.
10 In like manner, the Knights our faithfull Subiects and seruants,A limitation for vndertaking warres or long voyages by any of the Knights. shall not in^ude themselues into any wars, or long voyages, without our leaue and licence, or ^f our Successours Soueraignes of the Order. Not that we will, or intend to hin^er or restraine our Knights; but that in Lands which they hold of others, they may ^ter into warre and seruice, in like manner as they had done, before the erection ^f this Order. And likewise, such as are not our Subiects, nor to our Successors, So^eraignes of the Order; may serue in Armes, and make voyages at their owne plea^re, without making it knowne to vs before; if possibly they may doe so, without ^e preiudice of our seruice and affaires.
11 If any debate or contention shall happen betweene any the Knights, and Of^ers of the Orders, in regard of their persons onely, whereby some doubt may arise,In case of difference or discontent betweene any of the Knights. ^hat way is best to be taken therein: The case comming to the knowledge of the ^oueraigne, he shall prohibite (by his Letters to the parties) all meanes and matter (...) fact. And at the next Chapter, those debates shall be discided by the Soueraign, ^d his Brethren Knights; the parties being heard what they can say, as well on the ^e side, as other. Which parties shall stand bound to make their apparance (or ^duocates for them) to obey such an appointment as thereon is made, giuen by the ^oueraigne and the Knights: Reseruing all right of our high Iustice, and Authority ^oyall, of vs and our Successours. And if any shall presume to outrage, or iniurie ^e bodies of our Knights, or Officers of the Order: all the rest (then present, or ^hich may come to the wrong) shall succour, relieue, and remedie him or them, so ^re as their power will extend.
12 Moreouer,For iniurie or offence offerd to any knight or Officer. if any one (being no Vassaile nor Subiect to the Soueraigne of (...) Order) shall offer grieuance, iniurie or violence to euery, or any Knight or Offi^ of the Order, and subiect to the Soueraigne, whereof he cannot haue any repa^ion by Iustice, and yet the Knight or Officer so wronged, will submit himselfe the ordenance of the Soueraigne, and the other partie maketh refusall: In this ^e, the Soueraigne and Companions of the Order, doe stand bound, to vse all ^our and assistance to their Brother and Companion. And on the behalfe of strange ^ights, as shall submit themselues, and the other partie make refusall; the Soue^gne and Companions must giue them such assistance, as in reason and equitie ^y ought to doe.
13 If either at this present, or in time to come, there happen to be Brethren of (...) Order, not Subiects to vs, or to our Successours, Soueraignes,For mouing war against any Knight of the Order. and it may so ^ne to passe, that we, or our Successours shall be moued to raise or make warre, ^inst a naturall Lord and Brother of the Order, or against their or his Coun^y: In this case wee openly declare, that such a Knight or such Knights,

being no Subiects to the Soueraigne; may lawfully defend their naturall Lord and Countrey, without incurring blame, taxation of their honour, or any mispri^i^^ against their chiefe Soueraigne. But if their naturall Soueraigne, shall raise wa^^ against the Soueraigne of the Order, his Kingdome and Subiects, during the time of Constitution and Brotherhood of the Order; they may excuse themselues from seruice. But if their Lord will constraine them; they may doe it, without any forfeit of their Honour: prouided, that the Lord himselfe goe to the warre in person, but not otherwise, and they make the same (before) knowen to the Soueraigne of the Order, vnder their Hand and Seale.
Concerning trauaile, or seruing in War vnder any forreigne Prince.14. If it shall so happen, that any of the said Knights doe goe vpon some voiage, or seruice in Armes of any Stranger Prince: he is first to aduertise the Soueraigne thereof. And if any of the Brethren or Companions of the Order, chaunce to be taken in Warre or Battaile: he stands bound to performe good and loyall behauiour, for sauing the life of his Brother and Companion. If he take him with his owne hand, he must franckly quit him on his faith, and so deliuer him: except the Knight be a chiefe Leader in the warre, by him taken Prisoner. And if his Lord will not consent thereto: the Knight cannot (with his honour) take Armes for him, but may forsake his seruice.
Continuance in the Order during life, except in cases of foule crimes.15. For the rest, the Bretheren and Knights entertained as hath bee^e said, and on the before remembred conditions: they are to continue so during their liues; except they forfeit, or commit some reproachfull crimes, for which they shall deserue to be depriued and cast off, whereof We purpose to speake more, as hereafter followeth.
In case of errour or heresie and treason.If it happen that any Knight (which Wee wish may neuer come to passe) shall be conuinced or attainted of Heresie, or errour against the Catholique Faith, for which he hath recei^ed some punishment, or publique penaltie: If he shall be attainted or conuicted of Treason: If he shall depart, or flie on any day of Battaile, be it with his Lord, or with any other, when the Ensignes (...) displayed, and readie to fall to handie-stroakes: In any of the three before named cases (to the end, that the Order may remaine pure and vndefamed, according as it ought to doe:) We ordaine, that the Knight found to be so cha^ged, attainted or conuinced, of all, of two, or any one of them, shall ((...) iudgement of the Soueraigne,(...) be g^iu^n by the Soueraigne and Companions of the Order. and Companions of the Order) be depriued degraded and throwne out of the Order; after he hath first beene heard, what defences he can alleadge in the cases, if he will stand on his owne clearing (...) purgation, and hath beene thereto required, appealed, and sufficiently summo^ned. If likewise he doe commit any foule, enormous or disgracefull act; (...) is to be proceeded against by the Soueraigne and Bretheren of the Order, wh^^ shall iudge as before is said; but in any other case, he is not to be depriued (...) degraded.O^ wrong or iniurie by the Soueraigne to any of the Knights. But if the Soueraigne doe offer wrong or preiudice, to any (...) the Knights of the Order, for which the partie offended doth admonish t^^ Soueraigne and Bretheren of the Order, to award him reason and iustice (...) his due attendance, and yet his right is denied him: In this case, and (...) before (the other Knights, hauing made declaration of the wrong) the o^^e^ded Knight may surrender his Coller, and depart from the Order, with^^^ any blemish or scandall to his honour; and yet notwithstanding, with tak^^ his leaue in as honourable manner, as he can best deuise to doe. Moreouer, (...) other causes, and lawfull reasons; he must be ordered by the aduise deter^^nation and iudgement of the Soueraigne, and Companions of the Order, (...) greate^ part of the company.
Co^cerning precedencie o^ priori^ie of place in the Order.16. And for taking away of all doubts, errours, scruples and difficul^^^ which may happen concerning prioritie and posterioritie, of Honours, Est^^^ Dignities and Degrees of the said Knights, Bretheren and Companions of (...) Order, because true and brotherly loue should haue no respect to such thing

We will and ordaine, that a^ well in going, as comming, sitting in the Church or Chapter, at the Table, naming, speaking and writing, and in all other actions, and things whatsoeuer, depending, regarding, and touching the estate of the present Order; the Bretheren and Companions are to hold both manner, place, and order, according as before, or after they had receiued the Coller of Knighthood. And if many will haue it so, that the most Auncient shall hold the prime place on ^he instant day; then the rest are to follow in due order. And as for such, who hereafter are to be rancked in the Order, by election of the Soueraigne, and Bretheren of the Order: Wee doe ordaine, that they shall hold place,For such as come into the Order after the prime election. according to the time as they were accepted into the Order. And if there be ma^y entred vpon one and the same day: they shall hold place according to ^heir yeares and age, as hath beene said, Except he be an Emperour, King, and Duke, who for the greatnesse of their dignitie, are to haue place in this Order, ^ccording to the time when they receiued the Order; without other respect ^f Nobilitie, Lignage, greatnesse of Commaund, Estates, Offices, Riches, and ^ower.
17.The paiment of euery knight to the Treasurer. Each Knight (at his entertainment into the Fellowship) shall pay to the Treasurer of the Order, fortie Crownes of Gold, or the value of them: to con^ert them into Iewels, Vestements and Ornaments, for Diuine Seruice of the Col^edge.
18. Moreouer, euery one of the Order shall stand obliged, to giue vnto the Treasurer,Paiment of money to the decease of any knight. when any Knight deceaseth (and he shall haue tydings of his death) ^oney, for the singing of twentie Masses, and sixe Crownes of Gold, to giue in ^lmes for the deceased Knights of the Order. Which money the Treasurer shall ^mploy, as is said in the place of the Foundation what is to be done, and in other ^laces beside. And he is to hold the Chapters and Conuentions, according (as by ^he Soueraigne and Bretheren of the Order) he shall be aduised.
19 And for the singuler Confidence and Deuotion,For the place and Church of the Mount Saint Michael. which Wee beare to ^e Lord Saint Michael, the first and chiefe Knight, who fought in Gods qua^ell, and who defendeth alwaies his Place and Oratorie, from being subdued ^y auncient enemies to the Crowne of France, making it inuincible, and vnder ^hose name and title, this present Order hath beene founded and instituted: We ^aue ordained, that all Diuine Seruices, and other Ecclesiasticall Ceremonies, ^or the well performance of foundations, intended to be done by Vs, and also by ^ur Successours, Soueraignes of the Order, or the Bretheren Knights and Com^^nions thereof; shall be celebrated and performed at the place, and in the ^hurch of Mount Saint Michael, which We elect and make choice of, as well for ^^fecting the fore-named things, and all other beside, as shall hereafter be de^ared
20. Be it enacted and ordained,Seates in the Church for the Soueraigne and Knights. that in the Quier of the Church there shall (...) Seates, whereon to seat the Soueraigne, and Knights of the Order there assem^ed. Ouer the Seates, fixed to the Wall, shall (first of all, aboue the Soueraignes ^at) be placed the Escutcheon of his Armes, with his Helmet and Creast. And (...) consequently, of each of the other Knights, keeping the order of preference, ^hereof before We haue made mention.
21. For the benefit, honour and exaltation of the Order,The Chauncellour of the Order, and what he must be. We ordaine to haue a ^hancellour. And because the Office is great, and requireth the attendance of some ^otable person: We will and ordaine, that no one shall execute the place, except (...) haue beene first constituted in the Ecclesiasticall Prelacie. As Arch-Bishop, Bi^op, or some notable dignitie in a Cathedrall or Colledgiate Church: At the least a ^octour in Diuinitie, or decreed to be one, or (not failing) to be a Licentiate in ^e of the said Faculties.
The Se^le of the Order to be kept by the Chancellour.22. The Chancellour is to haue the keeping of the Seale, which shall be made and appointed for the Order: wherewith the Chancellour shall not Seale any Le^ters, conerning the honor of any Knight, without the expresse ordenation of the Soueraigne, and sixe Companions of the Order, who must be present, and subscribe to the signing of the Letters. And the Chancellour shall haue charge to propound, and deliuer the speeches, at well as Chapters, as in other places, of matters touching the Order, the benefit and augmentation thereof, at all times as neede shall require, and the Soueraigne shall please to appoint.
Of the absence of Knights from meetings and Chapters.23. It shall also be the Chancellours charge, to enquire at the Chapters, of such Knights as are there, the order, estate and gouernement of each of them, being absent from the said Chapter. The opinions and depositions of the Knights shall be recited, being reuealed as matter of fact, and to take conclusion at the same Chapter. Which is so ordered, as tending to the end of praise and commendation, or correction, paine and punishment, which the Chancellour shall speake and pronounce, on the Knight whom the case shall touch and concerne.
24. Of the Order there must be a Register or Pregnotarie, who is to keepe two Bookes of Parchment,Concerning the Register of the Order, and the Bookes by him to be kept in each whereof must be set downe and engrossed, the foundation of this present Order, with the Statutes, Causes and Ordenances therei^ contained. In the beginning of which Bookes, shall be inserted an Historie, concerning the representation of the Soueraigne, and of the fifteene Knights, first elected, named and called to be of the Order. Those Bookes are to be chained; vnto, and in the Quiere of the said Church, wherein shall be the Foundation; and the other in the Chapter-House, before the Seate of the Soueraigne. But the Books must be fast lockt vp in two Coffers for the purpose, whereof the Treasurer of the Order shall keepe the Keyes. Nor are they to be opened or seene, but at the Chapters and Assemblies, or by appointment of the Soueraigne, as neede shall require. And the Register shall be bound to set downe in writing, the honorable actions, and commendable performances in prowesse, as well of the Soueraigne, as of the Knights; whereof he is to be informed by the Herauld of the Order. Moreouer, the Register must be bound, to shew and report the draughts of those writings, (...) the following Chapters: to be seene, corrected, and after engrossed, as also read with the prime Copie of the subsequent worke.
Another Book appertaining to the Order.25. Moreouer, the Register shall write in another Booke, the Iniunctions, Conclusions and Acts of the ordenary Chapters; the faults committed by the Knights of the Order, for which they are to be blamed and reproued in the Chapter. Also what corrections, punishments and paines hath bin ordained and enioyned them: Their contumacies and defaults, when they haue not appeared, obeyed, or duely made knowne their essoines and excuses.
26. We will moreouer, and constantly ordaine, that there shall be a Treasurer in the said Order,A Treasurer of the Order, and the charges belonging to his Office. who shall haue the keeping of the Charters, Priuiledges, Letters, Commands, Writings and Enstructions concerning the foundation, appun^nances and dependances of the said Order. He shall likewise haue the custodie of all the Iewels, Reliques, Ornaments and Vestements of the Church, the Tapistri^^ and Librarie belonging to the Order. Also, hee is to keepe the Mantles and Cloakes of the Knights, seruing for the State and Ceremonie: which (at the Chapters and Assemblies) he shall deliuer to the Knights, and afterward receiue and keep them, vntill another Chapter. But the habits of the Officers, shall continue and remaine with them, to vse at their owne will.
Order concerning any Knight deceased or depriued.27. After the death or priuation of any of the said Knights, the Treasurer shal^ cause to be taken thence, the Shield of Armes, Helmet and Crest of the Knigh^ deceased, or displaced from the roome which he held, to put them in some other place of the Church. Whereinto likewise hee shall conuaye all the Escutch^o^^

Armes and Helmets of the said Knights dead or depriued, in this manner: the deceased on the one side, and the depriued on another, and lay therewith the causes of their depriuation: to make knowne in liuing memory perpetually, both their names and their deedes. And when another Knight shall be appointed for the place of the deceased or depriued: his Shield, Helmet and Crest shall be hung and ^eated in the said Church beneath, and directly before the Seate which was appointed for the new chosen Knight, there to be seene, and so ordained.
28. It shall be for the Treasurer,Concerning the Endowments and other benefits belonging to the Order. to make a Receipt of the Foundation and Endowments of the said Order, as also the emoluments and beneficiall gifts thereto belonging: He shall pay the Buildings, Pensions, and ordenarie charges, according as was ordained from the foundation. He is likewise to dispose all the missions, all conuenable and necessary payments, for businesse of the Order; by command of the Soueraigne, or his Committees: And of all he is to render a good and faithfull account yearely, at the ordenarie Chapter, before the Soueraigne, his Committies, or such as he shall please to depute, or whosoeuer shall sit as Chancellour of the Order. And of all Gifts, Legacies, Augmentations and Benefits, which haue bin giuen and bestowed on the Order: The Treasurer shall cause a Booke to be made, wherein he shall write (with the Inuentorie of Iewels, Ornaments and Reliques) a further manifestation (for publique ostension) by Inuento^ie at euery Chapter, and shall set downe by name or Sir-name, such as haue bin the Doners of any thing. Whereof he must make declaration at the Chapters, in memorie of the Benefactors, to the end, that prayer may be made to God for them, and for giuing daily example of the like well doing, on behalfe of the Order. Moreouer, the Treasurer shall cause to be made two Bookes of the Charters,Bookes of Charters, Priuiledges, etc. Priuiledges, Foundations, Acquests, Augmentations, Letters and Enstructions of the said Order; which are to be colationed and examined by the Originals; that ^ecourse may be made to them, if the other should be lost, or any way else miscarie.
29. In the Order there shall be another Officer, named the Herauld, King of Armes, called Mont S. Michaell, who must be a man wise, and of good fame,The Herauld and King of Armes of the Order called Mont. S. Michael. skilfull and expert for the Office; to whom must be giuen a rich embroidered Coate, ^o serue for the said Order, which he is to wea^e during his life time. And he being dead, his heires shall stand obliged, to render the same to the Treasurer of the Order: except it shall happen to be lost in any Voyage, or honorable action, in which cases, his heires shall stand clearely acquitted. But if the Herauld doe returne home aliue; the Soueraigne of the Order shall then cause another to be made for him, euery way answerable to the other. And the said Herauld, King of Armes, shall haue One thousand and two hundred pounds Pension, which is to be paid him yearely, and euery one of the Knights shall giue him halfe a Marke of Siluer, at euery Chapter ordenarily. And the said Herauld, King of Armes,The yearely pension and allowance to be paid to the Herauld or King of Armes of the Order. shall be charged to carrie, or cause to be carried, the Letters of the Soueraigne to the Brethren of the Order, at their Elections, when choise shall be made of them, as also to returne their answeres; and generally to performe all necessary messages and meete seruices, which by the Soueraigne and Officers of the Order shall be ordained. He stands bound also, to enquire of the prowesse, high-deedes and honorable actions, as well of the Soueraigne, as the other Knights of the Order; whereof he shall make true report to the Register, to haue them duely set downe, according as formerly hath bin said.
30. These foure Officers of the Order, as namely the Chancellour, Pregnotary or Register, Treasurer, and Herauld, their persons, goods and liuelihoods,Concerning the foure especiall Officers of the Order. their Seruants and Families, must and shall remaine (in regard of their said Offices) so long as they liue, and their Successours in the said Offices perpetually, in the protection and safeguard of the Soueraigne of the Order. And if any iniury, force, violence and shame be offered to them, either that it hath apparantly bin done by

the Soueraigne, or any Knight of the Order, or other Subiect: And they will submit themselues to the Soueraigne; he and the Companions of the Order may receiue and doe reason to them. But if the Partie will not consent: In this case, the Soueraigne and Companions doe stand engaged, to beare out, and fauour the said Officers; so long as they can doe it, for the better keeping of right and equitie.
An Order for especial obseruing the Festiuall day of S. Michael.31. Moreouer we doe ordaine, that the day of Saint Michael, which is the last day in the Moneth of September; shall be held as a solemne Festiuall, with the Chapter and generall Assembly of our Soueraigne, as also the Brethren and Companions, Knights of the Order. And that from thence forward, the Assembly shall be made yearely: except there shall happen any other great or important affaires in the Kingdome, for which (according to the aduise and opinion of the Soueraigne, with the greater part of the Knights) it shall be thought fit, to prolong and delay the Chapter, for one or two yeares after, or otherwise, according as the time and place shall be aduised for the best. At which Feasts, Assemblies and Chapters,For altering or deferring the dayes of meeting. the Soueraigne is to make knowne vnto them, the time, and place conuenient in limitation, and they all shall stand obliged to appeare there. But we further ordaine, that if by reason of sicknesse, imprisonment, perill in warre, dangers on the wayes, or other reasonable causes, the said Soueraigne, or any of the Brethren Knights, cannot come thither in person, and appeare at the Chapter, Feast or Assembly: He or they (then) are to send (by an honest Attourney) his excuse, according to the condition of his person, to know, whether the Soueraigne, or a Deputie doe sit there for him, and the Brethren in his assistance. There shall hee tell the causes of their excuse and absence, and performe such other Offices, as the Soueraigne and Brethren should doe, if they were there in person present.
Offices to be done on the Vigile or Fue of S. Michael by the Brethren.32. Vpon the Vigile of the Feast of S. Michael, all the Knights of the Order being come to the place appointed for Assembly, shall goe and present themselues to the Soueraigne in his Pallace or House of being, before the houres of Euensong; where he is to welcome them kindely and honorably, as to such a meeting appertaineth. On which day of the Vigile, the Soueraigne and Brethren of the Order, shall depart together from the Pallace, or lodging of the Soueraigne, apparelled in their Cloakes of white Damaske, hanging downe so low as to the ground, their Capes or Collers, and round about embroidered with pure Gold: bordered also with Scallops of Gold, bestowed richly in Lacets vpon the same embroiderie, their Cloakes likewise being furred with Ermines. On their heads, or about their neckes (which is best liking to them) they shall weare Chaperons of Crimosine Veluet all along the Cornet,The manner of their wearing habits for going to the Church. and of the same fashion and length. Which Cloakes and Chapperons, the Soueraigne and Knights are to make at their owne cost and charge^* And in this manner they shall goe to the Church in order, two and two together, the Soueraigne going alone by himselfe, and last of all. Each man shall betake himselfe to his Seate, and hauing heard Diuine Seruice, must returne againe to the Soueraignes Pallace, in the same order as before is said: the Officers of the Order going formost before the Knights, according to their estate and degrees. Which Officers are to be attired in long Robes of Chamlet, or white Silke Furred with Mineuer, and Hoods of Scarlet; and on the morrow, with Roabes and Hoods of the same.
33. On the morrow (being the Feast day of S. Michael) in the morning, the Soueraigne and Companions of the Order,The Ceremonie to be vsed on the Feast day of S. Michael. in such habiliments and cloathing as before hath bin said, shall goe to the Church, and at the Offertorie of high Masse (solemnely celebrated) shall by the Soueraigne, and each of the said Brethren, or Deputies for them in their absence, be offered a piece of Gold; in forme and value answerable to the deuotion of the Knight the Offerer. The Seruice being accomplished, they are to returne to the Pallace of the

^oueraigne in the same Order; where he is to welcome them to his Table, and feast ^hem honorably, or else cause them to be so entertained, by his Commissioners ^hereto deputed.
34. This day, at the houre of Euening Prayer, the Soueraigne and Compani^ns of the Order, shall depart from the Pallace of the Soueraigne,Office for the day at Euening Prayer, and the next day following. attired in their Cloakes of blacke Cloth, and Hoods of the same (except that belonging to the So^eraigne, which is to be of Scarlet or Violet) and goe to heare Euen song for the ^ead. And on the morrow after the Feast, Masse for the dead, attired in the same ^anner: At the Offering whereof, the Soueraigne and Knights there present (as ^lso the deputies for the absent) shall offer a great Waxe-Candle, containing a ^ound of Waxe in weight, adorned with the Armes belonging to the Offerer.The Offering of great Waxe Candles. And during the time of this Offertorie, shall be read by the Register, a Roule of ^he names and Sir-names, as also the titles of the Soueraignes and Knights de^eased of the said Order: for the soules of whom, and for others likewise departed, ^e which celebrateth the Masse, shall say at the ending of the Offering, De Profundis, ^nd Prayers for the dead.
35. On the next day after the Feast, the Soueraigne and Knights of the Order,What is to be done on the morrow after the Feast day. ^ttired in such garments as best pleaseth themselues, shall goe to the Church, to heare the Masse celebrated of our Lady; and the same day, the Soueraigne and Brethren of the Order, may begin their Chapter, in such place as shall be by their Soueraigne appointed. But the Elections and Collections, are to be done at the Chapter-house in the Church, where the Seruice hath bin performed, if there shall be such a conuenient Assembly or Chapter. If not, in such place as shall be liking to the Soueraigne, and where the Knights must haue their white Cloakes or Mantles; and where it shall be enioyned (by the Chancellour of the Ordenance) to all the Knights present, and Atturnies or Deputies for the absent, as also the Officers of the Order; to keepe the Councels of the Chapter secret, especially, the corrections imposed on the Brethren of the Order, without disclosing or reuealing any thing; but what the Deputies of the absent, may report and deliuer to their Maisters, which onely may touch or appertaine vnto them.
36. In the said Chapter, the Chancellour may relate in generall,The Office of the Chancellour at the Chapter. what he thinketh fitting should be made knowne; and he is also to perswade, either for correction, or extirpation of vices, and perseuerance for the encreasing of vertues, in all them that are of the Order: to the end, that they may labour, and giue example of good and commendable life, to all other Knights and Noble-men, which shall attaine to the knowledge of them. By the same Chancellour is to be enioyned (in name of the Order) to the last man seated, that he is to depart from the Chapter, and giue attendance without the roome, vntill such time as he shall be called for entrance. In the meane while, the Soueraigne, or his Deputie, or else the Chancellour (in name of the Soueraigne) shall demand (by way of Faith and Oath solemnely) of all the Brethren, and namely of the Soueraigne himselfe, and then of euery one perticularly, beginning at the last to the first: whether they doe know, or haue heard reported by any person worthy of beliefe that their said Brother and Companion, dismissed from the Chapter, hath done, spoken, or committed any thing, which may be censured contrary to the Statutes, Points, Perticulers and Ordenances of the Order, by meanes whereof, the said Order might be defamed, or any way misprised and reproued.
37. And if it doe appeare, by report of the Bretheren of the Order, that the said partie hath committed any vicious act or offence, contrary to the honour,For any such as shall offend against the Rules of the Order. deuoire and estate of Nobilitie and Knighthood, or some other case, that may import and challenge depriuation; the same shall be related to him by the Soueraigne or his Deputie, or by the Chancellour, from point to point effectually, admonishing a due correction of such imperfections, and such manner of life; that those

blames, imputations and defamatorie language, ill agreeing and suting with a (...) of so great and Noble condition, may for euer cease, and that thenceforward, the Companions of the Order may heare better report of him. As concerning the punishments and inflictions; the Soueraigne and Brethren are to iudge of them, according as they shall deeme necessary and conuenient: whereunto the said p^rtie must be obedient, and endure those paines and punishments appointed for him* As (in like manner) is to be exercised and inflicted on any of the Knights prese^^, or Deputies for the absent, being offenders, euen so farre forth, as to the Chiefe and Soueraigne of the said Order.
For auoiding partialitie or fauourable respect either in Prince or Peers38. Ouer and beside, for diuers reasons before specified, and to the end, that the said louing Companie and Fraternitie, may be the better kept and maintained in equalitie, because reason requireth, that from them which are greatest, should proceede the best example: It is our will, that the issue and examen may as well be made of the Soueraigne, as any of the other, and that paine and punishment may likewise follow, by aduise of the Brethren of the Order, if it doe so come to passe.
39. And if the Knight which stood dismissed from the rest, be found (by testimonie of the Brethren) to be of good and commendable life, bending his care and endeauour, to high actions of Chiualrie and Nobilitie; recitall must be made thereof (according to the Soueraignes aduise, assisted with the Companions) by the Chancellour,Encouragement to the yonger Brother of the Order. for the more honour of his vertue, with further exhortation, and encouragement, for his continuall perseuerance therein, the more worthily to attaine the due recompence of his praise-full paines. Because it may serue as a good example to other, for their well doing in like manner: the same hauing bin formerly done by the other Knights, of whom remaineth the like good and commendable report.
40. If in the Chapter time, the Soueraigne shall be enformed, that any of the Brethren hath committed some such crime, as may deserue priuation, according to the Statutes of the Order:Concerning complaint of some crime committed, reuealed in the Chapter-time If the Knight be there present, the Soueraigne shall cause the case to be propounded, with relation of the crime in question; to heare the parties defences, and what he can say for himselfe, for his excuse and discharge, whereupon, right is to be done him by the Soueraigne and Brethren, or else by the greater part of them. And if there be no Chapter kept for sitting, then the Soueraigne is to be aduertised, that he may make it knowne by Letters fast closed, or Patents sealed with the Seale of the Order, which he is to send by the Herald Mont S. Michael (or some other) to the Knight meriting blame, and charged with the case. Enioyning him, to appeare in person at the next Chapter, to be proceeded withall in the matter according to reason. And if the time, for the said Chapter be short in regard of the distance of place, and the dwelling of the Knight thus charged; the assignation must be deferred till the Chapter following; and then (whether the Knight come or no) he is to be proceeded against, notwithstanding his absence.
41 And if it be found, that the Knight hath committed an ignominious offence, and worthy depriuation of the Order: By the Soueraigne and Brethren of the Order, or by the greater part of them; he shall be taken, depriued and expelled, as before hath bin said.For auoiding of scandale to the Order, after depriuation. And to auoide all scandale, blame and obloquie to the Order, by reason of his transgression: He shall be prohibited, neuer more to weare the Coller of the said Order, nor any other like thereto. Moreouer, he shall be enioyned, vpon the Oathes by him taken; to deliuer the said Coller into the hands of the Soueraign, or else to the Treasurer of the Order. And if (vpon the sentence) the Knight were not present; Letters Patents shall be sent vnto him, sealed with the Seale of the Order: Containing the priuation, sentence, condemnation, interdiction, inhibitions, commandments, and matters aboue named. And if the Knight being so sufficiently summoned, shall refuse to render, or send back the Coller; the Soueraign (if the party be his Subiect) may compell him thereto by the course of Iustice. And being not his Subiect; yet he may proceede according to reason, and as he shall think it most conuenient, by the aduise and counsel of his Brethren, who are Co^panions of the said Order.
For sending back the Coller of a deceased Knight.42 When any one of the Brethren of the Order, shall decease and depart out of this life; his Heires shall stand obliged (within three moneths at the furthest) to send the

Coller of the deceased Knight to the Treasurer of the Order. Which Heires recei^ing the Scedule and acquittance of the said Treasurer; shall thereby be acquitted ^nd discharged, but not otherwise.
43 And if any of the Companions, either in war, or such a like honorable acti^n, or in pursuite of some noble occasion, shall be taken prisoner,Losse of the Coller in any honorable action, and in the contrary. and (by that meanes) ^he Coller be taken from him: The Soueraigne of the Order (in such a case) stands ^bliged to bestow another on him. But if otherwise the Knight shall chance to loose (...); he must be bound, to cause another to be made at his owne cost and charge, and ^o weare it within three Months after, or sooner, if possibly it can be done.
44. When a place is vacant, by decease of any Brother of the Order, or otherwise;For choice of a new Brother when a place is vacan^. ^lection is to be made of another Knight (endued with those conditions before remembred) by the greater number of voices, both of the Soueraigne and Brethren of ^he Order. Who must giue in their Scedules fast closed, and which are to be re^eiued by the Chancellour at the Chapter, in a Basin of Siluer. In which Election ^nd all other things, conclusions, and deliberations concerning the said Order) the ^oyce of the Soueraigne must haue place, and shall stand accounted for two, but ^o more. Except there are two to be elected, who must haue so many voyces the ^ne as the other. In which case, the Chancellour, hauing collected the voyces ^y Billets or Tickets, from the Electours in equall number; shall declare to the So^eraigne that equalitie of Suffrages. And then the Soueraigne (out of his owne ab^olute authoritie) may pronounce and giue his third voice, to which of the two him ^keth best. Or if this way like him not, he may renounce the Election, and then must be giuen in new Scedules as before, to the end, that the Election may be the ^ore iust, and least scrupulous, the Scedules of the absent being (neuerthelesse) (...) fu^l force. Whereupon, and in this respect, the Soueraigne and Brethren of ^he Order, for their more iust proceeding in the businesse, shall sweare, entring ^to the Chapter; to make this Election, without any regard to loue, hatred, fa^our, friendship, kinred, or any other occasion, that m^y remoue the iudgement ^f men, from loyall and true aduise or counsell, and to be free from suspition in the ^llection. Which Oath shall be made on the Soueraignes hand, by all the Knights one ^ter another, beginning at the lowest to the highest.
45 And for proceeding in the act of Election,For proceeding in the act of new Election. after that the Herauld of Mont S. Michael shall haue signified to the Soueraigne, the decease of any of the Knights of ^he Order, according as by his Office he standeth bounden to doe: the Soueraigne (...) to signifie the same to all his Companions. Aduising them, that they must all ap^ea^e at the next Chapter, with full disposition and preparation, for election of ano^her Knight, in place of him that is deceased. And if the time shall seeme too short, (...) the iudgement and opinion of the Soueraigne; the said Election may be defer^ed and respited to another following. And if by accident, or reasonable excuse, ^ome of the Knights sent for, cannot be there present; they may (for that time) haue ^ntertainment and acceptation by their deputies, bringing their electiue Scedules, ^osed and sealed with their Seales.
46 Be it knowne likewise, that before proceeding to the Election (which is to ^e done in due time, and place of the ordenary Chapter,Another seruice before perform^nce of the Election and not otherwise) by the ^learke or Register of the Order, must be publiquely read, such matter as he former^ reported by the Herauld, concerning the high deedes and deseruings of the Knight ^eaceased, according to his true commendation and praise.
47 All the Scedules and voices receiued, and comparison made of them by the ^hancellor; he is then to pronounce the number of them.The order obserued in the Election. Then the Soueraign or his ^eputie or Committee, shall take the most voices, and name him of whom they ^ue made choice, saying. Thus, by greater part of voices of the Electours, being ^ow present in this Chapter, and by the Scedules of such as are absent: Our Bro^er and Companion N. is elected into this Order. Which Election so made, shall ^e Registred and set downe by the Register, in a Booke seruing expresly for that ^urpose.
48. If the Knight made choice of by this Election be not then and there pre^nt: the Soueraigne writes his Letters to him, sealed with the Seale of the Order; ^nding them by the Herauld King of Armes, or else some other, signifying to him

this his Election.What is done, if the Knight made coo^ce of is ab^e^t at the Election. Requiring him louingly, to accept and receiue graciously, his calling and entrance into the Order: the Statutes and Ordinances whereof, together with the said Letters, shall be sent him double, that thereon he may take aduise, for making it better knowne to him, whether the said Election and association in the Order, may be acceptable to him, or no. Which prouing so, he is to come to the Soueraigne, at the day contained and assigned in the said Letters, to take his Oathes, and receiue the Order and Coller, with other things thereto appertaining. Moreouer, the said Knight thus elected, must hereupon make knowne his meaning and intent to the bringer, and make certificate also accordingly, to the Soueraigne by his Letters.
Concerning the qualitie of the person elected, and his occasions.49. If it shall so happen, that the Knight thus made choice of, be a Potent Lord, or such a person in degree, as may haue, or hath great businesses, affaires, or farre of voyages, which may be his hinderance and impeachment, for appearing in person before the Soueraigne, at such limited time as he is required and appointed to doe. In such a case, if it seeme expedient to the Soueraigne, he may giue to the Herauld, or him that carrieth the Letters of the Orders-Ordinances; a Coller of the same Order, that, after such time as the Knight elected, shall haue accepted the Election (and not before) he may deliuer it as from the Soueraigne, that the Knight may returne his Letters of acceptation of the Coller, to the bringer thereof, who is ^o deliuer them to the Soueraigne. In, and by which Letters, the Knight must make promise, to come (if possibly he may) to the next Chapter, or some other subsequent, to the Soueraigne, to sweare the points and constitutions of the Order, and performe all such duties as he standeth bound to doe, according as his other Brethren and Companions of the said Order haue done.
50 This Knight elected, being come before the Soueraigne; at his comming and presentation, he shall deliuer these, or the like speeches.




The words to be vsed by the Knight at his apparance before the Soueraigne.
SIr, or, My most gracious Lord (if he be of the Blood) I haue obserued by these Letters, that of Royall Grace in you, and Loue in the most honorable Brethren and Companions, of the worthy and Noble Order of my Lord Saint Michael; I haue bin, and am elected (...) that Order and Companie, whereby I hold my selfe to be very highly honored. I haue reuerently receiued, and made acceptation thereof, and doe most hartily thanke you, ye^, s^ much as in me possibly remaineth* for so great Grace and fauour: tendering mine obedience, and seruice-able duetie in the said Order, so much as in me lyeth to doe.




The sonne of the Soueraigns answere.Whereto shall be answered by the Soueraigne; that the renowne of his vertues, incited both him, and the Brethren of the Order, to receiue and embrace hi^ as their Companion: not doubting, but that he will perseuere in his vertues, an^ augment the honor of God, to the praise and commendation of the Order; taking the Oath as followeth.




The forme of the Oath giuen to the Knight.

YOu shall sweare, that to your loyall power, you shall assist, guard, maintaine and def^^^ the eminencie, rights and greatnesse of the Crowne of France; of the Maiestie Royal, and authoritie of the Soueraigne, and of his successiue Soueraignes, so long as you liue, (...) shall be of the said Order, you shall imploy your selfe to your vttermost power, to maintaine the said Order, and Honour thereof; taking what paines you can, to augment (...) without suffering it to decay or diminish, so long as your strength may remedie and support it.

Articles within compasse of the Oath.51. And if it shall so come to passe (which God forefend) that in you there shall be (...) some such fault, whereby (according to the Statues of the Order) you are to be depriued, s^^moned and required, to redeliuer backe the Coller: In such case, you must send it to the S^raigne, or the Treasurer of the Order, without euer-more (after the said Summoning) ^^ring the said Coller. And all penalties, paines and corrections, which (in meaner (...)

may be censured and appointed to you: you are to vndergoe and beare patiently, without rancour, spleene or hatred (for, or in that respect) in you, either against the Soueraigne, Brethren, or any Officers of the said Order.
52 You must, ouer and beside all this, duely appeare at the Chapters and Assemblies of the Order: Or else you must send thither (according to the Statutes and Ordenances thereof) your sufficient Deputie or Atturney. As testifying thereby, your obedience to the Soueraigne, and to his Deputies or Committees, in all things reasonable, concerning the dutie and affaires of the Order; and your owne loyall power, for accomplishing all the Statutes, Points, Articles and Ordenances, which you haue seene and read in writing, and shall hereafter heare read vnto you. To them you shall promise and sweare, as well generally, as perticulerly, and to each Point you are to take an especiall Oath. All these things, as you are a Knight of the Order, you must sweare and promise on the Soueraignes hand: by your Faith, Oath and Honor, and on the Crosse and holy Gospels of our Lord.
53 This being done, the elected Knight shall kneele reuerently before the Soueraigne, who shall take the Coller of the Order, and put it about his necke, vttering these or the like words, or causing them to be spoken by some other.
The Order receiueth you as a louing Companion, and in signe thereof,The words of the King to the Knight.giueth you this Coller. God grant that you may long weare it, to his praise and seruice, and exaltation of his holy Church, encrease and honour of the Order, and your owne well deseruings and good fame: In the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. Whereto the Knight shall answere: So be it, Amen; And God giue me his Grace to doe it.
Afterward, the Knight of the first Seate, he being then present; shall leade or conduct the new made Knight to the Soueraigne, sitting in his Seate.The new Knights presenting to the Soueraigne. Who shall kisse him in token of perpetuall loue; and so doe all the Knights there present, euery one following another in place and order:
54 But if the Knight shall excuse himselfe from accepting the Election:Of refusing the Election. the Soueraigne is to make it knowne to the Brethren of the Order: sending them command and order, to make themselues ready in due preparation, for the election of another, at such time, and in such manner as thereto belongeth.
55 The Knights heretofore named, and all other entring into the Order; shall take their Oathes in the forme and manner formerly set downe.
56 And when the Office of the Chancellor of the Order shal happen to be vacant;For vacancie of the Chancellors Office. Election is to be made by the Soueraigne and Brethren of the Order, in manner before related, concerning a noate-worthie man, and of such condition and qualitie as hath bin obserued. And if the new-chosen Chancellour (after Election) shall excuse himselfe from it; it is to be committed to another, vntill such time, as the Soueraigne and Brethren shall be otherwise prouided, according to reason, and by the wayes before remembred.
57 The Chancellour elected, who hath made acceptation of the Office; shall on the Soueraignes hand, or his Deputie or Committee, take his Oath, part whereof followeth.

That he shall appeare in person, at all Chapters and Assemblies or meetings of the Order.
The Oath of the Chancellor
If hee chance to be sicke, or some allowable cause be his hinderance; hee is (in such a case) by his Letters bounden to aduertise the Soueraigne thereof, who in his absence (for that time) may commit the discharge of the Office, to some Noble and worthie man, such as himselfe shall please to make choice of.

58 That he shall not seale (with the Seale of the Order) any Letters,For sealing with the Seale of the Order. touching the Honour of the Knights, but by the command of the Soueraigne, and then being present, sixe Knights of the Order, at the least. And aboue all, not to Seale any Letters, for summoning any Knight to deliuer vp his Coller; without the Soueraignes expresse command, and knowledge of the Companions of the Order. Nor so neither, except the conclusion be agreed on in a full Chapter, and generall assembly of the Order.
59 That neither for loue, feare, hatred, fauour or affection, hee shall forbeare to speake any thing, and deliuer faithfully (yea euen to his vttermost power) what hee is to

propound in the said Chapters and Assemblies. But all those things to bee vttered loyally, whereof hee hath receiued charge from the Soueraigne. And those conclusions agreed (...) in the Chapter, concerning penalties and corrections of the Knights,, or otherwise, he shall deliuer as thereto appertaineth, and as it is ordained for him, in the Chapter of the Order euery yeare. Hee is also (if possibly hee may) as formerly hath beene said, to (...) present at hearing the accounts of the Treasurer: And to keepe secret the Counsels of the Order; and (in briefe) to exercise his Office well and truely.
Vacancie of the Registers Office, and electio^ of another60. And when the Office of the Register or Pregnotarie of the Order shall bee vacant: then by the Soueraigne in person, and eight Knights of the Order, at the lea^^, shall another Register bee elected, of such condition as formerly is expressed. The Election of him is to bee made at the Chapter, or any other day at the Soueraign^ pleasure: vpon whose hand, or of his Deputie, the Register shall take his Oath, i^ forme following.

The Oath of the Register.
That truely and diligently (to his vttermost power) hee shall set downe in writing, and Register the high and commendable actions of the Knights of the Order, according as hee shall be instructed by the Herauld: And shall faithfully obserue in writing, the paines, penalties and corrections, appointed to Knights delinquents in the Chapters; the Acts whereof are to remaine registred. Performing his duty loyally in his writings, and keeping the Counsels of the Order as he ought to doe.

61. Election is to be made of a Treasurer, when the Office shall fall vacant, according as of t^^ R^gister: and the Treasurer is to bee sworne in manner following.

The Oath of the Treasurer.
That he shall faithfulle keepe* conserue and gouerne (to his vttermost power) the Iewels, Moueables, Re^ts, Reuennues, and all the goods of the Order, as they shall come to his hands, without distribution of any thing, except to such vses as they are to be applyed, and by appointment of the Soueraigne. That he shall faithfully distribute to men of the Church, such things as are allowed to them for diuine Seruice. Also to Officers for exercise of th^^ charges, and to other persons, according as the Soueraigne shall ordaine. And in these negotiations, he must vse all diligence, without omitting any thing, trifling or delaying; re^dring a good and faithfull account, as well of the rents and reuennues belonging to the Order, as of the Gifts, Legacies, and Largesses that haue beene bestowed, without retaining or concealing any thing; exercising (in all these perticularities) his Office duely, truely, and so much as in him lieth.

62 Concerning the proceeding, commanded to be vsed in the Election of the Herauld, named Mont-Saint-Michael; it shall be done in the same manner, as is formerly related of the Register and Treasurer; And his Oath is after this manner.

The Oath of the Herauld Mont S. Michael.
That he shall diligenily enquire, of the high deedes and valiancies, of the Knights of the Order; and, without fauour, hatred, loue, iniurie, profit, or any other affection, make true report to the Register, of them, that they may be set downe in a Chronicle and Register, as he ought to doe. Any Knight deceasing, he shall make it knowne speedily to the Soueraigne, duely deliuering such messages as he shall be charged withall. He shall be obedient to the Soueraigne, Brethren and Officers of the Order, in all reasonable ma^ers and occasions: And shall keepe secret whatsoeuer ought to be concealed in the Order. And in briefe; in all things whatsoeuer, he shall faithfully and diligently doe his duetie, to hi^ vttermost power.

63 When it shall so happen, that by the death of the Soueraigne, his Successour shall be in minoritie and vnder age, and thereby vncapable of managing, disposing and ordering the affaires of the Order: We doe ordaine, that in such cases, the Brethren and Companions of the Order shall make a meeting. At which time, by opinion of the greater part and number of voyces; they shall elect one among them, to preside, order and manage the affaires of the Order, in stead and place of the others minoritie, and at his charges; vntill he shall be of yeares to receiue Knighthood. And to that elected person, we will and ordaine, that (during the said time) obedience shall be giuen, in those things concerning the Orders affaires, in like manner as to the Soueraigne.
64 And in regard that this present Order is a Fraternitie, Brotherhood and louing Companie, whereunto the Brethren submit themselues freely, promising and swea^ing to hold and keepe inuiolably, all the Lawes and Constitutions thereof: Wee doe ordaine, establish and determine, that the said Order shall t^ke

^owledge, and be as a Court Soueraigne, in cases which concerne, and may ^uch the Brethren, Companions and Officers thereto belonging. And that all ^mmons, Seines, Corrections, Punishments, Priuations, Appointments, Sen^ces, Iudgements, Arrests, matters past, done and decreed by the said Order, in ^ses which may or shall concerne any of the Brethren, Knights, and Officers there^ belonging, shall be executorie, auaileable, and as absolutely allowed, as in a ^ourt Soueraigne; without any hinderance or impeachment, or hauing recourse ^sewhere) by Complaint, Supplication or Appeale, or otherwise in any kinde ^hatsoeuer.
65 All the said Points, Conditions, Articles, Ordenances, Constitutions and ^ases before remembred, and euery one of them: Wee, for Vs,The Kings absolute confirmation of the Order, and all Articles therein contained. our Heires and ^uccessours, Kings of France, Heads and Soueraignes of this our present Order, ^^d louing Companie of my Lord Saint Michael, doe promise to hold, keepe and ^tirely accomplish inuiolably, euen to the vttermost of our power, from this in^ant houre, and for euer. But alwayes reseruing to our selfe, and to our Succes^ours, Heads and Soueraignes of the Order; that if in the said Articles, there shall ^ppeare any difficultie, obscuritie or doubt: To vs, and our Successours shall ap^ertaine the Declaration, Solution, Determination, Interpretation and clearing ^ereof. And it shall remaine in Vs, to adde thereto, resolue clearely, diminish or ^hange any of them, with the aduise and counsell of our Brethren,An especi^ll^ exception, and other of like nature, to perticuler Articles according as we ^hall thinke good.
66 Excepting this, concerning the Articles of the number, and conditions of ^he Knights, allowed to be of the Order.
67 That such as are accepted into this Order; shall not be capable of receiuing ^ny other.
68 That of the amitie, which the Soueraigne and his Companions ought to haue ^o each other.
69 That concerning the seruice, which the Knights are obliged to yeelde to the Soueraigne.
70 And that, wherein the Soueraigne promiseth, to defend and keepe the Com^anions and Officers of the Order, in their Estates, Dignities and Seigneuries.
71 The Article of the Order, for going, comming, seating, and other things con^erning the Precedencie of the Knights.
72 That of new Election, when any place shall happen to be voide; where the Soueraigne shall haue his two voyces.
73 The Article of receiuing the Knight elected, and other, making mention of the Oathes, which the Knights and Officers are to take, in the cases before ^elated.
74 Which Articles formerly excepted; we will haue to remaine firme and in^ire: Without, either by vs, or our Successours Soueraignes of the Order,The finall act of full ratification* making ^ny variation, restriction, or any alteration.
And wee will, that the examination of these presents, giuen vnder our Royall Seale, and Seale of the Order: credence shall be giuen thereto, as to the Originall.
And to the end, that it remaine a matter firme and stable for euer: We haue caused our Seale to be put to these presents.


Giuen in our Castell of Amboise,

the first day of August, One thousand foure hundred threescore and nine: And of our Reigne the ninth.







The great Seale of this Order, hath engrauen on it, the figure of S. Michael;The great and lesser Seales. as in the Ouale forme, which hangeth at the great Coller: And the lesse Seale hath three Floures de Luces entoured with the Order.
The great Coller of the Order,Of the great Coller of the Order. is composed of double Scallop-shels of Gold (as ^n that of the Order of the Shippe) fastened with round Points of blacke Silke, hauing ^ong Tagges of Gold, enterwouen in the forme of Loue-knots. At the end of this Coller, hangeth vpon the brest, an Ouale of Gold, hauing a small rising hillocke cu^iously enamelled in it; whereon standeth the Image of S. Michael, treading the Dragon vnder his feete.
Alteration of the points into twisted Cordons of Gold.King Frances first of the name, at the first Chapter of the said Order, which he held after his Sacring, in September, One thousand fiue hundred and sixteene* did change those Points into double Cordeliers of Gold: As well in regard of himselfe, being named Frances; as to conserue the memorie of Queene Anne of Bretaigne, Mother to his wife Queene Claudia, who had thereto earnestly moued and entreated him.
Alteration of the Cloaks by King Henry the second.King Henry the second, their Sonne, being come to the Crowne; at the first Chapter of the said Order of Saint Michael, which he held in the Citie of Ly^^, wherein he made his entrance, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fortie and eight, ordained: That the Knights of this Order should alwayes after, weare Cloaks of Cloth of Siluer, embrodered about with his deuise; to wit, three Crescents of Siluer, enter-wouen with Trophees, Quiuers and Turkish Bowes, semed* and cantonned with Tongues and flames of Fire. The Mantelet or Chapperon was of Crimosine Veluet, couered with the same embroderie, and the Order of S. Michael aboue.
Other habits by him likewise appointed.He appointed also, that the Chancellour of the Order, should weare his Cloacke of White Veluet, and the Chapperon of Crimosine Veluet. The Prouost and Maister of the Ceremonies; the Treasurer, Register and Vsher, or King of Armes belonging to the said Order: are to haue their Cloakes of White Sattin, and their Chapperons of Crimosine Sattin, and thereon a chaine of Gold, at the end whereof, vpon the breast, hangeth a Scallop of Gold onely. And in this manner, was the solemnitie performed of the Order, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Iohn in Lyons, on the Eeuen and day of Saint Michael at Eeuensong, and a high Masse. The King of Armes, Herauld or Vsher of this Order, is called by the name of Mont-Saint-Michael.
I haue seene many of those great Clarkes of Cloth of Siluer, appertaining to that Order. And namely two, in the Chappell of the Dukes of Bourgongne, at Di^, which those Gentlemen of the Noble House of Vienna in Bourgongne, gaue there freely, to serue for Coapes in the Church, and whereon are the Armes of the said House, De Gueulles al Aigle d^Or, ou d'Argent.
To make relation here, of the Chapters, Names, Sirnames, Armes and qualities of the Knights of the said Order; would require the containdure of an whole Volume; from the yeare of the Institution vnto this present, it being yet still on foote. Wherefore, as in the first Chapter, is fully and largely contained the maine maximes, by the Statutes of the Order: So will wee finish this our discourse with the last Chapter, solemnely held and celebrated by King Charles, ninth of the name, in the Church of Paris, on the Eeuen and day of Saint Michael, in September. Anno One thousand fiue hundred threescore and twelue.


The solemne holding of the Order, in the Church of Paris, by King Charles, ninth of the name. Anno 1572.
ALL the preparations being fully effected, the King being come into the Queene of the Church; tooke his place on the right hand, vnder a goodly State of Cloath of Gold Frized. Two paces beneath, and on the same side, were seated Monsieur Henry Alexander of France, Duke of Aniou, Brother to the King and his Successour for the Crowne.The forme of their sitting. The Duke of Montpensier, The Duke of Ne^^rs, The Duke of Guize, The Marshall de Tauanes, The Prince Daulphine, La Chappelle aux Vrsins, Rubempre, And Villequier the yonger.
A second StateAt the other side of the Quire, and on the left hand, was another Canopie o^ State of Cloath of Gold, vnder which sate not any person, but onely were placed Tables of Armes.
Of Kings of Spaine, Of Denmarke, And Of Sweden.
And beneath the Chaires reserued for them, as Knights and fellow Brethren o^ the Order, were seated, The King of Nauarre, afterward King of France, Henry

fourth of the name. Monsieur Frances Hercules de France, brother to the King, Duke of Brabant and of Alencon, The Duke of d Vsez. The Prince of Conde. De Sansac. De Losses. De Chauigny. De Rets. And De Villequier the elder.
The King, Princes and Lords of the said Order, were cloathed in white Sattin,Their Habits. the great Cloakes of Siluer, with long traines drailing on the ground; their Chapperons of Crimosine Veluet, vpon which hung the great Collers.
Before the Kings Seate was a long Forme or Bench, couered with Cloth of Gold, whereon were seated in one ranke, The Chancellour, Treasurer, Register, Maister of the Ceremonies.
And before them, on two Stooles, couered with Cloath of Gold, sate Mont Saint Michael, King of Armes; And Vsher of the Order*
All cloathed with long Mantles of white Sattin, and Chapperons of Crimosine Sattin; as had bin ordained by King Henry the second.
At Celebration of the Vigile, and Masse for the Knights deceased;Funerall memorie. the King did ^hen weare a great Cloake and Chapperon of Violet colour cloath: And the other wore great Cloakes and Chapperons of blacke Serge, yet had the great Order vpon their seuerall Chapperons.
To the Offering, the King went foremost, preceded by the Officers of the Order,The Offering. ^ccording to their ranke. His Maiestie held in his hand a Candle of white Waxe, ^ontaining a pound in weight: being followed by Monsieur the Duke of Aniou, his ^rother, who presented his Offering.
The King being conducted backe to his Seate, Monsieur d'Aniou, preceded likewise by the Officers of the Order, was guided to the Offering.
Next to him, the King of Nauarre.
Followed by the other Princes and Lords, according to their Order, from the ^ight side to the left.
There is yet (to this present) to be seene, the most of the Tables, with the Es^utcheons of the Knights of the said Order, called or present at this solemne Chap^er, in the Quire of the Church at Paris: in which regard I omit their Blazons, and ^ecause the more part of them may be obserued, in the Great Order of the Holy-^host.
This of S. Michael hath bin continued, and the memorie thereof remaineth to ^his day: because it is worne by the Princes and Lords, retained and named from Chapter to Chapter, for receiuing that of the Holy-Ghost. And this is the reason, why we behold it rounded with the Armes of the Princes of the house of Lorraine, of Ne^rs and of Nemoux.
And our Kings do yet honor therewith Princes Strangers. I saw it giuen by King Henry the great (of endlesse memorie) to the Duke of Moldauia, and to the Prince ^is Sonne, depriued of their dignities by the Turkes forces, and withdrawne thence (...) Paris, where the King gaue them entertainement. The Prince deceasing there (...) the life time of his Father, his seruice was performed at Saint Nicholas des Champs; ^e Funerall Girdle of the Church being charged with his Armes, which were thus ^nblazoned.

De Gueulles a vne Teste de Taureau d'Or, somme d'vne Estoile de mesme, Coronne d'vn ^mnet Ducal d'Or releue pour Cimier d'vne Aigrette, and facon de Houppe d'Argent, en^ure de l'Ordre Sainct Michel.





The most excellent and famous Order of the HOLY-GHOST, instituted at Paris in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and nineteene: By the Most-Christian King of France, and of Poland, HENRY, Third of that name.
CHAP. VII. The most excellent and famous Order of the Holy-Ghost.
The worth and dignity of the Order.OF all the Orders of France, yea, euen of all Christendome, there is not any more Illustrious or of greater Excellencie (as well in regard of the subiects dignitie, as magnificence and Ceremonies) then that of the Holy-Ghost. Instituted, ordained and established in the Church and Monastery of the Augustine Friers Heremites at Paris: In the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and nineteene, by the most Christian King of France and Polonia, Henry, Third of that name, of eternall and sacred memorie.
The reason of the Orders Institution.This good King, the honour and mirrour to all Princes of his time, in meere deuotion towards God, loue and liberalitie to men, and in remembrance of the day of his Birth, happening on the Festiuall day of Pentecoast, or Whit-Sunday, in the yeare one thousand fiue hundred and fiftie; and his election to the Kingdome of Poland, as on the same day of Solemnitie of Pentecoast, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and thirteene. Also on the very same day (the yeare following) he came to the Crowne of France. In dutifull acknowledgement, of so many fauours and perticuler great graces, receiued from God, by assistance of the Holy-Ghost, he instituted and ordained this new Order of Knighthood, by the name, and in honour of the Holy-Ghost. Whereof he declared himselfe to be the chiefe and Soueraigne great Maister, he and his successours the Kings of France. This is especially remarked and carractred, in the first Glasse-window of the Quire, at the Gray Frier^ Church, and behinde the high Altar, vnder the descent of the Holy-Ghost, vpon the blessed Virgin and the Disciples, contained in these sixe Verses.

Hocce die, quo almus Coelo descendit ab alto
Spiritus, inflammans pectora Apostolica,
Erricus Franco ter maximus ortus in orbe est;
Electus Populi Rex quoque Sarmatici:
Et Rex Francorum Carlo successit amori,
Ipse amor, and Franci Deliciae Populi.

The first Session and Ceremonie of the Order.The first sitting and Ceremonie whereof, was held at Paris, on the Eeuen and first day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and nineteene, in the Church of the Augustines. In memorie whereof, behinde the high Altar, betweene the two great Glasse-windowes, in the Quire of the said Church, was placed a^ large Table, whereon his Maiestie was figured to the life; deliuering his Order to Princes and Lords of his Court, all kneeling before him. In like manner was (naturally) there represented at the Pedestale of this Table, these words written i^ Letters of Gold.
Fortissimis and prudentissimis vtriusque militiae Equitibus, priscae nobilitatis, belli and pace de Republica optime meritis, Henricus Tertius Galliae and Poloniae Rex Augustus, D^nini Spiritus apud Christianos Symbolum pro Equestri stemmate esse voluit, inssit, decre^,

^laudante, acclamante, venerante populo, and vota pro Salute Principis nuncupante, ob slugularem ipsius pietatem. Lutetiae Parisiorum Kal. Ianua. Anno Domini M.IC.LXXIX. This Table was taken thence in the Feast time of Christmas, fourescore and eight,The mercilesse trouble caused by the League in Paris. by ^harking Souldiours of the bloudie League, madde and enraged with furie of their ^eale, and termed the Zealous men of Paris. Of whose naturall disposition, and Tragicall actions, a true description is made (in their liuely coullers) by the Hebrew Historian Iosephus, in his Fourth Booke of the Iewish Warres, the nineteene, twentie, and two and twentie Chapters, and so onward, speaking of the Zealous, meern^y imitated in their pilferies and robberies, by these Zealateurs of Paris. Those men, to take away the memorie of this good Prince, and the noates or markes of his Royall power, to the end that an Anarchie might be brought in, instead thereof; did euery where deface his Figures, and carried away that royall Table; in place whereof they left a memoriall of our Lords Supper, as is there to be seene at this present.
The great Coller of this Order, is composed of Floures de Luces of Gold, Can^onned or cornered with flames of Fire, tearmed Flammes de'Or Esmaillees de Rouge,A Description of the great Coller of the Order. ^nter-wouen with three Ciphers, and diuers Monogrammes of Gold likewise, Es^aillez de Blanck. The first Cipher or Figure is the Letter H. and a Lamba L. and ^oth double, which might be read aboue and beneath. They are the first Letters, ^elonging to the names, of the said King, Founder and Institutour of the Order; and of the Queene his wife, Madam Louisa de Lorraine. The other two were reserued ^n the Kings owne minde, of some persons his fauourites. Now followeth the Kings Letters Patents, for confirmation of the Order.




The Kings Letters Patents.
HEnry, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Poland: To all present, and to come, Greeting. As in all things created, the omnipotent power of God doth ^cknowledge and manifest it selfe: euen so is it in the disposition, course and conduct of them, which at full auoucheth his holy and eternall prouidence, whereon ^ntirely dependeth all our felicitie. And there is not any thing in this lower world, that doth not thence receiue all happinesse, and true meanes of well ordering and gouerning it selfe. So that if the meanest Creatures, cannot withdraw themselues from his Prouidence: the very greateh, and such as are constituted to highest authoritie, cannot so well prosper and order themselues, without his especiall grace and prouidence.
In this regard, from our yongest yeares, hauing alwayes thus knowne and be^eeued: We haue addressed our vowes, and affixed our principall and intire confidence, onely in his diuine goodnesse. And acknowledging, that thence We haue and hold the best felicitie of our life; it is no more then reason requireth, that (hauing these things euer in our memorie) We should striue to our vttermost, in rendring him most hartie and eternall thankes, and testifie to our posteritie, his great benefits bestowed on vs. Especially in this, because it hath pleased him (among so many diuers and contrary opinions, which haue exercised their very greatest powers in our times) to preserue vs in the confession of his holy Name, and in vnion of the onely Catholique and Apostolique Church, wherein we purpose (by his gracious assistance) both to liue and dye.
Moreouer, because it hath pleased him, by the inspiration of his blessed Spirit,His Election to be King of Poland, and returne to France. on the day and feast of Pentecoast; to vnite all the hearts and wils of the Noble Polanders, ranking likewise therewith all the Estates of this potent and renowned Kingdome, and great Dukedome of Lituania; to elect vs as their King and Soueraigne. Afterward, vpon the same Festiuall day; to call vs to the rule and gouernment of this Most-Christian Crowne, onely by his will, and right of our Succession.
In regard whereof, as well for a Commemoration of these things before rehearsed,Care and regard of Knighthoods honor and support. as for continuall fortefying and maintaining (to the full) our Faith and Catholique Religion: Also, to decorate and honor (more and more) the Order and degree

of Nobilitie in this our Kingdome, and reduce it into her auncient dignitie and splendour, as that whereto we haue (by naturall inclination and reason of kinde euermore borne most intimate loue and affection, as well, because therein consisteth our chiefest strength and Royall authoritie, as hauing heretofore, and since our comming to the Crowne, made proofe in many great, hazardous and memorable victories, of our auncient and singuler loyaltie, generositie and valour, which hath made it selfe famous and commendable among strange Nations:) We hauing aduised with our most honorable Lady and Mother, to whom wee acknowledge to owe (next vnder God) our principall and intire band of dutie; the Princes of our Blood, and other Princes and Officers of our Crowne, and Lords of our Councell neere vnto vs, to performe as followeth.
To erect a Military Order in this our Kingdome (ouer and beside that of my Lord Saint Michael,Erection of the Order of the Holy-Ghost. which our will and meaning is, shall remaine in full force and vigour, and be obserued, euen as alwayes it hath bin from first Institution thereof, to this present.) Which Order we create and institute, in honor, and vnder the name and title of the Holy-Ghost, by inspiration whereof, as it hath pleased God (heretofore) to direct our best and happiest actions: So we most humbly beseech him to grant vs grace, that we may see our Subiects reunited in Faith and Catholique Religion, and alwayes hereafter to liue in loue and agreement together; vnder due obseruation of our Lawes, and obedience to vs and our Successours Kings, to his honour and glory, commendation of the good, and confusion of the bad: which is the maine end, whereto all our thoughts and actions bend their aime, as to the height of our greatest happinesse and felicitie.

This being generally published and made knowne, his Maiestie (afterward) disp^sed himselfe, to haue the Statutes and Ordenances of the Order set downe, and to be as amply expressed and signified.






Here followeth the Statutes and Ordenances concerned in the Order of the Holy-Ghost.
FIrst, that in this Order, there shall be a Soueraigne, chiefe and great Maister of the Order:The Soueraign or great Maister of the Order. who shall haue full and absolute authoritie, ouer all the Brethren, Commanders and Officers thereto belonging. To him onely (and to no other) shall appertaine the reception of them that are to be embraced into the Order: all direction and power of making Statutes, and to dispence with them, which shall (for certaine dispenceable cases) take exception against some Articles hereafter specified. Otherwise, for what cause or occasion soeuer, that may offer it selfe; he shall neuer grant any dispensation. Which to doe, he is to take his Oath, and make solemne vowe at his entrance, when he shall be receiued as great Maister of the Order; with all such faculties and powers, as shall be found appertaining thereto by right or priuiledge; euen as if they were set downe in more ample manner, and at large specified.
The great Maisters title vnited to the Crowne of France.2 That we shall (for euer) be the Chiefe and Soeeraigne great Maister of the said Order, held and named to be the first Founder thereof. Which great and Soueraigne Maistership, we haue, and doe (from this present) vnite and incorporate to the Crowne of France: without any power or meanes of seperating it from it, either by vs, or any of our Successors, for what causes or considerations soeuer which may be offered, or any way pretended.
No power before Coronation.3 That the said Kings our Successours, are not to dispose of the Order (in any manner whatsoeuer) or the Monies thereunto appertaining, neither to conferre any Commander, although a place be voide: vntill he haue first bin Sacred, and receiued his Coronation.
4 Vpon which day, they are to be required by the Archbishop of Rheimes (or he that shall represent his place and Office at the said Sacring) in the assembly and presence of the twelue Peeres, and Officers of the Crowne therein to be imployed: to sweare the obseruation and keeping of the Statutes of the Order, according

to the forme hereafter following.


Which they shall stand obliged to doe, without any power of dispensing withall, for any cause whatsoeuer. And on the morrow after the said Sacring, the King shall receiue the Habit and Coller of the Order, from the hands of him that gaue him Consecration: he being assisted therein by the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the said Order, who are for that purpose to be summoned thither, and bound to be there present.
5 To this end We haue and doe ordaine, that the forme of the said Oath, shall be transcribed and inserted in a Booke of the Sacring: with the other Oathes, which the Kings must be bound to take, before they are to be Crowned; without at any time afterward, the Act and Oath to be omitted.
6 And forasmuch as (alreadie) We haue, by the grace of God, receiued the said Sacring and Crowning: yet We intend and purpose to take the same Oath againe, by the hands of the Arch-Bishop of Rheimes, or some such other Bishop, as We shall please to appoint in his sted, at the first meeting or Assembly, which We shall hold of the Order: in the presence of the Princes and Officers of Our Crowne, with such Lords also as shall be called thereto, in the Church where the Celebration thereof is to be performed, laying Our hands on the true holy Crosse, ^nd the sacred Euangelists. Which solemne Oath being by vs so taken: an Act ^hall be made and passed thereof, which shall be registred in the said Booke, to serue as a Testimonie in times hereafter, that We did truly take such an Oath.




The Oath and Vowe made by the King.
7. Wee Henry, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Poland,The Arch-bishop or his deputie holdeth the Booke for receiuing the Oach. doe solemnely ^weare and vowe on this Booke in our hands, to God the Creator, to liue and dye in the Holy, Catholique and Apostolique Faith and Religion, as to euery good and Most-Christian King ^t belongeth, and rather to die then faile at any time therein. Wee sweare also, to maintaine for euer, The Order of the Holy Ghost, founded and instituted by Vs: without suffe^ing it to shrinke, fall or diminish, so long as it rem^ineth in Our power to helpe it. To obserue the Statutes and Ordenances of the said Order, truly and intirely, according to their ^^^ure and forme; And to cause them be kept exactly, by all such as are, and shall be re^eiued into the said Order hereafter. Moreouer, neuer to contradict, nor dispence, or at^empt to alter and chaunge the irreuo^able Statutes thereof: perticulerly those which are ^ere mentioned.




8 Namely, in the first place, the Statute, speaking, of vniting the Great Maister^hip to the Crowne of France.
Secondly, that containing the number of Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers.
Thirdly, that for not transferring the prouision of Commands, either in whole, or any part, to any other vnder coullour of inheritance, Appennage or concession whatsoeuer.
Fourthly, that whereby We Our Selfe stand bound (so much as in Vs lieth) that We shall not (at any time) dispense with the Commanders and Officers receiued into the Order: From Communicating and receiuing the precious Body of Our Lord Iesus Christ, at such daies as are appointed; which are the first day of the yeare, and that of Pentecoste.
Fiftly, that wherein is expressed, that We and all Our Commanders and Officers, must be Catholiques, and Gentlemen of three paternall races, as euery one mu^^ and ought to be.
Sixtly, that whereby all power is taken from Vs, of imploying about any other occasions whatsoeuer, may be vrged or pretended; the monies due and belonging to the reuenewes and maintaining the said Commanders and Officers: Nor to admit any Strangers into the Order, except they be naturalized, and inhabitants of Our owne Kingdome.
Seuenthly and lastly, that wherein is contained the forme of the Vowes, and the bounden dutie, for daily wearing the Crosse (with ordenarie garments) and that of God hanging about the necke, fastened to a Ribband of Blew Silke: And the other habit, on the daies thereto appointed.

All these doe we sweare, vow, and promise to performe, vpon the Holy Crosse, and l^ying our hand vpon the Sacred Euangelists.

What Cleargy men were constituted to be of the Order, and what belonged to their charge and office.9 Hauing principally made and created this Order, in the honour of God: We doe ordaine and appoint, that there shall be (as Bretheren thereof) foure Cardinals, and foure Arch-Bishops, Bishops or Prelates, who are to be chosen among the very greatest, and most vertuous men of the Cleargie, throughout all our Kingdome. Who are to be Commanders in the said Order, to make proofe of the case of Nobilitie, in such forme as hereafter is ordained. They shall haue entrance, seates, and deliberatiue voices in the generall Chapters, Assemblies, and meetings, which are to be held for affaires of the Order; in the ^ame manner as the other Commande^s haue. Moreouer, they shall haue charge, to informe of the Religion, life, manne^s and ages of Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Officers, that shall enter into the Order. And to giue Vs knowledge (with ample remonstrance) in the said Chapters, of such faults and abuses, as shall be committed by any of the Order, or in the case concerning Religion.
The Great Almone^ a chiefe Commaunder.10 Moreouer, beside those foure Cardinals, and foure Prelates: We haue, and doe at this present incorporate, and vnite (for all times hereafter) in the Order, vnder title of a Commander: Our Great Almoner, and his Successours in the same degree, who notwithstanding, shall not stand obliged, to make proofe of his Nobilitie.
For election of the Cardinals, Arch-bishops, etc.11 The said Cardinals, Arch-Bishops, Bishops or Prelates, shall be by Vs elected and chosen, at the Chapters and Assemblies of the Order: and shall receiue (from our owne hand) the Crosse of the Order, in the Church appointed for those daies and to that effect; but not otherwise: As our Great Almoner is to doe the (...) Which Crosse the said Cardinals must be bound to weare daily hanging about th^ neckes, with a faire Silke Riband of Blew couller. And the fiue Prelates, bes^ that which they weare about their neckes, as the Cardinals doe; must be bound (...) weare another, sowed or made fast vpon their Roabes or Cloakes: wholly in (...) same forme and manner, as the other Commaunders doe.
Necessarie du^^^ to be performed by the Cl^^rgie men.They shall stand obliged, to assist at the Feasts and Ceremonies, which are (...) celebrated for the Order. For their better vnderstanding, the Cardinals are to we^ their great rich Coapes; and the Bishops or Prelates their long loose Cassoc^s (...) Violet couller, and a Mantelet of the same couller, whereon the Crosse of the O^der is to be sowne, or embrodered, with their Rochets and Hoodes. And on th^ daies, when Seruice is to be celebrated for the dead; the Cardinals are to (...)

their Violet Coapes, and the Prelates cloathed in Blacke, after the same forme and ^shion. Which Prelates (each after other) shall say Masse, and celebrate Diuine ^eruice on the daies of Ceremonie. Obseruing and keeping among them (as well ^r celebration of the Diuine Seruice, as in all things else, which shall depend vp^n their sitting in the Church and Assembly of the Order only) the rancke which ^^th beene accustomed to be obserued, among the Ecclesiasticall persons of our ^ingdome. But if the said Ceremonie shall be celebrated in the Diocesse belon^^ng to any one among them: then he in whose Diocesse it shall happen to be, is to ^ecede and goe before the other.
Now, concerning our Great Almoner;Concerning the Great Almoner. he is to remaine in the Church neere ^out Our Person, according as his estate and dignitie requireth: except when he to performe and celebrate Diuine Seruice, which then he is to celebrate in his ^cke, as the other. The Cardinals and Prela^es, at their receiuing into the Order; (...) the hand of the Soueraigne, are to take this Oath following.




The Oath to be taken by the Cardinals and Prelates; at their reception and admittance into the Order.
11 I sweare in the presence of God, and promise to you Sir, that I will be loyall and ^thfull to you all my life time: I will acknowledge, honour, and serue you as my Soue^gne of the Order of the Commanders of the Holy-Ghost, wherewith it is your high ^asure at this present to honour me. I will keepe and obserue the Lawes, Statutes and ^denances of the said Order, without contradicting them in any thing. I will weare the ^tes or markes thereof: And I will daily say the Seruice thereto belonging, as an Ec^siasticall person, and one of my qualitie ought to doe. I will make my personall appea^ce on the daies of Solemnities, if there be not any lawfull occasion that may be my hin^ance, whereof I will giue aduertisement to your Maiestie. And I will neuer reueale disclose any thing, which shall be treated or concluded in the Chapters thereof. I will (...), councell and procure, whatsoeuer shall seeme in my conscience, appertaining to the ^ntenance, greatnesse, and augmentation of the Order. I will daily pray to God for the ^lth, as well of your Maiestie, as also the Commanders and Supporters thereof, liuing (...) dying. So God be my helpe, and by his holy Euangelists.




12 And as we institute this present Order in the honour of God,The intent of the Orders institution. and more and ^re to excite and vnite our Subiects, to perseuer in the Holy Catholique and ^ostolique Religion: Also perticularly to illustrate the estate of Nobilitie in (...) Kingdome; We haue said, enacted and ordained, doe say, enact and or^ne.
13 First, that no man shall be made a Commander,Care of sinceritie in Religion. and receiue the habit of the ^der: if he haue not publiquely made profession, of the said Catholique and A^tolique Religion, and haue not protested to liue and die therein.
14 Secondly, that he must be a Gentleman of name, and of Armes,Gentilitie of three descents. by three ^ces at the least: without being taxed with any reproachf^ll accusation, or pro^ed before a Bench of Iustice. And being Princes, to haue compleated fiue (...) twentie yeares of age: And fiue and thirtie, if he be otherwise.
15 We only, and after Vs, the Kings our Successours,The Kings only prerogatiue. Great Maisters of the Or^, shall propose and make choice of such as We thinke meete to enter into the (...) Order. And it shall not be lawfull for any person whatsoeuer, to make pursuit ^equest thereof, either for himselfe, or any other. Declaring such at the same ^ant, vnworthie for euer to attaine it, by desiring it, or causing it to be requested him. Only to this end, that this degree of Honour, which We intend to be be^ne and distributed by Grace and merit; may neuer be made subiect to mono^zing and briberie.
17 And in regard We hope, that God will so assist Vs with his Grace, and Our ^cessours after Vs, by the inspiration of his blessed Spirit, whose helpe We in^e (to that end) in Our present intention, that We may not propose, or make ^ice of any one to be our associate in the Order who shall not be adorned with forenamed qualities: Yet notwithstanding, because We would auoide all surprises,

and render our choice free from all reproach, so much as possibly we ma^ It is our will,A Royall prouidence for electing Bretheren in the Order. that yearely there shall be held a Chapter, on the last day of De^ber in the morning, and after dinner, if neede shall so require, wherein shall (...) the Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, with the Officers of the Order. (...) them we will propound and name the men, whom we are aduised to make choice for the Order. And we entreate our said Assistants, to make enquiry what langua^ or report passeth of them: to the end that they may giue vs faithfull informa^ at the Chapter (which for that purpose) shall bee held on the first day of the year^ before Euensong.
18. At which Chapter the Cardinalls, Prelates and Commanders, that gaue the^ assistance at our proposition;Information to be giuen to the King. shall be bound to bee there personally present. Where they shall declare to vs (vpon their consciences) their full and intire aduice, for ^ceiuing them, by vs propounded. In which case at their entring into the said Chapter, they shall sweare by the liuing God and vpon their honour (the Oath being g^uen by the Chancellor of the Order) to tell vs the truth, and nothing but the truth.
19. If it so come to passe, that the proposition formerly made by vs shall be app^ued, and that the men by vs propounded, shall bee found and adiudged worthy after receiue the Order;Commissions for firme intelligence of the Parties nominated. they are to giue vs true aduertisement thereof. And then (...) shal be deliuered, or sent to each of them particularly, Commissions, which are needfull for them; for firme verification, as well of their Religion, Age, life and manners as of their nobility and extraction. By which Commissions, they are at full to be^ aduertised in the forme which they ought to obserue, for verifying their inioyned proues. Together with the names of the Commissaries, that were Committees (...) Deputies in the Chapter: into whose hands they are to deliuer all the contracts an^ Titles, which they would produce, as also in what time they ought to performe the^ To the end, that the parties elected and chosen, may obserue in, and by all mean^ whatsoeuer they are enioyned or appoynted by the Statutes of the Order, for (...) as desire to enter and be there associates, for ample verifying their prooues.
In what manner the proues are to be made for Religion, etc.20. And those proues shall alwayes be made (in regard of Religion, life and ^ners, and likewise for yeares of Age) by the Arch-bishop, or Bishop of the Dioce^ where the parties proposed and named, shall make their abiding. To whom (for (...) purpose) shall be directed Commission, sealed with the Seale of the Order: by (...) whereof, hee shall send to be diligently informed, concerning the Religion, life (...) manners of the said named partie. Which information is to bee sent close sealed, (...) deliuered into the hands of the Chancellour of the Order, a moneth before the (...) day of the yeare. Ouer and beside which information, wee doe further ordaine, (...) the partie named for entring into the Order, shall stand bound (before power bee gr^^ted for his reception) to make profession of his faith, according to the fo^me prese^ bed by the Church, on the Booke, h^ld by our great Almoner, or one of the Prel^ incorporated into the Order, being our Subiect: and this to be certified in the Boo^ containing the said Profession, amongst the rest.
Concerning proues of Nobility, and how they are to be made.21. The proofes of Nobility, is to bee made by Contracts of Marriages, Pa^ Testaments, Donations, Transactions, Auouchings, Inuentories of goods or L^ homages, or Extractions of Foundations by Fathers, Grand-fathers, and great Gr^ fathers, the names of whom must bee exhibited into the hands of the Commiss^ who were named for the verifying of their proofes, sixe monthes after they haue (...) aduertised of their Election, from the Originalls. And if the named parties (...) compasse attaining of the said Originalls; then the Commissaries must goe thither commodiously they may doe it) where any parts or parcels of the Originalls are ^maining, that in their presence, and of our Officers and Aduocates of those places, ^tracts of them may bee made. And if it so happen, that they cannot goe thither, (...) are obliged to informe his maiestie, concerning the names of some Lords in those ^uinces, in whose presence the named persons may cause the said extracts to bee (...) and read, and an Act of them to bee made for the Pretendant, which shall a^ward bee deliuered into the hands of the Chancellor of the Order; who there^ shall cause a Commission to bee dispatched by the Register of the Order, (...) sent to the Gentlemen deleagud by the said Commissaries, to call (with them) (...)

^fficers and Aduocates of the places before the^, to be present at the examind Copies.
The Commissions for verifying the said proues of Nobility,How, and to whom the Commisions for Nobility are to be directed. shall alwayes bee di^cted to two Commanders of the Order, who shall be chose (by vs) in the Chapter? call our Officers and Aduocates of the places (if need require) before them, to be ^ligently informed, and by good witnesses (who must be chosen men of Office, and ^t produced by the named persons, but authenticall Acts;) whether the said named ^rsons, for entring into the Order, be Gentlemen of three races by the Fathers side, (...) no: And whether the sir-names and Armes which they carry, were carried by ^eir Fathers, Grand-fathers, and great Grand-fathers, or no. And of what Lands and ^eigneuries they were then possessed and took the title. Whether the matters containd (...) those proues, which were deliuered to their hands, be true or no. And whether the ^med persons haue not beene attainted and conuicted of crimes and cases, directly ^pposite against Nobility and honor.
Of all these they are to prepare a verball answer, with an extract thereof in writing; ^hich they must send a month before the said first day of the yeare, vnto the Chan^llour, close and fast sealed with their seales of Armes, affirmed vpon their faith and ^onour, and signed by their hands with titles, contracts, and particulars produced by the ^med persons. His Maiestie expressly forbidding the Chancellor to receiue the^; ex^ept they were or be presented to him, a month before the said first day of the yeare.
23. The Chancellour hauing receiued the said verball Answer,What is to be done after the Chancellour hath receiued the Verball Answere. is to aduertise the ^ing thereof: who shall (yearely) meete himselfe in person, ten dayes before the ^ding of the moneth December, or sooner; with the Cardinalls, Prelates, Com^anders and Officers, in his Court. By whose aduice, he is to elect and depute to ^e number of eight of the Commanders: in whose presence, the Chancellour must ^pen the verball answer. And then the titles of the said named parties are to be sur^yed, that report of them may be giuen at the next Chapter, which shall be held the ^st day of December. In the number of which said eight Commanders; there must ^e alwayes one of the Cardinalls, two Prelates, two of the Commissaries, which ^uerred and examined the proues, and three other Commanders, chosen as before hath ^eene said. And if the Commissaries shall happen to be absent; two other Comman^ers are to be subrogated in their stead. And (continually) the said verball Answer is ^o be sent by the said Co^missaries, and carefully kept by the Register of the Order, for ^resent seruice when need shall require. And in case that all, or part of them be iudged ^orthy by vs, and two thirds of the Assembly: We and our Successors, as great Mai^ers and Soueraignes of the Order, shall make choyce and election of him, or them, ^s we thinke best; who at the same time shall be called to the Chapter, by the He^uld King of Armes belonging to the Order, to bee aduertised by vs of their associ^tion in the Order, and then to receiue the appointment what they are to doe.
24. The Chancellour in relating the verball answer,Relation of military seruices done for ^he^ King. shall also represent and make ^nowne to vs in the said Assembly; the charges and degrees wherewith the Preten^ants haue beene honoured, and the places where they haue serued vs in our Camps ^nd Armies, according to the memories which haue beene deliuered of them: to the ^nd that their receiuing into the Order may appeare the more honourab^e.
25. And although Strangers, Inhabitants and naturalizd in our Kingdome,Concerning the receiuing of strangers into the Order. to ^hom we permit (by present institution) entrance into the said Order, in like manner (...) our Subiects, by submitting themselues to the Rules and Statutes therof, cannot wel ^ccomplish (in all and euery part) those things which we haue ordained to be obserued (...) the said proues: It shall suffice, that they exhibite and deliuer into the hands of the Chancellour, the Originalls of Contracts of Marriage, Testaments or Inuestitures of ^heir Fathers, Grand-fathers, and great Grand-fathers, or of Acts extracted out of the ^owles and publike places in the Townes or Cities, concerning the extraction and ^riginall of their houses: or Copies of Contracts, and Instruments forenamed, duly ^ade out of the said extracts, by vertue of a Commission which shall be sent by ap^ointment of the Soueraigne, and sealed with the Seale of the Order, directed to some ^ersons, who (to that end) shall be named in the Chapter, without binding them to ^ake any more ample proues.
26 We ordaine also, that the Sonnes, Brethren, Nephewes, and Cousins Germaine

of a Commander in the same Order,Of Commanders Sonnes and Kindred of the Order. bearing the same names and Armes, (...) being of the same extraction, hauing beene named by vs for entring into the Ord^^ shall not stand bound to produce (concerning their Nobility) any other proues* the^ those which their said Fathers, Brothers, Vncles, or Cousins haue formerly made. (...) they are to be further constrained, in those Articles concerning their Religion, (...) Manners and Ages, as the other.
For appearing in the formall hab^ts of the Order.27 And to the end that such as shall be honoured with the Order, may appe^ at Feasts and Ceremonies thereto belonging, in the formall habits of the Order, a^ we haue ordained that they shall doe, and without any constraint of borrowing* We giue them further to know and vnderstand, that they are to pay fiue hundred Crownes to the Treasurer of the Order, to be imployed in making of the said habits, before they can be thereinto admitted.
28. Which habits, and Coller of the Order, may neuer be vsed for wearing, and giuen by vs or our Successors: but on the last day of December after Euensong, and in the Church where the same is solemnly performed, in such forme as hereafter followeth.
The manner and forme of deliuering the Habites and Coller of the Order.29. Such as are accepted and to be receiued into the Order; must repaire on the said day after dinner, to the place where the Cardinalls, Prelates, Commanders and Officers meete together with vs, to goe to Church to heare the Euening Seruice. Thither they are conducted, walking asunder each after other, or going two and two together, if there be many, according as they were, and are called by their Election, betweene the Chancellour of the Order, and the Commander: their Doublets and Hose being of Cloth of Siluer, and the most honourablest that can be had.
What behauiour is vsed in the Church, to a new chosen person.30. Being come to the Church, there they humble themselues on their knees, by the seates, which (for that purpose) are appointed in the Quire, on the contrary ^i^e to them for the Officers: Euening Seruice being sung, we depart from our seate, and goe towards the Altar, the Officers walking before vs; and being seated in the State, there prepared for vs, the Prouost and Maister of the Ceremonies of the Order, the Herauld and Vsher going before him: goe to aduertise the two Dukes last receiued into the Order, if the said new elected person, and to be receiued, bee a Duke: but (...) hee be not a Duke, then the aduertisement passeth by the two Commanders, (...) receiued and entertained) to go take the first of the elected persons, whom they shall guide and leade betweene them (the Prouost going before) vntill they come where wee are seated. No sooner is he there, but being prostrate on his knees, to him is then giuen (by vs) the Cloake and Coller of the Order, wherein the Officers giue their assistance each one in his Office, as followeth.
The Chancellour Office.31. First of all the Chancellour, to present and hold the Booke of the holy Euangelists: whereon the Gentleman laying both his hands, he maketh his vow and Oath in due forme.
The Register.32. Next after him the Register, who shall giue the Gentleman the forme of the vowes and Oath which he is to make, fairely written in Parchment, which hee himselfe is to read with a loud voyce: and next to signe the Scedule with his hand, and then to present it to vs. The Scedule must (afterward) be enrowled by the Register of the Order; to serue as a testimonie of the day of his entertaining. And the Originall thereof, is to be deliuered by the Chancellour, into the Treasury of the Charters belonging to the Order, there to be kept very respectiuely.
The Maister of the Ceremonies. The Kings words in putting on the Cloake and Mantle.33. The Prouost and Maister of the Ceremonies, is to present vs with the Cloake and Mantle of the Order; which we must put on him in vsing these words.

The Order doth reuest and couer you with the Cloake of this amiable company, and Brotherly vnion, for the exaltation of our faith and Catholicke Religion: In the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy-Ghost, making the signe of the Crosse.

34. Afterward commeth the high Treasurer of the Order, who presenteth vs with the Coller thereof: Which we put about the Commanders necke saying.


The Kings words at the deliuery of the Coller.
Receiue from our hand the Coller of our Order of the Holy Ghost: whereinto We (a Soueraigne Great Maister thereof doe receiue you. Keepe in perpetuall remembrance, the death and passion of our Lord and Redeemer Iesus Christ: In signe whereof, wee appoint you to weare the Crosse (for euer) vpon your outward garments. And God giue you grace, that you may neuer goe against the Vowes and Oath, which you this day haue

^me hither to take, but that they may remaine perpetually in your heart. For be you well ^sured, that if you doe contradict them in any sort: you shall be depriued and excluded out (...) this Companie, and incurre those paines and penalties, which are appointed by the Sta^tes of the Order. In the name of the Father, of the Sonne; and of the Holy-Ghost, Amen.


53 Whereunto the said Commander is to returne this Answere.




The Commanders Answer to the King.
SIr, God endue me with his Grace, and grant, that I may rather dye, then faile in any Article of duetie belonging to me. And most humbly I thanke your Maiestie, for the Ho^r and happinesse which it hath pleased you to bestow vpon me. In signe whereof, I kisse ^ur Royall hand loyally.
36 I sweare and vowe to God, in the face of his Church, and promise to you Sir,The Vowe and Oath taken by the Commanders. vpon ^y Faith and Honor: that I will liue and dye in the Faith and Religion Catholique, with^t euer departing from it, or the vnion of our holy Mother the Church Apostolique. 1. That will beare to your Maiestie, intire and perfect Obedience; without failing in any part of ^utie, as a good and loyall Subiect ought to doe. 2. That I will keepe, defend and main^ine (to my vttermost power) the honor, the quarrels, and rights of your Royall Maiestie; (...) all, and against all whatsoeuer. 3. That in times of Warre, I will yeelde my selfe to ^llow you, in the furnishment or equipage of Horses and Armes: as I am bound to doe by ^e Statutes of this Order. 4. In the times of Peace, when any occasion of importance shall ^esent it selfe, at all times, and as often as you shall please to command me: I will doe you ser^ice, against any person that can liue and dye, without exception of any, and euen to death ^selfe. 5. That in such occasions, I will neuer leaue or abandon your person, or the place ^here you haue appointed me to doe you seruice; without your expresse leaue and licence, or ^mmand, signed with your owne hand, or of him whom you shall ordaine me to obey; stan^ing free from all other exceptions, but vpon iust and lawfull occasion. 6. That I will euer goe forth of your Kingdome, especially, to goe in the seruice of any strange Prince; ^ithout your command. And I will neuer take pension, wages or benefit of any other King, ^rince, Potentate, or Lord whatsoeuer: nor binde my selfe to the seruice of any other per^^n liuing, but to your Maiestie onely; except it be by your expresse permission. 7. That (...) will faithfully reueale to you, whatsoeuer I shall know hereafter: to import your seruice, ^e estate and conseruation of this present Order of the Holy-Ghost, wherewith it hath plea^^d your Maiestie to honor me. 8 That I will neuer consent, nor euer permit (so much as (...) me lyeth) that any thing shall be innouated or attempted against the seruice of God; nor ^gainst your Royall authoritie; or to the preiudice of this Order, which I will labour to my ^ttermost power, to augment and maintaine. 9. I will keepe and obserue most Religiously, ^ll the Statutes and Ordenances thereof. 10. I will continually weare the Crosse vpon ^y vppermost garments, and that of Gold about my necke; as I am enioyned by the said ^tatutes. 11. And I will be personally present, at all the Assemblies and generall Chap^ers of the Order, so often as you shall please to command me; or else acquaint you with my ^st excuses: which I shall neuer hold for good or lawfull, except they be approued and au^orized by your Maiestie, with the aduise of most part of the Commanders, which shall be ^eerest to take knowledge of them: Signed with your Royall hand, and sealed with the Seale ^f the Order, whereof I am to haue an Act. All these things I Vowe and Sweare, so helpe ^e God, and on this Booke of his blessed Euangelists.




37 And in regard, that by this Oath, it is expressely ordered,Concerning Seruice to a foraign Prince by any of the Commanders that the Comman^ers cannot binde themselues to the seruice of any stranger Prince; which cannot ^ell be obserued, by such as are subiect to others then our selfe: We publish and de^lare, that no Strangers, if they be not reall Inhabitants, and naturallized in this our ^ingdome, can enter into this Order, by any meanes whatsoeuer; neither our owne ^atiue Subiects, which are already of any other Order. Excepting neuerthelesse,The Orders of S. Michael and the Holy-Ghost allowed together. that ^f my Lord S. Michael, which we desire to hold and maintaine in the prime splen^our: We will and ordaine, that it may lawfully be worne with this, by such as shall ^e honored both with the one and other.
38 Excepting also from the said exclusion, Cardinals of the Sacred Seate, Arch^ishops and Bishops: And likewise our Subiects, who either by permission of vs, or ^f the Kings our Predecessours, haue beene, or shall be hereafter, receiued into the

Orders of the Golden Fleece, and that of the Garter; in regard of propinquity, (...) peace and amity, which is betweene vs, and the Chiefes and Soueraignes of the (...) Orders. All which wee meane may enter into the Order, as well as the other, obse^uing the formes and rules, prescribed to them by this present Institution.
A summe of money disbursed for the maintenance of the Order.39. For the maintenance of this Order, and for giuing meanes to Cardina^ Prelates and Commanders, to maintaine themselues in honourable condition, as (...) very conuenient, and to doe vs seruice, in such occasions as shall present themsel^^^ There must be a good round stocke of money leuied, which is to be diuided for p^ment in a full Chapter, and in our presence, according to such an estate, as shall be b^ vs thought fit and set downe. And concerning the said moneyes, in any na^ whatsoeuer, neither by vs or our Successors hereafter; they are to be taken, imployed, distrained or challenged to any other vse; but for maintaining and paying the pensions of the said Commanders, and according to such partition as shal be made of the^*
Of what number of persons the Order is to consist.40. We will and ordaine that this present Order shall be composed, and con^ of the number of an hundred persons, besides him that is the Soueraigne, and Great Maister. In which number are to be comprehended foure Cardinalls, fiue Prela^^^, the Chancellour, Prouost, Maister of the Ceremonies, the high Treasurer, and the Register, who are Commanders. Vpon any cause or motion whatsoeuer ensueth, may not the said number be augmented. And when any vacation shall happen, in any one of the places of the Cardinalls, Prelates, or Officers: those places are not to be filled or supplyed, but only with such persons as are to serue in the same quality.
No pension to be diminished.41. Nor shall it be permitted to the great Maister and Soueraigne of the Order, to encrease the pension of any of the Commanders, by diminishing any of the other.
Absolute prouision of all Commandes.42. To vs only, and to the Kings our Successors, as Soueraignes and great Maisters of the Order, shall appertaine the Collation and prouision of all Commands: without permission in vs at any time, to giue way, or transport our right to any person whatsoeuer, either in all, or in part, vnder any pretence of gift, gracious concession, dowrie, inheritance, younger Brothers portion, or aduancement of Heiredome, in any manner whatsoeuer it be.
Vpon vacancie of a Commaunderie.43. Moreouer we will haue to be very strictly obserued, that when any Commandery happeneth to be vacant, it shall not bee prouided by vs; but at Generall Chapters, and in the forme before appointed; without power in vs (for any occasion whatsoeuer) either to prolong or anticipate the time.
The Chancellours ordinary stipend.44. There shall be a Chancellour of the Order, who shall make the vowes and proues of Nobility, in the same manner as the Commanders, neither more nor lesse. He shall haue a thousand Crownes of the Sunne for ordenarie wages and his maintenance, and shall weare the Crosse as a Commander. Hee is alwayes to bee taken and chosen from amongst the most learned, notable, worthy, and honestest personages in our Kingdome: to the end, that the said charge and Office may bee administred, so much the more worthily and honourably.
The Seale to be kept by the Chancellour.45. The said Chancellour is to keepe the seale, which is to be made and appointed for the Order. Therewith hee shall seale all Expeditions, Prouisions and Mandates concerning the said Order, which shall be commanded by vs and our Successors in generall Assemblies of the Cardinalls, Prelates, Commanders and Officers, and not otherwise. And in the Signature of the said Letters, shall bee alwayes vnder-written these wordes.

By the King, Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maister, sitting in the Generall Assembly of the Commanders of the Sacred Order of the Holy-Ghost.

Duties appertaining to the Chancellours charge.46. Also the said Chancellour must stand bound, to bee present at all generall Chapters which are to be held; wherein he shall haue charge, to propound all such matters, as are Commanded him by his Soueraigne. Hee is also to make faithfull report of Informations, and verball Answeres, which haue beene made and sent by the Cardinalls, Prelates, Commanders, or other Committees in the businesse, for the receiuing of Gentlemen, that shall be named for entrance into the Order. Wherein hee must haue especiall care, that hee vse not any abuse, fraud and conniuencie. Hee must be iust in his carriage, to the end, that the Statutes and Ordinances of the Order; may bee exactly obserued, and kept by the Commanders and

^ficers. He is also to aduertise the Soueraigne and Assembly, of such as breake or ^ntradict them; for further proceeding to correction and punishment of them. He ^ll likewise receiue the complaints and grieuances of the said Commanders and ^fficers. Hee shall haue the Superintendencie ouer managing the moneyes of the ^rder: and alwayes be an Assistant, for the reddition or rendring accounts to the ^easurer. And the said Chancellor shall sweare and promise at his entertaining, to ^serue and fulfill all these things, without fayling in any one of them.
47. And to the end that the Statutes, Ordenances and Ceremonies of the Order,The Office of the Maister of the Ceremonies, and his stipend. ^y be kept, maintained and obserued, as they ought to be: wee haue created, ere^d, and instituted an Office, of Prouost and Maister of the Ceremonies: who shall ^w and approue Nobility, in the same manner as the Commanders. He shall haue ^uen hundred and fifty Crownes of the Sunne, as his yearely stipend or wages. He ^ll bee carefull that the Statutes, ordinances, and Constitutions of the order, be not ^y way infringed by the Commanders and Officers of the Order; but shall diligent^ and secretly informe himselfe, concerning such as doe not obserue them. If the ^ences be light, or of little moment; himselfe is mildly to aduertise the delinquents, (...) the end they may correct such errors in themselues. If otherwise; to cause them be (...) downe by the Register of the Order; that report of them may be made at the next ^hapter held.
48 He must haue a care also, that on the Festiuall dayes of Celebrating the Order;His charge on the dayes of celebrating the Order in the Church. (...) things may be readily prouided in the Church, and as they ought to be: as well ^r the adorning thereof, as for the seates and rancke of Chaires and Benches for the ^oueraigne, Cardinalls, Prelates, Commanders, and Officers of the Order. Also for ^mbassadors from Kings and Princes, and others, that are and ought to assist in the ^d Ceremonie. That the Coates of Armes belonging to the Soueraigne and the ^ommanders, may be orderly rancked and placed aboue the seates, whereon they ^e to sit. And for the better performance hereof, the said Prouost must be bound (...) be personally present where wee are, or shall bee, eight dayes (at the least) before ^e Feast day, without any fayling.
49. When any of the Cardinalls, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order,His charge on the death of any of the Order. ^all happen to depart out of this life: the Prouost standeth obliged, to haue true cer^ication of their sicknesse and death, the day, month and yeare: whether by any in^^nuenience naturall, or other accident, and the condition of their finall departing. To ^e end, that Funerall seruice for the dead may bee performed in such due manner as ^ereto appertaineth; and afterwards to cause it be set downe by the Register.
50. The said Prouost must take paines also, to enquire and haue knowledge,His charge for contentions and quarels, etc. when ^ere shall happen any debate, contention or quarrell betweene any of the Comman^rs and Officers; for informing vs thereof immediately: To the end, that wee may ^dresse the same, and hinder it from proceeding any further. At his receiuing into the ^rder, he shall sollemnly sweare to obserue and effect all these things diligently.
51. All Cardinalls, Prelates and Commanders, that shall bee receiued into the Or^^r: at the time of their entertainment, are to giue to the said Prouost, as fees and rights ^^longing to his Office, these things hereafter following
1. Euery Cardinall is to giue him tenne Elles of Crimson Veluet.The Fees and rights belonging to the Maister of the Ceremonies.
2. Euery Prelate ten elles of violet veluet.
3. And euery Commander twelue Elles of blacke veluet.
4 It is our expresse will, that if any of shem shall deferre or delay to make satisfaction of ^ese dues: As much money shall be detained (as may amount thereto) on the account of (...) Command, to be paid and giuen by the Treasurer to the said Prouost.
52. There shall be likewise a Treasurer of the said Order:The Treasurer of the Order. who shall be called high ^reasurer of the Order; who is to make proofe and vow of his Religion; and shall re^iue seauen hundred Crownes of the Sunne, as his ordinary Wages.
53. He shall haue in keeping, all Chartres, Priuiledges, Letters, Mandates,Such matters as belong to the Treasurers Office. Com^ands, Writings, Registers and Enstructions, concerning the foundation of the Or^er, with all their appurtenancs and dependances. Hee shall receiue, manage, pay ^d distribute the pensions, wages charges, and all kindes and natures of moneyes ^rought in and imployed for charges, and maintaining the Order. And as occasion requireth,

he shall haue the keeping of the Church-Ornaments appertaining to the (...) As also the Cloakes and Mantles of the Commanders, seruing for the (...) and ^^remony of the Order. Which he shall stand bound to yeeld and deliuer to the C^manders, at the Chapters and Conuentions which are to be held. And afterward, (...) receiue them again, and keep them very respectiuely, vntil some other such Chap^
For making the Collers of the Order.54 It is his charge likewise, to cause the Collers to be made, which we shall g^ to the Commanders; of what weight and fashion they are appointed, and (...) time of their entertainment, hee is to present them to vs in the Church. And wh^ the death or depriuation of any one shall happen; it is his bounden duty, to re^taine them into his possession from the Heyres. And if any of them shall make ^fusall, or be ouer-tardy in sending or re-deliuering them into his hands at a time ^ted; a Commission shall be decreed at the Treasurers suite, and directed to such (...) our Iudges and Officers, as the case requireth, to proceed in making seizure and (...) of the best goods and moueables left by the deceased, so farre as to concurrence (...) the Collers true valuation. And this payment shall bee preferred before all o^ debts, morgages or priuiledges whatsoeuer they be.
The Treasurers yearly account to bee giuen at generall Chapters.55. The said high Treasurer must bee bound to render a good and faithfull a^count euery yeare at the Generall Chapters (and not elsewhere) of all receipts a^ expences made and laid out of the Orders moneyes: which account shall be see^ and examined by the Chancellour, and fiue Commanders of the Order, thereto deputed at the Chapter. Wherein it is our further pleasure, that there shall bee assis^ one of the Presidents of our Chamber of Accounts, or Exchequer at Paris, or the ^^tendant of our Finances, or some such other of our Officers, as it shall please vs (...) appoint. And all the accounts and fines agreed on, and signed by them; shall b^ brought into the Treasury of the Orders Chartres: whereof a Copie is to bee d^uered into the hands of the High Treasurer, well and diligently examined, in ^sence of the Chancellour, Commanders, and him that (as hath beene said) shall b^ by vs chosen and appointed. Which shall serue to him as a full discharge of ma^ging the said monies. And those fiue Commanders, Committees, as Auditours (...) the same accounts, shall bee changed yearely, because they may not assist two yeare together, in the reddition and locking them vp. And concerning the President o^ Intendant, or other person* by vs chosen; hee shall haue foure hundred Crowne as yearely wages by vs, which shall bee paid to him by the high Treasurer, out (...) those moneyes appointed to him for that purpose; with inioying the same Pri^^ledges, Franchises, Immunities, and Exemptions, as the Cardinalls, Prelates, C^^manders, and Officers of the Order doe, whereof wee will send to him speedy Le^ters, signed by the Register of the Order.
A Booke for all Donatiues to the Order.56 We will also, that the Treasurer shall stand bounden, to cause a Booke^ be made, containing all the Gifts, Legacies, Augmentations, and Liberali^ which shall be granted, made and giuen to the Order; as well by vs and (...) Successours; as by the Cardinals, Prelates, and Commanders. Wherein (...) be written the Name, Sirname, and the Gift which euery one hath giuen: to (...) end, that a perpetuall remembrance may remaine of the Benefactours, and pr^yer made to God for them. The Treasurer, at his acceptation into the Order, sh^ solemnely sweare, to obserue and keepe faithfully, all the matters before recoun^^^ without failing in any one of them.
The Register of the Order his s^ipend.57 In like manner, there shall be an Officer of the Order, called The ^egis^^ (...) the Order: who must make vowe of his Religion, and shall receiue fiue hund^ Crownes of the Sunne for his ordenarie Wages. He must stand bounden, to (...) two Bookes made of Parchment, in each whereof shall be set downe, the fo^^^^tion of this Order, the Statutes, Causes, and Ordenances thereof. At the beg^^ning of which Bookes, shall be liuely figured or painted a Historie, with rep^^sentation of the Soueraigne, his sitting in State with the Cardinals, Prela^ Commanders and Officers, on the solemne day of the Ceremonie. Those Boo^ shall be fastened with Chaines, in the Quire of the Church, where began the Fou^dation: but lokct vp fast in a Chest, whereof the high Treasurer shall keepe the (...) Key, and the other shall alwayes be brought and presented to the Soueraigne, (...)

the Register of the Order, at the Chapters and Conuentions, as they are seuerally and yearely made; to haue his recourse to them for his own helpe and seruice, whensoeuer neede shall require.
58 The said Register shall receiue, set downe in writing,Duties of seruice belonging to the Registers charge. and keepe a perfect Register well and faithfully, of all the Prouisions, Appointments, Conclusions and Ordenances, which shall be made at the Chapters. Hee shall make and signe all Commissions, Letters, Commands and Expeditions, which shall be needefull touching and concerning the said Order: declaring a Nullitie, and to be of no effect or value, all those which shall hereafter be signed by any other then himselfe. He is also to inhibite and forbid, the signing or expediting of any other, for what cause, or vpon what occasion soeuer they may be pretended: as being neuer purposed, concluded and appointed by the Soueraigne, fitting in the generall Chapter of the Order; whereof he is bound to keepe a certaine Register, which he must bring and present at euery Chapter.
59 He shall keepe another Register also, apart by it selfe, for Informations, verball Answeres and Scedules, which are to be reported at the Chapters,Another Register Book for Informations, etc. of them that haue bin receiued into the Order: for rendering true testimonie of the prooues they haue made, of their Religion and Nobilitie, as also of the day of their entertainment. Hee is to Register likewise, such memories as shall be deliuered to him by the Prouost of the Order, as well of errors and delicts committed by the Commanders and Officers, to be read and reported to vs at the Chapters: As also of the decease of them, when any one shall happen. And hee shall promise and sweare at his entrance, to execute, keepe and performe all these seuerall things, without failing in any one of them.
60 All these foure Officers, shall be Commanders; weare the Crosse vpon their vppermost Garments, and another of Gold about their neckes,The four chief Officers. as the other Commanders doe.
61 Moreouer, there shall be in the Order another Officer, called an Herauld,The Herauld or King of Armes of the Order. King of Armes, Of the Order of the Holy-Ghost; who shall be chosen (hauing made proofe of his Catholique Religion) to be a man of good fame, and expert in such a charge as he is to vndergoe. He shall haue foure hundred Crownes of the Sunne for his ordenary stipend. Portera vne croix d'Or de l'Ordre pendue au Col a deux petites Chainettes d'Or auec son Esmail. He shall stand bound to keepe a Booke, wherein must be depicted to the life, the Armes, Crests and Supporters of all the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers, which shall be receiued into the Order. And vnder euery one of those Armes, shall be set downe in writing, their Names, Sirnames, Seigneuries and Qualities. And for the doing hereof, each of the said Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, shall be obliged to giue him a Marke of money, at his reception.
62 When neede shall require, to make any Signification, Command or Denomination, to any one of the Commanders and Officers: the said Herauld must haue the charge thereof, and shall report to the Soueraigne (in full Chapter) the Answere which hath bin made vnto him; or whatsoeuer hee hath learned or vnderstood in his iourney, concerning the good, honor and seruice, of the Order of the Holy-Ghost.
63 Wee ordaine and appoint also, that there shall be an Vsher of the Order,The Gentleman Vsher of the Order. who is to assist in the Ceremonie of the Order, and to beare a Mace vpon his shoulder, which is to be expressely made for seruice of the Order. Hee shall haue three hundred and twelue Crownes of the Sunne for his ordenarie wages; which shall be paid vnto him (in manner as to all the other Officers) by the high Treasurer. The said Vsher shall be chosen, making proofe of his Catholique Religion: and shall stand bound, to be present at all the Chapters to be held, for keeping the doore, and performance of whatsoeuer else shall depend vpon his Charge.
64 When the death of any of the said Officers shall happen,Election of Officers by the Soueraign. the Election of him that is to succeede, must be made by the Soueraigne. In whose presence he shall make his Vowes, and at his hand receiue the Habits and Crosse, according as the other Commanders. Except the Herauld and Vsher, who are to take their Oaths,

and receiue their Chaines and Crosses, at the hand of the Chancello^, but in presence of the Soueraigne.
65 The pensions of the Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, and Wages of the forenamed Officers,Of Pensions and Wages. may not be pawned or morgaged, or seisure made on them for any occasion whatsoeuer: except it be to buy Armes and Horses. Moreouer, i^ must be done by permission, signed vnder the hand of the great Maister, and Sealed with the Seale of the Order.
66 It is our will and meaning, that the said Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order, shall hereafter stand exempted, from contributing to the Ban, and Arriereban of our Kingdome; and from paying to vs any Redemptions, Lots, Alienations, Quints and Requints, as well of Lands which they shall sell, as those which they shall buye and purchase, relying vpon vs. Except by occasion of Customes of our Kingdome, importing, that the Buyer is bound to pay the fift Pennie in the price of selling the Fiefe, where something may be quarrelled or demanded, of the said Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order, and likewise of them that haue made the same acquisitions.
The Court of Requestain the Pallace at Paris.67 Moreouer we will, that the said Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order, hauing their causes committed to the Court of Requests, of our Pallace at Paris; may there haue and enioy all and semblable Priueledges, as doe our domesticke Officers and Seruants in ordenarie. Of which Priuiledges, we will cause our Letters and Declarations to be dispatched, for being made publique and Registred, as well in our Courts of Parliament, Chamber of Accounts, and Court of our Aydes; as euery where else, where it may appertaine, in regard of their seruice and esteeme.
68 Each one of the said Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, as also the Officers; shall stand bound, to take Letters of prouision, sealed with the great Seale of the Order, and Signed by the Register thereof: to serue him as a testimonie, concerning the day of when he was associated into the Order.
Allowance of Acts made in the Chapters.69 All Deliberations, Commands and Ordenances, which shall be made in the generall Chapters of the Order; can no way be auaileable* except they be made and approued, by aduise of two third parts of the Commanders, which shall be there assembled, accounting the Soueraignes voyce for two. And the said Chapters are not to be held; except there be eighteene Commanders present, beside the Officers.
Genealogies or Pedegrees for proofe of their Nobility.70 And because in times to come, euery one may take knowledge truely, concerning the Nobilitie, Vertues and Merits, of all such as we shall call and associate into the said Order. We will, that euery one of the Commanders, after his admission into the Order; shall cause to be made in Parchment, a Tree of his Genealogie or descent, which he shall cause to be signed and verified, by them that shall be appointed as Committees, to testifie and report his prooues. Which certificate must containe the day, when they make their report in the Chapter, and how they haue seene and iustified the same, very exactly by their prooues. Commanding further, that the said Genealogie or Pedegree, shall be written and enrouled by the Register of the Order. And the Register likewise must certifie, how the Commanders and Commissaries haue made their report in our presence: that recourse may be made thereto (when occasion requireth) that it is a true Act, and whereto faith may be vndoubtedly giuen, for euer.
The certa^ne day of celebrating the Order in the Church.71 Euery yeare, the Feast of the Order shall be celebrated the first day of Ianuarie, in the Church of the Augustines, in our good Citie of Paris; which is the place chosen and destenied by vs for the same effect. And if some publique affaires of our Kingdome, will not permit vs to be in our Citie of Paris on the same day: the^ the Feast is to be celebrated wheresoeuer we are, and in the most spacious Church neere adioyning. Where our will and pleasure is, that all the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers shall be present with their assistance; if they haue not other Command from vs ^o the contrary. Hereupon, and for this purpose, they are to come themselues in person (wheresoeuer we shall chance to be) two dayes before the Eeuen of the first day of the yeare, to giue their assistance in the Ceremonie.

Which is to begin the Eeue of the said day, at Eeuensong; where the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers are to accompanie the Soueraigne of the Order, from his Pallace to the Church, in such manner as is here set downe.




In what manner the Soueraigne or great Maister, and his Knights of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, goe on the Day of Solemnitie to the Church.
^2 FIrst, the Gentleman-Vsher goeth foremost.
The Herauld followeth next.
The Prouost, High Treasurer and Register goe together: but the Prouost in the mid^est betweene them.
After followeth the Chancellour alone.
The come the Commanders, walking two and two together, according to their ^anke, as shall be hereafter related.
After them followeth the Soueraigne or Great Maister.
Next to him follow the Cardinals and Prelates that are of the Order.
The Great Maister and Commanders are cloathed in long Cloakes, made of the ^me fashion that are worne on the day of Saint Michael; being of blacke Veluet, ^mbrodered round about with Gold and Siluer. The embroderie consisteth of Floures de Luces, and Knots of Gold, betweene three sundry Ciphers of Siluer. And aboue the Floures de Luces, Knots and Floures of Gold; are thickly semed or ^oudered Flames of Fire, but made of Gold.
The great Cloake is garnished with a Mantelet of Cloath of Siluer, couered with ^mbroderie, made after the same fashion as is the Great Cloake; reserued onely, that ^n stead of the Ciphers, are wrought faire Doues of Siluer.
The Cloakes and Mantles are double-lined with Sattin of Orange-tawnie coler.
And they weare the Cloakes turnd vp on the left shoulder, the opening being ^n the right side; according to the patterne which we haue caused to be made.
They weare Doublets and Hose of White or Orange-colour; the fashion ac^ording to the discretion of the Commander: A blacke Hat, a white Plume.
Vpon the said Cloakes, are openly worne the great Collers of the Order, which were giuen to them at their first admission.
The Chancellour is habited in all respects like to the Commanders:Concerning the Officers. yet he hath not ^he great Coller, but a Crosse onely embrodered before on his Cloake; and that of Gold hanging about his necke.
The Prouost, High Treasurer and Register, haue likewise Cloakes of blacke Veluet, ^nd the Mantelet of Greene cloath of Siluer; but they are embrodered about with ^ome Golden flames onely, wearing also the Crosse of Gold of the Order, and that ^f Gold about their neckes.
The Herauld and Prouost weare cloakes of blacke Sattin, and their Mantelets of Greene Veluet; embrodered with flames, like to the other Officers. Onely the He^auld weareth his Esmail hanging about his necke, and the Vsher a Crosse of the Order; but much lesse then the other Officers.
After returne from Eeuen-song, the Commanders and Officers may not faile to goe to Confession.
73 On the morrow in the morning, the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers, shall accompanie the Soueraigne againe, in the same Order and Garments ^s before, to the Church to heare Masse. At the Offering, We our selfe will offer ^s many Crownes of the Sunne, as We are yeares old. And each of the Commanders is to offer a Crowne of the Sunne; which at the instant we haue ordered, ^o be giuen for the nourishing and maintaining the Religious Nouices of the said Augustines. The Commanders shall goe together to the Offering, yet notwithstan^ing, one after another, according to their ranke and place. Masse being ended, ^he Commanders and Officers shall (in our presence) receiue the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body: exhorting the Cardinals, Bishops and Prelates, to communicate

also the same day, either before comming to the Ceremonie, or after, according as themselues doe thinke fittest.
The Kings royall dinner to his Knights. etc.74 After Masse, they are to reconduct the Great Maister home to his Pallace; where the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Chancellour of the Order, are to sit downe, and dine at the Table, at the cost and charge of the great Maister; is token of loue and amitie. At which Pallace, and in a place a part, shall be prepared a Table; where must dine the Prouost, High Treasurer, Register, Herauld and Vsher.
Their manner of going to Eeuen-song.75 At the houre of Eeuening Prayer, the Soueraigne, Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers, in order as hath bin said, wearing Cloakes and Mantelets of Blacke cloath (except the habite of the Soueraigne, which may be darke Scarlet, or sad Murrie) vpon which Cloakes shall be alwayes the Crosse of the Order wrought, as on the other. In this Church they are then to heare Euening Seruice for the deceased, and the next day in the morning, to heare Masse and Seruice: At the Offering in which Masse, the Soueraigne and Commanders shall offer (each of them) a Waxe Candle, weighing a pound of Waxe. And being at the Offering, the Register shall report the names of such Soueraignes, Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, as are deceased of the Order, and since performance of the last Ceremonie: For whose soules, he that celebrateth the Masse, is to say (ouer and beside the rest) at the Offerings conclusion, a De Profundis, and a Prayer for the dead. At departing home from the Masse, they are all to dine at the Soueraignes charge againe, as the day before.
Mourning Seruice for them of the Order deceased.76 Vpon these dayes, and in the said Church, must be prepared Garlands or Chaplets of Floures, thickly set about with Waxe-lights; and in the middest of them, the Escutchons of Armes belonging to the deceased parties. Beneath, or rather somewhat behinde those Garlands, shall be placed a Bench or Seate, couered with blacke cloath, whereon must be laid the Collers of the deceased Commanders. And behinde that Bench must be placed another, whereon are to sit the Heires of the deceased, or those that make representation of them, cloathed in mourning, during the time of Seruice for the Deceased. Which being ended, the Collers are to be brought and presented to vs; and (in our presence) deliuered and receiued by the high Treasurer.
A generall Chapter to be held after Dinner.77 After Dinner, a generall Councell and Chapter is to be held of the Order, wherein we are to be assisted by all the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers; but not any other, of what qualitie or degree soeuer they be. And before any thing shall be spoken, or called in question; solemne Oath is to be giuen by Vs, and the Assistance, for not discouering or reuealing to any person liuing, whatsoeuer shall be said, treated and concluded in the said Assembly; vpon paine to be depriued of the Order, and proclaimed for Traitours and infamous persons. The Oath being made, which is presently to be set downe by the Register: then is to be propounded from the mouth of the Chancellour, all that he knoweth and thinketh meete to be deliuered, necessary for the honor, benefit, encrease and conseruation of the said Order.
For errors and offences committed by Commanders78 And if it be knowne, that any of the Commanders haue failed or forfeited in their Honor, or committed any Act vnworthy of their profession, and contrary to their dutie: As, if he be attainted and conuinced of the crime of Heresie, Treason, flight from Battaile in the Field, Sacriledge, Robberie, detention of goods Ecclesiasticall, and other actions, vnfitting for Gentlemen, that make profession of Honour and Vertue; and these to be auouched by good and sufficient prooues. In this case we will, that he, or they shall be depriued and degraded of the Order; and aduise giuen in the Chapter, for correction and punishment of such offences, according as the case shall require.
79 And to the end, that memorie may alwayes remaine, concerning the Election we haue made of the Church belonging to the Couent of the Augustines, in our good Citie of Paris, for celebrating there the Feasts of the Ceremonie of the Order: We haue ordained and doe ordaine to the said Religious Conuent, the so^^ of three hundred thirtie three Crownes, a third part of yearely rent, whereof shall

^e dispatched and passed the contracts, for such necessaries as are to be vsed. With ^harge also, that they shall be bound to say euery day in the yeare, two Masses; the ^ne aloude, for the prosperitie and health of the Soueraigne, Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order; and the other still and soft, for the dead. Whereof we will our great Almoner to haue especiall care: to the end, that our in^ent may be fulfilled, and the Seruice performed as it ought to be.
80 Now, in regard that this Order of ours, is instituted to the honor of God,For auoiding contention and quarrel in their publique going. and ^f his blessed Spirit the Holy-Ghost, who euermore liketh and alloweth the humblest ^earts: We ordaine, that in the Orders walking or going to Church, or other^ise, as also in their Seates; there shall not be any dispute, or contention for ranke ^r place; but euery one to goe according to the Antiquitie of his receiuing into ^e Order, thus.
First our Sonnes and Brethren, and the Princes of our Blood.
Then, the Princes issued of our Soueraigne House, which be Dukes.
Next, the Princes which are not Dukes.
And after them the Dukes, who are but Gentlemen, in keeping the Order and ^ancke: yet this attribution is granted to them, by creation of their Duchies or ^ukedomes.
After them, the Commanders, according to their Antiquitie of receiuing into ^he Order.
Onely exception is made on behalfe of them, that haue bin chosen and ele^ed by vs, for entring into this present Order, and from the first Institution there^f: who shall keepe the Ranke of their receiuing into the Order of S. Michael, al^ough they receiued the habite of this Order after the other.
81 It is our will and meaning, that the Commanders haue and hold (afterward) (...) all places, such Ranke, Seate, Authorities and Prerogatiues;Concerning such Knights are of both the Orders. as the Knights of ^e Order of Saint Michael should haue. Declaring furthermore, that such as are ^d shall be Knights of the Order of Saint Michael, and Commanders in that of the ^ly-Ghost; shall precede them that haue but tho Order of Saint Michael onely, be^use they be honored with both together. Neuerthelesse, this Article hath no ^rther meaning, but for Lords and Gentlemen onely; who haue no other Ranke (...) sedence, then that which they haue won by the Order.
82 All the Prelates, Commanders and Officers,Colour of the Crosses to be worne. shall alwayes weare their ^rosses of Yellow, or Orange coloured Veluet, wrought on the left side of their ^loakes, Robes and other Garments vp on high. We onely and our Successors, ^ill weare it beneath on our garments, on the middest of the brest, when it see^eth good to vs, and that aloft on the left side, of the same bignesse as the Com^anders are. Those Crosses which are wrought on the Garments and Cloakes, ^cause they are Prelates, Commanders and Officers, shall alwayes be of Yellow, (...) Orenge-coloured Veluet: except in actions of Armes, where our permission (...), that such Commanders and Officers as shall be present there; may weare them ^f Cloath of Siluer, or white Veluet, made in the forme of a Crosse of Malta. (...) the midst whereof shall be a Doue figured, in embroderie of Siluer, and at the ^orners, Beames and Flours de Luces of Siluer, of such bignesse, and according to the ^traict, which we haue caused to be made.
83 The Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers,Crosses formed according to them of Malta. shall likewise weare a ^rosse the Order, fastened about their neckes with a faire blew silke Riband: ^e Crosse being made according to the forme of that of Malta, wholly of Gold, ^ammelled with White about the sides; but the midst without any enammelling. Within the angles or corners shall be a Floure de Luce, and in the midst, such as ^e Knights of the Order of Saint Michael; shall beare the noate of that Order (...) the one side, and on the other the figure of a Doue; which shall be worne ^n both sides, by Cardinals, Prelates and them that be of the Order of Saint Mi^^ael.
84 For a marke or cognisance of the Order, and the Commanders thereto be^onging: We will giue to each Commander, a Coller of Gold, made with Floures ^e Luces, and three sundry Ciphers, interlaced like knots, in the fashion of the

Cloakes embroderie. Which Coller shall alwayes containe the weight of th^^e hundred Crownes of Gold, without enriching with Stones, or any other thing. And the Commanders may not sell, engage or alienate them, for any cause or necessitie, or in any manner whatsoeuer: but they must continue and appertaine to the said Order. And the Heires of such Commanders as shall decease, must stand bound, to bring in, and deliuer them to the hands of the high Treasurer of the Order, three moneths after the parties death, or later; in which case, the Treasurer is to giue them a Receipt, for their discharge.
The Habites of the Order to remaine in the High Treasurers keeping85 The Roabes and Garments of the Order, are to remaine in the custodie of the high Treasurer, for best and safest conseruation of them. And if any of the Commanders shall happen to dye; the heires of him or them, may not pretend any right to the Garments: which are to remaine to the Order, for seruice of him that shall next succeede in the place. Who must stand bound, to pay to the Heires of the defunct, the monies appertaining to the first yeare of his Command, with the value of the great Cloake and Mantelet, if he be so pleased, the estimation being made by the Chancellour, calling to him the assistance and aduise of the Officers of the Order.
A due to the Treasurer for the Augustines86 All the Cardinals, Prelates, and Commanders of the Order, must be engaged, at their entertainment into the Association; to pay and deliuer to the hands of the high Treasurer, the summe of ten Crownes of Gold of the Sunne. Which ten Crownes we haue granted (instantly) as an Almes, belonging to the Conuent of the Augustines.
The Kings care for his Knights daily holy exercises.86 And because it is no more then reasonable, that such as principally doe dedicate themselues to God, and couet to make it knowne by exteriour signes; are more tyed to deuout prayers and spirituall exercises, then others: We exhort and entreate (so much as in vs lieth) that all them of the Order, should giue their daily attendance in deuotion, at the holy Sacrifice of the Masse, if they haue the meanes and leisure, and on the Feast dayes, at the Celebration of diuine Seruice. Albeit we know, that they are bound to say daily, their Rosarie Garland or Beades of Tennes, which ordenarily they carrie about the^ and the Houres of the Holy-Ghost; with the Hymnes and Prayers contained in a Book, which we will giue them at their entertainement: Or else the seauen Penitenti^^ Psalmes, with Praye^s made vpon each of the Psalmes, and the Letanie following the ordenarie Prayers, being all contained together in the same Booke. And whe^ any one shall be found to faile in any of the forenamed duties; he shall be bound to giue a liberall Almes to the ^^ore.
Moreouer, we enioyne them, not to faile (twise euery yeare) to be confessed, by such Fathers of the Church as are thereto authorised, and to receiue the blessed Body of our Lord Iesus Christ; namely, on the first day of Ianuarie, and the Feast day of Pentecoast. Ordaining also, that on those dayes, and all other, when (in deuotion) they shall communicate, at any place where themselues thinke best: th^^ during the time of Masse, and that of the Communion, they shall weare the Coll^ of the Order; vpon paine and penaltie, that such as doe faile to Communicate o^ those appointed dayes in the said yeare, and so adorned, shall forfeit and loose th^ reuennue of their Command, for that whole yeare.
87 And if it shall so happen, that any of the said Commanders and Officers, do perseuere, and continue three yeares each after other, and not Communicate on tho^^ appointed dayes: In this case, the Crosse and Habits of the Order shall be tak^ from them, and for such wilfull obstinacie, they shall likewise be depriued of th^ Order.For wi^ful obstinacie from the Co^munion But if any one doe faile but one of those two appointed dayes in the yeare^ distresse and restraint shall be made in the fruits of his Command, euen the fift p^ of his Annuall reuennue, which we giue and grant, as an immediate Almes to th^ said Augustines. And therefore the Cardinals and Prelates are to be sworne yea^ly at the Chapter, vpon their holy Orders, and the Commanders and Of^^cers vpon the holy Euangelists; to receiue the Communion on those two Festiuall dayes.
88 We, and the Cardinals shall vse to weare the great Coller of the Orde^

^n the foure Festiuall dayes, in the yeare, when we goe to heare Masse, in generall Processions, and at other publique Acts, which are to be done in the Churches,For wearing the Great Coller of the Order. and ^ur entring into Cities of our Kingdome, wherein we hold a Court of Parliament: And likewise at all other times, when it shall be commanded by the Soueraigne of ^he Order.
89 This Order being Instituted, for the defence of our Faith and Religion, as al^o of our person and Estate: All the Commanders shall stand obliged,For attendance on the Soueraigne. to come and ^isue vs, at all times when they shall there to be commanded: accompanied and at^ended, according to their degrees and qualities; paying for all things in their pas^^ge willingly, and liberally, without iniuring or abusing our people, on paine of be^^g degraded and depriued of the Order.
90 And this being a Companie or Societie, instituted for the honor of God; we ^ommand and enioyne you all, to vse and exercise all Brotherly dilection and kind^esse one towards another. We doe ordaine and enioyne our Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order, to treade vnderfoote (from hence forward) ^ll enuie, hatred and rancour, which may be pretended one against another, either ^ow, or at any time hereafter: liuing together alwayes in true, perfect amitie, con^ord and vnitie. Euen as we shall and will declare Our selfe, and on Our owne be^alfe, louing to you all, in sustaining, defending, honoring and gratifying your kinde^esses towards Vs: according as your qualities and vertues shall iustly merit, (...) answerable to the bond of Brotherhood, wherewith Wee haue honored ^ou all.
91 And if any debate or contention, shall happen hereafter among our Com^anders or Officers of the Order, whereof true appearance may arise,Auoiding of contentions and qua^rels. to doubt what ^ereof will ensue: We protest and promise, that the matter comming to our know^^dge, we will immediately (by our Letters) prohibite all meanes and matter of fact, ^d the said cause or quarrell shall be (by vs) heard and determined, with aduise of ^e fellow Brethren and Commanders neerest about vs, so soone as possibly it may ^e done; where the parties shal be indifferently heard, what they can say each against ^e other. And they shall be bound (for the same purpose) to appeare, or Atturneyes ^r them, to obey such end and order, as by vs and the said Commanders shall be con^uded. Euermore excepted, the right, and high Iustice of Ours, and the Authoritie ^nd Prerogatiue Royall, of Vs, and of Our Successors.
92 We ordaine and appoint also to the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Of^^cers: that if there happen to their knowledge, any quarrell, debate or contention,Intelligence of contentions. ^etweene two, or more Brethren of the Order; to aduertise Vs thereof with all di^^gence, to the end, that We may prouide for the euasion.
93 Now, hauing thus estated and established this Order, in those things which we ^^pposed most important and necessary: We hold it a matter hard and vneasie for Vs, (...) facilitate all executions and expediences thereto appertaining, and which day by ^y (God enabling vs) experience will further tutour and enstruct vs, what interpre^tion and addition shall be else required. In regard whereof, we reserue to our Selfe, ^d to our Successors, full power, of making and establishing all Lawes, Statutes and ^rdenances, which shall be thought sacred and reasonable, for their incorporating to the Booke of our Order. Prouided neuerthelesse, that the said Ordenances doe ^t alter, change or diminish in any thing, those Articles by Vs already established ^d ordained, and that they shall be read, published and Registred in the generall As^^mblies of the Order, as they are yearely made, and approued by two third parts of ^^e Commanders, which shall be there present.
We promise for Vs, and our Successors Kings of France, Heads, Soueraignes, Great ^aisters of the Order of the Holy-Ghost*The Kings solemne protestation. To keepe and accompl^sh (to our power) the ^d Points, Articles, Ordenances and Constitutions, wholly, inuiolably, and al^ayes; According to the Vowe and Oath, which wee haue solemnely made and ^en.

In Witnesse whereof, and to the end, that it may be a matter firme and stable for euer: We haue Signed these presents with our owne Hand, and haue affixed thereto our Seale.
Giuen at Paris
in the Moneth of December, the yeare of Grace, One thousand (...) hundred, seauentie and eight: And of our Reigne the Fift.
Thus Signed: Henry.
And on the foulde in the bottome: By the King; De Neufuille. And beneath Visa. Sealed with the Great Seale of Green Waxe, hanging at strings of Silke Greene and Red.



The Commission for Information, concerning the Nobilitie of the Knight nominated.
HEnry, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Poland, Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maister of the Order of the Holy-Ghost: To our louing and faithfull (...) and Commanders of our said Order of the Holy-Ghost. As at our Chapter and assembly Generall, of Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order: Wee haue (for many good and great considerations) Elected, named, added, called and associated into our said Order, our louing and loyall (...) in being satisfied by him, concerning the prooues requisite and necessarie to come from him or them, whom wee call to be so honored, as well in that which toucheth Religion, Age, Life and Manners; as for the Nobilitie and Extraction of the house, from whence he is descended. We, for these causes, with the aduise of our Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers, being present at the said Chapter; haue to you committed, ordained and deputed, doe commit, ordaine and depute these persons by these presents, to visite, see and examine very exactly and faithfully, the Contracts of Marriage or Partages, Testaments, Donations, Transactions, Auouchings, Catalogue of names, Hommages, or Extracts of Foundations, from the Father, Grand-father, and Great-Grandfather of you the said (...) The which Contracts We doe appoint you to haue set downe written, within sixe Moneths, beginning at the day and date of these presents. Calling to you our Atturney or Aduocate, and Officers of the place, if neede doe so require: to be informed diligently by witnesses and testemonies, chosen by your selfe, and by Authenticall Acts; whether the said Lord (...) be a Gentleman of Name and Armes, and of three Paternall Races at the least, or no. Also, whether the Sir-name, and the Armes which he beareth, haue bin borne by his Father, Grand-father and Great-Grandfather, and wi^ what Lands and Seigneuries they were possessed, and tooke their titles of; an^ whether they be contained in the proues by you exhibited for truth, or no. An^ moreouer, if hee haue not bin attainted and conuinced of cases and crimes, contradictorie to Nobilitie.
All which, following and being according to the Statutes and Ordenances of our said Order; We will that concerning the truth thereof, you make good and ample verball Answere of: which you shall send close and fast Sealed, with absolute affirmation, vnder your Faith and Honor, as also all the Titles and Contract^ which haue bin deliuered to your hands by the said Lord (...) before the last day of Nouember next ensuing, sending them to the hands of o^ most deare and faithfull Chancellour of our Order, to be presented to vs open, an^ read in the next Assembly and Chapter which we shall hold, with our Cardinals* Prelates, Commanders and Officers, there to be aduised in the said Assembly, whether we shall proceede to the receiuing of the said Lord (...) or no.
And if he cannot recouer, or come by those Originals of Titles, and Contracts before mentioned, and are expedient for them, which we call for entrance, and to mak^ our Associate in our said Order: He must then resort to you, and craue your aduise, concerning the necessity, of reexamining the said Titles, Extracts and Enstructions*

^ur will and pleasure then is, that you request the aduise of some Lords and Gentle^en in those Prouinces, where the Copie and Originals were first made: and in their ^resence, as also our Aduocates and Officers in those parts, and examination may be ^therwise made, concerning those Titles and Contracts, by testimony of the said Lords ^^d Gentlemen. Which to effect, we will direct our Letters of Commission to them; ^aled with our Seale of the Order, as in such cases is necessarily required.
We further will and command you, that you make knowne to the said Lord (...) that he is to bring and exhibite before you, good and ^arrantable testemonies, of the Charges and Degrees, wherewith hee hath (before ^at instant time) bin honored, and attestations of the places; where hee hath ser^ed in our Campes and Armies. Those affirmations are to be signed by our ^ieutenants Generals in those Armies, vnder whom hee serued vs, if they be ^ing: if not, by the chiefest Lords and Knights that were then present. Not ^e wee allow those attestations to be by you receiued: except they be signed (...) foure, three or two of those chiefe Lords and Knights at the least; to be like^ise sent with your Verball Answere, to the hands of our said Chauncel^ur.
For the performance of all which, we haue giuen, and doe giue to you full Power, ^ight, Authoritie, Commission and especia^l Command by these pre^ents: Charg^g, willing and commanding all our Iustices, Officers and Subiects, to be obedient ^d assisting to you in the doing hereof. And likewise to all our Vshers and Sergeants, (...) make all Exploits and Commands, which herein shall be needefull; without making ^y difficultie, or demanding Placet, Visa, or Iniunction. Because, such is our ^easure.


Giuen at (...) Vnder the Seale of our Order.

Signed By the King, Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maister, sitting in the generall Assembly, with the Commanders of the Order of the Holy-Ghost.
 And Sealed with the Great Seale, and white Waxe vpon the Labell.



The Commission to bee informed, concerning the Life, Manners and Religion of the Knight nominated.
HEnry, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Poland, Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maister of the Order of the Holy Ghost. To our louing and loyall (...) and one of the Prelates and Commanders of ^r said Order. Whereas by the Statutes and Ordenances of Our Order, it is ex^esly appointed, that there shall be diligent Information, concerning the Religion, ^ife, Manners and Age, of such as are by vs to be named, elected and chosen, for ^ssociation in the said Order, and by the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocesse, ^here he abideth, that is so chosen, and to be receiued into the said Order; or else (...) his great Vicare. Wee, vpon these causes, by the aduise of the Cardinals, Pre^tes, Commanders and Officers of the Order: haue committed, ordained and de^ted you, doe depute, ordaine and commit you, to be diligently informed, and by wit^esses that shall be named to you; concerning the good Life, Manners, Age and Catho^^que Religion, of our louing and loyall Subiect.
And the said Information being well and duely made, and certified vnder your ^nd; to send, betweene this and the ending of the Moneth of Nouember next, close ^aled, and affirmed vpon your Faith and Honor; to the hands of our deare and loyall Chancellour of the Order. To be presented to vs, and read at the next Chapter and As^^mbly, which shall be held for our Order, to the end, that it may serue, and be allowa^e in the receipt.
Which to accomplish and performe, We giue and grant you full power, might, autho^ty, co^mission and especiall command by these presents: willing and commanding also all

our Iustices, Officers and Subiects, to be helpefull and obedient to you in the ^cution hereof: For such is our pleasure.


Giuen at Vnder the Side of our Order.

Signed, By the King. Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Mais^er; sitting in the generall Assembly with the Commanders of the Order of the Holy-Ghost. De l'Aubespine.
And sealed by the Great Seale of the said Order, with white Waxe vpon the plai^ Labell.



Enstructions for the Knight nominated, to be receiued into the Order and Militarie Discipline of the Holy-Ghost.
IT behoueth the Knight nominated, for receipt into the Order and Militarie discipline of the Holy-Ghost, to procure from Monsieur de Verderonne, Register of the said Order,Two Co^missions from the Register. two Commissions: both of them Signed by him, and afterward to be Sealed with the Seale of the Order.
One of those Commissions, must be directed to the Lord Bishop of the place, where the Knight was borne, or to the Bishop of the Prouince, where he maketh his abiding principally. The contents whereof must extend; that he is to haue Information,Contents of the first. concerning the life, Manners and Catholique Religion of the said Lord Knight; or else from the Lord Great Almoner, who is Bishop of the Court: causing ten witnesses to be produced at the least, most of them Gentlemen, and the other, persons of qualitie, for making proofe of his receiuing the Communion.
The second Commission.The other Commission, is to be directed to two Knights of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, whereby they are commanded; to see the titles of the Lord Knight nominated, whereby he is to make proofe of his Name, and of his Armes, and of what Father he is the Son: who were his Grandfather, and Great-grandfather; what Armes they did beare, and whether they be answerable to those which the said Knight beareth or no; of what Lands they were possessed, and what titles they caried.
Concerning those Titles; they are Contracts of Mariages, Partages, Testaments, Donations,Import of the Titles. Transactions with his Brethren, or other Heires; Auouchments, Catalogue of Names, Hommages, Reliefe of Fiefes, Foundations, and other titles of his Ancestors.
Proof of Nobilitie by three des^^rts.And by those Titles, the Knight is to make proofe of his Nobilitie, and who were his Father, Grandfather and Great-grandfather, to hold by three Generations and Paternall Races; all these being most expedient and necessarie proues.
Whatsoeuer he can shew more, so much the more it is for his honor; but the foresaid proues of three Generations, are most requisite for him, and make all the rest the more honorable.
Epitaphes and Monuments.Likewise he is to procure Copies of Epitaphes, from the Graue-stones, Tombes and Monuments of his Ancestors, concerning their Coates of Armes; which are be had in Churches, Glassewindowes, Belts, Bauldricks, and other things: As also Castles, Mansions and Houses, which haue appertained to the parties Predecessours in times past, or at the present.
Enquest of O^fice.He is also to make an Information, and Enquest of Office, concerning all the forenamed matters; before the Iudges, Bayliffes and Officers in the places of his Birth, and Houses whence he is descended.
The O^fi^e of Armes.He must deliuer all those Informations, Titles and Enquests, into the hands of them or him; who hath the Office and charge of making Genealogies and Pedegrees, and who is also to make the said Knights.
A Memor^all of SeruicesMoreouer, the Knight is to produce a Memoriall, concerning the places where he hath bin imployed in the Kings seruices, what charge he hath there borne, no man can better performe then himself. Which memorial is to be deliuered to them, or him

^at draweth the said Pedegree or Genealogie; for further addition thereto, as shall (...) thought necessary.


The Certificate from the Commissaries, deputed and Authorized, for verifying the Nobilitie of the Knight nominated.
WEE, (...) And Commissaries Deputed by Letters Patents from his Maiestie, Sealed with the Great Seale of the Order, for auouching and verifying the Titles of Nobilitie of ^e Lord (...) doe certifie to all them to whom (...) may appertaine: That by vertue of the said Commission, we haue seene, read, ex^mined, and verified the Titles of Nobilitie of the said (...) ^eing exhibited to vs, some in their Originals, and others in their true Copies, due^ and authentically questioned and cleared, and coated on the Tree of Genealo^e, which by them was ordered and prepared, and likewise to vs formally presen^d. And we haue found the Titles very auncient and warrantable, of the said Lord (...) that he is a Gentleman of Name, and of ^rmes, by many Generations, and beareth the same Armes of his Auncestors. In ^ithful witnesse whereof, we haue directed this present Certificate, in forme of a ^erball Answere: Which we haue signed with our hands, and thereunto affixed the ^eales of our Armes, the day and yeare aboue written.


Enstructions for those Knights, that are to receiue the Order of the Holy-Ghost.
THE Knight nominated, to receiue the Order of the Holy-Ghost, must make proofe: That he is a Gentleman of Name, and of Armes, by three Paternall Races at the least. And that the Sirname, and Armes which he beareth; ^as borne by his Father, Grand-father and Great-Grand-father. Also, of the Lands ^nd Seigneuries which he and they enioyed, and how they bore the titles of them.
The proofes of his Nobilitie, must be made by Contracts of Marriage, Partages (...) deuisions, Donations, Testaments, Transactions, Catalogue of names, Hommages, ^nd other Titles, which may proue the Affiliation or Adoption, and Prouidence of the ^ather, Grand-father and Great-grandfather, and by extracts of their Foundations, (...) also the titles and qualities which they enioyed.
He must stand obliged, to exhibite the Originals of those Titles, to the hands of ^e Commissaries, which shal be deputed for the verifying of those prooues, six Mo^eths after he hath receiued aduertisement of his Election: or whether he can ex^bite the Originals, or examined Copies of them, according to the XXXV. ^rticle in the Statutes of the said Order, and answerable to the tenure of the Com^ission directed to the Commissaries. Also hee is to procure Extracts from the ^raue-stones, Tombes and Monnuments of his Ancestours: And cause to be made (...) Information of the Blazon of Armes belonging to his Father, Grand-father and ^reat-Grandfather, as they bare them, to shew, whether he beareth the same, or (...). Those Extractions he may haue from their Tombs, Glass-windows in Churches, (...) Paintings within them and without them, and their Houses, together with other ^rmes of theirs, in Wood, Stone, or Painted places.
Which Information must be made by Iudges of those places, by request from ^e Chancellour, or his Attorney; and thereto must be called many witnesses, who ^e to certifie, how those Armes were carried by the Auncestors of the said Knight? ^nd he must likewise extract the Copie of the Inscriptions, on the Monuments of ^f his Auncestouts.
And because his entertainment may be the more honorable; he must cause a sum^rie discourse to be made, concerning the charges and degrees wherewith (...) hath bin honored, and those places where hee hath serued the Kings in their

Camps and Armies. Then to deliuer them to the hands of the Lord Chancellour of the Order, to make report thereof at the Chapter for the Order, which shall be held by the King, the day before the Ceremonie for receiuing the said Knight.


Concerning the Seale belonging to the Order of the Holy-Ghost.
OVt of Edicts, Statutes and Commissions, appertaining to the Order of the Holy-Ghost, it is to be seene, that the Seale of the Order was, and is of wh^^^ Waxe; and not Yellow, Redde or Greene. In the Chanceries of France, Yellow Waxe is vsed for all kindes of Letters: except, Charters, Priuiledges and Pardons, which are expedited and Sealed with Greene Waxe, on Strings of Sill^ Red and Greene. But on Good-Friday, after Noone, there is no Sealing in the Great or high Chancerie, except with Greene Waxe, for cases held to be vnpardonable, and are tearmed Pardons of Mercy, which our Monarches on the said day, haue vsed, and doe vse, to prefer to rigour. Deriuing their Example from the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who (as on that day) was exalted vpon the Tree of the Crosse, to redeeme vs from that death eternall, which we had most iustly deserued.
How the Kings of the first and second Ligne sealed.We haue heretofore declared, that our Kings of the first and second Ligne, Sealed with White Waxe, hauing their Image engrauen on the Stampe in true proportion, sitting on the Bench or Throane of Iustice. A Custome put in practise by the Kings of the third Ligne, and perticulerly for Letters of importance, and such as principally concerned their Honor and Sacred Maiestie; and vsually Expeditions, Mandates and Commissions, for Orders of Knighthood, instituted by themselues, as we haue already said.
Sealing with white Waxe by p^i^^ledges granted.So that it was not permitted to a Prince, although he was of the Sacred Kingdome of France; to seale with white waxe, except he had Letters of Grant and Permission from the King, and by an especiall Priuiledge of honour. The Lords of Albret (into whose house the Crowne of France fell by lawfull succession) by the Priuiledge which King Charles, sixth of the name, granted them, of quartering Armes with France: had (by the same meanes) that of sealing with white waxe. Priuiledges likewise granted to the Duke of Millaine, and Count de Vertus, by the same King Charles, dated he third day of Ianuary, Anno, one thousand three hundred fourescore and fourteene; and to Nicholas de Ferrara, by King Charles, seauenth of the name, by his Letters bearing date the tenth of May, one thousand, foure hundred, thirty two* and to Pedro de Medicis of Florence, by King Lewis the eleuenth, by his Letters dated in the Moneth of May, one thousand, foure hundred, threescore and fiue.
All these Princes, I say, hauing had the honour, to diaper their Armes with the sacred Lillies of France; had Commission also thereby, to seale with white waxe, which otherwise was not permitted but to the King, and to his eldest Son, apparant Successor vnto the Crowne of France.None but the King and his eldest Sonne sealed with white Waxe. For the other Princes of the Bloud, they had not any power to seale with white waxe, although they carried naturally the Flower-deluces, ^n their Armes. For example, we are instructed by the Registers of the Court, that King Lewis the eleuenth, (a Prince as troublesome and hard to be indured, as euer was any as an vnspeakable fauour, permitted Rene King of Sicilie, and Duke of A^iou, and his Heyres in the direct Line, to seale with white waxe, for the Kingdoms of Ierusalem and Sicilie, and for the Dukedomes of Aniou, and other Siegneuries, as well in France, as elsewhere: by his Letters Patents, bearing date the eight and twentieth day of the Moneth of Ianuary, one thousand, foure hundred, threescore and eight, and other Letters of expresse command at the Parliament of Paris, (which had refused to auouch and admit the former) dated in the Moneth of May, one thousand, foure hundred, threescore and nine.
The descriptio^ of the Great ^eale of the Order.The Great Seale belonging to the Order of the Holy-Ghost, is of the same greatnesse as that appertaining to the High Chancerie of Franee; but of a different impression and figure. For that of the Order, instituted by the late King Henry (of bessed

^emorie) his Maiestie is thereon presented in person, sitting in his Chaire of ^ate, hauing on his right hand the Chancellour of the Order, Messire Philippe ^urault, Counte de Cheuerny, holding the Booke of the Holy Euangelists. On his ^ft hand the Register of the said Order, Messire Claude de l'Aubespine, standing bright likewise, and reading the Oath which the Commanders ought to take. ^n his knees, and before his Maiestie, kneeleth Frances de Bourbon, Prince of Contey, (...) Prince of the Blood, receiued as first Commander of the Order, holding his hand ^n the holy Euangelists. All these Portraitures are there figured to the life, and ^e Personages cloathed with their Cloakes, Mantelets and Collers of the Order, ^escribed by the Statutes thereto belonging. Aloft, and on the toppe of the ^eale, out of a luminous and bright shining Heauen, appeareth the representati^ of the Holy-Ghost, in the forme of a Doue or white Pidgeon, descending ^on the King. All the vpper part else of the Seale, is cirkled with radiant ^ames of the Sunne, thickely powdred with Tongues of flames of Fire. And ^und about the Circkle of the Seale, these words are engrauen as the Le^end.

Henry, third of that name, by the grace of God, King of France, and of Poland: Authour, Chiefe and Soueraigne of the Order of the Knights of the Holy-Ghost.





Now, as concerning the Counter-Seale, it is an Escutcheon or Shield,The contrary side of the Seale. charged ^ith three Floures de Luces, Cantonned with foure Flames, as is on the Great Col^r of the Order. The Escutcheon is held and supported by two Angels, after the ^onted manner. Aboue on the Shield, instead of a Crowne, is a Doue descen^ing, circkled (as all the rest of the Shield is) with golden Sun-beames, intermingled ^ith Flames of Fire. And because the great Table, which hung in the Augustines (...) Paris (taken thence by the Authors of the mad and furious League, to deface the ^emorie of good King Henry the third) had the same representation, as is contained (...) the great Seale of the Order: Here you may behold the true figure thereof.


The Order of Christian Charitie, Instituted by the same Most-Christian King of France and of Poland Henry, the Third.CHAP. VIII. The Order of Christian Charitie.HENRY III DE CE NOM. PARLA GRACE DE DIEV ROY DE FRANCE, ET DE POLOGNE, AVTHEVR, ET SOVVERAIN DE L'ORDRE DES CHEVALIERS DV S'ESPRIT^'Ordre de la Char^e C^r^st^enne.THE same King Henry, of happie memorie, was the Institutour of another Order, tearmed of Christian Charitie; for the maintenance of poore Captaines and Souldiours, maimed of their Limbes in Warre. To whom hee assigned Rents and Reuennues, for their Diet and Garments, from the Spittle-Houses and Hospitales of France. And for their lodging, a House very sufficient, scituated in La Rue des Cordeliers Sainct Marcel lez Paris, called The House of Christian Charitie.The (...) the Order.He ordained, that such as were to be receiued into this Charitable Order, should wear^ vpon the left side of their Cloaks, an Anchored Crosse, embrodered on white Sattin or ^a^sata, with an Orle and Bordure of blew Silke. Au mitan de ladite Cru^ vne L^za^^e de Satin Bleu Celeste chargee d'vne Fleur de Lys d'Or en broderie. This Crosse wa^ ci^kled, to expresse the kinde of the Order, with a Legend containing these words,(...). embrodered with Letters of Gold; For hauing serued faithfully. But

King Henry the third, could not perfect his intent according to his desire,; being ^indered by the bloudy factions of the disordered League: Wherefore King Henry ^he Great (of eternall memory) fourth of the name, and his Successor in the King^ome, in singular loue to the deceased, and pietie to the world, endeuoured to bring (...) to the point of perfection. And performed it in such sort, that, in times to come, ^en of martiall Profession, shall haue meanes for their contentment, and to finish ^he remainder of their liues in quietnes. Hauing by an Edict set downe to the Kings ^is Successors, for establishment of a Chamber of Iustice, at the Monastery of Saint ^roix de la Bretonnerie a Paris. This Chamber is composed of the Constable,Establishment of the Order. Mar^als and Colonels of France, with the number of ancient Knights of the Order, ^aisters of Requests, and Substitutes to the Attourney Generall, to iudge without ^y further appeale.Returne wee now againe to the Order of the Holy-Ghost.In the Statutes of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, the seauentie and ninth Article,A remembrance of the 79. Article. it (...) set downe, that to preserue alwaies the memory, for electing the Conuent of the ^ugustines, in the good Citie of Paris, there to celebrate the Festiuals of the Ceremo^ie of the Order; the King appointed to the said religious Bretheren, the summe of ^ree hundred thirty three Crownes, a third part of Rent euery yeare. Whereupon, ^ontracts should bee dispatched for the necessaries, with charge, that they must be ^ound to say euery day in the yeare two Masses; one aloud, for the prosperity and ^ealth of the Soueraigne, Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Or^er; and the other softly and stilly, for the deceased. Hereof the great Almoner to take charge, to the end, that the intention of the Founder may be followed, and ^e said Seruice performed and celebrated as it ought to be.In the execution of this Article, the Reuered Father in God,Hee that traduced Plutarch out of Greeke into French, and Heliodorus. Messire Iacques Ami^, Bishop of Auxerre, Great Almoner of France, (to whose learned labours we are ^e to giue due honour, for conuerting the workes of Plutarch (so sprightly) into our ^tiue French Language, and as exactly to be read as in Plutarch himselfe. And before ^ade another Maister-piece of Art, which neuer will perish, mounting so high a ^ght, as the traduction of that admirable Romant, composed in Greeke by a Bishop ^med Heliodorus, reporting the chaste and modest Loues of Theagines and Cariclea) ^ade a Contract with the Religious men, the Prior and Conuent of the Augustines (...) Paris. And the Lord Amiot, by vertue of the Procuration or Letter of Attourney ^ssed to him (before two Notaries Du Chastelet de Paris) by the late deceased King ^enry, third of that name, as also the Augustines assembled in their Chapter and Dis^etorie, for the two Masses appointed to be said each day in the yeare; to bee payd ^e summe of three hundred thirty three Crownes, and one third part of a Crowne ^f the Sunne euery yeare; without comprehending the Rights, for entrance of the ^nights of the said Order, Offerings and waxe-Lights, as well for the Knights de^^ased, as the sollemne Feast-dayes of the Order. This Contract was in the Moneth ^f December, Anno, one thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and eighteene.According to which Contract, the Augustines haue since the third day of Ianuary, ^e thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and nineteene; continued to this day, saying ^d celebrating dayly, an high Masse of the Holy-Ghost, called, The Kings Masse, at ^e high Altar; and at the ninth houre in the morning: And the lower Masse, for ^e Kings, Prelates, Commanders and Officers of the Order, at the tenth houre ^ecisely.In elder dayes, the low Masse was said at the Altar of Saint Augustine, in the body (...) the Church, as wee behold written in a small Table fastened to the place where ^e Gospell was read in the said Chappell, containing these words.In this Chappell is said and celebrated euery day in the yeare a low Masse,The Contents of the Table.at ten of the ^cke in the morning: founded to perpetuity, in honour of the Order and Military discipline ^he Holy-Ghost; created and instituted by the most Christian King of France, and of Po^d, Henry third of that name, Chiefe Soueraigne, Great Maister, and first Founder of the ^d Order: To pray for the Soules of the deceased Kings, Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders ^d Officers of the Order.But within some few yeares afterward, the said low Masse was said and celebrated

in the Chappell Royall, belonging to the Order of the Holy-Ghost, placed in (...) right wing of the Quire,The Armes of Philip de Comines. behind that of our French Salust, Messire Philip de Co^, Lord of Argenton, (of whom and of his Wife is to bee seene the Figures on their knees, vpon the Monument, and that of his Daughter, wife to the Count de P^tyeure, in the said Royall Chappell, against the inclosure of the Quire. The said Philip de Comines Portoit de Gueules au Cheuron d'Or et trois Coquilles d' Argent.) which Chappell is richly fretted and gilded with Doues,Three goodly Tables. and the Crosse of the Order. On the Gospel-side are three great Tables, in the first whereof is the representation according to life, of good King Henry the Third, of blessed memory, Author and Founder of the Order. In the second, the figure of King Henry the Great. And in the last, that of our present King, Lewes Augustus, Thirteenth of that name.The beautifying of the Chappel.Vpon the Altar is a faire Table, containing the Baptisme of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ, by Saint Iohn Baptist, and the Holy-Ghost descending on him i^ the forme of a Doue. Aboue that Table on the frontispice, is exalted another Table, of the height and widenesse of the Chappell, and very curiously painted, containing the descent of the Holy-Ghost, vpon the Apostles and Disciples, on the day of Pentecoste, and in fiery Tongues. On the two sides of this Table, are the representations (on their knees) of the two Chancellours of the Order, very liuely figured. On the Gospell-side is that of Messire Philippe Hurault, Count de Cheuerney, first Chancellour of the Order, attired in the Cloake belonging thereto, and on the Mantlet,The Chancellors Article reformed by the King. the Great Order of Commander (For the late King Henry, Third of the name, reformed the Article concerning the Chancellour of the Order, permitting him and the Chancellours his Successors, to weare the Great Coller of the Order.) Before him are his Armes, D'or a la Croix d'Azur, Cantonee de quatre Soleils de Gueules. On the Epistle side, is that of Messire Guillaume de l'Aubespine, Baron de Chasteau neuf, Second Chancellour of the Order. Who bare D'Azur au' Saultoir pery d or Cant^nee de quatre Billettes, de mesme, Escartele de Gueules a Trois Roses d'Argent.On the Doore of the said Chappell Royall, in a Table of Marble, is this Inscription.The Inscription on the marble Table.En ceste Chappelle, se celebre la Messe pour le Roy, et les Cheualiers, et Commandeurs de l'Ordre du Saint Esprit, fonde par Henry Troisiesme du Nom, Roy de France, et de Prologue l' an Mil Cinq Cents Soixante et Dix neuf.In this Chappell is celebrated Masse for the King, and the Knights and Commanders of the Order of the Holy-Ghost; founded by Henry, Third of that name, King of France and of Poland; in the yeare, one thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and nineteene.High Masse is daily celebrated at nine of the clocke in the morning, at the high-Altar, wholly new made and enriched with foure Colombs of blacke marble, and sixe goodly Angels of Brasse: the Table hanging thereon, containeth the adoration of the three Kings. This high Altar is adorned on the day of Pentecoste, and sollemne Festiuals of the Order, with a Cloth of State, Coapes, Chasubles and Tuniques of Cloth of Siluer, the ground greene, powdered with flames of Gold in embroyderie, hardly any place wanting or voyd, with diuers Figures, expressing the misteries of our Redemption, and the Armes of the King that was the Founder, in most excellent imbroderie, not to be equalled. The said Ornaments, Coapes, Chasubles and Tuniques are lined with Orange colour Taffata; And the Chappell beautified with vessels of Gold and Siluer, of most inestimable value, and truely worth the Greatnesse of a King of France, especially King Henry, Third of the name, Great in all his actions, and the most bountifull Prince of his time.The Kings intent for instituting another new Order of Knighthood.This Great Prince was once minded, to institute a new Order of Knight-hood, farre beyond all them that had carried renowne, through all the Kingdomes on the Earth. His Fauorites counselled him, that as he was the Phoenix of all Kings in the world: euen so he should take that Bird, (the onely creature of his kinde, and without any Paragon) for the subiect of his new Order. But this Prince, reiecting such counsel,A Kingly Answere. sauouring of nothing but flattery, returned them this Answer. That he had no other Phoenix but the Holy-Ghost, for whose assistance hee humbly prayed daily, to bee his directer and guide in all his actions.And yet there was some apparance, that hee did not altogether distast their

^ion; because the Phoenix is the King of Birds, and the only wonder of the ^rld.All our Ancients tooke knowledge thereof, Poets,The generall opinion of the Phoenix. Historians and Naturalists of ^st note; Ouid, in the fifteenth Booke of his Metamorphosis, saith.Vna est, quae reparet seque-ipsa reseminet Ales:Assyrii Phoenica vocant: nec fruge, nec herbis,Sed Thuris lachrymis, and succo viuit Amomi.Haec vbi quinque suae compleuit saecuia vitaeIllicis in ramis, tremulaeque cacumine Palmae,Vnguibus, and duro nidum sibi coustruit ore.Quo simul ac Casias, and Nardi lenis aristasQuassaque cum fulua substrauit Cinnama Mirha,Se super imponit, finitque in odoribus aeuum.Inde ferunt totidem, qui viuere debeat annosCorpore de patrio paruum Phoenica renasci.Cum dedit huic aetas vires, onerique ferendo est,Ponderibus nidi ramos leuat arboris altaeFertque Pius, cunasque suas, Patrium Sepulchrum,Perque leues auras Hyperionis Vrbe potitus,Ante fores sacras Hyperionis aede reponit.There is one Bird that euermore, doth new it selfe beget,By the Assyrians to this Foule, the Phoenix name is set.Like other Birds, not Corne or Herbes, this Phoenix liueth by;But the sweet iuy^e of Frankinsence, and Gum of Amony.When of his life fiue hundred yeares, are well neere spent and gone,The Holme-tree or the Palme-tree then he gladly mounteth on.Where with his Tallants and his Beake he builds himselfe a Nest,Bestrewing it with Cassia sweet, and Nardus of the best,Myrrhe, Gummes and Cinamon, with other Odours else,As if it were a Bridall Bed, compos'd of purest smelles.Then sits he downe vpon his Nest, and in those spices dies,And of his Fathers Corps (men say) doth very soone ariseA faire young Phoenix, which must liue as many yeares againeAs did his Sire. But when he doth both age and strength obtaine;Fit for the loade; the heauy Nest he beareth from the Tree,(His Fathers Graue, his Cradle-Nurse, Labours of Pietie)And so he flieth through the Ayre to bright H^perions Towne;And fore Hyperions Temple Gate, he sets his burthen downe.Poets doe vnderstand the Sunne, by the Greeke name Hyperion,Hyperiod, the Greeke name of the Sunne. to whom they ^crificed the swiftest-running Horses, as wee haue heretofore declared. And that which they termed the Towne or City of the Sunne,A Towne on the edges of Egypt. is the very same which anci^nt Geographers vsually called Pelusium, where Nilus emptieth it selfe into the Me^iterranean Sea. It hath beene since then (as now at this day it is) called Damieta in ^gypt, on the bankes of Nile, anciently called Heliopolis, Ciuitas Solis. And it is the ^ore remarkable, by the surprizall which our King S. Lewes made of it, at his first ^oyage ouer the Seas: most exactly described by Iohn, Lord of Ioinuille, Steward ^f Champaigne, in his learned History.This Bird was seene in the same City of Egypt at the time of the Emperour Tibe^ius (vnder whose Raigne, the Phoenix of the world,At what time the Phoenix was seene in Egypt. our Sauiour and Redeemer ^uffered death and Passion, to bring vs to the hauen of eternall Life) In the yeare of ^he Foundation of Rome, seauen hundred fourescore and seauen, as it is obserued by ^he noble Histor^an of Rome, Cornelius Tacitus, in the sixt Booke of his Annals, and ^his Text, well worthy to be regarded.Paulo Fabio, L. Vitellio Coss. post tongum Saeculorum ambitum Auis Phoenix,Cornel. Tacit. in Annal. lib. 6 in

Egyptum venit praebuit que materiam doctissimis indigenarum, and Grecorum, multa (...) eo miraculo disserendi; de quibus congruunt; and plura ambigua, sed cognitu non (...) proniere libet. Sacrum Soli Animal, and ore, ac distinctu pennarum a ceteris (...) ^uersum, consentiunt, qui formam eius definiere. De numero Annorum varia tra^tur, tur, maxime vulgatum, Quingentorum spatium Sunt qui adseuerent Mille Quadgentos Sexaginta vnum intersticij, prioresque Alites Sesostride primum, post (...) fide dominantibus, de in Ptolomaeo, qui ex Macedonibus tertius regnauit, in Ciuit^ cui Heliopolis nomen, aduolauisse, multo ceterarum volucrum comitatu, nouam faciem ^rantium. Sed Antiquitas quidem obscura. Inter Ptolomaeum, ac Tiberium ruinus Duce^ti quinquaginta Anni Fluxerunt: Vnde nonnulli falsum hunc Phoenicem, neque ^bum e terris credidere, nihilque vsurpauisse ex his, quae vetus memoria firmauit. Conf^ quippe annorum numero, vbi mors propinquet, suis in terris struere nidum, eique vi^ ^nitalem adfundere: ex qua foetum oriri, and primam adulto curam sepeliendi Patris. Ne^ id temere, sed sublato Murhae pondere, tentatoque per longum iter, vbi par oneri, par (...) tui sit, subire patrium corpus, interque Solis Aram perferre, atque adolere. Hac incuta, and fabulosis aucta. Ceterum. Adspici. Aliquando. In. Aegypto. Eam. Volucrem. Non. Ambigitur.At such time as Paulus Fabius, and Lucius Vitellius were Consuls, after the passage of diuers Ages, the Bird named the Phoenix came into Egypt, and gaue occasion of much matter to the most learned men of that Countrey, as also to the Grecians, for discussing many things concerning this miracle. Whereof I finde it not much amisse, that I should set downe some particularities of their agreement, with others questionably doubtfull, yet (neuerthelesse) deseruing to bee all knowne. That the Bird is consecrated to the Sunne, and varieth in the forme of his Beake, being different also in his Feathers from other Fowles; all they doe consent, that haue made description of his forme and proportion: but concerning the multiplicity and number of his yeares, they are variable in their reports. The vulgar coniecture affirmeth, that hee liueth fiue hundred yeares, whereas some other doe hold, that hee liueth one thousand, foure hundred, threescore and one yeare. The first of these Birdes flew to the Citie, called Heliopolis, and a great number of other Fowles with him, as admiring or wondring at his new kinde of shape, in the time of Sesostris. After that in the Raigne of Amasis and Ptolomie, who was the third King of the Macedonians, gouerning Egypt. But Antiquity is obscure and darke, for betweene the Raignes of Ptolomie and Tiberius, were scarcely two hundred and fifty yeares. In which regard, some haue imagined, that this was no true Phoenix, neither euer came from the Countrey of Arabia, or had any part of that which Antiquity hath attr^buted, yea, and confirmed to remaine in that kinde. For hauing well neere perfitted the number of his yeares, and his end neere approching, he buildeth a Nest in his Countrey, and throweth therein the seed of generation, out of which a young one doth spring or arise. Whose first care and prouidence is (being growne to ripenes) to bury the old. Yet not rash or vnaduisedly, but taking vp a quantity in weight of the stone Murha,A Stone of diuers colours yet cleare as Christall, bearing purple and white spottes. and making tryall of carrying it in a long iourney when he findeth himselfe able to holde out, and beare so heauie a burthen, fit for accomplishing the iourney; he taketh vp his Fathers Body, and beareth it to the Altar of the Sunne, where hee doth burne and sacrifice it. These things may be vncertaine, and fabulously enlarged. But concerning that which is sometimes seene in Egypt, it is not to be doubted.Plin. in Hist. Nat. Lib. 10.The Naturalist Plinie, in the tenth Booke and second Chapter of his naturall History, saith; Ethiopes atque Indi discolores maxime, and inenarrabiles ferunt Aues, and ante omnes Nobilem Arabia Phoenicem. Haud scio an fabulose, vnum in toto Orbe, (...) visum magnopere. Aquile narratur magnitudinem, Auri fulgore circa colla, cetera P^purcus, Coerulam Roseis caudam pennis distinguentibus, faciem, caputque plumeo apice c^^ honestante. De eo prodidit Manilius extitisse neminem quae vescentem viderit. S^crum in Arabia Soli esse. Viuere annis DCLX. Senescentem Cassia, Thurisque sarculis construere nidum, ipsum replere odoribus, and super emori. Ex ossibus deinde, and medallis eius nasci primo Vermiculum, inde fieri Pullum: Principieque insta funeri, priori re^dere, and totum deferre nidum prope Ranchaiam in Solis Vrbem, and in Ara ibi deponere.
(...)
Ethiopia and the Indiaes doe yeelde and produce vnspeakeable Foules and Birds, of (...) strange colours, and aboue all the rest, The Noble Arabian Phoenix. Nor know ^ether it be fabulous, or no, That the whole World containeth but onely one of (...), nor is he vsually, or oftentimes seene. It resembleth the Eagle in greatnesse: A ^en radiance cirkleth round his necke, all his body else of Purple colour: yet his traine ^istinguished by Rosie-hewde Feathers, his face and head thickened with a plumie ^e. Maninilus auouch not, that the oldest men liuing haue seene of them. In Ara^ He is Sacred to the Sunne, and there to be liuing sixe hundred and threescore ^res. Being old; with Cassia, Frankinsencc and other Perfumes, he buildeth him a (...), which when he hath filled with those sweete Odours, Hee dieth vpon them. First ^is bones and marrow a Worme is bred, which soone after groweth to be a young ^d. Iust Hee is in furnishing his Procreators Funerals, conueighing his whole (...) neere to the Citie of the Sunne in Panchaya: And there he leaueth it vpon the ^ar.
Petrus Belonius of Mans, in the end of his tenth Booke of the Nature of Birds, ^keth wonders of the Phoenix.
Our French Lucretius Du Bartas, hath exactly well translated into our Language, (...) which the fore-alleadged Authors haue written in theirs. In the fift Day of his (...) Weeke.
Le Coeleste Phoenix commenca son ouurageParle Phoenix Terrestre, ornant d'vn tel plumageSes membres reuiuants, que l' annuel flambeauDe Cairan, iusques en Fez ne void rien de plus beau.Il fit briller ses yeux, il luy planta pour cresteVn astre flamboyant au sommet de sa teste:Il couurit son col d'Or, d'Escarlate son dos,Et sa queue d' Azur, puis voulut qu'AtroposLuy seruist de Venus, and qu'vne Mort fecondeRendist son aage egal au long aage du Monde.Car ayant veu glisser dessous vn Ciel diuersEt cent fois dix Estez, and cent fois dix HyuersDes Siecles abatu, il luy prend vne enuieDe laisser en depost a la flamme sa Vie,De mourir pour renaistre, and d'entrer au Tombeau,Pour apres en sortir cent mille fois plus beau.Lors perche sur les bras d'vne Palme il entasseLe Baume sur le Nard dessus la Casse:Et sur le poinct du ^our de leurs branches, bastitSon Vrne, son Berceau, son Sepulcre, son Nid,Cependant qu'il attend qu'vne flammeche espriseA l'odorant buscher ses os sacrez reduiseEn genitale poudre, and que ces bois ardansFinissent non sa Vie, ains ses caduques Ans.L'Eschanson Phrygien d'vne prodigue aiguiereNe verse sur les Champs Riuiere apres RiuiereLes froidureux Trions ne couurent de verglasLes Bois Phoeniciens, l'Autan ne daigne pasPasser le bord Lybique, and l'Antre HyperboreeRetient dans ses prisons captif le froid BoreeCar adonc la Nature encontre tout effort,Soigneuse tient la main a sa viuante Mort,Ses funebres apprests, sa Naissance, ses Couches.Mesmes le clair Soleil sur son lict doux-flairantIette vn de ses Cheueux, qui tout soudain s'esprendAux rameaux de Sabee, and peu a pen consumeDe l'Immortel Phoenix and la Chair, and la Plume.Presqu'en mesme moment de ce cendreux, monceauNaist vn Ver puis vn Oeuf, and puis vn autre Oyseau:Aincois le mesme Oyseau, qui nay de sa semenceDeux cents Lustres nouue aux trespassant recommence,Au milieu du brasier sa belle Ame reprend,Infiny par sa fin dans la tombo se rend,De soy-mesme se fait par vne Mort prospere,Nourrice, Nourrisson, Hoir, Fils, and Pere, and Mere:Nous monstrant qu' il nous faut, and de Corps, and d'EspritMourir tous en Adam, puis pour renaistre en Christ.
The Heauen-borne Phoenix did begin to frameOur Earthly-Phoenix, and so plumde the sameWith such reuiuing members, that the Sunnes eye(From Cayre to Fez) no fairer thing can spye.For Forme, for Feathers, Fate and all beside:Nature n'ere shapt a worke of Statelier pride.Eyes sparkling Fire, and planted on his CrestA flaming Starre, to grace his Head the best.His necke is couered with bright glittering Gold;Scarlet his backe, his traine doth Azure fold.Instead of Venus ioyes, Death is his doome;And for his Bride-Bed fits him with a Tombe.Yet fruitfull is his death, and makes his AgeEquall in length to the Worlds Pilgrimage.For, hauing wandred thorow diuers Climes*A thousand Winters, and as many Primes;O'respent with yeares, and earnest in desire,To end his life in sparkling flames of fire,(Yet to reuiue againe) enters his Graue,A fairer State an hundred times to haue.Pearcht on the Palme, his Pile is there prepar'dOf Balme, Myrrhe, Cassia, precious Nard.By Day-breake buildes he on the branches high;His Vrne, Nest, Cradle and his Tombe to dye.There he awaites some little sparkling SpriseTo fire this perfumde Pile, and Sacrifice.His holy bones into such seeding Cenders;As (for old Age) yong Life to him surrenders.The Phrygian Fill-Cup, with his Ewer of Showres,Forbeares the Fields, and none vpon them powres.The friezing Trions couer not with FrostPhoenicia is a Country in Syria, next to Iudea.Phoeniciaes Forrests. The South-Winde lies as lost,Not daring to passeLybia is Affr^ca, named so of Lybia, daughter to Epaphanus, Iupiters Sonne. Lybia. The Northerne DenneKeepes in cold Boreas Prisoner. For thenNature with care and strength became a friend;And by her hand (in Death) new Life doth lend.The Funeral's prepar'd: His Birth, his Bed,Bright Phoebus with his Beames doth ouer-spred;Darting one flaring Locke, which instantlyFier'd the Sabaean Branches. By and by,Of the Immortall Phoenix, Flesh and Plume,To Ashes (in a moment) doth consume.Those Ashes breedes a Worme, and then an Egge,And afterward a Bird, with wings full fleg:Euen the same Bird, as borne out of his SeedeWhich his new Life more glorious now did breedeIn miest of the hot embers: A faire soule wun,Made endles^e, by thus ending, in his Tombe.This happie death, of our Life make another*Nurse, Nursling Heire, Father and Mother.Enstructing vs, that all are borne to DyeIn Adams fall, to liue with Christ on High.
This is the Conclusion of that Author, very properly deriued from the naturall ^position of this Celestiall Bird. Whereof, that bright splendour of the Church ^nt Hierome maketh vse, to infer from him a Paralell of Virginitie, for the Queene (...) Heauen, deliuering these remarkeable words, vpon the Exposition of the Creede.
Quid mirum videtur si Virgo conceperit, cum Orientis Auem quem Phoenicem vocat, ^tantum fine coniuge nasci, vel renasci constet? vt semper vna sit, and semper sibi ipsa ^cendo, vel renascendo sucedat? What wonder is it to see, if a Virgin shall conceiue; ^en the Bird of the East, which is called the Phoenix, is such, as to be borne without a ^ke-fellow or mate, and afterward to be borne againe? That alwayes it is one, and euer^e is borne to and of it selfe, or succeedeth it selfe by reuiuing?
The same Doctor of Doctors, writing Ad Praesidiam, delighteth himselfe, in ^scribing this admirable birth. Phoenix Auis est in India, and per Quingentos Annos, de ^ano implet se Aromatibus, and sic nidificat, and indicat Sacerdoti Heliopolitano in Mense ^menoth, siue Farmuth. Implet Aram Sacerdos sarmentis, and ibi confert Phoenix A^nata, and Electrum Arae imponit. Et primo Solis ortu Phoenix quidem mouet pennas. ^is vero calore accenditur Electrum, and sit exuruntur Aromata, and ipsa Phoenix incen^ur. Crastino die De Cinere Gignitur Vermis. Secundo pennas adfert. Tertio ad anti^am redit naturam, and sic ad sua loco reuertitur. The Phoenix is a Bird in India, and (...) fiue hundred yeares of age, he loadeth himselfe from Lybanus with Aromaticall Spices, ^d so buildeth his Nest, and sheweth it to the Heliopolitane Priest in the Moneth Farmeth, or Fa muth. The Priest filleth the Altar with branches, and thither doth the Phoe^x bring diuers Drugges, Amber and sweete Spices, laying them vpon the Altar. And (...) first day. at the rising of the Sunne, the Phoenix fluttereth his Feathers ouer them. ^e heate and warmth of the Sunne, kindleth and fiereth the Amber and Drugs, so the ^ices burne, and therein the Phoenix burneth himselfe. On the next morrow. Of the ^shes is a Worme engendered. The second day he hath Feathers. And on the third day, recouereth his auncient nature, and so returneth to his wonted place.
Saint Ambrose in his Hexameron, saith. Phoenix in locis Arabiae perhibetur degere ^tam, atque eam vsque ad Annos Quingentos longaeua aetate procedere. Quae cum sibi fi^m Vitae adesse aduerterit, facit sibi thecam de Thure, and Myrrha, and ceteris odoribus, (...) quam, impleto vitae suae tempores intrat alarum remigia, atque in superioris auis speci^ formamque reparatur. The Phoenix is a Bird reported to lead his life in the parts (...) Arabia, and attaineth thereto such length of yeares, as amount to fiue hundred. When ^ing aduertised in himselfe, that his life draweth neere ending; hee buildeth himselfe a (...) of Myrrhe, Frankinsence, and other sweete Odours: whereinto (hauing fulfilled the ^ted time of his life) he entreth, and there dieth. Of the moisture of his flesh A Worme ^bred and ariseth, in short while after it attaineth to growth, and in processe of time put^h on wings for flight; becomming wholly, in forme and kinde, like to the other Bird.
Hereupon was it, that the Pope Saint Clement, first of that name,Resurrection of the dead proued by the example of the Phoenix. in his Apostoli^ll Constitutions: Saint Cyprian in his Creede: and the learned Antiquarie Tertul^n, in the Treatise which he wrote De Resurrectione Mortuorum, deriued example ^om the Phoenix, to proue the Resurrection of the Dead.



Chapters, Names, Sir-names, Qualities and Armes: Of the Cardinals, Prelates, Commanders, and Officers of the Order of the Holy-Ghost. From the first institution thereof, vntill this present yeare; One Thousand, Sixe hundred and Nineteene. CHAP. 9.
THE First Chapter for the Order of the Holy-Ghost, so much famed and renowned through all parts of the World: was held at the Augustines in Paris, the last day of the yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and eighteene; and the first and second dayes of the yeare following, in regard that the Ceremonies of the said Order, continued three whole dayes together.
The most Christian King of France, and of Poland, Henry, Third of the name, of blessed memorie: receiued the Cloake and Great Coller, likewise the lesser Cloake and paire of Beads; at the hands of the Lord Cardinall of Bourbon.
Here is to be obserued once for all) that the Crosse of the said Order, it hath on the one side, and in the midst thereof, Vne Colombe Esmaillee de Blanc, comme l Orle de ladict Croix; and on the other side is the Image of Saint Michael. So that the Commanders beare their Armes, circled or entoured with both the Orders: Of Saint Michael, and of the Holy-Ghost.
King Henry carried for his Armes two Escutcheons Collared or Banded, yet sundred and diuided each from other at the point. The first was of France, and the other of Poland, which was De Gueles a vne Aigle d' Argent, Coronnee, and Membre d'Or. Parti de Lituania, qui est de Gueulles, au Caualier arme d' Argent, au Bouolier d'Azur, a vne Croix Patriarchale d'Or. About the two Escutcheons, were both the Great Collars belonging to the two Orders formerly named, and the Imperiall Crowne of France: within the Bases whereof was the Deuice of the deuout and holy King, Author of the Order, which was three Crownes. The Soule and Legend speaking: Manet Vltima Coelo.
The Tenants and Supporters for the Armes of France, were two Angels.
The representation and true figure (acco^ding to the life) of this Great Prince, is to bee seene at the Augustines of Paris, in the Chappell appointed for the Order: At the Gray Friers, in the second Glasse-window of the Quire: And in the Cloyster of the (...) as you see it figured on the great Seale.
Heere now you may behold the ranke (...) the Cardinals, Prelates and Commanders, wh^ were first honored with the Order by the sa^^ Royall King Henry, and at the first Chapter.

Of Cardinals and Prelates.
CHarles de Bourbon, Prince of the Blo^^* Cardinal, Legate of Auignion, Arch-Bishop of Rouen, Primate of Normandy, (...) Prime of the associated Prelates: Porti^^ (...) France, au Baston de Gueulles Pery en Bande.
Lewes de Lorraine, Cardinal de Guise, Arch-Bishop and Duke of Rheimes, First Peere o^ France, Primate of Normandy, and Leg^ Borne of the Seate Apostolicke Port^ Hongrie, Party de Sicilie; Tierre de Hierusa^ and le Quart d'Arragon. S^ustenuz d'Am^* (...) Gueldres,;de Flandres, and de Bar. Sur le (...) Lorraine, au Lambean de Gueulles en Chef.
Rene de Biragne, Cardinall, Chancell^ (...) France. Portoit d'Argent; a Trais^ (...) and Contre Bretessees de Q^^^re (...) chacune chargee de Quatre Tr^s^ier^ d'Or.
Philippe de Lenoncour, Bishop and Co^ Chaalons, Peere of France, afterward Ca^nall. Portoit d'Argent, a la Croix Engres^e^ (...) Gueules, Escartele del'Eglise de Chaalons, qui (...) te d'Azur, a vne Croix de Gueules, Canton^ (...) France.
Peter de Gondy, Bishop of Paris, (afterwa^^ Cardinall) Councellour of Estate, and Ch^^cellour to Elisabeth, Queene of Austria, D^ager of France. Portoit d'Or, a deux (...)

d Armes de Sable passees en Saultoir, liees de Gueules, par embas.
Charles d Escars, Bishop and Duke of Langres, Peere of France, and Counsellour of Estate. Portoit de Gueules, au pal Vaire, Escartele del Eglise de Langres, qui porte d' Azur, au Saul^oir de Gueules, Cantonne de Quatre Fleurs de Lys d'Or.
Rene de Daillon, Abbot des Chasteliers (afterward Bishop of Bayeux) and Councellor of Estate. Portoit Escartelee, au Premier, and Quariesme d' Azur, a vne Croix Engreslee d' Argent. Au Deuxiesme Escatele d' Or, and d' Azur. Au Troisiesme de Laual, au Canton droict d' Azur, seme ^leurs de Lys d' Or, au Lyon de mesme. Sur le Tout, d'Or, a six Annelets de Gueules, 3.2.1. Qui est ^e la Maison d' Illiers, au Pais Chartrain.
Iames Amyot, Bishop of Auzerre, Great Almoner of France, and Councellour of E^^ate. Portoit d' Azur, au Cheuron d'Or. Deux ^reffles en Chef, and vne Estoile en Pointe de ^esme.
The Pictures and Portraits of all these Pre^^tes formerly named, are to bee seene in ^he Glasse-windowes of the Quire, in the Gray-Fryers Church at Paris.


Of those Commanders that were associates, at the first Chapter.
MOnsieur le Prince de Conty, Frances de Bourbon, Prince of the Bloud, was entertained ^nd named to be the first Commander of the Order. But his Sicknesse did so much hinder ^im, that he could not be made Knight vntill ^he second Chapter: And the chiefe or prime ^ommonder, was
Ludouic de Gonzagua, Duke of Neuers, Peere ^f France, Prince of Mantua, Councellour of ^state, Captain of an hundred Men of Armes ^f the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Cham^igne. This is the same Man, that on the Great Seale of the Order, is presented on his ^nees before King Henry, holding his hand on ^e holy Euangelists, and taking the Oath be^nging to the Order.
Il portoit. Au Premier Quartier de Manto^, qui est d' Argent, a vne Croix Pattee de ^eulles, Cantonnee de Quatre Aigles de Sa^e, Membrez de Gueulles. Sur le Tout, de ^eulles, au Lyon d' Or. Escartele d'Or, a vne Face de trois pieces de Sable; Party de sa Marck. Tierce d Artois; and le Quart de Flandres. Cleues porte de Gueulles au Raiz Pommette, and Fleuronne d'Or, de Huict pieces parce d'Argent: La Marck porte d'Or, a la Face Eschiquettee d' Argent, and de Gueulles de Trois traicts. Artois, est seme de France au Lambeau de Gueulles, de quatre pieces, charge de douze Chasteaux d'Or. Flandres porte d'Or, au Lyon de Sable Ces Quatre Chefs sont soustenus de Trois en Poincte, a scauoir de Neuers, qui est Bourgongne moderne, a scauoir de France, a la Bordure Camponnee d'Argent and de Gueulles; Party de Retheil, qui est de Gueulles a Trois Rasteaux, sans manches, d' Argent. 2.1. Tierce d'Orual, qui est de France, Escarte d' Albret, a la Bordure Engreslee d' Argent. Le Quatriesme Quartier est compose de Trois en Chef, Soustenus de pareil nombre en Poincte. Le Premier est de l'Empire d'Alemaigne, d Or, a l' Aigle esploye de Sable; Party de Hierusalem; and Tierce d' Aragon; Soustenus de Saxe Moderne, Face de Sable and d'Or, a la Coronne de Rue de Synople brochant en Bande sur le Tout; Party de Bar, qui est d' Azur seme de Croix Recroisettees au Pied fiche d'Or, a deux Bars, ou Barbeaux adossez de mesme, and Tierce de la Ville de Constantinople, qui est de Gueulles a la Croix plaine d'Or, Cantonnee de Quatre Fuzils adossez de mesme. Sur le Tout de ce Quatriesme Quartier, de Saluces, qui est d' Argent, au Chef de Gueulles. Sur le Tout de Tout, d' Alencon qui est de France, a la Bordure de Gueulles chargee de Huict Bezans d'Argent.
For his Crest, on a Crowne and Dukes Chapeau, the Mount Olympus, on the toppe whereof is raised or exalted an Altar, with this word Fides. And at the foote of the said Mountain, this other word in Greek Carracters (...).
The Supporters or vpholders, Vn Aigle de Sable, And Vn Cigne d'Argent.
Philippe Emanuel de Lorraine, Duke de Mercoeur, and De Pont-Yeure, Peere of France; Marquesse de Nomeny, Prince of the Sacred Empire, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances (Afterward Gouernour of Bretaigne) Portoit de Lorraine (in the same manner as the Cardinall de Guise, before remembred) Au Lambel, En Face d'-Azur.
The Crest, A Blacke Eagle, Aigle de Sable.
The Supporters, Deux Aigles de mesme. This is the Crest and Supporters for all them that are of the House of Lorraine.
Iames de Crusall, Duke Vsez, Peere of France Baron de Leuy Lord d' Assier, Councellour of Estate, ann Captaine of an hundred Men of the Ordenances. Portoit Escartele. Au Premier, and Quatriesme Face de six pieces d'Or, and de Synople; Party d'Or, a Trois Cheurons de Sable. Au Deuxiesme and Troisiesme, Escartele d' Azur, a Trois Estoiles d Or, peries eu Pal, and d'Or, a vne Bande, de Trois pieces de Gueulles. Sur le Tout des grands Quartiers, de Gueulles, a vne Bande de Trois pieces d'Or.
The Crest, A Vnicorne of Siluer.
The Supporters, Two golden Lyons.
Charles de Lorraine, Duke d'Aumale, Peere, and Great Huntesman of France, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Lorraine, au Lambeau de Gueulles, Escartele de Bourbon.
The Crest, a^d
The Supporters of Lorraine.
Honorat de Sauoye, Marquesse de Villars, Count de Tende and de Sommerine, Admirall of France, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hund^ed men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Sauoye, qui est de Gueulles, a la Croix plaine d Argent: Escartelle de Tende, qui est de l Empire de Constantinople, de Gueulles, a l Aigle esployed d Or, Contre-Escartelle de Gueulles au Chef d'Or.
The Crest, a Golden Eagle spread.
The Supporters, two Lyons Siluer. This is the Crest and Supporters for them of the house of Sauoye.
Arthur de Cosse, Lord of Gonnor, Count de Secondigne, Marshall, and Great Pantler of France, Counceller of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred men of the Ordenances. Portoit Escartele. Au Premier, and Quatriesme, de Cosse, qui est de Sable a Trois Fueilles de Scie, autrement dicte Trois Faces d'Or, denchees par embas. Le Seconde de Sable, au Lyon d' Argent, Coronne, Lampasse, and Arme de Gueulles, d'autres, disent d'Or. Le Troisiesme Gouffier, qui est d'Or, a trois Iumelles de Sable. Sur le Tout, de Montmorency.
The Crest, A Lyon rising of Siluer.
The Supporters, Two Siluer Lyons.
Frances Gouffier, Lord of Creue-Coeur, Counceller of Estate, Captain of fiftie Men of Arms of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Picardie. Portoit d'Or, a trois Iumelles de Sable, Escartelle de Montmerency.
The Crest, A Lyon rising, of Siluer.
The Supporter, Two Sauages of fleshie colour naturally.
Frances D'Escars, Lord of the said place, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Arms of the Ordenances. Portoit de Gueules au Pal de Vair.
The Crest.
The Supporters, Two Harts of Gold.
Charles de Halwin, Lord of Piennes, Marquesse of Meguelay, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Metz. Portoit d' Argent a trois Lyons, de Sable Lampassez de Gueulles, Armez and Coronnez d Or. 2. i.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Charles de la Roche-Foucauld, Lord of Barbezieux, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, Gouernour of Champaigne and Brie. Portoit Escartelle. Au Premier, and Quatriesme, Burele d' Argent, and d' Azur de Dix pieces, a trois Cheurons Brochants sur le Tout de Gueulles. Le Second and Troisiesme d'Or, a vn Escusson d'Azur, Sur le Tout d Or, a deux Vaches de Gueulles, Acornees, and Clarinees d'Azur.
The Crest, A naked Maide, holding with both her Hands, exalted aboue her Head, a Counts Crowne.
The Supporters, Two naked Sauages.
Iohn D'Escars, Lord de la Vau-Guyon, Prince de Carency, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d Escars, a la Bordure Eugreslee d' Argent. Escartelle de Bourbon. I haue seene them to be so: yet others doe say, that this Quarter should be De Vendosme, qui est de France, au Baston brochant sur le Tout de Gueulles, charge de Trois Leonceaux d'Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters, Those D' Escars, before noated.
Christopher des Vrsins, Lord de la Chapelle, Baron de Treinell, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit Bande d' Argent, and d^ Gueulles de sixe pieces. Au Chef d' Argent, charg^ d'vne Roze de Gueulles, Soustenue d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances le Roy, Count de Clinchamp, Lord (...) Chauigny, Councel^our of Estate, Captaine of an Hundred Gentlemen of the Kings house* Portoit Escartele. Au Premier, and Quatries^ d' Argent, a la Bande de Gueulles. Au Deuxies^ and Troisiesme Eschiequete d'Or, and d'Azur, a l^ Bordure de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Scipio de Fiesque, Count de Lauagne, and de ^ressuyre, Councellour of Estate, and Knight ^f the honor of the Queene Mother, Catha^ine de Florence. Portoit Bande d'Azur, and d' Ar^ent de six Pieces.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Anthony Lord of ^ons, Count de Marepnes, Councellour of Estate, and Captain of an hundred Gentlemen of the Kings House. Portoit (...) Argent, a la Face Bandee d Or, and de Gueulles, de six pieces.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iames Lord de Humieres, Marquesse d' An^re, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Go^ernour of Montdidier, Peronne and Roye. Portoit d'Argent, Frette de Sable de sixe ^ieces.
The Crest, A Lyon rising de Gueulles, Ac^oasted with a Lure d'Argent, Frette de Sable.
The Supporters, Lyons de Gueullles.
Iohn Lord d'Aumont, Count de Chasteau Ra^ul (De Castro Radulphi) Marshall of France, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Argent, au Cheuron de Gueulles, a Sept Merlettes de mesme, Deux a chaque coste de Cheu^on, and trois en Triangle dessous.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn de Chourses, Lord of Malicorne (afterward Gouernour of Poictu) Captaine of fiftie Men of the Ordenances, and Councellour of Estate. Portoit d' Argent, a vne Face de Cinq pie^es de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Albert de Gondy, Count de Rets, Marquesse de Belle-Isle, Counceller of Estate, chiefe Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances: Afterward made Duke of Rets, Peere, Marshall, and Generall of the Gallies of France. Beareth the same as Peter de Gondy, Bishop of Paris, and his Brother doth.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Rene de Villequier, the yonger, called le Gros, Baron d' Aubigny, and d Iury, Councellour of Estate, Prime Gentleman of the Kings Chamber, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, Gouernour of Paris, and Isle de France. Portoit de Gueulles a la Croix fleurencee, ou Fleurdelysee d'Or, Cantonnee de Douze Billettes de mesine. Escartele de la Roche Chouard, qui est de Gueulles a trois Faces Viurees, ou Entees d' Argent: la Premiere Brizee d'vne Belete de Sable. Sur le Tout Pale d Or, and de Gueulles de six pieces.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn de Blosset, Lord and Baron of Torcy, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, Gouernour of Paris and Isle de France. Portoit Escartele. Le Premier, and quatriesme Pale d'Or, and de Synople, de six pieces; au Chef d' Argent, charge de trois Cheurons de Gueulles. Les Deuxiesme and Troisiesme d' Argent, a vne Face de quatre pieces de Gueulles, a vn Lyon de Sable Brochant sur le Tout.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Claude de Villequier, the elder, Lord and Baron of the said place; Vicount de la Gierche, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes. Portoit de Gueulles, a la Croix Eleurdelysee d'Or, Cantonnee de Douze Billettes de mesme.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Anthony D'Estrees, Prime Baron, and Seneschall of Boulonnois, Lord de Coeuures, Councellour of Estate, Captain of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances: And afterward Great Maister of the Artillerie of France, Gouernour of Paris, and Isle de France. Portoit Escartele. Au Premier, and Quatriesme, d' Argent, Prette de Sable, au Chef d Or, charge de trois Merlettes de Sable. Au Deuxiesme de France, a deux Bastons, l'vn de Gueulles, and l autre d' Argent, passez en Saultoir. An Troisiesme d'Or, au Lyon d' Azur, Coronne, Lampasse, and Arme de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Charles de la Mark, Count de Mauleurier, Lord of Rignac, Colonges and Villomer, Vicount de Huyssay; Baron de Pont-Arcy, Captaine of the hundred Switzers of the Kings Guard, and Councellour of Estate. Portoit de la Mark, qui est d'Or, a la Face Eschecquee d' Argent, and de Gueulles de trois Traicts, au Lyon naissant de Gueulles. Escartelle de Breze, qui est d'Azur, a l'Escusson d'Argent, a vne Orle d'Or, accompagnee de Huict Croisettes d'Or, trois en Chef, Deux en Flanc, and Trois en Pointe.
The Crest, A Blacke Eagle.
The Supporters. Two Griffons Gold.
Philebert de la Guiche, Lord of the said place Councellour of Estate, Gouernour of Bourbonnois; and afterward Great Maister of the Artillery of France, Gouernor of Lyons, etc. Portoit de Synople, au Saultoir d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Philippe Strozzy, Councellour of Estate, and Colonell Generall of the French Infanterie. Portoit d'Or a la Face de Gueulles, chargee de trois Croissants tournez d' Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters.


The Names of Officers accepted into the Order.
PHilippe Hurault, Councellour of Estate, Count de Chiuerny, and de ^imoux, Gouernour of Orleans, Pays Chartrain, Blaisois and Loudunois, Chancellour to the Duke of Aniou (King of France and of Poland, Henry, Third of that name) Afterward Keeper of the Seales, and Chancellour of France, and of both the Kings Orders, figured standing vpright in the Great Seale of the Order, on the Kings right hand, holding the Booke of the Holy Euangelists. Portoit d'Or, a la Croix plaine d'Azur, Cantonnec de quatre Ombres de Soleils de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
William Pet, Lord of Rhodes, and of Chemaux, Knight, Prouost of the Order, and Great Maister of the Ceremonies, chiefe Esquire Caruer, and Bugle-Bearer to the King. Portoit d'Or, a la Face d'Azur* au Lambeau de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The supporters.
Nicholas de Neuf. Ville, Lord of Ville-Roy, Councellour and Secretarie of Estate, and Great Treasurer of the Order. Portoit d'Azur, au Cheuro^ d^Or, a trois Croix Anchrees de mesme.
Claude de Laubespine, Lord of Verderonne, Councellour to the King, and Register of the Order, presented in the great Seale of the Order, standing on the Kings left hand, reading the Oathe, which the Knights of the Order are to pronounce. Portoit de Gueulles, a trois Quinte-fueilles d' Argent. 2.1. Escartele d'Azur, au Heaume abaisse, sans Lambrequins, d'Argent. Sur le Tout, d'Azur, au Saultoir d'Or, accompagne de quatre Billettes de mesme, a la Bordure d'Or.
Mathurin Morin, Lord of the Planchette i^ Brie, Herauld, and King of Armes of the Order. Portoit d'Azur, a vn Aigle d'Or, a tr^ Croix Anchrees de mesme en Chef.
Philippe de Nambu, Vsher of the Kings Chamber, and of the Order. Portoit Eschuquette d'Or, and d'Azur, au Canton droict (...) ^^mines.


At the Second Chapter, held in the Augustines at Paris, the last day of the yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred threescore and nineteene, were Created these Knights following.
FRanecs de Bourbon, Marquesse de C^^tey, Prince of the Blood. Portoit de Bourbon, Escartele de l'Alencon.
The Crest, A double Floure de Luce, Gold.
The Supporters, One or two Angelles, which are the Crest and Supporters for the most-Christian Kings, and Princes of the Blood, of the Sacred Lillies of France.
Prances de Bourbon, Prince Daulphin d'A^uergne, Duke de Sainct Fergeau, Prince of the Blood, Peere of France, and Lord du Pays de Puisaye, and Captaine of an hundred Men of the Ordenances. Portoit de Bourbon; Escartele du Daulphine d'Auuergne, d'Or, au Daulphine d'Azur.
The Crest, Of France.
The Supporters, Two Greyhounds Siluer, Collared Gueulles, the Border and Nailes, Gold.
Henry de Lorraine, Duke of Guise, Peere and Great Maister d'Hostel de France, Prince de Ioinuille, Gouernour of Brie and Champaigne. Portoit, de Lorraine, au Lambeau de Gueulles e^ Chef.
The Crest, and the
Supporters, as before is shewne.
Lewes de Luzignan, called of Sainct Gelais, Baron de la Mothe Saincte Eraye, Lord of Lansac, and de Pressy, Councellour of Estate, and Knight of the honor of the Queene Mother, Katharine of Florence, Portoit Cinq Poincts d'Axur, Equipolez a Quatre d' Argent Escartele de Luzignan, qui est Burele d'Argent, and d^Azu^, au Lyon de Gueulles, Coronne d'Or brochant sur le Tout.
The Crest, An open Tub or Vatt of Gold, wherein is Mellusina, halfe a woman, and halfe a Serpent, bathing, viewing and trimming her

^lfe. Which is the ordinary Crest for the ^ouse of Luzigna^.
The Supporters, Two Griffons Gold.
Iohn D'Ebrard, Lord and Baron of Sainct ^ulpice, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine ^f fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. ^ortoit d'Argent, au Lyon de Sable, seme d'Om^res de Croix, de mesme. Escartele d'Or, a la ^ande de Gueulles. Sur le Tout, d'Argent, Party de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iames de Matignon, Lord of the said place, Count of Torigny, Councellor of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances (afterward Lieutenant Generall at Bourdeaux, and in the Gouernement of Guyenne, ^nd Marshall of France) Portoit d'Argent, au Lyon de Gueulles, Coronne, and Arme d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Bertrand de Salignac, Lord de la Mothe-Fe^elon, Vicount de Sainct Iulian, Baron of Loubert, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Or, a la Bande de Trois p^eces d^ Synople.
The Crest.
The Supporters.


At the third Chapter, held in the Augustines at Paris; the last day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred and fourescore, were made Knights these following.
FRances de Luxembourg, Duke of Pigney, Peere of France. Prince of Tingry, Count de Roussy, and de Ligny, etc. Captaine of an hundred men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Argent, au Lyon de Gueulles, la Queue nouee, and passee en Saultoir, Coronne, and Arme, ou Ongle d' Or, au Lambeau de Gueulles en Chef.
The Crest. Mellusina, as before.
The Supporters, Golden Griffons.
Charles de Birague, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes. Beareth as the Cardinall and Chancellour of France, of the same Name, at the first Chapter.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn de Leaumont, Lord of Puy-^a^lland, Councellour of Estate, high Marshall of the Field for his Maiesties Armies, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Azur, a vn Faulcon a Volestend^, ^erche, and Lie d'Argent, Grillete de mesme.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Rene de Roche-Chouard, Baron de Mortemar, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Gueulles a Trois Paces Viurees, ou Entees d'Argent, la Premiere ^rizee d'vne Belete de Sable.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Henry de Lenon Court, Lord of the said place and of Coupeuray, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Marshall of the Campe. Portoit d'Argent, a la Croix Engreslee de Gueulles; as the Cardinall, and Bishop of Chaalons doth.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Nicholas D'Angennes, Lord of Rambouillet, Vidame du Mans, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Mets, Portoit de Sable, au Saultoire d'Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters.


At the fourth Chapter, held in the Augustines at Paris; the last day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and one, were these following Knights made.
CHarles de Lorraine, Duke d'Elboeuf, Peere of France, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Lorraine, au Lambel, and Bordure de Gueulles.
The Crest and of Lorraine
Supporters, are of Lorraine
Armand de Gontault, Baron of Biron, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Marshall of France. Portoit Escartele d'Or, and de Gueulles en Banniere.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Guy de Daillon, Count de Lurde, and de Pont-Gibauld, Baron d'Illiers, du Chesne Done, and de Magne. Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Poictou* Portoit, etc. He beareth as

the Abbot des Chasteliers his Brother doth, in the first Chapter.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances de la Baulme, Count de Suze, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Or, a Trois Cheurons de Sable; le Chef d'Azur, au Lyon naissant d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Anthony de Leuis, Count de Quelus, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, Gouernour and Seneschall de Rouergne. Portoit de Leuy, qui est d'Or a Trois Cheurons de Sable.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn de Teualle, Lord of the said place, of Auire, Bouille, and of Creans, Councellor of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernor of Mets. Portoit de Or, a Trois Annelets de Sable. 2. i.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Lewes D'Angennes, Baron de Mesle, Lord of Maintenon, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Angennes (as already hath bin said, at the ending of the third Chapter) Au Lambeau de Gueulles en Chef.
The Crest.
The Supporters.


At the fift Chapter, held in the Augustines at Paris, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred, fourescore and two, were made these Knights.
CHarles de Lorraine, Duke de Maienne, Peere and Great Chamberlaine of France, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Bourgongne. Portoit de Lorraine, au Lambeau de Gueulles: Escartelle de Ferrara; qui est de France, a la Bordure Denchee d'Or, and de Gueulles: Party de Ferrara, qui est d'Azur, a vn Aigle d'Argent, Coronne, and Ongle d'Or. Cest Escart soustenu de France, sans Brisure,
The Crest, of Lorraine.
and Supporters of Lorraine.
Anne, Duke de Ioyeuse, Peere and Admirall of France, Councellour of Estate, Captaine (...) an hundred Men of Armes of the Orde^^^ces, and Chiefe Gentleman of the Kings Chamber. Portoit de Ioyeuse, qui est Pale d'Or, and d'Azur de six pieces, au Chef de Gueulles, ch^ de trois Hydres accostez d'Or, Escartela d'Azur, au Lyon d'Argent, a la Bordure de Gueulles, charge de Huit Fleurs de Lys d'Or. Qui est de Sainct Didier.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn Louis de Nogaret, Duke d'Esper^, Peere of France, Prime Gentleman of the Kings Chamber. Afterward Admirall of France, and Colonell Generall of the French Infanterie, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Metz, Pais Messi^, Boulonnois, Angoulmois and Xaintonge. Portoit d'Argent au Noyer de Synople: Party de Gueulles, a vne demye-Croix Pommetee d'Or, au Chef de Gueulles, charge d'vne Croix Potencee d^Argent. Sur le Tout d'Argent, a la Cloche d'Argent, B^taillee de Sable.
The Crest, A Leopard Muzzle Tawnie.
The Supporters, Two Lyons Tawny Langued Gueulles, and Ongled Siluer.
Tanneguy le Veneur, Count de Tilliers, Lord of Carronges, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Lieutenant for the King in Normandie. Portoit d'Argent, a la Bande d'Azur, chargee de Trois Saultoirs d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn de Moi, Lord of the Mailleraye, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundr^ Men of Armes of the Ordenances, Vice ^mirall of France, and one of the Gouer^ for the King in Normandie. Portoit de (...) Frette d'Or de six pieces; Escartele d E^ Ville, qui est Burele d'Argent, and de Gueulles* (...) Lyon de Sable, Coronne d'Or. Sur le T^ (...) Dreux, qui est Eschicquier d'Or, and d'Azur, (...) Bordure de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Philippe de Volluire, Marquesse of Iusa, Lord of Saint Brice, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of (...) Ordenances, and Gouernour of Engo^ Portoit Face d'Or, and de Gueulles de Huict p^ces. Escartele, de Gueulles, a Neuf (...) d'Or, au Lambeau de Quatre pieces de Arg^ Sur le Tout Pale d'Or, and de Gueulles, de (...) pieces.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances de Maudelot, Lord of Passy-Lerne, ^icount de Chalon, Councellor of Estate, and ^ouernour of Lyonnais Beauielois, and Forests. ^ortoit d' Argent, a vne Face d'Azur.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Tristram de Rostain, Baron of Bron, Lord of ^aisy le Sec, Councellour of Estate, and Cap^in of an hundred Men of Armes of the Or^enances. Portoit d'Azur, a vne Face en Deuise ^Or, a Vne Roue de Auict Raix en Poinct, de ^esme.
The Crest, A Lyon rising Tawnie.
The Supporters, Two Sauages Tawnie, with ^eir Clubbes exalted.
Iohn Iacques de Susanes, Count de Serny, ^o^ncellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie ^en of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de ^ble, a Trois Annelets d'Argent. 2.1.
The Crest.
The Supporters.


The sixt Chapter, was held in ^he Augustines at Paris; the last day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and three. And therein were made these Knights, Prelates and Commanders.

Prelates of the Order.
CHarles de Lorraine, Cardinal de Vaudemont, Bishop and Count of Toull (Brother to the Queene Louisa de Lorraine: Princesse (without her Peere) for vertue ^d Sanctitie of life, and the worthie Wife to ^ng Henry, third of the name, the Mirrour good Princes, was associated into the Or^r, by the decease of the Cardinall de Bi^ue, Portoit de Lorraine, au Lambeau mis en ^ce d'Azur.


Commanders created of the Order.
HOnorat de Bueil, Baron de Fontaines, Councellor of Estate, Captaine of fifty Men of ^mes of the Ordenances, Vice-Admirall, ^d Gouernour of Bretaigne. Portoit au Pre^er and Quatreisme, de Bueil, qui est d' Azur, Croissant moutant d' Argent, accompagne de six Croisettes, Recroisettees au Pied fiche d'Or. Escartele de Gueulles, a vne Croix Anchree d'Or. Sur le Tout Escartele de Daulphine, and de Champaigne Aux Deuxiesme and Troisiesme Grands Quartiers, de Gueulles, a vn Aigle d'Or. Sur le Tout desdicts Grands Quartiers, Escartele d'Azur a vn Lyon d'Or; and d'Or, a vn Lyon d'Azur.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Rene de Rochefort, Lord of the said place, Baron des Iroles, la Croisete, Vassy, etc. Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Dunois, Blaisbis, and Chasteau d'Amboise. Portoit d'Azur, Seme de Billetes d'Or; au Chef d'Argent, charge d'vn Lyon Passant de Gueulles; a la Bordure Engreslee d'Argent, and de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn de Viuonne, Marquesse de Pisany, Lord of Saint Gonard, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Ermines, au Chef de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Lewes de Chastaignier, Lord d'Abin, and de la Roche-Pozay, Baron of Maleual, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Or, au Lyon passant de Synople, au Lambeau de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Bernard de Nogaret, Lord de la Valette, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Afterward Admirall of France, and Gouernour of Prouence, hauing formerly bin Gouernour beyond the Mountaines. Portoit de Gueulles, a la Croix Potencee d'Argent, Sonstenu de Nogaret; Party de Gueulles, a Vne-Demy-Croix Pommettee d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Henry de Ioyeuse, Count de Bouchage, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of Ordenances, and Maister of the Kings Warderobe. Afterward Duke de Ioyeuse, and Gouernour in Languedocke. Beareth as the Admirall de Ioyeuse his Brother doth. Escartele de Sainct Didier: Sur le Tout, Escartele d'Or, and d'Azur, qui est de Batarnay.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Nicholas de Grimouille, Lord de Larchant, d' Autueil, and de la Boulaye, etc. Councellour of Estate, Captain of an hundred Men of Armes of the Kings Guard. Portoit de Gueulles, a Trois Estoiles d' Argent. 2.1. Escartele d'Azur, au Lyon d'Or, tenant entre ses Pattes vne Masse perie en Pal de mesme.
The Crest, A Lyon rising Gold.
The Supporters, Two Lyons of the same.
Lewes D'Amboise, Count de Aubigeoux, Baron de Chasteau Neuf. etc. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d' Amboise, qui est Pale d'Or, and de Gueulles, de six pieces.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances de la Valette, Lord of Cornusson, and of Paschor, etc. Councellor of Estate, Gouernour and Seneschall of Tolosa. Portoit de Gueulles, au Perroquet d' Argent, a la Patte-Droict leuec; Party de Gueulles, au Lyon d Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances de Cazillac, Lord and Baron of the said place, de Cessac, and de Noailles Councellour of Estate, etc. Portoit d'Or, a Deux Lyons passants de Gueulles, a la Bordure de Synople, chargee de Huict Bezans d'Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Ioachim de Tinte-Ville, Lord of the said place, and de Fougeroles, Baron de Mery, etc. Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Gouernour in Champaigne and Brie. Portoit de Sable, a Deux Leopards d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Ioachim de Chasteau-Vieux, Lord of Verson, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of the hundred Archers of the Scottish Guard: Afterward Knight of the honor of Queene Mary of Florence, and Gouernour of the Castell and Bastille at Paris. Portoit d' Azur, a Trois Faces Ondees d'Or. Escartele d' Azur, a vne Fleur de Lys d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters
Charles de Balsac, Lord of Clermont d' Entragues, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Balsac, Escartele de Humieres (obserued before in the first Chapter) Sur le Tout de Milan, qui est d' Argent, a la Giure, ou Bysse d' Azur, Lyssante de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Charles du Plesseis, Lord of Liencour^, Councellour of Estate, Gentleman in Ordenary of the Kings Chamber, and Prime Querrie o^ the lesser Stable or Escuyrie. But afterward, Marquesse of Guerche-Ville, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of the Citie of Paris. Portoit d'Argent, a la Croix Engreslee de Gueulles, charg^ de Cinq Cocquilles d' Argent, au Lambean d'Azur. Hee hath thereunto added since, vn Est cart d' Argent, a vn Lyon de Gueulles, Coronne, and Ongle d'Or.
The Crest, A Lyon rising, Gueulles.
The Supporters, Two Lyons of the same.
Frances de Chabannes, Marquesse of Cart^^, Count of Rochefort, and Vicount de la Roche* Masselin; Councellour of Estate and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Gueulles, au Lyon d'Ermine^, Coronne, Lampasse, and Arme d'Or. Escartele de la Tour, qui est d'Azur, seme de France, a vn Tour d'Argent, Massonnee de Sable; and de Bologne, qui est d'Or, au Gonfannon de Gueulles, Frange de Synople. Sur le Tout d'Escart, d'Or, a Trois Tourteaux de Gueulles. 2.1. Which is of the Prime Lords and Counts of Bologne on the Sea.
The Crest.
The Supporters, Two Greyhounds Siluer.
Robert de Combault, Lord d'Arciere sur A^be, Councellour of Estate, and chiefe Maister D' Hostel du Roy. Portoit d'Argent a la Leurett^ passante de Sable.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances de Sennetere; Lord of the said place, and De la Ferte-Nabert, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Azur, a Cinq Fuzee^ d'Argent, en Face.
The Crest.
The Supporters.



At the seauenth Chapter, held in the Augustins at Paris; the last day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and foure, were these Knights then made.
IOhn de Sainct Lary, and de Belle G^ Baron of Termes, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of

Armes of the Ordenances, Marshall of the field, and Gouernour of Mets. Portoit au ^remier Quartier. d'Azur, au Lyon d'Or. Au ^e^xiesme Pale d'Or, and de Gueulles, de six pieces. ^u Troisiesme de Gueulles, a vn Vaze d'Or. Le Quatriesme d'Azur, a Trois demy-Fuzees d'Argent. Sur le Tout, d Azur, a la Cloche d'Argent, ^ataillee de Sable.

The Crest.


The Supporters.

Lewes Adhemar de Monteil, Count of Grig^ar, and Baron d^Entre-Chasteaux, Councel^our of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit au Pre^ier Quartier, d'Or, a Trois Bande, d' Azur. Au ^euxiesme, de Gueulles, au Chasteau somme de ^rois Tours d'Argent. Au Troisiesme de Gueulles, (...) Lyon d Argent, au Canton de Bretaigne. Et le ^uatriesme de Gueulles, a la Croix Coupee ^'Or, Cantonnee de Quatre Quintefueilles de ^esme.

The Crest.


The Supporters.



The Eight Chapter, was held at the AVGVSTINES in PARIS, the last day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and fiue, at which time were made these Knights.
CHarles de Bourbon, Count de Soissons, Prince of the Blood, Peere, and Great Maister of France. Portoit de ^ourbon, an Baston, and Bordure de Gueulles.
The Crest, of France.
and Supporters of France.
Iohn Grongnet de Vasse, Lord and Baron of the said place, and likewise De la Roche-Ma^ile, etc. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine ^f fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. ^ortoit d'Or, a Trois Faces d'Azur.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Adrian de Tiercelin, Lord of Brosse, and of ^arcus, etc. Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Mouzon. Portoit d'Argent, (...) Deax Tierces d'Azur, mises en Saultoir, Can^^^ces, and Accompagnces de Quatre Marl^ de Sable.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances Chabot, Lord of Brion, Marquesse de Mire-beau, Lord of Fontaine-Francoise. etc. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Or, a Trois Chabots de Gueulles mis eu Paulx. 2.1. au Premier Quartier. Au Deuxiesme de Luxembourg, qui est d'Argent, au Lyon de Gueulles Coronne, and Arme d Or a la Queue passee, and fourchee en Saultoir, Le Troisiesme des Baulx, c'est de Gueulles, a vne Estoile de Seize Raiz d'Argent. Et le Quatriesme de Long-Vy, qui est d'Azur, a vne Bande d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Gilles de Souuray, Lord of the said place, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Touraine. And afterward, Gouernour of King Lewes, thirteenth of the name, Marquesse de Courtennaulx, and Marshall of France. Portoit d'Azur, a vne Cottice d'Or, de Cinq pieces.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances d'O, Lord of Fresne, and of Maille-Bois, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Afterward Gouernour of Paris, and the Isle of France, as also intendant Generall of the Finances of France. Portoit d'Ermines, au Chef, Eudenchee vers la Poincte, de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Claude de la Chastre, Baron de la M^ison Fort. etc. Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordernances, and Gouernour of Berry; and afterward Marshall of France. Portoit de Gueulles a vne Croix Anchree de Vair, Escartele de Gueulles a Trois Testes de Loup, arrachees d'Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Girauld de Mauleon, Lord of Gourdan, Councellor of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Couernour of

Calais. Portoit de Gueulles, au Lyon d'Or (...) not Siluer, for so I haue I seene it in the Cathedrall Church of Sainct Bertrand de Commenges; in the Abbey of Bonnefons: At Gourdan, at Francon, Estancarbon, and diuers other places in Gascoignie.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iames de Boubens, Lord of the said place, and of Verdales, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Gueulles a vn Loup rampant d Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Lewes de Breton, Lord of Grillon, and Baron of Sainct Iohn de Varies, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Maister of the Campe for Regiment of the Kings Guards. Portoit d Or, a vn Cottice d'Azur de Cinque pieces*
Crest.
Supporters.
Iohn Dangennes, Lord of Poigny, Councellor of Estate, and Captain of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Angennes (two seuerall times formerly obserued) a la Bordure d'Azur.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances de la Iugie, de Puy, Count of Sault, Lord of Lauall, and of Montaubon. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit au Premier Quartier d Or, a vn Louy. Arme, and Lampasse d'Azur. Au Deauxiesme d'Azur a Trois Tours d'Or. 2.1. Au Troisiesme, de Gueulles, a vn Pal d'Argent de Trois pieces, au Chef d'Azur. Et le Quatriesme, d'Or, a Deux Lyons d'Azur.
Crest.
Supporters.
Mery de Barbesiers, Lord de la Roche-Chemerault, and Du Beis le Vicountie, etc. Councellour of Estate, and Great Marshall des Logis. Portoit d'Argent, a vne Face Fuzelee de Gueulles de Cinq pieces au Premier Quartier. Au Deuxiesme, d'Azur, a vne Croix Couppee, and Denchee d'Argent. Au Troisiesme, d Ermines, au Chef de Gueulles Et le Quatriesme d'Or, a vn Aigle Esploye de Gueulles, Coronne, and Arme de Synople.
Crest.
Supporters.
Frances du Plessis, Lord de Riche-Lieu, Councellour of Estate, and great Pro^^^ of (...) Portoit d'Argent, au Ch^uron ne Trois pieces (...) Gueulles.
Crest.
Supporters.
Gabriel Non-Par de Caulmont, Count of Lanzun, Lord of Toutabeuf. Count of Montbas, Baron de Puy-Guillem, de Fert^l, and De la Brouillye. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of the Ordenances. Portoit, Tierec en Bande, d'Or, de Gueulles and d'Azur.
Crest.
Supporters.
The House of the Sir-name of Caulm^nt, very famous, and much renowned in Guienne and Gascoigne; tooke for the first Sir-name, that of Non-Par, by reason of an vnequall Duell or Combate, performed there a long time sinne^ by one of their Great-Great-Grandfathers, named Richard de Caulmont, against two Giants that were Sarrazins, called Murgales, and Golias, whom he slew with his own hand. Neuerthelesse, this House hath different Armes, as you may noate by them formerly emblazoned. For this Richard de Caulmont, which fought with Golias and Murgales: Portoit de Gueulles, a Deu^ Leopards d'Or, l'vnsur l'autre, a la Bordure d'Argent. At this day, the Heire of Caulmont, Madame de Frans^^ Passage sur la Dordogne (the Castell whereof was built by our King Churlemaigne, in the yeare of Grace, seauen hundred threescore and nine, awaiting the Commissaries that hee had sent to Lupus, Duke of G^s^nie, who had retired to him Huon, (...) of Bourdeaux, who stiled himselfe (...) Aquitaine. Rex, donec Legati, quos mise^ reuerterenter, Castellum, Iuxta Dord^ Fluuium, nomine Francicum Aedificat, th^^ speaketh our Annalist the Monke of L^sheim, vnder the said yeare) a Seigneuire erected by the late King Henry the Great* of famous memorie, into a Dukedome and Peeredome of France, in fauour of the said Heire, the Lady of Fronsac, Anne de Co^mont, wife to Frances of Orleans, Count of Sainct Paul, Prince of the House of Lugue-Ville: the said Heire (I say) Porte d'Azur, a Trois Leopards, d'Or, l'vn sur l'antre. Now returne we to our Knights.
Hector de Pardaillan, Lord and Baron of ^drin, and of Montespan, and Captaine of (...) Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Or,

(...) Chasteau de Gueulles, a Trois Testes de Mores Sable en Chef. Escartele d' Argent, a Trois Ea^ Ondees d'Azur. Sur le Tout, d'Argent, a (...) Lyon de Gueulles, a l'Orle, de Sept Escussons de ^nople.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Lewes de Champaigne, Count de la Suze, Lord de la Chappelle Rinsouin, Councellour of ^state, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes ^f the Ordenances. Portoit de Sable, Frette d' ^rgent, au Chef d'Argent charge d'vn Lyon Na^ant de Gueulles, Arme, and Lampasse d'Azur. Es^rtele de Lauall. Sur le Tout, de Champaigne; Par^ d'Azur, a vn Lyon d'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Rene de Bouile, Lord of the said place, Count ^e Creance, and des Chastelenies de Chanteloup, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Perigueux. Portoit d'Argent a la ^ace de Gueulles, Frette de Sable, Accompaignee ^e Deux Faces eu Deuise, l'vne dessus, l'autre ^essons de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Lewes du Bois, Lord des Arpentis Councel^our of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Gouernour of Touraine. Portoit d'Or, a l'Escusson de Gueulles eu Abisme, a l'Orle de six Coquilles de ^able.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iohn d'O, Lord of Manou, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of the Guard for his Ma^esties Body. Beareth, as before hath bin said, (...) Lambeau d'Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Henry de Silly, Count de la Roche-Guyon, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Ermines, a la Face Ondee ou Viuree de Gueulles, a Trois Tourteaux de Gueulles en Chef, ^are les Ermines. Escartele de la Roche-Guyon, ^i est d'Or, a Trois Bandes d'Azur, a la Bordure ^le Gueulles,
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Anthony de Vienne, called De Bauffremont, Lord of Lystenais, Marquesse d'Arc en Barrois. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Bauffremont, qui est Vaire, and de Gueulles. Escartele de Vienne, qui est de Gueulles a vn Aigle d'Or. Sur le Tout de Sable, a Trois Testes de Leopards d'Argent. 2.1.
The Crest, A Dogge rising.
The Supporters, Two Greyhounds Siluer, Collared Gueulles, and the Border Gold.
Iohn du Chastelay, Baron of the said place, Soueraigne de Chastillon, Lord of Thou. Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit d'Or, a la Bande de Gueulles, chargee de Trois Flours de Lys d'Argent.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances Descoublean, Lord of Sourdis, and De Iouy en ^ozas, and afterward Marquesse d'Alluye. Councellour of Estate, Gouernour of Chartres, chiefe Squire to the King, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit Party d'Azur, and de Gueulles, a vne Bande d'Or, Brochante sur le Tout.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Charles D'Ogries, Count de Chaulne, Lord de la Hargerie, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Synople, a vn Face d'Ermines; Escartele d'Or, a Trois Cheurons de Sable, qui est de Rasse, ou Race: In regard of Anthoinetta de Rasse, daughter to the Lord of the Hargerie.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Dauid Bouchard, Vicount D'Aubeterre, Lord and Baron of Pauleon, Gouernour of Perigord, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Gueulles a Trois Leopards d'Or, mis l'vn sur l'autre. Escartele de Lozenges d'Or and d'Azur; au Chef de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.

Officers of the Order.
IOhn du Gue, Lord of the said place, Herauld and King of Armes of both the Kings Orders. Portoit d'Azur, au Cheual deslia d'Or, au Chef de mesme, charge vne Trefle de Gueulles.




At the ninth Chapter, held in the Augustines at Paris; in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and sixe, were these Knights made.
REne de Villequier, Vicount de la Guierche, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit de Villequier, Tout plein, and sans Escart.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iames de Moi, Lord of Pierre Court, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit au Premier and Quatriesme Quartier de Gueulles, Frette d'Or de six pieces. Escartele de Burele d' Argent, and de Gueulles de Dix pieces, au Lyon de Sable, Coronne d'Or. Le Troisiesme Eschicquete d'Or, and d' Azur, a la Bordure de Gueulles.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Charles de Viuonne, Lord de la Chastaignera^e, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Beareth as formerly hath bin said.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iames le Veneur, Count de Tilliers, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of Ordenances. Beareth as formerly hath bin said.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
These are the Chapters, of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, which were held by King Henry, Third of the Name, of Sacred memory. By whose ouer-vntimely death, happening on Tuesday, being the First Day of August, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and nine, without any Heire Maste begotten by his Body

The Crowne of the Holy and Sacred Lillies of France, by the Salique Law, fundamentall of the Kingdome; fell to his neerest Heire in the Collaterall ^igne, Prime Prince of the Blood

Henry of Bourbon (King of Nauarre, Duke of Vendosme, of Armaignac, and of Albret, Count de Foix, and de Begorre, Soueraigne of Bea^n, etc. and ^^^his iust right) became King of France, ^ourt^ of that Name. Vnder whom was held (...)*


The Tenth Chapter, at Dernetail, the King then being at the Sie^g^ of Rouen, the last Day of the yeare, O^^ thousand fiue hundred fourescore and ten. Whereat was accepted into the Order,

One Prelate.
FRances de Foix, de Candale, Bishop of Aire in Guienne, Councellour to the King in his Councels of Estate, and priuate; he being Associated into the Order. Portoit de Foix, qui est d' Or a Trois Paulu d^ Gueulles Escartele de Bearn, qui est d Or a De^^ Vaches de Gueulles, Acornees, Acollees and Clarinees d' Azur. This House of Candale did an^ciently beare D'Or, a Trois Paulx de Symple^ And by Alliance they quartered in the second and third Quarters, with Foix and Bearn.



The Eleauenth Chapter was held in the Citie of Mantes, the last Day of the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and twelue: Whereat were Associated, and made Knights these following.

Prelates of the Order.
REginald de Beaulne, Archbishop and Patriarch of Bourges, Primate of Aquitaine, Great Almone^ of France, Councellour of Estate, and afterw^^^ Archbishop of Sens. Portoit de Gueulles, (...) Cheuron d' Argent, accompagnee de Trois Be^ d'Or. 2.1.


Commanders of the Order.
CHarles de Gontault, Baron de Biron* Afterward Duke de Biron, Peere of France Admirall and Marshall of France, Councello^^ of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Marshall in the Field for the Armies of the King. Beareth as his Father did, formerly related.
The Crest.
The Supporters.


Officers of the Order.
MArtin Ruze, Lord of Beau Lieu, and of ^^^meau, Knight, Councellour to the King

(...) his Councels of Estate, and priuate, Secre^^rie for his Commandements, Superinten^ant Generall of the Mines and Minerals of ^rance, and high Treasurer of the Order. ^ortoit de Gueulles, au Cheuron Onde d' Ar^ent, and d' Azur, accompagne de Trois Lyons ^'Or.
The Crest.
The Supporters.



The Twelfth Chapter, was held ^n the Citie of Chartres, Monday being the eight and twentieth Day of February, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and foureteene.
THe first Sunday in Lent, being the seauen and twentieth day of February, in the said yeare; King Henry the Great (of glorious memory) was Sacred and Crowned in the Cathedrall Church of our Lady at Chartres, by the Bishop of the said ^lace, Messire Nicholas de Thou.
And on the Morrow, his Maiestie being willing to receiue the Order of the Holy-Ghost, ^eparted from the Bishops Pallace, about ^hree houres after Mid-day, and came to the Church of our Lady. There he heard the E^en-song of the Holy-Ghost (Sung by them of ^he Kings Chappell, and Musicall Voices ioy^ed with Instruments) and assisted by the As^ociates, Prelates, Commanders and Officers ^f the Order, attired in their great Cloaks and Collers of the Order.
At Magnificat, the Bishop of Chartres, Of^ciant in Pontificalibus (after he had Encen^ed the high-Altar) presented the Encense to ^is Maiestie, sitting vnder his Cloath of State (...) the first Chaire of the Quire, entring on the ^ight hand.
After the Prayer of Sanctus Spiritus, said at ^e end of the Magnificat, and the Episcopall ^enediction; his Maiestie went to the Altar, ^here presenting himselfe on his knees, hee ^oke and signed the Oath, as Head and So^eraigne of the Order, vpon the true Crosse (as they say) lying on a square Cushion of Cloath of Gold, fairely fringed with Red, ^eld by two Priests, and on the Booke of the ^oly Euangelists, then held by Phillip Hu^ult Count de Chiuerny, and de Limoux, Chancellour of France, and of the two Orders of the King. Behold here the tenure of ^he Oath.




Le Serment du Roy.
NOus Henry, par la Grace de Dieu, Roy de France, and de Nauar, Iurons and Vouons solennellement envos mains a Dieu le Createur, de Viure and Mourir en la Sainct Foy, and Religio^ Catholique, Apostolique, and Romaine, Comme a vn bon Roy Treschrestien appertient, and plustost mourir que d'y faillir. De maintenir a lamais L'Ordre du S. Esprit, sans Iamais le laisser deehoir, amoindrir and diminuer, tant qu'il sera a nostre Pouuoir. Obseruer le^ Statuts, and Ordonnances dudit Ordre entierement selon leur forme, and teneur, and les faire exactement obseruer par Tout Ceux qui sont and seront cy apres receux audict Ordre: Et par Expres ne contrenenir Iamais, ny dispenser, ny essayer de changer, ou innouer les Statuts irreuocables d'Iceluy. Ainsy le ^urons, vouons, and promettons sur la Saincte vraye Croix, and le Sainct Euangile

Signe Henry



The Oath of the King.
WE Henry, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Nauarre, doe Sweare and Vowe solemnely in your hands, to God the Creator, to Liue and Dye in the Holy Faith and Religion Catholique, Apostolique and Romaine; As to a good and Most-Christian King it appertaineth, and rather to dye, then faile therein. To maintaine (for euer) The Order of the Holy Ghost, without euer suffering it to decay, lessen, and diminish, so long as it shall consist within our power. To obserue the Statutes and Ordenances of the said Order intirely, according to their forme and tenure; and to cause them to be exactly obserued, by All Such as are, and shall be hereafter receiued into the said Order. And more expresly, not to contrary at any time, nor dispense, nor essaye to change, or innouate the irreuocable Statutes thereof. This doe we Sweare, Vowe and promise on the Holy true Crosse, and the Holy Euangiles.

Signed Henry





The King hauing made and signed the Oathe, the Lord of Rhodes, Great Maister of the Ceremonies of France, and Great Prouost of the Order; cloathed his Maiestie with the great Cloake of the

Order. Vpon the Mantelet whereof, the Lord Bishop of Chartres (being the Officiant) placed the great Coller thereof, making the signe of the Crosse, and saying: In the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy-Ghost.
The Lord de Beau-Lieu-Ruze, high Treasurer of the Order, deliuered into the Bishops hand, the Crosse of the Order, fastened at a faire Riband of Celestiall Blew Colour, to put about his necke, and a paire of Beades of Tennes, to present them to his Maiestie: who hauing receiued them from the Bishop, gaue them to the Lord de Rocque-Laure to keepe.
These Ceremonies being ended, his Maiesty was conducted backe to the Chaire, where the Prelates-Associates, Commanders, and Officers of the Order, went to him, and kissed his hand with all humble reuerence. And Compline being finished, his Maiestie returned to the Bishops Pallace; with the same Pompe, Traine and Magnificence, as he had when he went to the Church.


The Thirteenth Chapter, was held in the Augustines at Paris, on Saturday, being the seauenth day of Ianuary, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and fifteene.
ABout three houres after Noone, his Maiestie departed from the Hostell, Sir-named of Hercules, in regard that his imaginarie Labours (reported by Poets) are very ingeniously there figured both within and without it. But yet belonging to the house of Nantouillet at which Hostell, euermore hath bin made the meeting of the Knights of the Holy-Ghost, from the first Institution thereof, and as often as the Ceremonie hath bin celebrated at Paris. And thence he went to heare the Euening Seruice at the Augustines, according to the accustomed obserued Order.
After the singing of Magnificat, and the Prayer to the Blessed-Spirit: His Maiestie, assisted with the Great Almoner, and Officers of the Order, went and sate somewhat neere to the high Altar. And at this Session, were made Knights and Associates of the Order, as followeth.

Prelates of the Order.
PHillip du Bec, Archbishop, and Duke of Rheimes, Peere of France, Bishop of Nantes, and Councellour of Estate. Portoit ^^x Premier and Quatriesme Quartiers F^ze^^ (...) Arge^ and de Gueulles. Aux Deuxiesme and Trois^^^ d' Argent, a Deux Faces de Synople, a l'Orl^^ Merlettes de Gueulles. Sur le To^t, Escartele de Gueulles, a la Bande d'Or. Le Deuxiesme (...) Gueulles a la Croix d' Argent. Le Troisies^^ Bande d^Or and d' Azur, a la Bordure de Gue^lles au Quatriesme d' Argent, a Deux Faces de Gueulles. Sur le Tout du Tout, a six Annele^ d' Argent. 3, 2.1.
Henry Descoubleau, Bishop de Malesay^, Councellour of Estate. Beareth as before hath bin declared.


Commanders of the Order.
HEnry de Bourbon, Prince of the Blo^d, Duke de Montpensier, Peere of France, etc. and Gouernour of Normandie. Portut de France, au Baston de Gueulles, Brize au Hault (...) Daulphine d'Argent, and d'Autres y o^t m^ Croissant montant d'Argent.
The Crest, A Floure de Luce double.
The Supporters, Two Greyhounds white.
Henry d'Orleans, Duke of Longue-Ville, Pee^^ of France, Soueraigne de Neuf-Chastell, Court of Dunois, and of Tancaruille, Councellour of Estate, and Gouernour of Picardie. Portoit ^e France, au Baston, and Lambeau d' Argent, que l'^^dict de Longue-Ville.
The Crest, A double Floure de Luce.
Supporters, One Angell or two.
Frances d'Orleans, Count of Saint Paul, Councellour of Esta^e, and Captaine of a^ hundred Men of Armes of the Ordenances (Afterward Duke de Fronsac, Peere of France, in regard of his wife, Madame Anne, Inheritrixe of the House of Caulmont in Guienne.) Portoit de Longue-Ville, Escartele de Bourbon.
Crest, A double Floure de Luce.
Supporters, One Angell or two.
Anthony de Brichanteau, Lord of Bea^-Nangis, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fiftie Men of Armes of the Ordenances* Portoit d'Azur, a six Bezans d'Argent.. 3.2.1.
The Crest.
The supporters.
Iohn de Beau-Manoir, Lord and Baron of Lauardin, and of Tusse, Asse, etc. Count of Negr^pelice; Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of fifty Men of Armes of the Ordenances. Afterward Marshall of France, and Gouernor o^ Maine, Lauall and Le Perche. Portoit d' Az^r, (...) Vnze Billetes d' Argent. 4.3.4.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Frances Despinay, Lord of Saint Luke, Baron of Creue-Coeur, and Daruert, Peere and Castillian of Cambresis, Councellor of Estate, Cap^aine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordenan^es, Gouernor of Brou^ge, and of the Isles of ^ainctonge, and Lieutenant Generall for his Maiesty in Bietaigne. Afterward Great Mai^^er of the Artillerie of France. Portoit Escar^elle, Au Premier d' Argent, au Cheuron d' Azur, ^harge d'Vnze Bezants d'Or. Au Deuxiesme Es^artele. Au Premier de Gueules, a la Face d'Or, (...) Chef Eschicquete de Trois Traicts d' Argent, and (...) Azur. Au Deuxiesme d' Ermines, a la Croix ^e Gueules, chargee de Cinq Quintefuilles d'Or. ^^u Troisiesme de Gueules, a Deux Bars Adossez d'Or, seme de Treffles de mesme. Au Troisiesme Grand Quartier de Gueules, a Trois Faces d' Or. ^u Quariesme et Dernier Grand Quartier, d' A^ur, Frette d'Or.
Crest, A Moores head Black, Banded with Siluer.
Supporters, Two Vnicornes Siluer.
Roger de Belle-Garde, Marquesse de Versoy, Lord and Baron of Termes, Councellour of E^tate, Great Esquire of France, Prime Gentleman of the Kings Chamber; and afterwardes Gouernour of Bourgongne: beareth as before ^ath beene said.
Crest.
Supporters.
Henry d' Albret, Count of Marempnee, Ba^on of Miossens, of Coaraze in Bearn, and of the ^sle of Oleron; Councellor of Estate, and Cap^aine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordenan^es. Portoit Eseartele, au Premier de France, Es^artele d' Albret, qui est de Gueules sans Brizure. Au Deuxiesme d' Azur, a Deux Leopards d'Or. Au Troisiesme de Bourbon. Et le Dernier Escar^ele de Foix, et de Bearn.
Crest.
Supporters.
Anthony de Rocquelaure, Lord of the sayde place, of Biran, etc. Councellor of Estate, Cap^aine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordenan^es, Maister of the Kings Wardrobe. Afterward Marshall of France, and Lieutenant in the Gouernment of Guienne. Portoit d' Azur, (...) Deux Vaches de Gueules, Acornees Acollees, and Clarinees d' Azur; au Chef d' Azur, chargee de Trois Estoiles d'Or. Sur le Tout, d'Azur* a vn ^yon d'Or.
Crest.
Supporters.
Charles, Sire de Humieres, Marquesse d'En^re, Councellor of Estate, Captaine of Fiftie men of Armes of the Ordenances, and Lieutenant Generall in Picardie. Portoit d'Argon^ Frette de Sable.
Crest.
Supporters.
William de Hault-Mer, Lord of Feruaques, Count de Grancey, Baron of Maulney, Councellor of Estate, Captain of Fiftie men of Armes of the Ordenances, Lieutenant Generall in Normandie, Marshall of the Campe, and afterward Marshall of France. Portoit Escartele, ^u premier, d'Or, a Trois Faces Ondees d' Azur^an Second d' Or, a la Bande Viur^e d'Azur: au Troisiesme de Gueules, a trois Bandes d' Argent. Et le Quatriesme and Dernier d' Azur au Lion d'Or, seme de Billettes de mesme.
Crest.
Supporters.
Frances de Cugnac, Lorde of Dampierre, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fifty men of Armes of the Ordenances. Portoit Gyronne d' Argent, and de Gueules de Huict pieees.
Crest, The necke of an Ostridge.
Supporters, Two Sauages.
Anthony de Sylly, Count de la Roche-Pot, Baron of Montmirall, Soueraigne Danuille, Damoiseau de Commerhis, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an Hundred men of Armes, of the Ordinances. Portoit Escartele, Aux Premier and Quatriesme Quartiers de Silly, and de la Roche Guyon. Aux Deuxiesme and Troisiesme Escartele de Laual and d'Eureux. Sur le Tout de Sarebruche, qui est d' Azur au Lyon d' Argent seme de Croix, Recroisetees au Pied fiche de mesme: As you may behold formerly emblazoned.
Crest.
Supporters.
Odet de Matignon, Count of Torigny, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, Marshall of the Field, and Lieutenant for the King in Normandie. Beareth as before is said.
Crest.
Supporters.
Frances de la Grange, Lord of Montigny, and of Sery, Baron des Ais-d' Angillon, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, Gouernour of Paris. Afterward Marshall of France, and Lieutenant Generall in the Countries, Blessois, Dunois, Vendosmois, and County of Gien. Portoit d' Azur, a Trois, Ranchers d'Or, Escartele de la Roche-Chouard.
Crest.
Supporters.
Charles de Balsac, Lord and Baron of Dunes,

Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances. Beareth as before hath beene said. Et sur le Tout de Grauille, qui est de Gueulles, a Trois Fermaulx d'Or; Party de Milan.
Crest.
Supporters.
Charles de Cosse, Count of Brisac, Councellour of Estate and Captaine of Fifty men of Armes, of the Ordinances, Marshall and Great Pantler of France, and Lieutenant Generall in Bretaigne. Portoit de Sable, a Trois Faces Denchees d'Or.
Crest.
Supporters.
Peter de Mornay, Lord of Buhy, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances: One of the foure Marshals of the Field, and Gouernour of Paris. Portoit Face d' Argent, and de Gueulles de Huict Pieces, au Lyon brochant sur le Tout, de Sable Coronne d'Or.
Crest.
Supporters.
Frances de la Magdelaine, Marquesse de Ragny, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Gouernour for his Maiestie in the Countrey of Niuernois. Portoit Escartele. Au Premier d'Ermines, a Trois Bandes de Gueulles, chargee d'Vnze Coquilles d'Or. Au Seconde d'Or, a Vne Croix Anchree de Gueules. Au Troisiesme de Gueules a Trois Bandes d' Argent. Le Quatriesme de Bourgongne ancien.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Claude de L'isle, Lord of Marinault, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordenances, Gouernour of Laon and Lieutenant Generall in the Isle of France. Portoit de Gueulles a la Face d'Argent, and Sept Merletes de mesme, Quattre en Chef, and Trois en poincte.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Charles de Choiseull, Lord of Praslin, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an Hundred Archers, Guards attending on the Kings Body, and Gouernour and Bayliffe of Troyes in Champaigne. Portoit d' Azur a la Croix d'Or, accompagnee de Dixhuict Billettes de mesme, Dix aux d^ux Quartiers d'enhault and Huict aux Deux de dessoubs. Escartele de Gueules, au Lyon d'Or, Coronne de mesme. Sur le Tout de Sable, a Deux Faces d'Argent, Escartele d' Argent, au Lyon de Sable.
Crest.
Supporters.
Humbert de Marcilly, Lord of Cipierre, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Marshall of the Field. Portoit de Sable, a Trois Faces d'Or, a la Bordure de Gueulles. Escartele d'Argent, (...) Trois Lyons de Sable, Armez and Coron^ce d'Or, 2.1.
The Crest.
Supporters.
Gilbert de Chazeron, Lord of the said place, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, Gouernour and Lieutenant General in Bourbonnois. Portoit d'Or, au Chef Emmanche de Trois pieces d'Azur.
The Crest.
Supporters.
Rene Viau, Lord of Chanliuaut, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Gouernour de l'Auxerr^is. Portoit de Gueulles, a la Bande d'Or, accompagnee de Six Merlettes de mesme, Trois en Chef, and pareil nombre en Poincte.
The Crest.
Supporters.
Claude Gruell, Lord de la Frette, de la Ve^trouse, and of ^ouillet, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Councellour of Estate. Portoit d'Argent, a Trois Faces de Sable.
Crest.
Supporters.
George Babou, Lord de la Bourdaisiere, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of an hundred Gentlemen of the Kings House. Portoit d'Argent au ^ras de Gueuelles, Sortant d Vn N^^g^ d' Azur Tenant Vne Poignee, de Vesse en Ram^ de Trois pieces de Synople. Escartele de Synople, au Pal d'Argent: Party de Gueulles, au l^ d'Argent.
Crest.
Supporters.
Henry, Duke of Montmorencie, Peere and Constable of France* and Gouernour of L^^guedock. Portoit de Montmorency, qui est d Or, (...) la Croix de Gueulles, Cantonnce de Seixe All^rions d'Azur.
The Crest, A Dogge, the Simbole of Fidelity. And for the Soule of this Deuice, thi^^ ancient French Motto (...) without fraud, and without error.
The Supporters, Two Angels, for Enquirie.
Here wee are to note and know, that Hil^,

Abbot of S. Denis in France, writeth, to ^ue read the acts of the Life and Martyrdome (...) S. Denis the Areopagite, first Bishop of Pa^, and of his fellowes, composed in Latine by ^sbius, sonne to a Parisian Gentleman, called ^sbius, Lord of Montmorency. This Lisbius, ^th Hilduin, was the first that receiued Saint ^nis into the Precincts of Paris, and the first ^at Saint Denis baptised. This was also the ^ne Lisbius, that gaue the place and meanes ^nuenient for building an Oratorie, on the ^ombe of Saint Denis and his fellowes, and ^o caused Saint Rieul (Disciple to the Great ^eopagite, to bee sacred the first Bishop of ^lis, by him) with the vertuous Lady Catul^ whom some haue written to bee Sister to ^s Lisbius, Lord of Montmorency.
Now although there are Sixe Barronies, all ^iect to the Bishop of Paris, the Lords ^ereof ought to cary the Canopie ouer him ^on the day of his ioyfull entrance, as name^ Montmorency, Chereuse, Luzarches, Massy, ^nt-lay, with the Queux in Brie, and each of ^se Barons may take the Title of Baron of ^nce, as anciently they haue done: yet it is ^otwithstanding, that the Sonnes and de^dants of this Lisbius, Lord of Montmorency, ^n especiall note of excellencie and prece^cie before the other, haue so conserued ^mselues (euen to this very day) in that ho^^rable Title of Prime Baron of France, and ^y for their warre-Crye: Dieu Ayde au Pre^r Chrestien. Witnessed by the Dogge for ^rest and Embleme, as the marke or note of ^elity, and by the Soule of the Deuice, this ^ient French word (...), Exempt ^rreur. Giuing all men to vnderstand; that ^hey haue beene the first that receiued and ^raced the faith of Iesus Christ. So in like ^ner they haue neuer been tainted or soyled ^h any heresy whatsoeuer, but haue co^ntinu^ faithful and co^stant in the true beleefe of the ^urch: and that is the reason, why the Armes of (...) house are vpheld and supported by Angels. ^ercules de Rohan, Duke of Montbazon, ^re of France, Count of Roche-fort, Coun^our of Estate, Captain of an hundred men Armes of the Ordinances, Great Huntsman France, and Gouernour of the Bishoprick, (...) County of Nantes. Portoit Escartele. Aux ^ier and Quatriesme de Rohan, qui est de Gu^s a Neuf Macles d'Or, 3.3.3. Au Deuxies^e Nauarre, and au Trotsiesme d'Eureux, qui ^e France, au Baston Componne de Gueulles and ^rgent. Sur le Tout de Milan.
Crest. As before.
^upporters. As before.
Charles de Mont-Morency, Lord of Damuille, Count of Secondigny, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred men of Armes, of the Ordinances, and Admirall of France. Portoit de Mont-morency, a vne Croix d Argent en Abisme, ou en Coeur, sur celle-la de Gueules.
Crest. As before.
Supporters. As before.
Alphonso d'Ornauo, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an Hundred men of Armes, of the Ordinances, Gouernour of Daulphine, afterwards of Guienne, and Marshall of France,

Portoit de Gueulles a la Tour Doniconnee and Crenele d'Or, Massonee de Sable. Escartele d' Argent, au Lyon de Gueulles, au Chef d'Azur, charge d'vne Fleur de Lys d'Or.

Crest.
Supporters.
Vrbane de Lauall, Lord of Bois-Daulphine, Marquesse de Sable, Vicount de Breteau, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Marshall of France. Port^it de Mont-morency, la Croix chargee de cinq Cocquilles d Argent. The anci-House of Laual, before it was worne into that of Mont-morency, with reseruation of the Sirname of Laual. Portoit de Gueulles, a Cinq Cocquilles d Argent. 3.2.
Crest.
Supporters.
Charles de Luxembourg, Count of Brienne, and of Ligny, Councellour of Estate and Captaine of an hundred men of Armes of the Ordinances. Portoit d' Argent au Lyon de Gueules Coronne d'Or.
Crest, Mellusina.
Supporters, Two Griffons Gold.
Gilbert de la Tremouille, Marquesse of Royan, Count of Benon, and Baron Delbonne and D' Apremont, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred Gentlemen of the Kings House, and Seneshall of Poictou. Portoit Couppe de Huict pieces, Quatre en Chef, Soustenus de pareil nombre en Poincte. Le Premier de Orlean^; Seconde de Milan; Tierce de Bourbon; and le Quart de Bretaigne: a la Bordure de Gueulles. Le Cinquiesme (qui est le Premier de Soustenu) est d' Apremont, and not of Sauoy, be not deceiued therein. Le Sixiesme de Luzignan. Le Septiesme de Coitiuy, and le Huictiesme Mont-Morency-Laual. Sur le Tout, de la Tremouille, qui est d'Or, au Cheuron de Gueulles, accompagne de Trois Aigles, d' Azur, Deux en Chef, and Vne en Poincte.
Lauall is formerly obserued.
Lusignan. Burele d'Argent, and d'Azur, au Lyon de Gueulles, Arme Lampasse and Coronne d'Or, iusques a Huict and Bure, le doibt estre de Dix pieces: herein then is the difference.
And as for the Armes of Apremont, or of Aspremont, an Ea^les or Counts House originally of Lorraine, wherein the County of Apremont is seated. Elle porte de Gueules a la Croix plaine d' Argent.
For the Timber or Crest, An Imperiall Mantle or Cloake of Purple, with Tassels or Cordons of Crimson Silke, and the Tassels couered with fine Caules of Gold.
This Mantle serueth for Supporters, and enuelopeth the Escutchion. From forth the necke of the Mantle, issueth a Blacke Eagles head, crowned with Gold.
The Eldest Sonnes of this House, are Lords of Sorre, Vendy, and of Nantueill in Retelois, on the Riuer of Ayne. In the Yeare, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred and Foure-Score. Iohn de Sorcy as chiefe of the Name and Armes of the House of Aspremont, obtained in the Imperiall Chamber at Spire: Iudgement and Sentence of Restoration to the County of Aspremont, against his Highnes of Lorraine. And since that time, hee hath stiled himselfe Iohn Count of Apremont, Baron of Dun, of Saint Remy, of Sorcy, etc. Being deceased without Issue by his Wife Claudia de Coucy; the Name, Armes and Rights of the Earledome of Apremont, went to the Sons of his Brother Charles, Baron of Apremont, Lord of Nantueill: who in his first Marriage Espoused Lucie, de Villes, by whom he had three Sonnes yet liuing, but not married. His second Wife was Susan de Harange, of the House of Lorraine, Widdow to the Lord de Harancourt, and Mother to the Lord de Harancourt, at this present Gouernour of the City of Nancy. Of this second Marriage are issued two Sonnes, the eldest whereof is Absolon, Baron of Aspremont, Lord of Nantueill, and Captaine du Vol du Milan pour le Roy* Husband to Claudia d'Ey, Daughter and sole Inheretrix to the late Lord of Nouion the County, neere to Fere in Picardy, and of a Daughter of the House of Gramont.
This House of Gramont, originally of the Counts of Bourgongne: Porte d' Azur a trois Testes de Roynes Coronnes d'Or. 2.1. In honourable memory, that one of this house, combated and ouercame in single sight a Giant who made war against three Sisters, Daughters to a King of Scotland. There are of this House dweling in Therarche. Of this Marriage between Abscion of Apremont, and Claudia d'Ey is issued a Sonne, aged (at this present) about Seauen yeares old, and named Charles, in whole p^^son ought to be the chiefe Name, Armes (...) Rights, of the County of Aspro^^n^, which the Duke of Lorraine keepeth fro^ this Family.
The Branche of the Eldest thereof, (...) in the person of the late Iohn d' Aspre^^^ Prince d'Amblise Lord of Lumes, and of ^zancie, who dyed in the yeare One Thousand Fiue Hundred and Forty, if I am not deceiued. Who left no Issue, but only a Daugh^^^ named Iaquelina d' Aspremont, Wife to Affricano d'Angbure Lord of Burlaimont, to whom shee brought (in Marriage) the Principality of Amblise, the Seigneury of Bezancy, and other Lands belonging to that eldest branch of ^spremont, giuen by the Dukes of Lorraine, (...) exchange of certaine Rights, which the A^premonts of Amblise held in the City of Sa^nay, (vulgarly called Stenay) and other neighbouring places, possessed by the Dukes of Lorraine.
By this Marriage of Affricano d'Anglore, (...) Iacquelina d' Apremont, was begotten a younger Sonne, named Affricano d' Angure, Lord of Burlaimont, Prince of Amblise, Generall of the Army of the Duke of Lorraine, deceased: (...) the said Generall Amblise was slaine in (...) ouerthrow of the same Armie, at the Siege (...) the Towne of Beamont in Argonne, in the yea^ One Thousand, Fiue Hundred Four-Score (...) Twelue. Returne wee now againe to (...) Knights of he most noble Order of the H^-Ghost.
Iames Chabot, Mraquesse of Mirebean, Co^cellour of Estate, Campe-Maister of the Regiment of Champaigne, and Lieutenant in Burgongne. Portoit d'Or a Trois Chabots de G^^^mis en Paulx.
Crest.
Supporters.
Iohn Sire de Bueill, Count of Sancerre, (...) of Maran; Councellour of Estate, Captaine (...) Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, (...) Great Cup taster of France. Portoit d' Ar^^^^ au Croissant montant d'Argent, a six Crux (...) croisettees, au Pied fiche de mesme. Escarte^^ Gueulles, a la Croix Anchree d'Or. Sur le (...) Daulphine, Escartele de Champaigne; As (...) fore hath been auouched.
Crest.
Supporters.
William de Gadagne, Lord of B^^tu^, (...) of Verduu, Councellour of Estate, Cap^^^^^ of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordi^^^^^ and Gouernour in Lyonois. Portoit de G^ la Croix Engreslee d'Or.
Crest.
Supporters.
Lewes de L'Hospital, Baron of ^itry, Coun^lour of Estate, Captaine of the Guards, at^ding on his Maiesties body, Lieutenant ^nerall in Brie, and Gouernour of Meaux. ^toit Escartele. Au Premier de Naples and de ^ilie. Le Second d' Arragon. Le Troisiesme de (...) la, a De ^n L^opards d'Or. Au Qua^^iesme ^ape. Au Premier Face d'Or, and de Gueulles H^ict pieces. Au D^^^iesme de Robin. Su^ le ^d le Gueules au C^^ d'Argent, Creste, Bar^e, ^que and me^^re d'Or, tenant de son^p^ed vne ^asson d'Azur, charge d vne Fleur de Lys d'Or. ^aue seene in the said Armes one Quarter ^ules, a vne Croix Anchree d'Argent Vairee de (...) Pots d'Azur. And so you may see them ^blazoned at the Minimes de la Place Royale Paris, where he lyeth buried.
Crest.
Supporters.
^ons de Lauzieres, Baron of Themines, and Cardailla, Councellour of Estate, Captaine Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, Se^hall and Gouernour of Quercy, and afterwards ^rshall of France. Portoit Escartele. Au Pre^r d'Argent, a vn Ozier de Synople. Au Deux^ne de Gueulles a Deux Cheures passantes d'Ar^t. Au Troisiesme de Gueules, au Lyon d'Argent, Orle de Bezans de mesme. Le Quatriesme, Fa^ (...) Or and de Sable, de Six pieces au Chef d'Er^es.
Crest.
Supporters.
Lewes d'Ognies, Count of Chaulne, Baron of ^intz, Councellour of Estate Captaine of ^ty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and ^uernour of Mont-Didier, Peronne and Roy. ^areth as before is said.
Crest.
Supporters.
Edme de Malin, Baron of Luz, Councel^r of Estate, Captaine of fifty men of Armes ^he Ordinances, and Gouernour in Bour^gue. Portoit d'Azur, a vn Sauuage tenant Masse leuee d'Or, Party d'Argent, au Lyon de ^ulles.
The Crest, A Lyon rising Red.
The Supporters, Two Sauages, Gold.
Anthony D'Aumont, Count of Chasteau^ll, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of ^ry men of Armes of the Ordinances. Bea^ as already hath beene showne.
Crest.
Supporters.
Lewes de la Chastre, Baron of Maison^^^^, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances Beateth as his Father spoken of before.
Crest.
Supporters.
Iohn de Durfort, Lord of Born, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Lieutenant Generall of the Artillery of France. Portoit de Gueules a la Bande and Bordure d'Or.
The Crest.
Supporters.
Lewes de Bueill, Lord of Racan, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine of Fifty men of Armes, of the Ordinances. Portoit Escartele Au-R^mier Escartele de Bueill, which is (as wee haue formerly said) d Azur, au Croissant (...) d'Argent, accompagnee de Six Croix Rearoiset^es au Pied fiche de mesme, Escartele de Gueulles a (...) Croix Anchree d'Or. Au Deuxiesme d'Azur, a vn Aigle d'Or. Au Troisiesme d'Agent, a Trois Cheurons de Gueules, a la Face d'Azur, seme d^ France, au Lyon d'Argent Coronne d'Or.
The Crest.
Supporters.
Claude de Haruille, Lord of Pailaiseau, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Gouernour of Compeigne. Portoit de Gueulles, a la Cro^^ d'Argent, chargee de Cinq Coquilles, de Sable.
Crest.
Supporters.
Eustace de Constans, Vicount d'Auchy, Lord de Brecy le Buisson, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes, of the Ordinances, Great Marshall of his Maiesties Lodgings* and Gouernour of the Towne of Saint Quentins. Portoit d'Azur, seme de Billetas d'Or, au Lyon de mesme.
The Crest.
Supporters.
Lewes de Grimouille, Lord of Earchant, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Gouernour of Eureux. Beareth as before.
The Crest, A Braches Head, Siluer.
The Supporters, Two Greyhounds, Siluer.
Charles de Neufuille, Baron of Alingcourt, Counceller of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of the Ordinances. Great Marshall of the Lodgings. Afterward Marquesse of Ville-Roy, and Gouernour of Lyonnois, Beauieulois, and the Forrests. Beareth as his Father Nicholas de

Neusuille, Great Treasurer of the Order, at the first Chapter.
The Crest, An Vnicorne springing, Siluer.
The Supporters, Two Vnicornes, the same.



The Fourteenth Chapter was held in the Church of the Augustines, at Rouen, where were assembled the very Noblest Estates of the Kingdome; the last Day of the Yeare, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Foure Score and Sixteene.
IN this Chapter, King Henry the Great (of glorious memory) tooke from the Great Collers of the Order, the Cyphers or Characters of the deceased King Henry the Third, of famous Remembrance, his Predecessot in the Place. And instead of them, he caused to be there fixed Trophees of Armes, enterlaced with the Letters H. Crowned: And in the said Chapter were made these Knights following.
Anne de Leuy, Duke of Ventadour, Peere of France, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of an hundred men Armes of the Ordinances, and Lieutenant Generall in the Gouernment of Languedock. Portoit Escartele. Au Premier de Gueules, a Trois Bandes d'Or; ou de Gueules a la Bande d'Or de Trois pieces. Au Deuxiesme de Leuy, qui est d'Or, a Trois Cheurons, ou vn Cheuron de Sable, de Trois pieces, according as you please to haue it blazoned. Au Troisiesme de Gueules, a Trois Estoiles d'Or. 2.1. Et le Quatriesme d'Argent, au Lyon de Gueules. Sur le Tout Eschiequier d'Or and de Gueules.
Crest.
Supporters.
Iames Mitte, Count of Miollons, Lord of Cheuriers, and of Saint Chaumont in Lyonnois, Councellour of Estate, and Capaine of an hundred men of Armes of the Ordinances. Portoit aux Premier and Quatriesme au Saultoir de Gueules, a l'Orle de Sable, chargee de Huict Fleurs de Lys d'Or. Au Deuxiesme, Bande d'Or and de Gueules de Six pieces. Au Troisiesme d'Or, a la Bande de Gueules. Escartele d'Or au Cheuron de Sable. Sur le Tout d' Argent, a la Face de Gueuler; Party d' Azur.
Crest.
Supporters.
Frances Dauerton, Lord of Bellin, and of Serillac, Baron of Mille, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes, vse (...) Ordinances, and Gouernour de la (...) Han. Portoit Escartele. Au Premier and Qu^ me de Guelles a Trois Iumelles d'Argent. A^ Deux and Troisiesme d'Azur, a la Croix d'Or (...) ty d'Argent, au Lyon de Gueules.
Crest.
Supporters.
Bertrand de Bailleux, Lord and Baron (...) Poyane, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of ^ty men of the Ordinances, Gouernour of th^ Towne and Castle of Acqs, and Seneshall (...) the Lands of Bourdeaux. Portoit d'Or, au L^er Rampnat de Gueules Accolle d' Argent. Es^ tele d' Azur, a Trois Cauuetes d'Argent. If th^ be not Beaked and Ongled, they were M^tlets.
Crest.
Supporters.
Rene de Rieux, Lord of Sourdeac, Marque^ d'Oyzant, Councellour of Estate, Captaine o^ Fifty men of Armes of the Ordinances, a^ Gouernour of Brest in Bretaigne, Portoit (...) Rieux, qui est d' Azur, a Dix Bezans d'Or 3.3 (...) 1. Escartele de Bretaigne. Sur le Tout de Herc^ Qui est de Gueules a Deux Faces, ou vne Fa^ d'Or, de Deux pieces.
Crest.
Supporters.
Brandelis de Champaigne, Marquesse de ^lenes, Councellour of Estate, and Captaine (...) Fifty men of Armes of the Ordenances. P^toit Frette d' Argent and de Sable, au Chef d'A^gent, charge d'vn Lyon Naissant, de Gueules. (...) cartele de Laual. Sur le Tout de Champaigne, P^ty d' Azur, seme de France d'Or, au Lyon de ^me. See before in Lewes de Champaigne.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Iames de L'Hospitall, Count of Choisy, Ba^ of Montigny, Councellour of Estate, and C^taine of Fifty men of Armes of the Ordi^^^ces. Porte Escartele. Au Premier de Naples, Deuxiesme d'Escosse. Au Troisiesme de H^ Party d' Arragon,. Au Quatriesme Escartele d^ Tour, and de Bologne. Sur le Tout de l'Hospitall^ est de Gueules, au Cocq d'Argent, Creste, B^ Becque and de Membre dOr.
The Crest.
The Supporters.
Robert de la Vievville, Lord and Baron (...) Rugles, and of Arseilliers, Councellour of ^state, Captaine of Fifty men of Armes of (...) Ordinances, Great Faulconer de France, a^ Gouernour of Mesieres, of Rheimes, the Co^^ey

and Duchie of Retelois. Portoit d'Argent, a (...) Fueilles de Chesne, ou de Hon. 3.2.1.
Crest.
Supporters.
Charles de Matignon, Count of Torigny, ^ouncellour of Estate, Captaine of fiftie Men ^f Armes of the Ordenances, and Lieutenant (...) the lower Normandie. Beareth as before is ^d.
Crest.
Supporters.
Anthony des Vrsins, Lord de la Chapelle, and ^f Don, Marquesse of Treinell, and Baron of ^lly, Councellour of Estate, Captaine of fif^ Men of Armes of the Ordenances, and ^arshall of the Campe for his Maiesties Ar^es. Beareth of the Vrsins, emblazoned in ^e first Chapter, for Christopher de Vr^s.
Crest.
Supporters.

After the said Chapter, the King pleased to As^ate into the Order:


Prelates.
^mes Dauy, Cardinall of Perronne, Councel^our to the King in his Councels of Estate, ^d Priuate, Archbishop of Sens, and Great ^moner of France, by the decease of Regi^d de Beaulne. Portoit d'Azur, au Cheuron (...) Argent, a Trois Harpes d'Or, Deux en Chef, and ^e en Poincte.
And his Maiestie sent the Collar of his Or^r into Italie, to two Lords, that were made ^ights thereof.


Commanders of the Order.
^Om Iohn Anthony Vrsin, Duke of Sancto Gemini, Prince of Scandriglia, Count of ^^lo, etc. Portoit des Vrsins, as before hath bin ^ated.

The Crest.


Supporters.

Dom Alexander, Counte Sforzza, Duke of ^gna, Prince of Valmontana, Count of San^ Fiera, Marquesse of Proceno, etc. Portoit Argent, au Lyon de Gueulles, tenant entre (...) Pattes vne Fleur de Soucy, fueillee de Sy^ple.

Crest.


Supporters.



Officers of the Order.
IOhn du Gue, King of Armes of the Order. Portoit d' Azur, au Cheual effraye d'Or, au Chef de mesme, charge d'vne Trefle de Gueulles. After him succeeded in the same Office.
Mathurin Martineau, Lord of Pont. Portoit d Azur, au Demy-Vol d'Azur; Au Chef d Or, charge d'vn Croissant montant de Sable, Costoye de Deux Estoiles de mesme.
Mathurin Lambert, Vsher of the Order. Portoit d' Argent au Cheuron d' Azur, charge de Cinq Estoiles d'Or, Accompagnee de Trois Rozes de Gueulles, soustenues de Synople. In the same Office succeeded him, his Sonne in Law.
Peter de Hanicque, called of Beniamin, Baron of Cheny and of Pre. Porte Escartele. Au Premier and Quatriesme Eschicquete d'Argent and d'-Azur; Couppe de Gueulles, au Rameau Couche d'Or. Au Deuxiesme and Troisiesme d'Argent, Face en Deuize de Sable, soustenant vn Lyon passant de mesme.



The Fifteeneth Chapter was held in the Great Church of our Lady at Reimes, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and ten, on Monday, being the eighteenth Day of October. By
LEwes, thirteenth of that Name, King of France and of Nauarre, on the Morrow after his Sacring, hauing succeeded in the said Kingdomes, by the vntimely death of his Royall Father, Henry the Great (of glorious memorie) who dyed at Paris on Friday, being the foureteenth day of May, in the said yeare, One thousand sixe hundred and tenne.
His Maiestie hauing bin Sacred on Sunday, being the Seauenteenth of October, by the Illustrious Frances, Duke and Cardinall de Ioyeuse, Archbishoppe of Rouen, Primate of Normandie, and Deane of the Cardinals: would likewise receiue (by his hand) The Order of the Holy-Ghost. Which was accomplished at the ending of Euensong, the King hauing taken the accustomed Oath, at the hands of the said Cardinall de Ioyeuse. Then he gaue the Order to his Cousine onely, and to no other.

Commanders of the Order.
HEnry de Bourbon, prime Prince of the Blood and first Peere of France, Prince of Conde, Duke of Anguien, and of Chasteau-Raoul, Count

of Clermont in Beauuasis, and of Soissons, etc. Councellour of Estate, Captaing of an hundre men of Armes of the Ordinances, and Gouernour of Guienne, the first Gouerment of France. Porte de France au Baston de Gueules pery en Bande.


Prelates of the Order,
BY the death of the Cardinall du Perron, happening at the end of the Yeare, One Thousand, Sixe Hundred and Eighteene.
Frances, Cardinal de la Roche Foucauld, Bishop of Senlis, Councellour in the Councels of Estate, and priuate; was made Great Almoner of France, and associated into the Order of the Holy-Ghost. Portoit Bu^ele d'Azur, and d'Argent, de Dix pieces, (which were the Armes of the first Counts of Lusignan, and de la Marche) a vne Cheuron de Gueules de Trois pieces, brochant and portant sur le Tout.
In this present Yeare, One Thousand, Sixe Hundred and Nineteene, when wee finished this long labour, which had well neere worne vs out of breath: His most Christian Maiesty, in the deuotion which he beareth to the holy Sepulchre of our Sauiour in Ierusalem, and to preserue the memory of his Order of the Holy-Ghost, in those Marches beyond the Seas, caused to be made (for sending to the said holy Sepulcher) the Ornaments and deckings necessary for the performance of diuine Seruice there. As namely.
The Adornement for the lower part of the Altar, of Cloth of Siluer, thickly semed with Flowers de Luces of Gold, very highly embossed, and a Great Crosse of the Order of the Holy-Ghost of Gold, couched and beautified with the Armes of France and Nauarre, with the Orders of S. Michaell, and of the Holy-Ghost embroydered round about it.
The Chasuble, two Tuniques, three Coapes, The Miter for the Guardian; the Vaile and Corporall, two Stoles, three Fannes or Ma^^^^*
The Arras fot the Gospell of fine Clo^ Siluer, and all couered with Golden Flower de Luces, very highly embossed. The whole releuated with embroydery of Gold, and Siluer, Flowers and Characters of the King, a^ namely, the Letter L. crossed in Sault^ire, the Hand of Iustice, and a Scepter, interchangeably wrought with the Queenes Characters (...) double A. and all the deckings adorned wi^^ Doues, curiously formed in most rich a^ sumptuous embroydery, couched and q^^^red with the Armes of France and of Na^, according as an Altars furnishment should be. I my selfe did see these admirable Ad^^ments, the last Lent, in the house of Alexader Paynet, Embroyderer to the King, Queene, and Monsieur, neere to Saint Honorius.


Officers entertained into the Order,
THe same Yeare, by the Resignation, pe^formed by the Lord of Rhodes, which wa^ done the Three and Twentieth day of March and deliuered into his Maiesties hands: it ple^sed him to make Election of that Noble Gentleman
Henry Augustus de Lomenia, Lord de la V^^auclers, Counsellour to the King in hi^ Councels of Estate and priuate, and Secreta^^ of his Commands: hee was honoured wi^^ the Charge and Office of Prouost, and Maiste^ of the Ceremonies of the Orders of France.

Il Porte Escartele. Aux Premier and Der^ Quartiers d' Or, a la Arbre de Synople, aux ^nes de mesme, dans lesquelles est vn Tourten (...) de Sable. Le Chef d' Azur, Charge de Truis ^zanges d'Argent, Aux Deux, Troisiesme d'Azu^ a vne Face de Trois pieces d'Or.

The Crest, A Lyon rising or springing Gold.
The Supporters, Two Lyons, Gold.
HEere thinke we good to breath a while, with concluding this most famous Order of th^ Holy-Ghost, so much renowned through the Christian world, and (in it selfe) (...) Royall, although it hath proued fatall and vnfortunate. First in the Founder, Henry Third of the Name, King of France and of Poland, murdered by a Iacobine Frier. A^^ then in his Successor, Henry the Fourth, worthily deseruing the Title of Great, as indeed all his actions and designes were: yet murdered basely by another Villaine, of who^ wee shall haue more meete place to speake he ereafter, and according as occasion serueth.
FINIS,





The Orders of Mount-Carmell, and of Saint Lazarus: The one reuiued or renewed againe at Paris, by the holy King Saint Lewes, in the Yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred Fifty Foure: And the other there also, by King Henry the Fourth, Sir-named the Great, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Sixe Hundred and Eight.
CHAP. XI.
THE Knights of the Order of Saint Lazarus (euen as the rest were) being expelled and driuen out of the holy City of Ierusalem, and likewise from the strong City of Acres:L'Ordre du Saint Lazaro. The cruelty of the Turkes and Sarazens to Christians in the Holy-Land. were enforced to seeke for their safety in Europe. Whereupon, the good King S. Lewes, returning from his Voyage into those parts, beyond the Seas, which was in the Yeare, One Thousand^, Fiue Hundred Fifty and Foure, in the Moneth of March: he brought with him along from thence a troope of ^ose Knights. To whom he gaue great benefits througout all the Prouinces of his ^ingdome, especially in Townes, Borroughes, and Villages. And so much the rather, ^ecause they addicted themselues, to the curing of diseased persons, namely such as ^e infected with Leaprosie, Meazelrie, and the like, whereby they were segregated ^om the society and companying with any body.
Hee gaue vnto them Borigny, neere to Orleans,The bounty of King Lewes to the Knights of S. Lazarus.


(...) which place those Knights of Saint Lazarus, ^tablished the Seate and abiding for their Great ^aister on whom depended all the Comman^ers of the said Order, which remained then in ^ly, Germany and England. For, by the sur^izall of Acres, which happened in the Yeare ^ne Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and ^eauen; they were enforced to leaue the East ^rts, to seeke their fortune elsewhere. They held ^eir Generall Chapter euery seauenth yeare, ^hich was obserued sollemnly among them, en^ying very great Reuennues: in regard they pos^ed all the houses of diseased persons, as Spi^les, ^cke-Hospitals, and the like, throughout all the ^rouinces that were in Europe.
In processe of time, these Knights of Saint Lazarus became married men,The cause of this Orders subuerssion. and addict^g their whole care for the maintenance of their Wiues and Children: began to mis^ze and neglect their wonted charitable prouidence, for the curing and recouery of ^ch impotent people. Wherupon, those Princes and Great Lords vnder whom they ^ed, perceiuing their courses to be more popular and licentious, then either their ^ofession allowed, or humane reason permitted: they tooke into their own power, ^d seized on their Commands, Hospitals, and Spittles, reseruing the most part to ^emselues, and giuing the remainder to the Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, now ^med of Malta, but in those dayes of Rhodes.
In the Pontificality of Pope Gregory, the Thirteenth of that Name,Hugh Good-fellow, Pope of Rome. (called be^re Hugo Bon-Compagnio, Qui Portoit de Gueules au Dragon naissant d'Or) Emanuel Phil^ert, Duke of Sauoy, was chosen chiefe and Great Maister of the said Order of S. ^zarus, by Buls directed from the same Pope. Who cutting large thongs out of o^r mens Leather; gaue them all the Commanderies, and Spittles for Leaperous ^ople in France, Germanie, Italy and Spaine.
Now concerning France, opposition was made against this Grant,Opposition made by the K. of France. by the King of ^ance and Poland, Henry Third of the Name, of blessed memory: because the chiefe of ^e said Order remaining in his Kingdome, the great Maisters Office therof in meere ^ght and equity appertained to him, rather then to any other Prince of Chrstendome.

the Great Maisters Office thereof, in meere right and equity appertained to (...) rather then to any other Prince in Christendome.
The Knights of Malta, enioyed all of S. Lazarus.The Knights of Malta, an inuincible band of Souldiers for Iesus Christe and (...) Bulwarke of Christendome, enioyed and possessed the greater part of the Hospi^ and Lazar-houses, belonging to them of Saint Lazarus. Beside an infinite number (...) notable Priuiledges, with full and free exemption, from all Tenths and Contri^tions; yea, and vniting to their Mansion the Great Maistership of the said Order (...) Saint Lazarus. Vntill in our time, when Fryer Aymar of Chates, Knight of Malta and Gouernour of Diepe in Normandy (renowned for his House, and for his (...) singular Seruices, which he performed to our latest Kings) forsooke the Title (...) Great Maister of the Order of Saint Lazarus.

Concerning the Order of the Virgin Mary of Mount-Carmel.
KIng Henry the Great, Fourth of the Name, of eternall Memory, by the exa^ of the Dukes of Bourbon, and of Vendosme, his most famous Grand-fathers, ^^uing in his life time alwayes particular trust and confidence, in the succour (...) prayers of the Sacred Virgin:A new Order of Knighthood, of an Hundred French Gentlemen. instituted a new Order, in honour of the Virgin Mary of Mount-Carmell. And composed it of an hundred Gentlemen, all Frenchme^ of remarkable Houses, to wait and attend about his Person in following times, (...) occasion should call him to any warre: as a small Battalion of choyce men, and wel^ deseruing to be trusted. To this Order hee destenied and appointed all Comm^^deries, and Hospitals: to the end that these Knights of our Lady and of Saint Lazarus, might haue the better meanes to giue their attendance in all necessities.
Pope Paul the Fifth, sitting at that time in the Sacred Seate, confi^med this Institution, by his Bulle giuen at Rome in the Lateran Pallace, the Fourteenth of the Calends of March, One Thousand, Sixe Hundred and Seauen. And therein, after (...) hath extolled the deuotion and Pietie of the most Christian King: by good righ^ he calleth him the Eldest Sonne of the Church, and prescribeth (conformably to the intention of his most Christian Maiesty) the Statutes and the Forme which th^ Knights of the Order should hold afterward.


The Statutes and Ordinances appointed by the King, to be obserued by the Order.
1. THat they shall establish the Chiefe Residencie of their Order, in any City (...) Towne, either by Land or Sea, where it shall please the Maiestie of the mo^ Christian King.
2. That no one shall be receiued into the Order, if he be not a French Gentlem^^ Noble by foure R^ces, as well by the Fathers as Mothers side.
3. That the Knights of the said Order shall haue for their Patron, the Sacre^ Virgin, called of Mount Carmell, whose Feast they are to celebrate yearely, the Si^teenth day of the Moneth Iuly.
4. That they shall abstaine from eating Flesh on Wednesday in euery weeke: a^ dayly say the Office of the Virgin Mary, or (at least) their Chaplet of Beades.
5. They shall weare on their Cloakes, and on the left side, a Crosse of Taw^ Veluet or Sattin, Anchree a l'Orle a'Argent. In the middest whereof, and in a ro^dell, shall bee the Image of the Virgin Mary, entoured with Beames of Gold, (...) wrought by embroyderie. About their neckes they shall weare an Ancred Crosse (...) Gold, and in the middest thereof (both on the one side and other) the Image of (...) Virgin Mary, enamelled, hanging at a Riband of Tawny Silke.
The Husband of three wiues.6. They may be married twice in their life time, but no more, and one of the^ must be to a woman that is a widdow onely, and not to be a Trigamus: They sh^ keepe coniugall chastitie, and make a vow to doe it.
7. They are not to be admitted into the said Order, except they be borne in (...) and loyall Wedlock, and whereof they are to make good proofe. And they may (...) be admitted into the Profession, vntill they haue fully compleated Eighteene yea^ of Age. And before their entrance, they are to receiue deuoutly the Sacrament (...) the Body and Bloud of our Lord Iesus Christ.
8 Neuerthelesse, the Great Maister of the Order, may giue and conferre it vpon ^y young Gentlemen, being aboue seauen yeares old, to bee as Pages to the said ^reat Maister.
9. The said Knights are to fight for maintenance of the Catholique and Apo^olique Faith* at all times, and as often as they shall bee commanded by the Pope, ^e Sacred Apostolicall Seate, the most Christian King, and their Great Maister; ^der whose charge they are to march in Armes, but not otherwise.
10. The said Great Maister shall stand obliged, three Monethes after his no^ination by the most Christian King, to procure his confirmation from the holy ^eate, before hee meddle in the Gouernment of the said Great Maistership.
11. The nomination of the Great Maisters, as well for the present, as in times to ^ome: shall appertaine to the most Christian Kings, Soueraignes, and Founders of ^e said Order.
In fauour of whom, the said Pope Paulus Quintus, at the instance and suite of the ^ost Christian King, hath permitted to the Great Maisters of the Order, to haue ^ne Thousand Fiue Hundred Duckats from the Chamber, (that is to say,Reckoning of the pounds after the French Rates. Sixe ^housand Pounds) and to the Knights and Commanders, Fiue Hundred Duckats, which are Two Thousand Pounds) in Pensions one or more, which are to be deri^ed and leuyed on all the Benefices in France, as well Reguler as Seculer, Arch^ishopricks, Bishopricks, Abbeyes, as Deaneries, Priories, and Cures.
Moreouer, hee granted plenary Remission of their sinnes, both a poena and culpa, on ^e day of their entring into the Profession; and in the Article of death, being confes^d, and repentant for their sins, expressing the same as well with the heart as mouth.
This Order thus instituted and approued by the Pope,The first Great Maister of both the Orders. his Maiesty named for the ^rst Great Maister of the Order of Our Lady, of Mount-Carmel, and of Saint Laza^s in Ierusalem, Messire Phillibert de Nerestamg, a worthy Lord, and famous by his ^eruices performed to the Crowne.
And this nomination happened in the Moneth of Aprill, One Thousand, Sixe ^undred and Eight. And the Thirtieth day of October, in the said yeare, the same ^ord of Nerestamg, at Fountaine-Bleaud, before his Maiesty in the presence of my ^ord the Prince de Conty, the Duke of Aquillon, and other great Lords present in the Court; tooke the Oath as Great Maister of the said Order, swore Fidelity, Obedi^nce and Seruice to the King, and his Successors Kings of France, towards all, and a^ainst all, without any exception, to keepe and obserue inuiolably the Statutes of ^e Order, and to seeke the aduancing and conseruation thereof.
Which being done,The manner of his creation by the King. the King did put about his Necke the Crosse of Gold fasten^d to a Riband of Tawney Silke, and then cloathed him with the Cloake and Crosse ^f the Order: granting him full power and authority to raise the number of an hun^red Knights, without any further augmenting or increasing the number, at any ^me after. According to which Concession, the said Great Maister gaue the Order (...) diuers Gentlemen and Pages, in the Church and Monastery of Saint Lazarus, sea^ed in the Skirts and Suburbs of Paris.
Now concerning the Great Seale of the said Order,The Great Seal of the Order. for sealing all Letters and oc^sions for the Knights and Officers (it being made of Tinne and Lead) on the re^erse side is to be seene a Knight Armed at all points, and his Horse Barded, a shield ^efore him, and a naked drawne Sword in his hand. Round about it as the Legend, ^e these words engrauen. Sigillum Ordinis, and Militiae Beatae Mariae Virginis de Mon^ Carmeli, and S. Lazari in Hierusalem.
And on the other side, the Armes of the Lord of Nerestamg, Qui sont Quatre ou ^inq Bandes (...) Trois Estoiles sur l'vne d'icelles. The Armes are engirt with the Order ^f Saint Michaell, and for the deuise or Legend, twice about is: Philibertus de Ne^stamg, Magnus-Magister Ordinis, and Militiae Beatae Maria Virginis de Monte Carmeli, (...) Sancti Lazard in Hierusalem, with the Date, One Thousand, Sixe Hundred ^d Eight.




The Order of Orleans, called, Of the Po^cupine: Instituted by Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans: In the Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Foure Score and Thirteene.
CHAP. II.
L'Ordre d'Orleans, dit du Porc. Espoc.THE Originall of the House of Orleans, tooke beg^ning in the person of Mounsieur Philip of France, (...) Fourth Sonne of Philip de Valois, Sixt of that Na^ the Line of whom had direct continuance, vntill King Charles Eight of the name, King of France, Ierusalem, Naples, and Sicily; who deceasing without Hey^, the Crowne of France (by that meanes) fell to (...) House of Orleans,How the Crowne of France came to the House of Orleans. in the person of Lewes the Twe^ The foresaid Philip of France, married Madam Bl^ the Posthumus-Daughter to King Charles le Bell, and Queene Iane or Ioane of France, the Daughter to Lewes of France; Count D'Eureux. The said Duke of Orleans, had no Issue, and Port^it de France sans nombre au Lambeau de Gueulles.
The Second (and Subiect of this Discourse) had Originall in the person of M^sieur Lewes of France, the Second Sonne to King Charles the Fifth, named the Wi^e, borne the Thirteenth Day of March, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Threescore and Eleuen: His Godfather was Lewes, Count d' Estampes.
The Title of Lewes of France, his Armes and Descendants.He had for his Appennage or Portion, the Dukedome of Touraine, which became changed afterward for that of Orleans: Il Porte seme de France au Lambeau d'Argent, but not of Gueulles, as his Predecessor did. Hee had likewise the County of Val^, but hee tooke not the Sir-name thereof, neither the Armes, which were Seme (...) France, a la Bordure de Gueules, and here you may behold the Titles which he too^ Lewes, Sonne to the King of France, Duke of Orleans, Count of Valois, of Blois, and of Beaumont, Lord of Coucy, Chasteau-Thierry, etc. Hee had for his Crest the dou^ Fleur de Lys, as a Prince of the Bloud, and (in that respect) his Supporter was (...) Angell. He had for his Descendants also such as were Dukes of Valois, vnto King Lewes, Twelfth of the Name, who being come to the Crowne, gaue away liberaly, and as a Royall Gift, the Countie of Valois to his Cousin Francos of Ango^ and afterward his Sonne in Law.
An errour in Annalists, about the name of Valois.And this hath lien as a stumbling-blocke, in the way of many Annalists of France who haue giuen the Sir-name of Valois to King Frances the First, and to the King his Successors, euen to Henry, Third of the Name, King of France and of Polan^ of sacred memory; For it is a popular errour, and cannot passe for currant, in rega^ that the said King Frances the First, was descended of Mounsieur Lewes of France Duke of Orleans, and so (by consequent) his Sonnes and Descendants bare the (...) Sir-name and Armes, vntill King Frances the First: who carried the Sir-name (...) Engoulesme, his Partage, and the Armes of Orleans; yet with Brisure, the pointe^ ^pendents of the Labell were charged with Trois Croissants de Gueules.
Kings comming to their Crownes, lose their Sir-names.Moreouer it is another popular errour, to giue the Sir-name of Valois, to the ^scendants of King Philip de Valois: because when Kings come to the Crowne, (...) doe lose the Sir-name and Armes of their Portion, Appennage and Patrimony, (...) their Descendants (not being Kings) take that of the Patrimony which their Fathe^ giueth them: for Kings haue no Sir-names, and therfore it is no good language, to say* Lewes of Bourbon, Thirteenth of the name King of France, and of Nauarre; Don Philip^

^ustri^, third of the name, King of Spaine, or Iames Steuart, first of the name, King ^f Great Bretaigne, and the like of other Kings and Princes on the Earth. The same ^lso is to be vnderstood of their daughters, who ought to beare name of the place ^f their Extraction; as Mary of Florence, Anne of Spaine, etc. and not Mary de Medicis, Anne of Austria, Queenes of France. This is spoken (in this passe) but by way of aduise.
Monsieur Lewes of France,Lewes of Fra^ce his wife and issue. Duke


of Orleans, espoused Valentina of Millaine, daughter to Iohn Galeas, Duke of Millaine, and to Madam ^abell of France, daughter to King ^hn. By her he had three Sonnes, ^nd two daughters, as namely ^ine of Orleans, wife to Iohn, se^ond of the name, Duke of Alan^n, a branch issued from that of ^alois, and whereof hee bare the ^rmes, distinguished De Huict Be^ans d'Argent, sur la Bordure de ^ueulles. And the other was Mar^aret of Orleans, wife to Charles of ^retaigne, Count d'Estampes, and de ^ertus.
1. His Sonnes were Charles of ^rleans (Sonnes issuing of Sonnes ^f France, doe not carrie the Title ^f Monsieur, nor the Sir-name of ^rance, but onely that of their Fa^ers allowance) Father of King ^ewes, called the Twelfth.
2. Phillip of Orleans, Count ^f Vertus, who tooke to wife Ka^erine of Bourgongne, daughter to ^hn, Duke of Bourgongne, tearmed ^he Badde, and this Man had not any issue.
3. Iohn of Orleans, Count of Engoulesme, and of Perigueux.
Charles, Duke of Orleans, eldest Sonne to Monsieur Lewes of France,Of Charles Duke of Orle^^ans, eldest Son to Lewes of France. had three ^iues, but the two first had not any issue. At his returne out of England (where he ^d remained euer since the Battaile of Azincourt) he had in his third Marriage (as ^e shall shew hereafter) Marie of Cleues, Niece to Duke Phillip of Bourgongne, se^ond of the name, daughter to Adolph, second of the name, first Duke of Cleues, ^nd to his honorable Lady and wife Mary, daughter to Iohn of Bourgongne ^ount d'Estamp^s, but afterward of Neuers, and of Rhetheil, Brother to the said ^hillip of Bourgongne. In which marriage was borne the good King Lewes, twelfth (...) the name, called The Father of his People, and two daughters: Mary of Orleans, ^ife to Iohn de Eoix, Vicount of Narbonna, and of this marriage issued the valiant ^d generous Prince, Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemoux, slaine at the Battaile of Ra^an^* and Germaniae de Foix, second wife to King Ferdinand of Arragon, Vsurper ^f the Kingdome of Nauarre. The other Daughter was Anne of Orleans, Lady Ab^esse of Font-Euraud.
Iohn of Orleans Count of Engoulesme, third Sonne of the said Monsieur Lewes of ^rance; was famous for his Sanctitie of life, and whom we will speake of,Valentina of Millaine seeketh reuenge for the murder of her husba^d. albeit ^riefely. His Father being vnfortunately murdred by Iohn, Duke of Bourgongne. ^ir named the Bad or Wicked (as we shall hereafter relate more at large) Valentina (...) Millaine, to be reuenged on this Assassinate: made her recourse to the King of ^ngland, who sent her an Armie, conducted by the Count of Clarence. He made shew, as if he would worke wonders, and got assurance for the charges of his voyage,

which amounted to the summe of two hundred thousand Crownes, for the ^^^paiment whereof, Madame Valentina gaue in hostage the said Iohn of E^go^lesme her, Sonne, then aged no more then nine yeares. Conueyed hee was into England, Anno foure hundred and thirteene, and there he remained two and thirtie yeares, euen vntill One thousand foure hundred fortie fiue, when hee returned home into France, after hee had paied the summe for which he stood engaged: as well by the sale of his moueables, as by the Countie of Perigort, bought by the Vicount of Limoges, Iohn of Bretaigne.
The Disticks passing vnder Catos name writte^ by Iohn of Orleans here in England.During the time of his Adolescencie in England, he wrote (with his owne hand) the Distickes of Morall life, acknowledged vnder the name of Cato. Although some other doe auouch, that they were reduced into some better forme, by that great Light of the Church Saint Hierome, yea, and thought to be made by him in his ^eader youth, writing Commentaries vpon them, drawne out of diuers Authors of his owne reading. At his returne into France, he put them into the Sacristi^ or Vestrie of Saint Peter at Angoulesme, at the surprizall whereof by the enemies, they were consumed to ashes.
The ordenarie residing of this Prince, was at the said place of Angoulesme, vpon the top of an high Mountaine, the foote whereof is laued by the Riuer of Charente^ which doth as much at Coignacke (in the Diocesse of Xainctes) the place of the birth of King Frances the first; and from thence trauersing thorow Xaintonge, goeth, and looseth it selfe in the Ocean Sea.

A few memorable Obseruations, concerning the Holy and Deuout Life and Death of this worthy Prince Iohn of Orleance.
A good direction to Seruants.THe first Rule enioyned by him to the Officers of his Court, was to abstaine from Swearing, and blaspheming the Sacred name of God; nor once to name the Diuell in their mouthes. If any happened to saile herein; their wages being paid, they were banished from his Court, and caused afterward to be punished by Iustice, according to the qualitie of their blasphemie: yea, oftentimes, himselfe would (...) on the Iudgement Bench; that the distribution might be with all equitie, according to the Lawes, and the Customes vsed in that Countrey.
Daily he repaired to the Church, wearing a long gowne, and, for examples sake to his Subiects; on the solemne Feast dayes of the yeare, he receiued by his Curate his Creator,His daily charitie to the Poore. in presence of the people, hearing two or three Masses euery day: And at the ending of them, himselfe distributed to the Poore, such moneyes as ^e kept expresly (for the purpose) in his Almes Purses, and neuer went abroad without them.
On Wednesday he abstained from eating of flesh, and on Fridayes would feed^, on nothing but Fruites, Hearbes or Pulses: Fasting alwayes on the Eeue of the Purification of our Lady,His Fasting. called Candlemasse, with Bread and Water; as also (...) Lent, and the foure especiall times of the yeare. He would exhort and Preach (...) his Houshold people; to Fast three dayes in the Weeke, during the holy ti^^ of Lent.
He much delighted in the discoursings of the Bishop of Angoulesme, Messire ^^bert de Montbrun,His Musicall delight. and of an Augustine Fryer, named George, Learned and ski^ men in Diuinitie, hauing alwayes their company about his person. After his daily repasts, he caused one to play vpon the Harpe before him, hauing taken a feli^ therein while he liued in England, where that Instrument is much more common and familiar, then it is in France.
He went very meanely garmented, of plaine common Cloath, and of Ashes co^lour: except on good and solemne Feast dayes, when (for honour and decence^ he wore them of Cassocke fashion,His apparell and aduise to his Subiects. composed of Sattin, and other long Roabes (...) Silke. Nor would he suffer his Subiects and followers, to be excessiue in costlin^^ on their habits, with Laces of Siluer or Gold: except such as were renowned (...)

Valiancie, or honoured with the Order of Knighthood. At his Table, he was not superfluous in Viandes: hee did eate but little, and tempered his Wine very much.
In the Moneth of May, One thousand foure hundred threescore and seauen,The making of this Will and Death. ^udging in his owne Soule, that his ending approached neere: He made his Testament, giuing good Legacies to Churches, and to his Houshold Seruants, leauing to his Sonnes the care of discharging them, and to his Wife, his Lands and pur^hases. He dyed in the yeare following, Threescore and eight, the last day of Aprill (the Feast day of Saint Eutropius, the Apostle of Xainclonge) at the Castell of Coignack. He dyed in his Garments, and vpon the Couerlet of his Bed, for hee would not depart the World betweene Sheetes. Fryer George alwayes thus sung ^n his eare: Iohn, you must dye, and therefore remember, that Iesus Christ dyed for you. His Soule tooke her flight to the Celestiall Kingdome, saying his ordenary Prayer of the houres of the Crosse. Domine Iesu Christe Fili Dei viui, pone Passionem, and mor^em tuam, inter iudicium, etc.
His Buriall was in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Peter of Angoulesme, where his Widdow and Sonnes erected a Marble Tombe for him;His buriall in Saint Peters Church of Angoulesme. which was hewne ^owne in pieces, when the enemies tooke the Citie, in Anno One thousand fiue hundred threescore and two, and threescore and eight. But thirtie yeares after, the Canons causing Stones to be taken forth of the Vaults in the Quire, which were ^eaten downe by the enemies: found in the same Caue part of the Princes Body, without any iniurie done thereto, or any putrifaction whatsoeuer. An hu^dred yeares after it had bin buried, it was put into a Chest of Lead, and is there kept to this day) among the monuments of the Church; whereto (in elder times) were many Pilgrimages performed from all parts of France, and an infinite number of people receiued there helpe, as well for Feauers as other diseases, at the Tombe or Sepulcher of this deuout Prince, as is reported.
In the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and eighteene, at the request of King Frances, his yongest Sonne, during the time of Pope Eugenius, fourth of that name, ^^essire Anthony d Estain, Bishop of Angoulesme,Information giuen by the Bishop of Angoulesme. made information of the Life and ^eath of this holy Prince, as also of his famous Miracles, by the depositions of ^n hundred and twentie eight Witnesses, aged threescore and eight yeares at the ^east. And by whom it appeared, that from the time of his being in England, the ^e^owne of his deuotion and singuler pietie was so great; that at the Counsell of Ba^le, it was propounded to haue him chosen Pope.
But God reseruing him, to be the Original and sourse of so many Kings of France; ^o wit, Frances the first, Henry the second, and his Children: At his returne from England, he tooke to wife Margaret de Rohan, in the yeare foure hundred fortie ^nd nine, by whom he had two Sonnes and a Daughter; Iane of Orleans,Concerning his marriage and issue. wife to Charles de Coitiuy, Lord of Tallebourg, who had but one onely Daughter, wife to the Prince of Taillemont, eldest Sonne to the Lord of Trimouille.
His Sonnes were Lewes (held at the Font of Baptisme, by King Charles the sea^enth) who dyed yong, and was enterred at Bote-Ville in Angoulmois. And Charles, who was his Successour in the Countie of Angoulesme,Charles, sonne and Successor to Iohn the Religious, and the issue descending of him. and had to wife Louisa de ^auoye, daughter to Phillebert, Duke of Sauoye: by whom he had a Sonne and a daughter, Margaret of Angoulesme, wife (in first Marriage) to Charles, the last Duke of Alanson, and last Prince of the branch of Valois, because he had no linage. And in second Marriage, she espoused Henry* second of the name, King of Nauarre, ^onne to King Iohn d'Albert, and Queene Katherine of Nauarre, from whom the ^ing of Arragon, Ferdinand, vniustly vsurped the Kingdome of Nauarre, in the Moneth of Iuly, One thousand fiue hundred and thirteene. Of this marriage was ^orne their onely daughter, Madame Iane or Ioane of Nauarre, ioyned at the age of ^ine yeares (by King Francis the first, his Vncle) with the Duke of Cleues and Gulich, ^illiam, onely masle childe to Iohn, first of the name, and married to Monsieur the Prince, Anthony of Bourbon, Duke of Vendosme, fift Prince of the Blood. Of which marriage issued a Sonne and a daughter, Madame Katherine of Bourbon, Princesse of Nauarre, Wife to Monsieur Henry of Lorraine, Marquesse du Pont, afterward Duke

of Lorraine, and of Bar, who dyed without any issue: And
Henry of Bourbon, fourth of the name, King of France, and of Nauarre the thi^^, called the Great, of eternall memorie: Let vs now take againe the Branch of Orleans.
Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, beside his legitimate Children formerly named, had by the Lady of Canny, wife to Messire Aubert de Can^y, a Knight of Picardie,Iohn the Bastard of Orleans. a Sonne named Iohn, tearmed the Bastard of Orleans, who was Co^^ of Dunois, and of Lougue-Ville. Porta d'Orleans au Filet de Gueulles, brochant s^^ le tout, tirant de la droitte a la gauche, which signifieth Bastardise. His descent hath co^tinned the said Armes of Orleans, Au Filet d' Argent, de la gauche a la droitte, for a signale of legittimate birth. This Count of Dunois was so hardie and couragious in Warre, that his Militarie exploits hath made his memorie honorable for euer. For, next to Ioane d' Arc de Dompremy, Sir named The Pucelle of Orleans: He was the principall instrument, for expelling the English forth of France, and deserued the name of Cheualier Sans Reproche,The Knight without blame and Shield of the French. and de L'Escu des Francois. So that, to make acknowledgement of the worthy Seruices by him peeformed, King Charles the seauenth, made him Great Chamberlaine, a dignitie continuing to his Posteritie, the Dukes of Longue Ville, with the Sir-name and Armes of Orleans, vntill the Reigne of yong King Francis, who was the second of that name.
At the Sacring of the said King,Great Chamberlaine of France. the Duke of Longue-Ville that then was, being vnwilling to stand taxed with nouell matters of Religion (so speaketh the President of the Place in his memories) the Office of Great Chamberlaine of France, came to the House of Guise, with the Sir-name and Armes of Lorraine: in the person of Francis de Lorraine, Duke of Guise, vnto whose descendants, this Office of the Crowne is yet remaining to this day.
The ranke or place of this Great Chamberlaine, is to lye couched at the Kings s^ene, when he sitteth on his Throane of Iustice, and at his Sacring: but at his entring into Townes and Cities, he followeth the very neerest person behinde his Maiestie.
Lewes of Bourbon, second of the name (called the Good) Duke of Bourbonnois and of Auuergne, held it a great honour, to be the Great Chamberlaine of France, so is it said to vs in his Chronicle. King Charles, fift of the name, departing out of this life, to another much better, the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred fourescore and eight, the Princes of the Blood Royall, the Dukes of Berry, of Bourgongne, and of Bourbon, conducted the yong King, Charles the sixt, to be Sacred and Crowned at Rheimes. To honor the King there, there wanted no Chiualrie, nor Royall Feasting fit for the time.
After the Sacred Vnction, the King was seated at an high Table of Honour, and the Duke of Bourbon, who was Peere and Chamberlaine of France, gaue him Three of his Knights;Out of the Records of Fra^ce a noate to be obserued.one whereof stood at his right side, and the other on his left, and the third behinde at his backe, beside an Esquire at his feete (Obserue I pray you the auncient Ceremonie)) The three Knights were Messire Guichard Daupbin; Messire Guy le V^ueux, and Messire Iohn de Laye. And the Squire that was vnder the Table, where the King did set his feete, was Iohn de Castelmorant; in this manner was the King seated, Her by wee may remember, what hath bin noated by our illuminated Romaines, that our Kings being at the Table, or seated on their Throane: an Esquire lyeth couched at the Kings feete, vpon whose hands or breast, are the Kings fe^^e placed.
At the entrance of King Charles the seauenth into his Citie of Paris, the morrow after Saint Martins day in Winter, One thousand foure hundred thirty seauen, the Equipage of this Count of Dunois, is thus described by Alanus Chartierus.
The furnishment of the Bastard of Orleans.Behinde followed the Bastard of Orleans, Armed at all points, he and his Horse couered with Goldsmiths worke, and a rich Chaine of Gold, trailing behinde on the backe of his Horse, made like great Oaken Leaues, each Leafe weighing filtie Mar^ This was the man, that conducted the Kings Battalion, consisting of a thousand La^ces, Armed at all points, and their Horses barded.
King Charles gaue him this dignitie, not so much for acknowledgement of Seruice done by him to the Crowne; as to take away iealosie in the Princes of the Blood,

who then were a great number (which was the strength of the Kingdome) of mak^ng him march as a Peere with them. Hereafter we will set downe the Genealogie ^f this Count of Duuois, which continueth yet to this day. Hereupon this place was giuen him, by meanes whereof, and without enuie, he might appeare with the chiefest and neerest about the King: being compelled by his place, to lye at his feete when he sate on his Throane, and to come behinde his Horse, when he road abroad ^n Royall manner.
The said Monsieur Lewes Duke of Orleans, was (thorow enuie of gouernement) ^ruelly murdered at Paris, in the Streete Barbette, with Axes, by eighteene murde^ers, the conducters whereof was a Norman, named Rollet d' Auctouille,The cruell murder of Lewes Duke of Orleans. William ^nd S^az de Courte-heuze, Brethren (Scaz being a Groome of the Chamber to the ^aid Duke of Orleans, Natiues of the Countie of Guienne) and Iohn de la Mothe, hous^old seruant to Iohn, Duke of Bourgongne, Author and procurer of this execrable murder, committed on the person of the onely Brother to the King, and of his Cousine Germaine, on Wednesday, being Saint Clements day, the two and twen^ieth of Nouember, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and seauen, about ^he houre of eight in the night time. This poore Prince with the first stroake of an Axe, had his right hand cut off, and his head quartered in such manner, as his ^raines were scattered on the pauement, he dying presently in the place. With him was slaine a Germaine Squire, who had bin his Page, and seeing his Maister ^mitten downe, fell vpon him to saue his life, and receiued the blowes meant to ^is Maister.
About halfe an houre after the murder committed, the people belonging to the Duke of Orleans, tooke vp his Body, and carried it to the House of Messire Peter ^e Rieux, of Bretaigne, Marshall of France, neere to the place of the murder, and hauing wrapped it in a faire white Sheete, they bare it thence to the An auncient Order of Begging Fri^rs in Paris. Blancs-Man^auz, then called Guillemins, neighbouring to the Hostel de Rieux. The Body was ^fterward laid in a Coffin of Lead, and on Thursday in the morning after the mur^er: his right hand was found by his followers, and with such part of the braines ^s were left, put likewise into the Leaden Coffin. Soone after, all the Princes be^ng then in Paris (except the King and Messieurs his Sonnes) went to the Blancs-Manteaux, as namely; King Lewes of Sicilie, the Dukes of Berry, Bourgongne, and ^ourbon; the Marquesse du Pont, the Counts of Neuers of Clermont, of Vendosme, ^f Saint Paul, and of Dampmartin; Charles d' Albert, Count of Dreux, Lord of ^raen, and of Silly. Constable of France, with all the Lords and Gentlemen of ^he Court.
Thither likewise came all the Cleargie, of the Parishes and Monasteries in Paris,The Order of bearing the dead Body to the Celestines. ^nd in manner of Procession, filled with griefe and lamentations; brought the Bo^y from the Church of the Guillemins, and carried it to the Church of the Cele^ines, the Esquires of the deceased Duke carrying lighted Torches all the way be^ore the Body. The foure corners of the Pa^l being borne vp by the King of Sicilie, ^nd the Dukes of Berry, of Bourgongne, and of Bourbon, Princes of the Blood, Vnckles ^nd Cousines Germaine to the dead Duke. After that Seruice was solemnely per^ormed at the Celestines, the Body was enterred in the Chappell of Orleans, which ^ee had caused to be builded, and appointed for the place of his buriall, and his kin^ed. At his feete was the murdred Esquire laid, that lost his life vpon his Maister, de^ring to saue his.
Beneath on the Windowes in this Chappell,Princes of the House of Orleans. are represented (according to the ^fe) the Pictures of the Princes of the House of Orleans: beginning at King Charles ^t of the name, Father to Charles the sixt, and to the said Duke of Orleans; vntill ^e Duke of Alanson, Monsieur Frances of France, the last Sonne to King Henry the ^cond.
The Portraiture of the said Duke Lewes, beside that in the Windowes,At what age the Duke was murdered. and on his ^ombe of Alablaster, is seene depicted in Oyle (after the life) on a doore of Wood, (...) the right side of the Altar in the same Chappell. He is figured of the same Age, (...) when he was murdered (sixe and thirrie yeares old or thereabout) Antiquely ha^ted, according as the times then were. A long Red Cassocke or Gowne, furred

with Ermines, as worne ouer his Hose and Doublet, the sleeues of the Go^ being wide and large, as our Roabes are at the Pallace, not hauing any opening (...) at the necke, to passe the head out at, which opening about the necke aloft, is garnished with adornings of Ermines. and thereupon a Coller of Stones. Before, vpon the right shoulder, is painted a Starre in Gold, to shew, that hee was Knight of the Starre, it being then the Order in France, and his Cassocke guirded with a Gird^, fastened with a Buckle and Tongue. Before him is the figure of Death, very stea^^^ and dreadfully made, holding in his hand a Dart or Iauelin, wherewith hee endeauoureth to strike the Duke, who to guard and defend himselfe, offereth his hand i^ resistance. Betweene them standeth a faire Fruite Tree, well laden with Appl^, some whereof appeare to be ripe, but others not, the true Symbole of humaine (...), and about it is his Deuise: Iuuenes, and Senes Rapio. On the Dukes head is written; Lewes Duc D'Orleans Ayeul du Roy Louis Douxiesme du Nom.Yong and old I snatch away Lewes Duke of Orlea^, Grand-Father to King Lewes, Twelfth of the name.
This disastrous death of the Duke of Orleans, affrighted all the Princes and Lords of France. Queene Isabell of Bauaria (who was then tearmed La Grand Gorre, for her brauery in habits after the Germaine fashion, instead of attyring her selfe according as the French Ladies did) lying then in Childe-bed, was speedily transported to the Hostel Sanct Pol, and lodged close to the Chamber of King Charles the sixt, her Husband, who was so terrified with this vntimely death, that hee fell into his wonted distraction of minde. All the Bourgesses and Cittizens of Paris Armed themselues,What terrour ensued on the murder of the Duke. guarding the Streetes night and day, for the space of fifteene dayes and nights. Likewise suddenly entred into Armes the Counts of Sainct Paul, of D^^^ martin, and others beside, watching and warding the Hostel of Saint Paul, as fearing least worser accidents shall happen.
Iohn, Duke of Berry, already stept farre into yeares (for he was aboue threescore and twelue) was so affrighted with the death of his Nephew Lewes, thus happening in the floure of his time;The perplexitie and death of Iohn Duke of Berry. that he had death daily before his eyes, as he said himselfe, beholding him on his one side, and his Nephew on the other. And yet he li^ed ten yeares after, dying in the yeare foure hundred and seauenteene, aged then fourescore and fiue yeares.
In memorie of this his Nephewes vntimely death, he caused to be figured on the Meridionall Gate of Saint Innocents Church (where is the great Churchyard belonging to the Citie of Paris) the Historie of three Deathes, that appeared to three liuing Gallants hunting in a Forrest. The three Deaths were pictured in their hideous deformitie of bare Skellitons, and the three Iouiall youths standing gastly amazed,A Looking-Glasse for vaine Gallants with the sight and apprehension of three such gastly shapes: that they forsooke their pleasures and braueries of the Court, yea, and the delights of this miserable world, onely to prepare themselues for death. Which is nothing else but a sweet slumber, to such as liue after the will of God: but to the wicked, the gate and entrance into endlesse torments.
The Latine Verses made vpon this Meditation, are these following: Those of (...) Gallants, are to be obserued by themselues.

Aspice florentes humano in corpore vultus,
Aspice Fortunae prospera fata Deae:
Delicias (dum fata sinunt) ludosque, iocosque
Suminus, and toto gaudia mille sinu.

But vpon this conference, the three Deaths presenting themselues vnexpected, answered them.

Viximus, sed multo quondam resplenduit aetas
Ornatu, sed nunc nil nisi puluis adest:
Aspice quam fragilis viuas tu putre cadauer,
Tempore sic fies vermibus esca breui.

The remonstrances or admonitions, both of the one and other, are couched (...)

French Verses, answerable to those times, carued in faire large Stones, vnder the ^ngrauing of those figures; are on the vpper part of the Frieze, these other French Verses.

Eu l'An Mil-Quatre Cents Huict,
Iean Duc de Berry Trespuissant,
En toutes vertus bien instruit,
Et Prince en France florissant,
Par humain cours lors cognissant,
Qu'il conuient toute creature,
Ainsi que Nature consent
Mourir, and tendre a pourriture;
Fist tailler icy la Sculpture,
Des trois Vifs aussi des trois Morts,
Et de ses dorniers la facture,
En paya par iustes accords,
Pour monstrer que tout humaine corps,
Tant ayt biens, ou grande Cite,
Ne peut euiter les discords,
De la mortelle aduersitie.
Donc pour auoir foelicite,
Ayons de la Mort souuenir:
Afin qu apres perplexite,
Puissions aux saincts Cieux paruenir.

The French Verses conuerted into English, line by line.

IN th'yeare One thousand foure hundred eight,
Iohn, Duke of Berry, potently liuing,
Enstructed in all vertues, firme and strait,
A Prince in France right fairely flourishing,
By humaine course well vnderstanding
That euery creature (by iniunction,
As Nature hath giuen her consenting)
Must dye, and yeelde vnto corruption:
Here caused to be made this Monument,
Of three aliue, and of as many dead;
And as the three last doe their shape present,
So must Lifes paiment be accomplished.
To shew vs what all humaine bodies are
Though storde with goods, Townes, greatest potency;
Yet cannot shun those discords that make square,
And waite vpon mortall aduersitie.
Then, that we may enioy Felicitie,
Let vs remember still; That we must dye,
So, after this fraile Lifes perplexitie;
Our Soules will to the holy Heauens flye.

In the voide places about these Verses, are the Armes of the said Duke of Berry, ^hich are Seme de France sans nombre, a la bordure simple de Gueulles,The place of the Duke of Berry his buriall. like vnto those of ^lois and Aniou. Wherein there is a fault, because the Bordure ought to be Engrai^^ Gueulles pour Brizure; as those be at the holy Chappell of Bourges, builded and foun^d by this Duke and his wife, who are buried within the Quire thereof.
The Funerals being performed, diligent search was made for the Authors of this ^rder, and on the very same day the Prouost of Paris, William de Tignouille, made ^ure on the person of Messire Aubert de Canny, suspected of this murder, in regard ^his wife, gouerned by the deceased Duke: but he was found innocent, and set at

liberty. So that to make an ex^ct inquisition for the Authors thereof, the G^ of Paris were kept lockt vp fast; two onely excepted, S. Iames and S. Denys, with very strong Guards, to see what they were that issued forth.
Tignouille had discouered, that at the same instant as the Duke was massacred, a Water-Bearer to the Duke of Bourgougne, had beene knowne among the eighteene, who had let fire on a House (neere to the place where the murderers were hid) and where then hung for a Signe,A notable pollicie of murderers to conceale themselues. the Image of our Lady, neere to the Gate Barbette. For the Assassinates (to saue themselues after the murder (from being discouered) had set the said House on fire, crying out aloud themselues, Fire, Fire; onely to amaze the people of Paris. But they were withdrawne directly to the Hostel d'Artois, next adioyning (...) that of Bourgongne; and in their flight, had throwne Calthrops (made of Iron) in the Streets, to hinder the people from following after them.
On Friday, the Princes and Lords went to the Hostel de S. Paul, where then the King was lodged, to consult with his Counsell about this murder. Tignouille demanded power of the King, to enter the houses of his Seruants, and the Hostels belonging to the Princes of his Bloud: which was granted to him, and with francke good will, King Lewes of Sicilie, and the Dukes of Berry and Bourbon, gaue him authority to goe and make search in theirs.
The Bourgongnon, bitten by the worme of conscience, fearing such a sound and seuere search:The Duke of Bourgongne voluntarily confessed the murder. tooke Lewes King of Sicilie (chiefe of the Counsell, during the sicknes of the King) aside into a corner of the Counsell Chamber, and Iohn, Duke of Berry, his Vnckle. To them he freely confessed, that by the instigation of the Diuell, hee had caused the murder to be effected, wherof he repented himselfe. At which wor^ the hearts of the two Princes, being ouercome with sorrow and passion: the Counsell was adiourned till the morrow, being Saturday in the morning, and at the Hos^^ de Neesle, called at this present De Neuers, appertaining to the said Mensieur Iohn (...) France, Duke of Ferry.
Nor did the Duke of Bourgongne faile to come thither, accompanied with Valer^ of Luxemburg, Count of S. Paul, his Cousine: but the Duke of Berry sent him word, that he should attend vntill such time as he was sent for. The Duke of Berry discouered to the Counsell, the confession of the Duke of Bourgongne, his Nephew; whereupon, the Duke of Bourbon caused it to passe by plurality of voices, that the person (...) the Bourgongnon should be kept safe. And to seize on his Body, the Count of S. Pau^ was called into the Counsell Chamber. When the Bourgongnon perceiued, that he wa^ debarred from entrance thereinto; reuoluing in his minde, the abhomination of hi^ execrable crime,The Duke of Bourgongne his sudden flight. the apprehensions of imprisonment, with pursuite of a violent death, he departed thence suddenly, without speaking any thing, and passing the Seine, wen^ to his Hostel of Artois.
Mounting on Horsebacke with sixe of his followers, he rode forth at the Gate (...) S. Denis, and neuer left gallopping, till he came to Pont Saint Maixance, ouer the Riuer of Oise. causing Plancks of Wood to be cast after him in the middest of the R^uer, because he would preuent all pursuite. So, without looking behinde him, (...) stayed no where on the way, till he came to Bapaumes, where he slept the quarter (...) an houres space, going to take his repast in the Citie of Arras, and without soiourni^ there, went to lodge in the Isle of Flanders. His flight being discouered, he was (...) speedily followed, by sixe and twentie Men of Armes belonging to the Duke of O^leans; who were enforced to turne backe againe at Pont Saint Maixance.
This vnfortunate murder, vnderstood by the Duchesse of Orleans, Madam Vale^na of Millaine;Madam Valentina of Millaine her comming to Paris. she appeared in person at Paris the tenth day of December followin^ accompanied with her yongest Son Iohn, Count of Augoulesme, and with Madam ^bell of France, daughter to King Charles the sixt, Widdow to the King of Eng^ Richard second of the name, and first wife to Charles, Duke of Orleans, eldest So^ to the deceased.
Before her went King Lewes of Sicilie, the Dukes of Berry and of Bourbon, (...) Counts of Clermont, Iohn Sonne to the Duke of Bourbon, and of Vendos^e, both (...) them of the House of Bourbon; D'Albret, Constable of France, and all the Lor^ (...) the Court, who conducted her to the Hostel of Saint Paul, where she, her S^

^nd his Lady fell on their knees before the King, requiring Iustice for the death of ^is Brother. Which he promised to performe, and taking her vp from the ground, ^issed her, being both drowned in teares with the iustice of their griefe.The scituation of the Duke of Orleans his Hostel. Vpon this ^ssurance, the Duchesse went to lodge at the abiding of Orleans, neerest to that of ^eesle: that is, where (at this present) are the Houses of Guesle, du Tillet and du Lac, ^oyning to the Port of Bussy; containing backward the Court de Rouen, Le Rues de l'Es^eron, and of Saint Andewe de Laas, where were the Stable and Offices appertaining ^o the dwelling of Orleans.
The Duchesse being in her mourning habits, returned againe to the Hostel of Saint Paul, still there requiring Iustice, and still the same being there promised her. And ^auing fully restored to her, the Countie of Vertus, with other Lands and Seigneu^ies for her and her Children, which were held by her Husband; and deliuering to ^he King the Oath of Fidelitie: shee returned to her Castell of Blois, the ordenary ^welling for the Dukes of Orleans, vntill the time of King Lewes the twelfth.
The Bourgongnon summoned to yeelde himselfe in the Citie of Amiens,The Duke of Bourgongne summoned to appeare at Amiens. to make ^nswer to the King of Sicilie, Lewes, and the Duke of Berry, deputed by the King and Counsell, concerning the death of the late Duke of Orleans, at the same place to ac^nowledge his offence. Thither he came, but suited with such company; as (without performing any thing) they returned backe to the Citie of Paris; whether the Bourgongnon as speedily followed them in Armes, although the King had expresly ^ommanded him to the contrary.
And being come to Paris, to his Hostel d'Artois; hee caused himselfe to be ^ngirt with strong Pallisadoes; and Barriers of Wood, raising there a new square Tower, making therein an high Chamber, well furnished with murderers, where he meant to lodge, and keepe himselfe in securitie. This is the Tower which wee see ^ehinde the Hostel of Bourgongne, at Logis de l'Abistrade. Hauing obtained Audience, hee made his defence, not by any Aduocate, that would prophane himselfe, by pleading a case so sinfull and deplorable: but a certaine man,He maketh his answer by one called Doctor Petit, a bold and ignorant corrupted fellow. called Iohn Pe^it, a Doctor in Diuinitie, and a Norman by Nation, whose vendible tongue, being ^ltogether mercenary, was infected and worme-eaten with the poyson of Auarice, as we haue beheld too many in these times of ours, that easily are infected with the Oyle of Gold, the yellow colour thereof so highly pleasing them.
This Doctor, corrupted with infernall and diabolicall Doctrine, excused the Bour^ongnon, instead of accusing him, writhing the nose of the Sacred Scriptures, accor^ing to the manner of Heretiques, and expounding them answerable to his owne ^oolish and depraued iudgement. Declaring, that he ought to be commended for ^he murder, by him committed on the person of the late Duke of Orleans: not for^etting to alleadge many Histories out of the Holy Scriptures, drawne in constrai^edly by the eares, and as badly vnderstood, yet stoutly vouched by this ignorant Doctor. Inducing from thence, that vpon good and iust cause,Diuels want no Orators to defend bad actions. the Duke of Orle^ns was thus slaine, because he had bin the Motiue and Author for charging the peo^le with Taxations, Imposts and Subsidies; and that (in this respect onely) the Duke of Bourgongne deserued praise, sallarie and recompence. So that it was necessarily need^ull, to implore (on his behalfe) the mercy and clemency of the King.
In briefe, he concluded his friuolous Oration, with this hellish Maxime: That it ^as lawfull for any Subiect, according to the Lawes Morall, Naturall and Diuine, to kill,A Lesson neuer taught but in the Diuels Schoole. or ^ause to kill a Tyrant, without waiting for the command of Iustice. And not onely lawfull, but ^onorable and meritorious; especially, where the parties are so strong and powerfull, that Iu^tice cannot well be performed by the Soueraigne.
Against which allegation, the Abbot of Saint Fiacres, of the Order of S. Benedict, ^n the name, and on the behalfe of Charles Duke of Orleans, his Mother and his Bre^hren, boldly defended the innocency of the late Duke Lewes: manifesting the im^ertinent insinuations of the Norman Doctor, and the wickednesse of the Bour^ongnon, quite ouerthrowing the diuellish Maxime, for the murdring of Kings and ^rinces. Approuing withall, that the Bourgongnon, Author and procurer of this Massacre, was a true Caine, against whom, the blood of his Brother cryed to heauen ^or vengeance, as it is said in the fourth Chapter of Genesis. Vox sanguinis Fratris

tui clamat ad me de terra:No man may presume vpon the life of his equall, much lesse vpon his better. The voyce of thy Brothers bloud cryeth vnto from the ground. And that it was not permitted to the Bourgongnon, more then to any other perticular man whatsoeuer: to attempt vpon the life of his equall; by farre greater reason then, not vpon one much greater, without the authoritie of Iustice to warrant him.
And therefore all the Doctors of the Church haue, and doe hold, that Mo^ses sinned against God, by killing the Aegyptian, in the second of Exodus; because he had no power or authoritie to doe it: notwithstanding the pretext and apparant excuse which he had, for sauing the life of his neighbour, against the iniurie of a stranger. In like manner, the Sauiour of the World iustly reproued S. Peter, in laying hand on his weapon, to defend him from death. It is the opinion of S. Augustine, seconded by all the rest of the Doctors, who interpreting the murder of the Prince of the Tribe of Simeon, named Zimbrie (in the Book of Numbers, the 25. Chapter) slain by Phinees, Son to Eleazar, who was the Son of Aaron the High-Priest; they do say, that Phinees had power to doe it,The old Law abolished by the Law of Grace. as being Son to the High-Priest, so affirmeth S. Thomas Aquinas. But addeth withall, that in the old and ancient Law, many things were then permitted: which in the Law of Grace (wherein now wee liue) haue bin forbidden.
It is a case much to be lamented, that Princes are rather murdred and massacred by their owne Subiects, then by Strangers. The Readings of Suetonius, and of Cornelius Tacitus doe affirme the proofe thereof, in most part of the Roman Emperors. Quintus Curtius, in his sixt Booke of the life of Alexander the Great, saith. Latus a Demesticis hostibus muni, hos si submoueas; nihil ab externo metuas. The same Authour in his ninth Book auoucheth* Regum exitus si perpenderimus, and reputauerimus, plures a s^i^, quam ab hostibus interemptos reperiemus. Alexander the Great would not pardon Philotas,A bold saying of Philotas. because very impudently he told him: That it was daily in the power of Philotas to commit and act treason, but not in his power to punish for it. And it is the ord^nary misfortune of Princes, that attentates and coniurations against their liues, cannot be credited, till after their death, so (very effectually) speaketh Suetonius, in the life of Domitian.
The hard fa^e of the two last Kings of Fra^ceWe haue seene these mis-haps, performed on the persons of our two latest Kings; Henry the third, the best King that hath reigned in France for an hundred yeares space, kild in the midst of his Armie by a diuellish Monke: And Henry the Great, fourth of the name, miserably murdred in his chiefest Citie, euen in the armes of his familiars, by an incarnate diuell. There is not any pardon for him, that attempteth on the life of his Prince. Quis extendit manum suum in Christum Domini, and innocens erit? So saith the Royall Prophet in the first Booke of the Kings the 26. Chapter. Who ca^ stretch forth his hand against the Lords anniinted, and be guiltlesse? He spake of Saul, King of Israel, whom God had reproued for his wickednesse.
In the yeare foure hundred and thirteene, the Bishop of Paris, at the request of the Vniuersitie, sent to the Duke of Bourgongne, being then in the Citie of Arras, to vnderstand from himselfe;The Message to the Duke of Bourgongne and his answer. whether he did allow and auouch those Articles of M. Iohn Petit, which he had formerly proposed at his request, maintaining the murder by him committed on the person of his Cousine Germaine, Lewes Duke of Orleans. The Bourgongnon hauing returned his answer, that he did not auouch them, but in that which was no more then right and reason: the Bishop of Paris, and the Inquisitor of the Faith, sent the Proposition of the said M. Iohn Petit, to the Sorbon of Paris, according to the Decree in the Court of Parliament, to know whether it was good and warra^table, or no. Behold here the very words, sent by the Bishop to the Sorbonnists.

The Bishop of Paris his Letter to the Doctors of Sorbonne,
The French Massiue.MAistres Reuerends, on vous fait a scauoir, and vous enuoye-ou la Scedule conten^ aucunes Assertions, auec leurs Reprobations: parquoy nous vous requer^^s s^r peine de Droict, que vous donniez publiquement vostre deliberation par escrit. Si ces^ Assertion de laquelle est venu notairement scandale, est erronnee and a condamner, a

(...) que nous puisions consequemment proceder, si comme ordre de Droict le requiert, a ce que ^us ayez a vous assembler dans le Mercredy Vingtiesme Iour de ce Mois de December.


The same in English.
REuerend Maisters, we giue you to know, and send you the Scedule, containing certaine Assertions, with their Reproofes. Wherefore we require you, vpon the penaltie of Law, ^hat you giue publiquely your deliberation in writing, whether this Assertion, whereof (...) risen notorious scandale, be erroneous, and to be condemned, or no, to the end that we ^ay consequently proceede, according as the order of Law requireth. Wherfore you are to as^^mble your selues, betweene this and Wednesday, the Twentieth of this Month of December.


The Proposition (as we haue formerly obserued) was this.

Quilibet Tyrannus potest, and debet licite, and meritorie occidi a quocumque suo Vassallo,The damnable Proposition. ^t Subdito, and per quemcumque modum, maxime per insidias, and per adulationes, non ^stante quocumque iuramento, aut confoederatione facta apud eum, non expectando Sen^entiam, aut Mandatum Iudicis cuiuscumque.
Any Tyrant may be, and ought to be, lawfully and meritoriously murdred, by his owne ^ssaile and Subiect, in any sort or manner, whereby he can be intrapped: and especially by ^^cret ambushes, and flatteries. Notwithstanding any Oath of Allegeance made to him, or of ^onfederacie contracted with him. And this is to be done, without attending for any Sen^ence, or command from a Iudge whatsoeuer he be.
The Sorbonnists met together, to the number of fourescore Doctors,The meeting of the Sorbonnists. and of ^achelers in Diuinitie threescore and one. After the Masse of the Holy-Ghost, be^^g sung according to the manner in such cases requisite and accustomed; the thir^enth day of September, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and thirteene, ^hey condemned this execrable Proposition by their Censure, whereof here follow^th the Tenure.




The Censure of the Sorbonnists vpon the Proposition.
HAec Assertio generaliter posita, and secundum acceptionem huius vocabuli, Tyrannus, est error in nostra fide, and doctrina bonorum morum, and est contra Praeceptum Dei; ^on Occides (Glossa) propria auctoritate. Et contra hoc quod dicit Dominus noster Mat^i Vicesimo Sexto: Omnes qui Gladium acceperint (Glossa intelligit propria auctori^te) Gladio peribunt.
Item haec Assertio vergit in subuersionem totius Reipublicae, and Vniuscuiusque Regis, aut ^incipis.
Item dat Viam, and Licentiam apperit ad pura alia mala, and ad fraudes, and ad violatio*
Item dat Viam, and Licentiam apperit ad plura alia mala, and ad frudes, and ad violatio^em Fidei, and Iuramenti: and ad proditiones, and generaliter ad omnem inobedientiam ^ubiecti ad Dominum suum, and ad omnem infidelitatem, and diffidentiam vnius ad alterum (...) consequenter ad aeternam damnationem.
Item, ille qui affirmat talem errorem obstinate, and alios qui inde sequuntur, est Haereti^s, and tanquam Haereticus debet puniri, etiam post suam mortem, vt notatur in Decretis ^icesimo Tertia, questione Quinta Decretorum.
Actum Parisius Anno Millesimo, Quadringentesimo Decimo Tertio, die Mercurij Deci^o Tertio Decembris.

All these thus Englished.
THis Affirmatiue, thus put a generall Maxime, and according to the true signification of the word, Tyrant, is erronious in our Faith, and in the Doctrine of good manners.Concerning the word, Tyrant. (...) is against the expresse Commandement of God: Thou shalt not kill: The Glosse saith, (...) thine owne priuate authoritie. And it is against that which our Lord saith in Saint Mat^ew the sixe and twentieth Chapter: All they that take the Sword (the Glosse vnder^^andeth, of their owne priuate authoritie, and without the command of Iustice) shall perish ^y the Sword.
This Maxime tendeth to the subuersion and ruine of all Kingdomes and Common-weales, ^nd of euery King and Prince.
It openeth the doore, and sheweth the way to all other euils; as to deceipts, breach of P^, and the Oath of Fidelity sworne to his Prince: To Treasons, and (generally) to all disobedience of the Vassaile and Subiect towards his Prince and Lord: To all infidelitie, perfidie and all distrust in one man to another. And by consequent, it leadeth men to eternal damnation.
Item, he that (out of obstinate mallice) maintaineth this diabolicall proposition, and others that depend thereon; is an Heretique, and (as an Heretique) ought to be punished, yea, euen after death: As it is auouched in the Bookes of the Decretales Twentie three, and fift Question.
Resolued at Paris, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and thirteene, on Wednesday, being the thirteenth day of December.





According to the Resolution of the Facultie of Sorbonne, this diuellish proposition was condemned, as hereticall against the Faith. And further ordained, that the Pleading made by the said Iohn Petit, should be brought and burned before the Church of Paris. Also, that the bones of Iohn Petit, buried at Hesdin, should be taken vp out of the ground, and burnt publiquely as an Heretique.
The Plea, Proposition, and Petits bones burnt.This was thus executed, both the Pleading and the Infernall Proposition, publiquely burned by Order of Parliament, the nine and twentieth day of February, i^ the said yeare foure hundred and thirteene; all the Cleargie being assembled at this execution, before the Church of Paris.
Nor was it without cause, that this Proposition, tossed and agitated In vtr^mque partem, euen as problematicall, to be put in effect as a maxime most assured, for the death of so great a Prince, such as the Duke of Orleans was: should be published for Hereticall, and they that preposed and defended it, both punishable with materiall fire in this world, and in the other to come, with eternall and vnquenchable.
Petrus Waldonius, a rich Marchant of Lyons, was infected with the Heresie of Vigilantius,Concerning Petrus Waldonius a Mercha^t of Lyons. condemned of the Church, as Saint Augustine writeth in his Booke of Heresies, and Sain^ Hierome in his Epistle Ad Ripuarium, where they doe say, S^l^ Gallia monstra non habuit, sed viris semper fortissimis, and eloquentissimis abund^it. And pursuing the Heresie of Vigilantius, addeth. Exortus est subito Vigilantius, sed potius Dormitantius, Caupo Calaguritanus (for he was a Natiue of Calahorra in Spaine) Qui immundo Spiritu contra Christi Spiritum, and Martyrum neget Sepulchra venerand^, damnandas dicat esse Vigilius, Continentiam, Haeresim, Pudicitiam, libidinis Seminarium, etc. So this Peter Waldon began to appeare in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred threescore and ten, and by the meanes of his wealth, drew vnto him a troupe or rabble of wretched, penurious and miserable needy people, whom he gaue reliefe vnto, and expounded the Scriptures before them, according to his owne fancie; so saith Guido Carmelita, in his Tract of Heresies.
These Sectaries caused themselues (at the beginning) to be called the Poore people of Lyons;The poore people of Lyons, Albigenses, or Waldenses. afterward the Albigeois, or Albigenses, because they had made themselue^ strong with their opinionated Doctrine, in the Towne of Alby, ten Leagues from Tolosa, but more commonly were tearmed Waldenses, by the name of their electe^ Prophet. At the first they went wandring from Towne to Towne, without hauing any lodging, or setled dwelling, carrying along with them a great traine of women with whom they had indifferent association, without distinguishing degrees of consanguinitie. They were charged to giue themselues to the Diuell, followers of Sabaoths, and addicted to Sorceries, flights of Birds, Dreames and Sneezing. Among other opinions they held these.
What the opinions of these Sectaries wereFirst, that the Pope was Antechrist, and no more to be esteemed then the meanest Priest.
That Prayers for the Dead are altogether vnprofitable.
That Purgatory was a Fable, inuented by the Priests; and so was Auricular Co^fession.
That it was Idolatry to worship Images, and the Reliques of Saints; and so wa^ Prayer to the Virgin Mary.
That Vigiles and Fasts were mens inuentions.
That to liue within the compasse of Continency and Single life, as Priests and Religious persons did, was Heresie.
That to make the vowe of Virginitie and Chastitie, was a Cloake for Religious men and women, whereby to couer their immodestie: and that, notwithstanding their vowes, they might marrie.
They are further charged to hold.

That Kings and Magistrates, hauing committed any Sinne;
Some doe doubt, that in these they are wronged.
were no longer Kings nor Magistrates, but euen as the meanest of the People, and priuate persons: And that it was ^ermitted, to massacre and kill them, without any figure or forme of Iustice.

But all Heresies of such dangerous and vnchristian qualitie, were condemned in the Laterane Councill, and in the Prouinciall, held at Paris, vnder King Lewes, eight of his name, Father of Saint Lewes. Likewise in the generall Counsell of Constans, ^eld in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and fifteene.The generall Councill held at Constans. At which Counsell ^resided Pope Iohn, and present there the Emperour Sigismund; foure Patriarches; ^ine and twentie Cardinals; seauen and fortie Archbishops; two hundred three^core and ten Bishop, fiue hundred threescore and foure Abbots and Doctors; ^mong whom was the learned Maister Iohn Gerson, Chancellour of the Vniuersi^ie of Paris, Canon of the said Church, and Curate of Saint Iohn en Greue, Ambas^adour from King Charles the fift, as we haue said in our former Booke; all Assistants (...) the said Counsell of Constans, which is the sixteenth Generall. There the Fa^hers condemned the Heresies renewed in Bohemia, approuing and confirming ^he Decree and Censure of Sorbonne, against the Maxime of that idle-headed ^octor Iohn Petit; as it is recorded in the fifteenth Session, whereof these are the ^ery words.




The Decree of the Counsell.
SAcro-Sancta Synodus praecipua sollicitudine volens ad extirpationem errorum, and Haereseon in diuersis Mundi partibus inualescentium prouidere, sicut tenetur, and ad (...) collecta est, nuper accepit quod nonnulle Assertiones erroneae in Fide and bonis moribus, (...) multipliciter scandalosae, totiusque Reipublicae statum, and ordinem subuertere molientes ^gmatisatae sunt, inter quas haec Assertio delata est.
Quilibet Tyranus potest, and debet licite, and meritorie occidi per quemcumque Vassa^m suum, vel Subditum, etiam per clanculares insidias, and subtiles blanditias, vel adu^tiones, nonobstante quocumque praestito iuramente, seu confaederatione facta cum eo, non ^pectata Sententia, vel Mandato Iudicis cuiuscumque.
Aduersus hunc errorem satagens haec Sancta Synodus insurgere, and ipsum funditus tol^re, praehabita deliberatione matura declarat, decernit, and diffinit huiusmodi doctrinam ^roneam esse in Fide, and in moribus, ipsam que tanquam Haereticam, scandalosam, and ad ^audes, deceptiones, mendacia. proditiones, and periuria vias dantem, reprobat, and con^mnat. Declarat insuper, decernit, and d^ffinit quod pertinaciter doctrinam perntoisissi^am hanc assertentes sunt Haeretici, tanquam tales iuxta Canonicas Sanctiones puni^di.
Acta Constantiae Anno Millessimo Quadringentesimo Decimo-Quinto, Pridie Nonas ^lij.

The same in English.
THe Holy and Sacred Counsell, being willing to imploy all their care and diligence, to extirpate those Errours and Heresies, which bud and shoote vp in diuers parts of the ^orld: are thus assembled and called together for the same effect.The dangerous publishing of nouell propositions. Being newly in^med, of certaine propositions, contrary to Faith and good Manners, extreamely scan^^lous, and which tend to the subuersion of all order, and the Estate of euery Com^on-Wealth: haue bin very strangely taught and published. Among which Propositions, ^his.
That euery Tyrant may lawfully and meritoriously be kilde, murdred and massacred by

by his Vassaile or Subiect,A diuellish Maxime. in any manner whatsoeuer it bee: especially, by secret ambushes, insinuations and flatteries. Notwithstanding any Oath of Fidelity and Allegeance made and giuen to him; any Faith and promise sworne vnto him; without awaiting the Sentence or Command of any Iudge.
The generall voyce of the whole Councell.The Holy Councell willingly opposing themselues against this error, and wholly to plucke it vp by the roote. After their mature Consultation thereof, and what might best bee done in this busines; haue declared, decreed and defined: That such Doctrine being erroneous in faith, and contrary to all good manners, is reproued and condemned as hereticall, scandalous, and shewing the way to mischiefes, falshoods, Treasons and fractions of Faith. Moreouer they haue decreed, resolued, and declared, that such as with wilfull obstinacie, and purposed deliberation doe hold and maintaine this Proposition; are Heretiques, and so ought to bee punished, according as it is concluded by the Holy Canons.
Done at Constans, in the yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, and Fifteene, the Sixteenth day of Iuly.





The Censure of the Councell against the Duke of Bourgongne.Iohn, the bad Duke of Bourgongne, more then halfe madded, because in this Councell, his Ambassadour was put from his place and Seate, by him of Spaine (as heretofore wee haue related) and that by resolution of the said Councell, the murther of Mounsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, and the Proposition by him maintained, had beene declared as hereticall. Moreouer, that vpon consequence of the Censure iudicially and religiously deliuered by the Vniuersity and Sacred faculty of Diuines at Paris, hee had beene arested by the Court of Parliament at Paris, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Fourteene, the Seauen and Twentieth day of December. It was sent from the said Councell of Constans, and published throughout all the Kingdomes of Christendome; that hee was guilty of high Treason, hauing iustly forfeited both body and goods. And the Proposition of Iohn Paruis, or Iohn Petite, was as iustly condemned by the Bishop of Paris.
Hereupon, Iohn, Duke of Bourgongne, sent Iohn de Mount-Leon his Almoner to Paris, to raise and awaken his old acquaintances, partakers in the bloudy League, with Letters of credence from his Maister, to put all in trouble and co^fusion, by distributing Muotons a la grand Laine,Certain^ pieces of Gold in France so named. and Saluts, to Robbers and Boot-halers for them* as euermore it happeneth, when inciuill warres are raised and prosecuted by strange enemies, that buy and purchase men at any price whatsoeuer. Saint Gregory of To^^s hath well obserued it, to bee put in practice by all Estates in the world, by Princes that would make themselues Great with the goods of their neighbours. His passage is most remarkable to vs, that haue made too much proofe thereof within these hundred yeares last past, by diuers accidents. It is in the Eight Booke and Twenty Eight Chapter of his History of France, where hee setteth downe and figureth to the life those mischiefes, which haue happened to vs.
The Wisigothes practices against King Gonthran.Saint Gontran, King of France, perceiuing the Leagues and practises carried by the Kings of the Vuisigothes of Spaine his neighbours, who corrupted his Subiects euen so farre as to them of his owne Cabinet; resolued to make warre vpon them. His de causis commotus Gunthramnus Rex, exercitum in Hispanias destinat. Dum aute^ hic exercitus moueretur, Indiculum a nescio quibusdam hominibus Rusticis est repert^ quod and Gunthramno Regi legendum miserunt, hoc modo quasi Leuuichildus (then King of Spaine) ad Fredegundem (Queene Mother to Clothaire the Great, King of France Sonne to King Chilpericke, trayterously murdered) scriberet vt quocunque ingenio e^ ercitum Illuc (against the Spaniards) ire prohiberet, dicens. Inimicos nostros velocit^ interimite, and cum Rege Gunthramno pacem inite, quam proemijs multis coemite. Et. S^ Vobis. Minus. Est. Fortassis. Pecuniae. Nos. Clam. Mittimus. Tantum. Vt. Quo^ Petimus. Impleatis. Cum. Autem. De. Inimicis. Nostris. Vlti. Fuerimus. Tunc. Amelio. Episcopo. Et. Leubae. Matronae. Bona. Tribuite, per quos Missis Nostris, (...) vos accedendi aditus, Leuba enim Socrus est Bladasti Ducis.
The vow of King Gnothran to bee reue^ged.The same King Gonthran, hauing discouered these practises, and the execrab^ Assassinates of the Kings his Predecessors: sware to be reuenged on the Autho^ and Complices of them, euen vnto the ninth Generation. So proceedeth on Sai^^^ Gregory of Tours, in his Seauenth Booke, and One and Twentieth Chapter. R^ Iurauit. Omnibus. Optimatibus. Quod. Non. Modo. Ipsum. Verumetiam. Progeniem. (...)

(...). In. Nouam. Generationem. Deleret. Vt. Per. Eorum. Necem. Consuetudo. Auferre^^. Iniqua. Ne. Reges. Amplius. Interficerentur.
And yet notwithstanding, the Diuell is so vnchained,The wretched condition of this latter Age. that hee finds and meets ^th Soules in such sort corrupted with false Doctrine: as the massacring and mur^ring of Princes, are their onely delights. Oh the goodnes of God! in what an Age li^e ^e: when the death of a Prince, is but equall with that of a Monke?
On behalfe of the said Duke of Bourgongne, Iohn the wicked, there wanted no ^ercenary Pennes to imitate Heretiques, that is to say: To withstand and wrest the ^e sense of Sacred Scriptures, to cloud and darken the Maximes of their factious ^d confused dealing.
The holy and Sacred Councell of Constans, excommunicated all the Dogma^s, Assassines, Complices, and Fauourers of his. And here you may behold their ^l Resolution, sent to the Vniuersity of Paris, by Maister Iohn de Iarson.




^edula Missa a Constantia, per Magistrum Iohannem de Iarsone Parisius, contra Ducem Burgundiae, and eius fautores, Mense Augusto. Anno M.CCCC.XV.
Raestans scienter impedimentum, commissiue, vel omissiue; concilio, and auxilio, ne Dux Burgundiae recognoscat publice, and absolute, quod peccauit in fide, and bonis moribus, iusti^ndo, and iustificari faciendo notorie, and scandalose interfectionem Ludouici quondam ^cis Aurelianensis, and circumstantiam necis illius, Omnis Talis Est Inimicus dicti Du^ Burgundiae, and salutis suae, and Peccat Adeo Taliter: quod si in hoc sit pertinax, condem^dus est Vt Fautor Haereticae Prauitatis. Redditurus est insuper rationem de omnibus ^nis, tam Spiritualibus, quam Temporalibus inde prouenientibus, quam futuris. Re^gitet Id^i^co Quilibet Siue Doctor, Siue Praelatus, Aut Alius, quemadmodum dissi^lauit in hac materia, vel dissimulabit, Fauore, vel Timore, Vel Negligentia, prout ^ibet scit, aut scire debet, qualiter obligatur ad Correctionem Fraternam, vel Doctrina^, vel Iudicialem, Praecipue Summus Pontifex, Cum Sacro Cardinalium Collegio, (...) Etiam Generali Concilio. Attento, quod euidentia patrati sceleris, clamore (...) indiget Accusantis. Denique talis, qualis praedictus, Est Cencendus Impeditor ^^is.




^n that which hath beene set downe,The liues and lands of Princes put to the Popes arbitrement. is most remarkable against the Doctrine of ^h men, as (through a blindfold obedience) doe appoint the Life and State of ^^nces and Common-wealths, to the Iudgement and Arbitrement of the Pope, a^nst the determination of Generall Counsels, yea, and the wisedome diuine, who ^his owne mouth hath appointed Temporall Kingdomes, the States and Persons ^ecular Princes, with the power of his Church.
^n this Councell of Constans, confirmed by Pope Martin the Fifth, the three An^ Popes, Gregory the Twelfth, Benedict, the Thirteenth, and Iohn,Three Ante-Popes deposed by the Councell of Constans. the Three and ^entieth deposed: by the Fathers of the said Councell was elected Pope Martin, ^h of the name, who restored peace to the Church, which being troubled by the (...) Ante-Popes; France was in the same condition, through the Treacheries and ^ctions of the Bourgongnon, who hauing brought the English into France, hee was ^onely motiue and cause of the ruine thereof, and the death of many great Lords ^he Kingdome.
For the Bourgongnon making himselfe Maister of Paris, and getting into his pow^ ^he King and the Queene; by one named Cappeluche, the Hangman of Paris,The notorious cruelties of the Duke of Bourgongne. hee ^formed the very strangest cruelties, that euer could be imagined. For in one day (...) caused to bee brought before him, Sixteene Hundred Lords of note, among ^om was Bernard, Count of Armaeignac, Constable of France, Henry de Marle, ^ancellour, the Bishops of Constans, Bayeux, Eureux, Senlis and Xainctes; the Ab^ of Saint Cornille de Compeigne, the Count de Grand-pre, and other Lords of the ^y Councell and Requests, all inhumanely massacred before his owne eyes. Ha^g sworne peace with the Daulphine Charles, at Pouilly le Fort, neere to Melun, he ^mised to withdraw the English out of France. Which promise being not kept,

but persisting still in his rebellions and treacheries: for a full expiation of so (...) mischiefes, on Le Pont de Montereau, or Fault-Yonne, on Sunday, it being the Tenth of September,The deserued death of the Duke of Bourgongne. in the Yeare One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Nineteene, hee (...) kild and massacred before the Daulphine Charles, who reproached him with his ^fidious dealings, with blowes of Axes,: euen as Twelue yeares before, hee (...) caused Lewes Duke of Orleans, to bee bloodily butchered, To verefie the Ora^^^ pronounced by the mouth of him that is Truth it selfe: Qui gl^di^^ percutit, g^ peribit: For as Ouid saith.
--Nec enim Lex aequior vlla.Quam necis artificis arte perire sua.
This Iohn of Bourgongne, had espoused Margaret, Daughter to Albert of Ba^ Sister to William of Bauaria, Count of Henault, and of Holland, and of her he beg^^ one onely Sonne, Philip, Second of the Name, Third Duke of Bourgongne, who (...) reuenge the death of his Father,Philip, Duke of Bourgongne reuenged his Fathers death. raised the English againe to ruinate France. An^ hauing seized the Persons of the King and Queene, then remaining at Troyes in Champaigne, he there managed the marriage of Madame Katherine of France, last Dau^^ter to King Charles the Sixth, with the King of England, Henry, Fifth of the name the very Capitall Enemy of France. A Marriage of Sinister presage, celebrated (...) Troyes, according to the Treaty of Marriage contracted and accorded the One a^^ Twentieth day of May, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Twenty. By wh^^^ Treaty,Henry the Fift King of England, married Madam Katherine of France. King Charles the Sixt being then sicke in his senses (by the Counsaile of th^ said Duke of Bourgongne) instituted his future Sonne in Law, Henry the Fifth, Kin^ of France: disinheriting vniustly Charles the Daulphine of France, lawfull Heyre (...) the Crowne, forcing and violating the fundamentall Law of the Kingdome. Th^^ which made this Treaty of Marriage, were as void of iudgement and reason, as (...) King, being corrupted with gifts and premises; by the Bourgongnon, as in our tim^ wee haue almost seene the like, by the mediation and working of some vnnatura^ Frenchmen, corrupted with forraigne-Countrey Gold. But in those times then, (...) ours likewise: God (the continuall Conseruer of this Monarchie) hath kept th^ Right to the lawfull Heyres thereof, and hath reestablished them in their Pater^ Inheritance, to the shame and confusion of their enemies.
This Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, was the Instituter of the Ord^ of the Porcupine, (and not Charles Duke of Orleans, his Eldest Sonne, as it is writ^ by Paradine, and others that haue taken vpon them to warrant it) for ioy of the Bi^ and Baptizing of his First Sonne Charles of Orleans, borne (according to Du Till^ in the Yeare One Thousand, Three Hundred, Twenty and Three.


The Institution of the Order of the Porcupine, by Monsieur Lewes France, Duke of Orleans, in the yeare One Thousand, Three Hundred Foure Score and Thirteene.
In Chron. Iuuenal des Vrsins.THe Imprinted Chronicle of Messire Iuuenall des Vrsins, vnder the Yeare, O^ Thousand Three Hundred, Foure Score, and Fourteene, noteth this Birth the First Sonne of Orleans, in these words. In the said yeare, the Dutchesse of Orle^ had a Sonne, named Charles. And at his Baptizing there was great Solemnity. T^ you see what hee saith in summe.
But I haue seene a small Manuscript French Chronicle, composed by an Hera^ of Orleans, named, Hennotin de Cleriaux, a Natiue of Blois, who liued in the ti^ of this Christening, and whereat hee was present in his Coate of Office, and hee i^structeth me in this manner.
The words of Hennotin de Cleriaulx. Herauld of Orleans.For the Solemnity of the said Baptisme, Monsieut Lewes of France made a (...) Order of Knighthood, very excellent, and of great renowne, termed, The Order of (...) Porcupine: which hee had chosen for his Deuice, in fauour, and for the high hope wh^^^ he had of his first Borne Sonne. For at that time, there were some hard measures b^tweene the Nephewe and Vncle of Bourgongne, Monsieur Philip gouerning the K^ and Queene at his owne pleasure. A little after, hee setteth downe (particularly) (...)

^ir rancke and degree, the names of the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, his faith^l Confederates; to whom the said Duke of Orleans gaue his Order of the Porcu^^, of whom I haue lost the remembrance, and my Chronicle the sight.
The same King of Armes of Orleans, reporteth, that in the Yeare of Grace,The Dukes of Orleans and of Bourgongne reconciled and made friends. One ^housand, Foure Hundred, and Seauen, on Sunday, it being the Twentieth day of ^^ember, the Lord of Berry caused the Dukes of Orleans and of Bourgongne, to meet ^gether in his Hostel de Ne^sle at Paris, to make a louing and kinde agreement be^eene the said Princes: which hee did, and in such sort, as the three Princes went ^d heard Masse together at the Augustines, where the said Dukes of Orleans and (...) Bourgongne, receiued the Sacrament together, after then had sollemnly sworne ^od loue and Brotherhood. For assurance whereof, at the ending of Dinner in ^e Hostel de Neesle; the Duke of Bourgongne receiued the Order of the Porcupine, at ^e hands of the Duke of Orleans, who did put it about his necke, each kindly kissing ^e other, the Lord of Berry melting into teares of ioy, by beholding it.
The very same is recorded in the Chronicle of Messire Iuuenall des Vrsius,In Chron. Iuuenal des Vrsins. vnder ^e said Yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Seauen, and vnder that of One ^housand, Foure Hundred, and Nineteene, in these words. To the Duke of Orleans, ^ad a little before hee had caused him to bee slaine, in manner before related: the said ^hn of Bourgongne, made sollemne Oath vpon the Sacred Body of our Lord, to bee his true ^d loyall Kinsman. And promised to bee his Brother in Armes, wore his Order, and gaue (...) gracious behauiour, and they dined together.
This Order was composed of Fiue and Twenty Knights,The Habite of the Order. comprehending him^fe as chiefe Gouernour thereof. They wore long loose Cassocks of fine Scar^ted Murrey, (which is violet) and ouer them Cloakes of watchet coloured veluet, ^^ed (as the Mantelet and Chapperon) with Carnation Sattin. And therevpon the ^ollar of the Order, formed as a wreath of Chaines of Gold, at the end whereof ^^ing vpon the Breast a Porcupine, of pure Gold, vpon a rising Hill of greene Grasse ^^d Flowers.
The Porcupine is called by the Latines Hystrix, and are two familiar kinds of them,Concerning two kinds of Porcupines in Affrica and the Indies. ^^at is to say, which are oftner seene (more then else-where) in Affrica, and in the ^^dies. Both of them are called Hogges or Swine, in regard of comming so neere (...) the resemblance of that domesticke Creature amongst vs, inured to wallowing in ^e mire, particular by it selfe, and the other wild or Sauage, which is tearmed a wild ^oare, the hunting whereof is pleasant. And wee haue an ancient French Prouerb (...) this purpose: Au Cerf la biere, au Sanglier le Barbier. The Porcupine is a kind of ^edge-hogge as well as the Vrchin; for hee is wholly armed with strong Scales,These beasts hardly laid to, lay as hardly about them. like (...) them of the Tortoise, and perceiuing hard pursuit made after him, shuts himselfe (...) fast lockt vp, within his Scales, And the Porcupine is likewise resembled to the ^edge-hogge, both being armed with sharpe pricking points: but those of the Porcu^ne are much longer then the other. This Animall, seeing himselfe narrowly pres^d with Dogges, stretcheth himselfe forth, and bindeth his Skinne with such might, ^a^ he darteth and letteth flye his prickles like Arrowes at their muzzles, which for^th them to giue ouer their hold, and follow him no further. As we learne of Pliny, (...) the Eight Booke and Thirty Fiue Chapter of his Naturall History, and next to ^m, our French Lucretius, Du Bartas.

--De son Dos il fait BruireDu Barta^, on Cinq Iour Prom^or Semain^*
Vne forest de Dards, fier qui sans corde tire
Mille traicts en vn coup, de qui les rudes flancs
Sont couuerts d'Aiguillons, armez d'aspres Serancs,
Herissez de Poincons qui tousiours reiettonent.


--His back doth beare
A Forrest of Darts, no Bow-string needeth there,
To shoote a thousand at once, his brawny sides,
Are couered with sharpe bodkins, their force glides
With thorny points, which dayly he lets flye.

Marc. Paul. Ven^t. in lib. de Tartar. 1. Chap 33.Marcus Paulus of Venice, in the First Booke, and Three and Thirtieth Chap^ his Tartaria, writeth that in the Countrey of Scassem, there is found great (...) Porcupines; but the hunting of them is extreamly dangerous, in regard that (or^rily) they wound with their sharpe piercing quilles, all men and hounds that (...) come neere them.The Porcupines of Scassem in Tarta^i^. Sunt in Regione illa multi Sues Spinosi, qui quum capiunt^r Sp^ suis saepe Homines, and Canes Laedunt. Nam Canos a Venatoribus in P^rcos prouocati, (...) irritant, and commouent feras illas, vt simul concurrentes terga sua, quibus Spinae imi^tur, vehementer commoueant, atque stimulos ipsos vehementia quadam excutiant, (...) in viciniores Homines, and Canes euibrent.
The Viper and Vrchin alike in producing their young.Moreouer, the Vrchin or Hedge-hogge is subiect to the same mischance, as is ^ported to bee common to the Viper, to bring forth her young ones so late as (...) can. In the same manner the Vrchin, feeling in her wombe the sharpe quilles her younglings, forbeareth so long to produce them: that their keene points ^creasing by those long delayes, doe pierce through her entrailes and belly, that t^^ cause her death in recompence of her long delaying. And this was the reason, (...) the Egyptians vsed this Creature,The Porcupine the Hieroglyphicke of in-indiscretion. as a Symbole or Hieroglyphicke of Indiscre^^^ Procrastinationis damni^^e, deriued from the doctrine of the Hebrewes. To wh^ the Prophet Hieremy threatned, that the wicked, hardened in their sinnes, should (...) punished in a strange fashion* that is to say, that they should not leaue any Line^ behind them, which migh conserue the memory of them: And that their wo^ trauelling with Child, should haue the same labour as the Vrchin or Porcupine. ^illis labores Ericij. Vidi impium exaltatum super Cedros Libani transiui, and ecce non e^ So saith the Royall Psalmist.
The reason why he tooke this deuice.Monsi^ur Lewes of Orleans, tooke this Animall for the Deuice and Subiect of (...) Order, to make knowne thereby to Iohn of Bourgongne, his mortall enemie; that (...) would reuenge himselfe, for his brauadoes against him, and breake the wicked a^ bloody purposes, which Iohn of Bourgongne had conceiued and engendred, in (...) hollow pits of malediction and cruelty: whereinto himselfe would fall, and (...) House of Bourgongne perish to the third Generation; as it happened to Charles, (...) last Duke of Bourgongne, youngest Sonne to this Iohn the Cruell. And yet neuer^lesse, as all hatreds ought to bee mortall, and liue but for a time in euery Noble (...) Generous Soule: so after the death of the said Iohn of Bourgongne, who had for (...) Successor Philip the Second Duke of Bourgongne, they became Countrey friends ^gether.
Heauy enemies made louing friends.For in the Yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, and Forty, Charles Duke Orleans, (Eldest Sonne to Monsieur Lewes of France) deliuered out of Eng^ (where hee had remained euer since the Battell of Azingcourt, lost by the French Anno, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Fifteene) by the mediation of the (...) Philip of Bourgongne: these two Princes made a peace betweene themselue, vnited (...) Marriage of Mary of Cleues, Daughter to the Sister of the said Duke of Bourg^^g^ with the same Duke of Orleans, sollemnized in the Abbey of Saint Bertin, in (...) Towne of Saint Omer, on Saturday before Saint Andrewes day, in the Yeare, (...) Thousand, Foure Hundred, and Forty.
Particular deuises in honor of the Marriage.Among which particular Iouiall delights to honour this Marriage, on the Sun^ following, there was performed, a Masquerado, or Mummery of a Virgin richly (...) parelled, like to a Nymphe; leading in her right hand a Porcupine, darting vp (...) the Ayre his Quilles, or Arrowes, very arteficially. In her left hand shee conduc^ a goodly white Swanne, hauing about her necke a rich Collar of the Order of (...) Golden-Fleece. These were particular deuises and Emblazons, concerning the H^ses of Orleans, of Cleues, and of Bourgongne, the markes or notes of Alliances, of (...) two Houses of Orleans, and of Cleues: whereof are yet to bee seene (at this pres^ in the Louure) rich Tapestries of high and vnualluable price, made of Gold and Si^ in the parted Armes of Orleans and of Cleues.
The Order of Bourgong^^ of the Golden-FleeceThe manner of their Habits.On the Tuesday after the Nuptialls, the Duke of Bourgongne began to celeb^ the Feast of his Order, of the Golden-Fleece (whereof wee shall speake more at la^ in the Fourth Booke) with his Brethren Knights, who (with their Soueraigne) w^ to heare Euensong, wearing their Cloakes semed with Flames of Gold, the w^

^roydered with Fusils and Stones, which appeared to sparkle like fires,The manner of their habits. all em^sed most sumptuously, and their Chapperons with their round rich wreathes, as ^y were wont to be worne in elder times. According to their ranke and degree, ^y had their Chaires placed in the Quire; and directly ouer their heads, the Tables ^heir Armes and Emblazons.
After the establishment of this Order, fiue Knights were deceased, whose places ^re likewise vacant, and without Escutchions. On Wednesday, which was the ^st day of Saint Andrew, the Knights went to heare Masse in as magnificent man^ as the day before. At returne from Church, the Duke sate at the Table in the ^ddest of the Knights, all wearing the Order of the Golden-Fleece, made of Fusils Gold, and betweene euery two of them wete the shapes of Flint stones, which ^we haue elsewhere said) were the Armes of the first Dukes of Bourgongnes,The Armes of the first Dukes of Bourgongne. Sons ^d Descendants from great King Clouis, richly enammeled with fiery sparkles, and ^derneath a Fliece of Gold, hanging directly on the breast. These Knights were ^ted at the Table, all on the one side, according as Monks vse to sit in their di^^g Hall: and after Dinner was ended, they departed thence two and two toge^er, as Monkes vse to doe, but they who were the ancientest Knights, went last, and ^e younger went formost.
On Thursday, they were summoned for entrance, and to hold their Chapter,Charles Duke of Orleans chosen to the Order of the Golden-Fleece. to ^e end that they might proceed to the Election of new Knights in their places that ^re deceased. In this Chapter, they made choyce of Charles, Duke of Orleans, to (...) of their Order and Brotherhood, and to vnderstand from himselfe, whether hee ^d like of this election or no, they sent vnto him the Bishop of Tournay, and the ^ancellour of Bourgongne, Maister Nicholas Raulin (he which caused to be builded ^e Hospitall of Beaune, the most magnificent in all Christendome, to whom the ^ke of Orleans made answere, that most willingly he did embrace the Order, to ^nour his Brother in Law and Cousin the Duke of Bourgongne.
Hereupon, they entred the great Hall immediately, to which place came the Duke ^th all his Brethren Knights, returning from their Chapter.Golden-Fleece King of Arm^. The King of Armes ^med Toison d'Or, the Heraulds and Purseuants marching before in Order: the ^ng of Armes carrying on his left Arme, a Cloake and Chaperon of the said Order. ^essire Hugh de Launoy, who was appointed to beare the word; approaching neere Monsieur the Duke of Orleans, spake to him in these, or the like words.
Most Excellent Most puissant, and Most redoubted Lord, my Lord the Duke of Orleans;The Spe^ch deliuered to the Duke of Orleans. (...) behold here in your presence my Lord the Duke of Bourgongne, and my Lords his Brethren ^he Order of the Golden Fliece, who haue aduised and concluded altogether in the Chap^, in regard of the most high renowne, valiancie and wisedome remaining in your most noble ^son; to present you a Collar of the Order. Entreating you most humbly that you would be ^sed to receiue and weare it; to the end, that the Brotherly loue which is betweene you and (...) most honoured Lord, may be the better maintained and preserued.
Then my Lord the Duke of Orleans made Answere, that hee would doe it very ^dly. Wherevppon the Duke of Bourgongne (who had a Collar there ready of his ^der) stept forward, and put it about the Necke of my Lord the Duke of Orleans, ^aking these words. In the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy^ost; after kissing him in signe of Brotherly affection.
In like manner, and at the same instant,A mutuall enterchange of Loue and Honour between the 2. Dukes. did the Duke of Orleans as kindly re^ire the Duke of Bourgongne, requesting, that hee would likewise bee pleased to ^ceiue and weare his Order; whereto hee kindly condiscended: when instant^ the Duke of Orleans, drew forth of his sleeue a Collar of his Order, and put about the Duke of Bourgongne his necke: conducting him afterward to the ^apter (when hee had first put on the Cloake and Chapperon, of the Or^ of the Golden-Fleece) to take the Oathes in such cases required, and to giue as^ance, in the Election of foure other Knights, to fulfill the places of them that ^re dead.
This was kept secret amongst them, but yet notwithstanding within few dayes ^er it was so published; that they would needs send to the Dukes of Bretaigne Alanson, each of them a Collar of the Order of the Golden-Fliece. And thither likewise

was sent the King of Armes, Toison d'Or, to beare them to the said two Pri^^ and to deliuer them Letters for that effect,The Dukes of Bretaigne and Ala^son acce^ted into the Order. sent from the Dukes of Orleans, and B^gongne, and the Knights of the said Order. The Dukes of Alanson and Bretaigne, ^^cepted the Collars very-thankfully, bestowing rich guifts on the King of Arm^ This is that which Paradine speaketh concerning this Marriage, and the whole C^tents of this Chapter, in his History of Bourgongne.
King Lewes the Twelfth being come to the Crown of the Noble Flower de l^ retained the Porcupine for his Deuice;Chambre Dor^e. as is to be seene in the Gilded Chamber, (...) the Glasse-windowes and Barres, and on the Bench and Throane of Iustice, w^^ is so beautified when our Kings come thither in Magnificence,The Porcupine kept still in continued memory. at their Maio^ Regency, and other sollemne performances: yea, the Cloth of State, and com^ quarters of the same Seate, Semez de France, are enterlaced on the Gold-wo^ with Crimson Veluet, and the Letter L. after the ancient fashion Crowned, (...) with Porcupines Crowned. The like is to be discerned on the great Table in (...) Chamber of Accounts, and fore-front thereof, built in the life time of the Father (...) his People, where his Picture standeth very Royally in the middest of the Cardi^ Vertues, Fortitude, Prudence, Temperance, and Iustice; and euery where Se^ France, ou Porc-Espic Coronne. And the same is to be seene on all the Buildings ^sed in his Raigne.
The Armes of Orleans quartered with M^llaine.Wee haue obserued that this Royall Race of Orleans, Portoit de France au L^ de Trois pieces d'Argent; let vs now see in the same traine, why the said Armes (...) quartered with Millaine, D'Argent a la Bysse ou Giure d'Azur lissante de Gueules. T^ Marriage made of Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, with Valentin^ (...) Millaine, Daughter to Iohn Galeas, Duke of Millaine, Sirnamed of the Vicounts, (...) to Madame Isabell of France,An expresse stipulation and agreement for the Dukedom of Millaine. Daughter to King Iohn; it was stipulated or Coue^ted by expresse termes, that the said Iohn deceasing without Heyres Male; the Dukedome of Millaine, with the County of Ast, should appertaine to Monsieur Lewes (...) France, and to his Heyres. To cleare this right of the Dukedome of Millaine, a^quired to the Crowne of France, by Lewes the Twelfth: I hold it nothing di^ring from our purpose, to obserue the Originall and Progresse of the Vicounts, a^ of the Dukedome of Millaine.


The History of the Dukedome of Millaine, acquired to the Crowne of France.
THe noble Romane Historian Cornelius Tacitus, and all they haue especi^^ remarked the Antiquity of the Romane Empire,The ancient scituation of the Lombards. doe agree with one cons^ That the Lombards were (in elder dayes) placed on the bounds and Confines (...) Allemaigne or Germany, neere to Pannonia, and that vpon the declining of the E^pire, (as we learne by Iohn the Deacon, and Sigebert) they passed into that part (...) Italy (heretofore obserued by Caesar, in the First Booke of his Memories of the G^ wars) which held a portion of the Gaules, acknowledged by the Appellation of ^lia Togata, and that the Germane People held Possession there in Title of a Kingdo^ which our King Charlemaigne abolished, by bringing Italy vnder his obey-sanc^
Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millaine.The chiefe or Capitall City of Lombardy is Millaine, honoured by that b^ Beacon of the Church, Saint Ambrose, Bishop thereof, by whom it is called Me^num: in regard that the Gaules of Bourges, and of Autun, first founders thereof, in ^ing the foundation, did find there a wild Sow or Boare, halfe couered with S^ and the other halfe with Wooll. So saith the same S. Ambrose, agreeing with T^ Liuius, in the Fift Booke of his Romane History: whervpon said the Poet Cl^*
--Ad moenia Gallus,Condita lanigerae Suis ostendentia pellem.
The peo^ling of Italy by the Gaules.Her Foundation is recorded (after the opinion of Titus Liuius) vnder the Re^ of Tarquinius Priscus, at such time as one part of the Gaules, to the number of Th^ Hundred Thousand, went to people Italy, vnder Conduct of their Leader ^zus, one of the Nephewes to Ambigat, King of the Gaules, as we haue formerly (...) serued. Ausonius placeth this City, in the number of them best worthy of (...) for the fertility of her grounds and Soyle.


Et Mediolani mira omnia copia rerum,
Innumera cultaeque domas, facunda virorum
Ingenia, antiqui mores.

Procopius, in his second Booke of the Gothes warres, nameth it, next to Rome, the ^iefest of Cities vnder the Westerne Empire: And wherein the Emperors pleased (...) make their soiourning, which made it to grow rich, and wonderfully potent.
After the Conquest of Italie, and the Kingdome of Lombardie ruined,Gouernors appointed for Millaine and Lombardie. by the sur^izall of Didier their last King, confined at Lyons, but some say at Mont-Didier in ^cardie, in the yeare of Grace seauen hundred threescore and sixeteene: Charle^aigne established for Gouernour at Millaine, and the Iurisdiction of Lombardie, a ^dge and Seneschall or Steward. These Iudges and Seneschals were in (elder times) ^med Vice-Comites, Viscounts, and to the number of twelue vnder the Counts; who presented Gouernors, vnder the Lieutenants Generals of the great Prouinces, that ^ere called Dukes. And those Vicounts had Lieutenants vnder them, whom they en^led Vicarios, Vicars, and by another name, common in Gascoigne, Languedock, and Pro^^ce, Viguiers: as we haue said in the Tracts of the Officers of the Crown of France.
Italie in generall, and the Prouinces in perticuler, bounding on Pharos, and the ^raites of Messina in Sicilie, were by Charlemaigne annexed to the Crowne of ^rance, and rendred as Fiefes thereof, vntill the vnhappy partition made by the ^ebonnaire. After him, the Berengars cantonned themselues in Italie, and there sti^d themselues to be Kings.
These Berengars were descended of Boson, made and created King of Prouence,The descent of the Berengars and their rule in Italie. by ^r King of France Charles the Bauld. So Berengarius, first of the name, comman^d as Maister ouer Italie foure yeares: And Berengarius the second, seauen yeares. ^ugh Duke of Bourgongne, Prince of the Bloud of France, sent him roundly thence, ^d Regented Italie ten yeares: Lotharius his Sonne, two yeares onely. This man ^uing giuen his daughter Alix in marriage to Berengarius the third, possessed him^fe of Italie, against his Father in Law, and committed his wife Alix of Bourgongne (...) liue as a prisoner.
Against him went into Italie Otho of Saxonie,Otho of Saxonie his voyage into Italy against Berengarius. whom the Germaines sirnamed the ^reat; and who vanquished Berengarius in a ranged Battaile neere to Pa^ia, deliuered ^^ix out of prison, made her his wife, and brought her with him into Germanie. ^uring the time of his absence, Berengarius bestirred himselfe to recouer his losse, ^d compelled Otho to passe againe into Italie the second time, in the yeare of Grace ^iue hundred fiftie and seauen; when he stiled himselfe not onely King of Germa^e, but likewise Emperor of the Romans. A Title which should appertaine to none, but ^ely to the Kings of France.
Otho was fauoured in this his enterprise by Pope Stephen,Pope Stephen the eight, a friend to Otho in his attempt. eight of the name a Ger^ine by Nation, and his neere Kinseman, against the vnanimate consent of the ^ople of Italie: as is written by Palmerius Florentinus in his Chronicle, vnder the ^re nine hundred fiftie fiue, by these words. Post Arnulphum (this Arnoule was ^e Bastard of Carloman, the Bastard Sonne of Lewes the Stammerer, Emperour and ^ng of France, second of the name) Imperium confunditur, dolentibus Romanis, atque ^iuersis Italiae Populis, quod A Francia in Germaniam translatum esset. Quamobrem (...) a Romanis, Pontificeque insigniti sunt Trans-Alpini Imperatores, vsque ad primum ^bonem; and in Italia quidem Berengarij Imperium per id temporis vsurparunt.
After the death of Lewes the Fourth,The last Emperour of the bloud of Fra^ce who was the last Emperour of the Bloud of ^ance, Sonne to the Bastard Arnoule: Conrard Duke of Franconia, made vsurpa^n of Germanie then being deceased without children Henry, sirnamed the Bird^cher, Duke of Saxonie) continuing his wandrings, which were brought to ^d by his Sonne Otho, who (at a sudden) vsurped ouer Germanie, which had bin a ^se to the Crowne of France euer since Great Clouis, who subdued it in the yeare (...) hu^dred after the Battle of Tolbiac, as we haue before declared in the second Book. (...) is that deliuered by Beatus Rhenanus, writing vpon Cornelius Tacitus, his Germa^ in these words. Post ingentem illam cladem ad Tolbiacum Vicum Vbiorum (neere C^logne one the Rhine) acceptam, ita pressere nos Franci, vt respirare non ^^^uerit, donec

exoleta stirpe Veterum Francorum, auspicii^ primum Othonis Saxonia Ducis, C^^rardi Osto-Franci, atque Henrici Saxonis, mox magni illius Othonis, qui inter Imperature Germanicos primum obtinet locum, in pristinam libertatem, nos ipsi vindicauimus.
Pope Stephen his Crowning Otho for Emperour.Pope Stephen hauing (long before) caused Otho to come to Rome, he crowned him himselfe Emperor, so saith Palmerius. Otho a Romanis Ecclesiae Patribus, Vrbisque Principibus euocatus, Romam proficiscitur, in qua Vrbe amplissimis honoribus vsus, Cor^^^ suscepit. Et fuit primus qui post translatum in Germaniam Imperium, Imperiales tit^^^rite susciperet; quod postea obseruatum est, vsqe in praesens tempus.
This was consented vnto by the Romanes, because they had so sollemnly swor^* vnder paine fo eternall curse (Sub Anathemate Maranatha) to our Charlemaigne, when hee was crowned Emperour by Pope Leo, Thirteenth of the Name, in the Yeare of Grace, Eight Hundred and One, incurring by their violated faiths, the ^minatory Censures, sent out by this Pope against the Romanes, and People of the West, who would not acknowledge any other for Emperours, but onely the King^ of France, to whom alone the Title of Emperour appertained by successiue right* without either consent of the Romane people, or the Crowning of Popes, though necessary or requisite thereto, these being not of the essence of the Imperiall dignity, nor depending thereon. For concerning the matter of Coronation, the Emperour Maximilian the first, spake very well to the Popes Legate, and to the States of the Empire, assembled at the Dyet, held at Constance in the Yeare, One Thousand.The words of Maximilian Emperour, to the Popes Legate at Constans. Fiue Hundred and Seauen. That it was but a Ceremony, to take and receiue the Imperiall Crowne at the Popes hand: In regard (quoth he) that the dignity and power of the Emperour, dependeth vpon none, but on the Estates of the Empire.
And as for that which respecteth or concerneth consent of the Romane People* which Palmerius would haue to bee an essentiall cause: they neuer had any such right or authority,The Emperor Fredericke Barba-Rossa, his entrance into Rome. either of voyces or suffrages, although he would arrogate it (...) their power. And therefore the Emperour Fredericke, First of the name, Sirnamed Barba Rossa, making his entrance into the City of Rome, brauely answered to the principall persons among them that came forth to meete him, and thought highly to content him,The Emperors bold and worthy Answere. by saying in their Oration. That the Empire was come to the A^^maignes or Germaines, by the concession of Popes; and consent of the Romane people: And (...) consequently, that he was greatly beholding to them. But the Emperour presently replyed. Ego Romanum Imperium Maiorum meorum Francorum sanguine emptum, eisdem q^^bus accepi manibus, tueri conabor. Sic vanam Itallorum contudit arrogantiam. That (...) right of the Empire was come to him by the Kings of France, his most noble Grand-fathers and not by the Italians, whose arrogancie he made a mockery of. So saith Otho, Bishop (...) Frisinghen, and the Poet Ligurine, in the Life of this noble and famous Emperour.
Italy, then vnder Charlemaigne (which he wan with his blood) was gouerned by Counts and Vicounts.The right of kissing the Hand. But the negligence of his Sonnes and Descendants gaue wa^ and leysure to these Gouernours to impatronize themselues of their Gouernments and Benches of Iustice, and to become Lords domineering ouer their Counties (...) Vicounties: the right of Baise le maine, only reserud to the Emperours, with some (...) small Rights for their Inuestiture.
The place of the Vicounts descent.Among these then were the Vicounts of Millaine, bearing the Sirname of A^gria (which is a small little Towne in the Estate of Millaine, from whence those V^counts were issued and descended) who maintained themselues in the Possession (...) their Gouernment of Lombardy, very neere the continuance of Fiue Hundred yeare and vntill the time of Philip Maria, Brother to Valentina of Millaine, Dutchesse of Orleans, ouer whom the Sforzaes vsurped by power.


A Catalogue or briefe Chronicle of the Vicounts of Millaine.
Facius d' Angleria, Father to Heriprand.1. THe First of these Vicounts of Millaine, obserued by the Historians of Italy was Heriprand, sonne to Facius of Angleria) who by his valiancy, made hi^selfe Lord of Lombardy and of Millaine in the Yeare of Grace, One Thousand, (...) Twenty Three. Conrard, Second of the name, Emperour of Germany, pa^ into Italy, besieged him, to bring him to the tearmes of Duty and obedience. Th^ contention, consisting on nothing else but homage, was to be determined by a^

^de Duello or Combate, of a Duke of Bauaria, for the Emperour, against Heriprand: ^o whom the Victory inclined by the death of his Contrary. And according to the ^ompact and couenants of this Combate, Conrard was compelled to leaue Heri^rand in quiet; who enioyed his vsurpation the space of Two and Twenty Yeares, ^nd left it to his Sonne and Successor.
2. Otho, called the Vicount, First of that name,Otho, the Vicount, a valiant Champion in the Holy-Land. who (in deuotion) made one in ^he Voyage beyond the Seas, for Conquest of the Holy Land, with Godfrey of Bo^gne, the First King of Ierusalem. At the Seige whereof, this Otho fought in single ^uello with a Sarazen Admirall, named Voulx, who defied and challenged the Chri^^ians to fight against him man to man. Otho slew him in the Field, and as a note of his ^ictory, had for despoyles his Armes, and his Salade or Helmet of pure Gold, on ^he Crest whereof was exalted (as a Trophee) a Serpent and Viper: Viuree en pal ^^ucrant vn Enfant. To conserue the memory of this Combate to posterity: Otho ^oke for him, and those of his Descent and Linage, Vicounts of Millaine, D'Argent ^la Bysse on Giure d'Azur Lissante de Gueules, or speaking more grossely, L'Escu d'Ar^^nt a vn Serpent entortille de Bleu Celeste qui engloutit, vn Enfant de Coleur Rogue, ou (...) Sang. According the testimony of Georgius Merula; of Paulus Iouius, in the liues (...) these Vicounts of the Ciuill-Lawyer Alciate, a natiue of Millaine,Alciate the Emblematist borne in Millaine. in his Em^ems, and in the Tract which he wrote of Duels, the Three and Fortieth Chapter. ^or, concerning that which is written by Petrarche, and Gabriel Sym^ony, in his vul^r description of the Princes of Millaine; they are meere Chimeraes. Before this ^ploit was performed in the Holy Land; they of the House of Angleria; Portoit Argent a Sept Coronnes de Gueules.
3. Next after this Otho the First, succeeded his Sonne Andrew, the Vicount,Andrew the Vicount. Fa^^er of Gawin, otherwise called Galuagne or Gualuin, against whom the Emperour ^rederick the First, Sir-named Barbarossa, waged strong warre, and vpon this occasion.
4. The Wife of this Emperor, being called Beatrix,The Empresse very despitespitefully vsed. the Countesse Palatine of Be^son, was desirous to see the City of Millaine, and being entred thereinto, the Inhabi^nts tooke this Princesse, and to reuenge the quarell of the Vicounts against the ^mperours: did set her vpon a Mule backward, with her face turned towards the ^le, which they gaue her to hold in her hand instead of a Bridle, and in this man^^r, threw her forth of the City, with many iniurious scoffes and taunts. Barba-rossa ^tly offended at this Act of folly, soon after besieged the City of Millain, and so nar^wly pressed it with Famine; that the Inhabitants were constrained to yeeld, vpon ^rms of discretion. Yet notwithstanding in such sort,The Emperours reuenge-on the Millan^ises. that they who would haue ^^eir liues saued, should with their teeth, and without the help of any hand, draw a Fig ^^e of the secret parts of a Mule: And the same was performed, by such as were ^^lling to saue their liues. And hence grew the mocking by-word, when men were ^posed to scorne the Millanoises:Look on your Figge. they would shew them two Fingers ioyned to^^ther Ouall-wise, saying: Ecco la Fico, Voyla la Figue.
Millaine was razed downe to the ground, in the Yeare, One Thousand,The miserable condition of Guasuin. One Hun^^ed, Threescore and Two, the Plough passing ouer it, and Salt sowed thereon, in ^ne of a malediction. Gauluin was led Prisoner into Germany, by Barba-Rossa, ^ere he was many dayes whipt and beaten with Roddes, miserably hurried from ^e place to another, fed with scraps and morsels cast vnder the Table by Frederick ^d his wife, being tyed in a Chaine like a Dogge, hee continued in this miserable ^iction the space of Eight Yeares, and vntill the Yeare, One Thousand, One Hun^ed, Three Score and ^enne; when he found the meanes to depart thence, and returne againe to Millaine, which he began to rebuild; and dyed there without (...) Heyres begotten of his body, in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Foure ^ore and Two.
After his death, the Millanoises expelled the Noble men out of their City,The gouernment of Millaine quite altered to Senatours.Of the Tower crying ^berty, Liberty, and gouerned themselues in forme of a Common-wealth, making ^oyce of Senatours, among the principall Families of the People. And as chiefe (...) amongst them, they elected successiuely Iohn, Martin, Philip and Napoleon, all named De la Tour: who (from Father to the Sonne) commanded in Millaine, euer ^e the Yeare Foure-score and Two, vntill the Yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred,

Threescore and Seauen; when this Napoleon was vanquished in a ranged ^^taile, by Otho the Vicount, Second of the name, Arch-bishop of Millaine, Sonne (...) Vbertine the Vicount, Sirnamed of Angleria.
Iohn de la Tour.5. Vnder this Iohn de la Tour, First Captaine Generall and Standard-Bearer of Millaines Common-wealth, began the Factions (which ruinated Italy) of the Guelphes,The Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellines in Italy. and the Gibellines, by deuision betweene two Brethren, Germaine Captaines of the Army of Fredericke Barbarossa, at the Siege of the City of Parma, vsurped by the Pope, whose partakers were called Guelphes, that is to say in the Germaine Language, Rauenous Wolues: And those on the Emperours side, were termed Gibellines, that is to say, Faithfull and good Friends.
Vbertine of Angleria, and his Issue.This Vbertine of Angleria, was Brother to Gauluin the afflicted. He left two Son, namely Otho, Second of the name, made Archbishop of Millaine, by Pope Vrban, his Cousin; and Andreoccio, Father to Thibault, the Vicount, who contending to reenter Millaine, was ouercome neere to Angleria, by Napoleon, who caused his hea^ to bee smitten of at Galarato. Thibault left two Sonnes, Iohn and Mathew, called the Great, in regard of his huge corpulence and stature; whom the Archbishop Ot^, his Vncle left peaceably as Gouernour of Millaine, himselfe being retired to Cleruaux in Bourgongne, where hee ended his dayes in a Monasticall Habit, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Fifteene, in the Moneth of August, he being aged Foure Score and Seauen Yeares at his death.
Guy de la Tour Gouernour of Millaine.6. Against this Mathew, rose vp Guy de la Tour, the Sonne of Napoleon, and possessed himselfe of the Gouernment of Millaine. Mathew made his recourse to the Emperour Henry the Seauenth; whose part hee vndertooke to maintaine, Guy de la Tour being a Guelphe. Henry came into Italy, and caused himselfe to bee crowned at Millaine, with the Crowne circled with Iron, in imitation of our Emperour Charlemaigne. Guy conspired and practised against the life of the Emperour Henry: (...) his designes were discouered by Mathew,Mathew made Vicar o^ the Empire. who as his deserued recompence, was inuested with the State of Millaine, being entituled, Vicar of the Empire, with the red Scarlet Cloake, Furred with Ermines, and the Vicars Bonnet of Scarlet, exalted Mortier-fashion, Furred likewise on both sides with Ermines, but bordered aboue and below with Cloth of Gold. This Inuestiture was made by the same Emperour Henry of Luxembourg, hee creating Millaine a Vicariate, and ordenary Chamber of the Empire, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred and Twelue.
The Issue of Mathew.This Mathew left Fiue Sonnes, to wit; Galeas, First of the name, Marke, Sirname^ Balacion, Luchin, Iohn Arch-bishop of Millaine; and the Fift Sonne was Stephen Next to Mathew succeeded his Eldest.
Galeas, Knight of the Starre.7. Galeas, First of the name, nourished in France, in the Court of King Charles (...) Bell, Fourth of the name, who made him Knight of the Order of the Starre. The Emperour Lewes of Bauaria, Fift of the name, hauing taken the Crowne of Iron at Millaine; Mark^ Balacion accused before the Emperour his Eldest Brother Galea^, because hee had surcharged the Millanoises with Taxations and Subsidies, without lea^^ and permission of the Emperour his Soueraigne Lord. Being conuicted of this crime Lewes sent him Prisoner to the Castle of Modece, with his Children and his two Brethren Iohn and Luchin from whence within a while after they were deliuered. Gal^as dyed of a burning Feauer, after the surprizall of Pistoyia, By Beatrix of Sardai^ his Wife. Hee left two Sonnes, Azzo, otherwise called Actius, and Marke; wh^ hauing attempted against the life of his Brother, was strangled with a Table-napkin by his command.
(...) of the Empire.8. Azzo suceeded in the Vicariate of Millaine, wherein he was inuested by the Emperour Lewes of Bauaria; who (with the Inuestiture) gaue him the Title of Princ^ of the Empire, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Twenty and One paying the Summe of an Hundred Thousand Pounds, for the said Right of Inuestiture: hee had to Wife Katherine of Sauoy, and by her hee had no Children; so th^ chancing to dye at the Age of Eight and Thirty Yeares, in the Moneth of Aug^ One Thousand, Three Hundred, and Twenty Eight.
9. Luchin and Iohn the Arch-bishop gouerned the Estate of Millaine, the one t^ Spirituall, and the other the Temporall. Luchin had married Isabell of Fies^

in the Citie of Geneway, and being poysoned by her, died in the yeare One thousand three hundred fortie and sixe, in the Month of Iune.
10 By his death was aduanced Iohn the Archbishop, who gouerned Myllaine alone, and without any Companion. He caused to returne from Flanders,Iohn the Archbishop or Gouernor of Millaine. his Nephewes Galeas and Barnabie, who withdrew themselues thither for warrant of safety, being accused about the death of their Vnckle Luchin, whose wife was entertained by Galeas, according as her selfe had made knowne. Iohn the Archbishop dyed of a lingring Feauer, in September One thousand three hundred fiftie and two, and by his last Will and Testament, he instituted (as his Heires) his three Nephewes,Concerning the three Son of Stephen the Vicount. Mathew, Galeas, second of the name, and Barnabie, Sonnes to his yongest Brother Stephen the Vicount; but with this charge, that the Seigneuries of Millayne and Geneway should be Gouerned in common, and vnder one sole Potestate, established by them all three. And as for the other Cities and Townes, they should be parted and deuided in three Lots, by the Senators of Geneway and Millayne, among whom the parties did conclude, that the Lots should be drawne out of the Scrutinie, by Mathew, wherewith the Bretheren contented themselues, and should enioy their Lots in proper Heritage, which accordingly was executed. Mathew being dull, and of cowardly courage, dyed two yeares after the Archbishop his Vnckle, being poysonned (according to common opinion) in a Supper, whereto his two Brothers had inuited him
11 Galeas, second of the name, and Barnabie,Galeas and Barnabie deuided the Gouernement between them they deuided in twaine the Estate and Gouernement of Millaine, yea, and the Citie it selfe was parted betweene them, each of them building a Castell there for his dwelling. To Galeas fell the Lot of enioying Pauia and Genewaye; and to Barnabie fell by Lot the coasts of Bol^gna, Placentia, Lauda, and Baude in the Vallie of the Appenines, which had bin the Lot of Mathew their elder Brother. This Galeas the second, and Barna^ie his Brother, were Inuested into the Estate of Millayne, by the Emperour Charles of Luxembourg fourth of the name, King of Bohemia; who gaue them the title of perpetuall Vicares of the holy Empire, paying the summe of threescore thousand ^lorins. Galeas the second, at his being in Flanders, fought in single Combat with (...) Gentleman, who bare for his deuise a Taper lighted at both the ends, and in the mid^est hung two Buckets of Water. It was held by the said Galeas, and his Successors, Dukes of Millayne, vntill the times of the Emperour Charles the fift. This Galeas ^ied in the yeare One thousand three hundred threescore and eight, in the Moneth of Iu^y, leauing for his Successour his Sonne.
12 Iohn Galeas, third of the name, who espoused Madam Isabell of France,Iohn Galeas the first Duke of Millaine, and Vicar of the holy Empire. daugh^er to King Iohn, and Sister to King Charles the fift, called the Wis^: by whom he ^ad three Children, to wit, Iohn Maria, Phillip Maria, and Valentina of Millayne. By marriage of the said Madam Isabell of France, this Iohn Galeas was made (by King ^ohn his Father in Law) Count of Ve^tus in Champaigne; and created by the Empe^our Fredericke, third of the name, the first Duke of Millaine, and Vicar of the holy Empire, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred fourescore and sea^en; paying to the said Fredericke the summe of an hu^dred thousand Florins. Being ^duertised, that his Vnckle Barnabie conspired against him: he made himselfe Maister ^f Millaine, and of his enemie; whom he caused to dye in prison, and poisoned his ^onnes, remaining sole Lord of Millaigne, of Genewaye, and of their Iurisdictions.
He ioyned in marriage his daughter Valentina of Millayne,The marriage of Monsieur Lewes of Fra^ce with Valentina of Millaine. with Monsieur Lewes ^f France, the onely Brother to King Charles the sixt: she being sent into France, in ^he yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and eight. In fauour of this mar^age, he gaue to the said Valentina, the Counties of Ast in Piedmont, and that of ^ertus in Champaine, foure thousand Florines of Gold, and foure thousand sixe hundred sixtie and seauen Markes of Siluer in Plate, Iemmes and Iewels. Moreouer, it ^as promised a d^stipulated by the same contract of marriage, that vpon the de^ease of the Sonnes of the said Iohn Galeas, namely Iohn and Phillip Maria, without ^eires masles, begotten of their bodies in lawfull matrimonie: that in this case, the ^id Valentina of Millayne, she and her Children should be Dukes of Millaine, with ^cluding the daughters of the said Iohn and Phillip Maria. To this Iohn Galeas,



Count of Vertus, and Duke of Millaine; and to his heires, King Charles, sixt of the name, gaue permission De porter de France (in the first quarter, which we call the right side) sans nombre, escartele de Milan. The Charters are dated the nine and tweneth day of Ianuarie, in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and foureteene, as I finde recorded.
Concerning the Son^e of Barnabie the V^ount.The Lord of Argentre, writeth in his Historie of Bretaigne, that Barnabie the Vicount, imprisoned by his Nephew Galeas the third; left fiue masle children, Charles or Marke, Rodolphe, Lodowicke, M^slin and Carlo, and that the most part of his Children were poysoned, except Charles the eldest Son of Barnabie: who was made Lord of Parma, Cremona and Santa D^uina; he married Beatrix, Sister to Iames and Bernard, Counts of Armaignac. That this Beatrix, being gone into France, to be succou^ed by her Brother Bernard against Iohn Galeas: she lay in there, and was deliuered of B^nna of Millayne, who was married to William, Lord of Montauban, and of ^aubale in Bretaigne.
The issue of William of Montauban.That of this marriage issued two Sonnes and a Daughter, to wit, Messire Iohn de Montauban, Admirall of France, called by Ferron, Iohn de Rohan; And Arthur, Archbishop of L^ns and of F^urdeaux, dying in October, Anno One thousand fiue hundred: these two Archbishopricks comming to Frances de Rohan, Sonne to the Lord de Gie, Ma^shall of France.
Mary of Montauban, wi^e to Iohn de Grauille.The Daughter was named Mary of Montauban, married to Messire Iohn de Grauille, Father to Messire Lewes de Grauille, Lord of Marcoussis, Admirall of France vnder Charles the eight and L^wes the twelfth: whereby it ensueth, that they of the House of Bals^a, Lords of Marc^uss^s, Portent sur le tour de leurs Armes, celles de Grauille, qui s^nt de ^ull^s a trois ^rma ll^ts d'Or, party de Milan.
Iohn of Montauban (Sonne to William and this Bonna of Millaine) tooke to wife Anne de Kaeraur^s, and of this marriage issued their onely daughter, married to Lewes de ^cha^ Lord of Guemene, yongest of the house of Rohan, who quartereth his Armes, which are De Gueulles a neuf Macl^s d'Or, and those of Millaine, according as the Princes of France, that are of the House of Orleans, in regard of his Wifes Grandmother. Of whom Argentre reporteth a Request, presented to the Virgin Ioane of Orleans,La Pucelle ^eanne d'Orleans. to reseate her in the Dukedome of Millaine. A Request brought forth of the Titles of Charters, belonging to the House of Guemene, which will serue for the clearing of this Genealogie, forgotten in the Histories of I^




Supplication a la Pucelle Ieanne d'Orleans.
A Tr^s (...) and Tres deu^te Pucelle Ieanne, ennoy^e du Roy des Cieux pour la reparation, and ^ext^pati^n des Angl^is tyrannisans la France; Bonne V^scounte expose que s^n Aveu^ M^ssire Barnabe de Viscomtes eut vn Frere (il y a faute mettant Frere pou^ Nepue^ appelle Messire Galeas, lequel prit par trahison ledit Messire Barnabe, Louis, and Raoul s^s Fils, les fit mourir en prison* and pilla ses tresers, ou il y auoit Six C^nts Mille Ducats (les Histoires d Italie disent sept Chariots d'Argent massif en oeuure, and grand nombre de deniers monnoyez) Que dudit Barnabe demcurerent deux Enfants legitim^s, scauoir est M^ssire l Aisne, and Messire Mas^in le puisne, decede sans Hoirs. Que dudit Charles issirent trois ^nfants, scauoir Messire Ieanne, la Suppliante, and vne ^ille ou^ mourut tenne, c^mme aussi ledit Messire Iean. Et partant dudit Messire Barnabe lad^te Bonne estant scule Heritiere pour le tout, supplie la Pucelle de luy rendre son Herita^e iniust^ment vsurpe par ledit Galeas.


A Petition to the Virgin Ioane of Orleans.
MOst-Honored and most-Deuout Virgin Ioane, sent from the King of Heauen, for the repairing, and extirpating of the English, tyrannizing in France: Bonna, Vicount^sse expresseth, that her Grandfather Barnabie of the Vicountes, had a Brother (here is a fault, setting downe Brother for Nephew) called Messire Galeas, who surprized (by

treason) the said Messire Barnabie, Lewes and Raoul his Sonnes, causing them to dye in prison, and robbed his Treasures, where he had sixe hundred thousand Ducats (the Histories of Italie doe say, seauen Chariots of Siluer wrought in Plate, etc. and a great number of coyned monies.) That the said Barnabie left two legitimate Children, the one was Messire Charles the eldest, and Messire Mastin the yongest, deceasing without Heires. That of the said Charles issued three children, to wit; Messire Iohn; the Suppl^antesse, and a Daughter that dyed yong, as also the said Messire Iohn. And therefore of the said Messire Barnabie, Bonna being the sole Inheretrixe left off all: beseecheth the Virgin, to restore her heritage, vniustly vsurped by the said Galeas.




He addeth moreouer,Isabel of Bauaria wife to King Charles the sixt. that this Bonna was nourished in the Court of Isabell of Bauaria, wife to Charles the sixt, to whom she appertained, in regard of her Aunt by the Fathers side, Madam Thadea the Vicountesse, Mother to the said Isabel. Who in this contemplation, marrying this Bonna to the Lord of Montauban, gaue him thirtie thousand Francs, to be leueyed on the Garners of Salt, and the Aydes of Chasteau Thierry.
Now this Iohn, called Galeas, third of the name, and first Duke of Millaine, dying in September, One thousand foure hundred and two; his eldest Sonne
13 Iohn Maria, called the Cruell, succeeded him, and Reigned nine yeares.Iohn Maria the cruell Duke of Millaine. Hee tooke great delight in the nourishing of huge Mastiue Dogges, whom hee would cause to deuoure aliue as well such as hee hated, as them that were innocent. Wherefore, hee was slaine and massacred by the people, going to heare Masse in the Church of Saint Godard, the fifteenth day of May, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and Eleauen. Iohn thus dying without Children, his Brother
14 Phillip Maria succeeded him, and had two Wiues.Phillip Maria third Duke of Millaine. The first was Beatrix de Tenda; whom he commanded to be beheaded, being detected of Adulterie, committed with one of his Musitions. His second wife was daughter to Amades, Count of sauoye, retreated to Ripaille, not hauing any issue by either of these Wiues: but dyed of a Fluxe in his Bellie, the twelfth day of August, One thousand foure hundred fortie and eight. Sixe yeares before, he had married his Bastard Blanch Maria to Frances Sforza; and in fauour of this Marriage, gaue Cremona,Blanch Maria married to Frances Sforza and the Ter^itorie thereof, with the Castell of Petrenelle. He had this Bastard daughter by a Courtezane that he affected, Agnes de Mania; from which House came the Ciuile Lawyer Iason de Mania. By the death of this Phillip Maria, deceasing without Heires masle begotten in lawfull marriage: the Duchie of Millaine came to the House of Orleans, in regard of Valentina of Millaine, as was couenanted by the Marriage contract; yet notwithstanding there ensued some preiudice.
15 Frances Sforza, a simple Souldiour by fortune, Sonne to Sforza Attendula, a Shoomaker in a small Village called Cotignoles; possessed himselfe by vsurpation of the Estate of Millayne, the Forces whereof remained in his owne power.Frances Sforza the vsurper of Milain against the house of Orleans. He maintained his vsurped authoritie against the House of Orleans, by the meanes of Lewes the eleauenth, to whom (being Daulphine, and absent from France) he gaue yearely a great pension. In acknowledgement whereof, Lewes being come to the Crowne; caused Galeas Maria, eldest Sonne of Frances Sforza, to marrie Bonna of Sa^e, yongest Sister to Charlote, the second Wife to Lewes the eleauenth. Frances dyed in the Moneth of March, One thousand foure hundred threescore and sixe.
By his Wife Blanch Maria, Bastard daughter to Phillip, he left sixe Sonnes and two daughters. The Sonnes were named Galeas, Iohn, Phillip, Ascanio, Cardinall,The issue of Frances Sforza by his wifeBlanch Maria. Lodowicke Sforza, and Octauius, all Sirnamed Maria. The two daughters were Hippolita Maria, wife of Alphonso, eldest Sonne to Ferdinando, Count de Medina del Campo, Bastard Sonne to Alphonso, King of Arragon, of Naples and of Sicilie, vsurped vpon the House of Aniou. The other was Elizabeth Maria, married to the Marquesse of Montferrat.
16 Galeas Maria, eldest Sonne to Frances Sforza, receiued tydings of his Fathers death in the Court of France, where he was educated by Lewes the eleauenth, his Father in Law; who gaue him a sufficient Companie, to enstaule him in the

Dukedome of Millaine. For which (euen as his Father before had done) hee refused the Inuestiture of the Emperour Fredericke the third, who hoped (thereby) to draw a good Summe of money from him. The reason in this case yeelded by these two last Dukes, was, that they had conquered the Estate by force of their owne Armies; and not by any fauour or succour, by them receiued from the Emperor Fredericke, to whom (by consequent) they acknowledged not any duetie.
The wicked life of Galeas, and his death.This Galeas Maria addicted himselfe to all lubricitie and whoredomes, taking (by force and violence) the daughters and wiues of his Subiects, to appease his inordinate lust and incontinencie; whereby he won such contempt and hatred, that vpon S. Stephens day in Christmasse, Anno One thousand foure hundred threescore and seauenteene; they murdred him in the Church of S. Stephen, by the meanes of Iohn Andrea Lampugnano, and three other Complices, euen in the middest of his kinred, friends, and before the peoples face.
The Issue of Galeas Maria.He left by Bonna of Sauoye his Wife, two Sonnes and one daughter, named Blanch Maria, married to the Emperour Maximilian, and to whom she was affianced, euen when her Father was slaine. On this marriage grew the ground and subiect of the Warres of France and of Castile, for the Dukedome of Millaine, vniustly vsurped, and worse detained from the Crowne of France. The Sonnes were Iohn and Hermes, or Mercurie Maria.
Iohn Mariae Duke in his minority and thereby diuer^ inconueniences happening.17 Iohn Maria, the sixt Duke of Millaine, succeeded in the said Dukedome, being onely aged nine yeares; remaining in the Tutelage of his Mother, and of his Vnckles Lodowicke, Ascanio and Octauian. The State affaires were ordered and managed, by one named Cico de Calabria, a man trained vp in the House of Frances Sforza. But such was his nature, as being vnable to endure so many Companions, and winning the fauour of Bonna of Sauoye: Lodowicke and Ascanio (by this meanes) were banished from the State of Millaine, the two other yonger Bretheren put to death, and the plots and deuises of all such preuented, as could make any head against him.
With this Calabrian was admitted in gouerning the Estate, and disposing of the Finances,The folly of great ^adies being emptied of modesty. a man of Ferrara, named Antonio Thesino: who had some priuate gouernement of his Mistresse, carued before her, lodged neere to her Chamber, and carried her mounted behinde him thorow the Citie. This Lady gouerned her selfe with him most impudently, enriching her Minnion or Carpet-Squire with immense gifts; which this ill-aduised Duchesse bestowed on him, both in the sight and knowledge of her people.
The traite of e^^y in villan^The Calshrian likewise stood suspected, to share some part, in the fauours and great g^aces of his Mistresse, and he being couetous, desiring to enioy he^ alone to himselfe: found the meanes, to capitulate with Lodowicke Sforza, and Robert de S. Seuerino, who being promised mountaines and meruailes, he seekes to repeale them from banishment. No sooner were they returned to Millaine, but within three daies after; they tooke the Calabrian, put him into a Tunne, and hauing dragde him most infamously through all the Cities Streets;The Calabrian beheaded at Pauia. they lockt him vp prisoner in the Castell of Pauia, where (within short while after) they smote off his head. Thesino escaped secretly, being made wise by his fellowes example.
Now concerning the Duchesse, about fiue or sixe Moneths after their returne, Lodowicke and S. Seuerino tooke her two Sonnes from her, whom they sent to Pauia, vnder good protection and sufficient guard: causing her to renounce the Tutelage of her Children, and giue her voyce to Lodowicke, who was elected Guardian of his Nephewes, the yongest whereof dyed very soone after. Moreouer, they caused her to yeelde an account of the Dukedomes Treasure,The Ducall Treasure called in question which was then esteemed the very greatest in Christendome: commanding three Keyes to be made, for Lodowicke, S. Seuerino and the Duchesse; to wom (for honors sake) they gaue one, but themselues had the locking of it safe vp.
And as it is a matter impossible, that two great Lords (aduanced to one and the same dignitie) should any long time agree and endure together: euen so Lodowicke, aspiring to the Dukedome, supplanted S. Seuerino, who was constrained to take part with the Venetians. Thus Lodowicke, seeing himselfe Gouernour alone, and furnished

with Treasure: got possession of the Rocke or Cittadell of Millaine, which he fortefied with greater strength then euer it had bin before: and stamped Money, bearing his owne Image on the one side, and that of Duke Iohn his Nephew on the other.
He had married this Duke Iohn with Isabel of Naples, daughter to Alphonso, the vsurper of Naples and Sicilie, by whom he had a Sonne named Frances Sforza, and two daughters. Blanch Maria his Sister, was married to the Emperour Maximilian,Blanch Maria married to the Emperor Maximillian. to whom she brought in marriage, the summe of foure hundred thousand Ducats in ready Coyne, and threescore thousand for Iemmes and Iewels: the marriage being celebrated at Ispourg, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred, fourescore and foureteene, not any childe issuing of this marriage. Alphonso King of Naples threatned Lodowick to make warre vpon him, if he would not leaue the Dukedome of Millaine to his Sonne in Law.
18 Lodowicke, to make his part preuaileable against the Neapolitane, compassed the meanes, to reconcile himselfe againe with Robert of S. Seuerino: whose Sons he had sent into France with the Count of Gatasse, to King Charles the eight,Lodowicke his pollicie with King Charles the eight. making apparant remonstrance to him; what right they had to the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, the Conquest of them being very easie, binding himselfe to prepare the way for him, and to assist in the voyage with men and money.
Hauing thus mannaged, and made sure the support of France; he poysoned Duke Iohn his Nephew, with a gentle lingering poison, appointed to a certaine time.The death of Duke Iohn at Pauia. King Charles the eight, being gone into Italie, to feede vpon the viands of vanitie: by the way, visited the poore sickly Duke, lying on his death-bed. From Pauia he went to Placentia, where he receiued the newes in Letters, concerning the death of the Duke his kinsman deceasing at the Age of sixe and twentie yeares, leauing his Son fiue yeares old. Lodowicke taking leaue of King Charles, ranne in all possible haste to Millaine, and there possessed himselfe of the Dukedome.
This Lodowicke Sirnamed the Moore, in regard of his blackish swarthie complexion, and who tooke the blacke Mulberrie Tree for his deuise,Lodowicke the Moore, Duke of Millaine. being in possession of the Soueraigntie; obtained full confirmation therein by the Emperour Maximillian, first of the name, not onely for himselfe, but his heires likewise, paying the summe of foure hundred thousand Duckats, which he deriued from this Inuestiture. He had taken to wife the daughter to the Duke of Ferrara, and by her had two Sons, Maximillian and Frances; who was the last Duke of Millaine, as we shall perceiue by the thred and course of this Historie.
19 Lewes the twelfth, seeing himselfe peaceably seated in his Kingdome; resolued to get againe his Dukedome of Millaine, which appertained to him, in regard of his Grandmother Valentina, purposing to expell Lodowicke thence. Hereupon, and to effect what he intended, he caused a potent Armie to passe the Mountaines, conducted by the Lord D' Aubigny, Robert Stuart, an honorable Scot, Marshall of France, called the good Father of Chiualrie, and Iohn Iacques de Triuulce, a Millaynois (afterward Marshall of France) who at their first approach, tooke Noma and Rocque, laid Alexandria in the dust, the spoyle whereof serued for recompence to the Souldiours. Pauia fearing to runne the same riot; yeelded it selfe freely to the French: so that within the compasse of fifteene dayes, they conquered the Dukedome of Millaine. All this while was Lodowicke within the Citie,Millaine taken by the French. who growing distrustfull of the people; got secretly thence with his two Sonnes, escaping by the Lake of Coma, and fled toward Maximillian, King of the Romaines, to deriue some succour from him. By his departure, Millaine was taken by the French, the fourth day of September, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and nineteene; the Castell still holding out for Lodowicke the Moore.
Lewes the twelfth receiued tydings at Lyons, concerning the surprizal of Millaine; whether he went with all diligence, and made his entrance into it.King Lewes his entrance into Millaine. The Captaine of the Rocquet or Cittadell, who could well haue held it two yeares space at the least, so strongly it was furnished with all things necessary; did yet neuertheles yeeld it into the Kings hands, to haue the moitie of the goods and riches that were in it.
Lodowicke, assisted by the forces of Maximillian, preuailed on so farre, that he got entrance into Millaine, by intelligence and reuolt of the Inhabitants; this was done the third day of Ianuarie, in the said yeare foure hundred fourescore and nineteene; the French yet keeping still the Castell, which Lodowicke could not get by friendship nor force.
The yeare of Iubilie at Rome.The Iubilie for the Seculer yeare One thousand fiue hundred, being open at Rome (the Eeuen of Christmasse, in the said yeare foure hundred and nineteene, on which day the Romaines begin their yeare) by Pope Alexander the sixt: great concourse of the people (of all Nations) flocked into Italie, namely of the French, whose deuotion was much troubled by the bad dealing of Lodowicke, who did set their liues at open sale,The bloody c^uelty of Lodowicke to the French, and their reuenge. giuing a Ducate for euery head brought him: so that in all the Innes and Hosteries throughout Italie, vpon the high roade wayes conducting to Rome, French Pilgrimes throates were cut most cruelly. Which was no sooner discouered, but the French Armie, remaining in the parts about Millaine, made warre (without any pittie) on them of Millaine, and so fast as any of them could be taken; blood for blood serued to expiate and appease the ghosts of the French. And for example to the Hosteries and Innes, all crimson-tincturde with their blood: diuers were burned with their Maisters, Wiues, Maide-seruants and Men-seruants, without sparing so much as their Cats, which serued as no meane terror and affright to others.
The first voyage of King Charles beyond the Alpes.Now, that which gaue subiect to the Millaynoises (by their owne confession) to reuolt from Lewes the twelfth, was this extreame bad behauiour in the French. At the first voyage which King Charles the eight made beyond the Mountaines; the Italians (so speaketh our French Salust Phillip de Commines) adored the French, reputing them to be Saints, and saying, that they had not their like for goodnesse, Faith, mildenesse and discretion. But this good opinion of them lasted not long, for our French misgouerned Libertines, by their riots and robberies, declared the quite contrary: and gaue apparant subiect of being accused, for taking mens wiues perforce from them, and goods from the people, wheresoeuer they could finde them by night or day.
The best proceedings are ouerthrow^e by bad cariageConcerning the women, it may be that they lied not, and for the rest, doubtlesse somwhat was done; for the French could not finde any thing too hot, or too heauie; a disease (neuerlesse) as common to the Italians, Germaines, Spaniards, and other Nations, as to the French. But this was it that confounded the Kings affaires, which otherwise had carried themselues formally: but being conducted without any order, and the French Souldiours transported with pilferies; this was the reason, of alienating the Italians from their former affection to the French, to the great griefe and discontentment of honest mindes, for the extraordinarie honour and renowne, which the French nation might haue won to themselues in this voyage.
The naturall disposition of the Italians.And such bad behauiours, are meanes vtterly contrary for attaining to any great Conquest, in what part soeuer it is (but especially in Italie) and to keepe it long: because the Italians are the most iealous and couetous Nation, beyond all other in the world. Wherefore, whosoeuer would make himselfe a Potentate in Italie; he must hold it for an infallible Maxime, to be very modest and retent in all his actions; but especially towards women, and to lay no oppression vpon the people.
The Italians are inconstant, and desire nothing more then change; they contemne the facilitie of the French, and hate the rigour of the Dutch, a Nation diuers wayes proud and tyrannicall,Di^trust is the mother of assurance. yet can better conserue their Conquests, then we: who of all our voyages to Piedmont, Millaine, Naples, and Sicilie, haue not reserued one inch of ground. Diffidence is the Mother of Assurance, and to make our owne best beginning, it behoueth vs first to conquer our selues.
Maxima cunctarum Victoria, victa voluptas.
^he Epita^ on the tombe of great Scipio.A graue Verse, well seruing for an Epitaph on the Tombe of Great Scipio the Affrican: who abstained from all force and violence towards men and their goods. Moreouer, to containe the people subiected to dutie, by a moderated gouernment betweene mildenesse and power: is to stand vpon good guard night and day, and not to trust ought else, but in good behauiour towards the Italians, with whom to communicate, and be the least familiar, is the best and safest.
Now the men of Millaine, being thus reduced vnder the obedience of Lord Lodowicke; the King was constrained once more, to bring an Armie into the Field,King Lewes raiseth another Armie against Lodowicke. which he committed to the conduct of Messire Lewes de la Trimouille, Viscount of Thouers: who hauing made an agreement betweene the Lords of Aubign and of Tri^lce, all three ioyned together, and gaue such order and direction to the Armie, that Lodowicke standing in feare thereof, was enforced againe to forsake Millaine, with an hundred Horse onely, and so with-drew himselfe to Nouara, where was his Armie and Artillerie. As speedily was he followed by the French Armie, whereto a Bourgongnon Captain, named Des Yottieres, yeelded himselfe, being come forth of the said Towne of Nouara, wherein (at that time) for Lodowicke were foure thousand Swizzers, eight thousand Lands-kenets, about sixe or seauen thousand Lombardes, and eight hundred Bourgongnons, who with the said Captaine Des Yottieres, ioyned themselues to the French Armie on the one side, and the foure thousand Swizzers, won by the Bailiffe of Dijon, on the other side.
Lodowicke came forth into the Field, and presented Battaile to the French, which they accepted very willingly, and Lodowicks Armie comming to handy-blowes;The Armie of Lodowicke faileth him in the Field* they submitted to the French, without striking one stroake: because the Swizzers and Lands-kenets being not paid their Wages, they would not by any meanes fight. Such misfortunes as this, doe often happen to Princes, that make vse of strangers seruice, who when neede requireth; will be sure to hold their hands, making three or foure demands for money, before the Battaile, when they well knew it is not to be had. Let a Prince therefore prouide his Armie of his owne Subiects,A very worthy adu^se giuen to Princes. of whom he shall be better and more profitably serued: for strangers soules are meerely mercenary, and they affect not Princes, but in regard of the benefit they can deriue from them* They are for their seruice that will giue them most, and their lo^e is poized in the Ballance with their wages, but no otherwise. Lodowicke being thus betraied, disguised himselfe in the habit of a Gray-Frier, as hoping so to saue himselfe. But the Lord of Trimouille, causing a passage to be made betweene two Pikes crossed, for all them of the enemies Armie, departing with their liues and goods saued,Lodowick taken and sent ^^isoner into France one after another: Lodowicke being knowne, was taken, and sent prisoner to Chasteau de Pierre-Encise at Lyons, from whence he was (not long after) transported to the great Tower of Bourges, and there he finished his dayes.
The Towne of Nouara by this meanes yeelded it selfe to the King, who had for his part of the victory (won on the thursday before Palme-Sunday, in the same yeare fourescore and nineteene) Lodowicke, and all his Artillery, with the Town of Nouara, very rich and mighty in goods.
The Cardinall Ascanio Sforza, left Gouernour at Millaine by his Brother,Ascanio Sforza brother to Lodowicke. hauing heard the tydings of his surprizall: departed thence, accompanied with sixe hundred Horse, belonging to the richest Inhabitants, and some pieces of Artillerie, taking his way towards Bologna. On the way he was met by a Venetian Captaine, that came with his troupe to ioyne with the Armie Royall. This Captaine was named S^ncino Biansono, who crying out a loud France and Saint Marke; set vpon the Cardinals company, conducted by Count Iohn, Brother to the Marquesse of Mantua, to whom he gaue charge, to pursue him fighting to Chasteau de Riuolles, where the Cardinall was as soone inuested by the Venetian, who had prisoner in his power Count Iohn of Mantua, of whom he had a great ransome. With him was taken the Abbot of Sanzeles, foure of the Viscounts, Captaine Bardo, and an hundred thousand Ducates in ready money, with all the Iewels of the Cardinall Ascanio, who likewise was contented to yeelde, onely his life saued. He was deliuered into the hands of Stephen de Vers, Seneschall of Beaucaire, the Lord of Montoison, and the Iudge Mage of Prouence: who brought him safely to Chasteau de Pierre-Encise at Lyons, euen where before his Brother was imprisoned.
The Inhabitants of Millaine much daunted at the surprizall of their Duke,The lamentable condition of the Millainois^s* vpon loss of their Duke and his Brother. his Brother also, and the discomfiture of their Armie, by that of the Kings which had inuested them; sent their Deputies to the Cardinall George d' Amboise, who by the King was established Lieutenant generall ouer the Millainers; entreating him to take compassion of them, to saue their Citie from pillage, and to make his entrance into it, crauing

most humbly pardon of him, for their offence committed, by admitting Lord Lodowicke into their Citie. The Cardinall made it manifest to them, by Maister Michael de Ris, Doctor of the Lawes, and Councellour in the Parliament of Bourgongne, that the enormitie of their rebellion was punishable with death: because (without any subiect) they had withdrawne themselues from obedience to their King and Soueraigne Lord, who had so mildely and mercifully dealt with them. And that the sum of a Million of Pounds, which they payed yearely to Lodowicke in taxes and tallages,The Dukdom of Millaines yearly valuation. he had moderated it to the sum of six hundred and two and twentie thousand pounds (here is to be noated, that the Dukedome of Millaine valued yearely fifteene hundred thousand Dukates) which gentle and milde vsage in the French* they had neuerthelesse vtterly forgot.
All which notwithstanding, hee declared to them in the Kings name, that hee would spare the liues of the Inhabitants, and exempt their Citie from pillage, and all the people from death, which they had iustly deserued, vpon condition: that they would yeelde and deliuer to him, the principall Authours of the rebellion, to be iustly punished, and themselues (for euer after) continue faithfull to the King, and to his Successours the Kings of France, their Dukes and Soueraigne Lords. Moreouer, to defraye the charges of this last warre, the Citie of Millaine should (for an honorable amends) pay three hundred thousand Ducates; to wit, fiftie thousand in the present Moneth of Aprill, One thousand fiue hundred and fiftie thousand the first day of May next following; and the other two hundred thousand at the end of the same yeare, except the King would be pleased in clemencie, to prolong them a further time for the last paiment.
Which being agreed vnto, the Cardinall d'Amboise entred into Millaine vpon Good-Friday,The Cardinall d'Amboise his entrance into Millaine. it being the seauenteenth day of Aprill: accompanied with Iohn Iacques: de Triuulce (Marshall of France in the time of King Frances) the Bishop of Lucon, Chancellour of Millaine, the Lord of Neuf-Chastel, with other Lords and Captaines of the Armie. Hee went to lodge at the Hostell called La Cour-Vieille, the Pallace belonging to the first Viscounts of Millaine, whether the three Estates thereof went in solemne procession, bearing the Crucifixe and Banner of the Virgin Mary; after which followed all the Children of the Citie, Sonnes and Daughters, cloathed all in white, and in this manner the Cardinall welcommed them in the Court of his Pallace, sitting aloft vpon a Theater, and round about him his French Lords and Captaines. For the Inhabitants, the man most famous among their Aduocates,The Cardinals mercie to the Citizens. named Maister Michael Touse, made the Oration, desiring grace and mercie on their behalfe. The Councellour de Ris returned a kinde and mercifull answere, more then the inconstant people deserued: which being concluded, all the yong Children (innocent in the guilt of their Fathers) passed two and two together before the French Lords, crying with loud voices, France, France, Mercie, Mercie.
The Swizzers, being raised and prouoked thereto by Pope Iulius, had brought into Millaine Maximilian Sforza, Sonne to Lodowicke Sforza, who died in France, and which Maximillian (as we haue formerly said) had bin saued in Germanie, by his Vnckle the Cardinall Ascanio.
Lewes the twelfth retained as yet in his power, the Rocke or Cittadell of Millaine,Yong Maximi^lian Sforza estated (...) the dignity of Millaine. the Castell of Cremona, and some other places. The Swizzers, who had enstaulled in the Estate of Millaine the young Maximillian, and hee being taken into their protection; after they had vanquished Lewes de la Trimouille, Lieutenant Generall for the King at Nouara, and constrained him to forsake Italie; they pursued the said Lord de la Trimouille to Dijon in Bourgongne, to the number of fifteene thousand, supported by the forces of Pope Iulius, and of the elected Emperour Maximillian (Sonne in Lawe to Charles, the last Duke of Bourgongne) and them of La Franche Comte, as also some Germaines, conducted by Huldrich, the Duke of Wittemberg. There they besiedged him in this weake and ill-fortefied Citie, before which (neuerlesse) they remained sixe weekes, at the end whereof, being required to shew the occasions, why they thus bandied themselues against the French; the Lord of Trimouille receiued this for

answere. That since the time of King Lewes the eleauenth (with whom they had contracted and sworne alliance) there remained due debt vnto them,The answere returned by the Swizzers. foure hundred thousand Crownes of their Pension* whereof being satisfied, they would be louing friends to the Crown of France, and maintaine their cause to and against all Princes liuing or dying. To content them, they had assurance for their debt, and pay of some present money downe, but what sum I know not.
These men thus pacified, Lewes the twelfth disposed himselfe, to muster his troups, and to haue them passe ouer the Alpes. He published for his Lieutenant generall in Italie, his Cousine Charles de Montpensier, Duke of Bourbon,The great preparation made by King Lewes the twelth, but fore-stalled by his death. leuying in Germany betweene fifteene and sixteene thousand Lands-kenets, determining to haue on foote (at Spring time following) the most potent Armie, that, in the memory of men, had euer bin seene in Italie. But sudden death brake off his designes, and cut in twaine the thred of his life, the first day of Ianuary, about the mid-time of night, in the yeare of our Saluation, One thousand fiue hundred and foureteene.
A Prince, whose intire loue towards his Subiects, honored him with the memory of this Title, Father of the People, and who all his life time, had eased them of taxes and Subsidies. Being endued with magnanimous courage, he purposed to pursue the Conquests of Charles the eight in Italie; and (aboue all) to make firme the Dukedome of Millaine to the Crowne of France, which appertained thereto by successiue and lawfull right.
After this Prince succeeded Frances of Engoulesme, his Son in law, husband to Madam Claudia of France; but not in regard of his wife;Women excluded from succeeding in the the Crown of France. because daughters are excluded from the Crown of France, according to the fundamentall Law of the Kingdome.
Successor Imperij Francorum, Masculus esto.
But by his chiefe right and prerogatiue, and no otherwise, as being the prime Prince of the blood, most neerest, and best able to succeede the deceased King, departing this life without any heire masle.
At the beginning of his Reigne, Prince Charles of Austria, sent as Ambassador to his Maiestie, the Count of Nassau; who (in the name of his Maister) performed faith and homage, for the Counties of Flanders, Artois, Charolois, and other Lands held and depending on the Crowne of France.
Which being thus done, the King iournied to Lyons,The iourney of King Frances the first, into Italy to recouer Millaine from whence he passed into Italie, to recouer his Dukedome of Millaine. The Swizzers being introduced, and won by the perswasions and boundlesse promises of the Cardinall of Syon, would needs breake their faith engaged to the King; and were ouerthrowne at Marignano, on thursday, being the foureteenth day of September, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and fifteene, there lying in the field of Battaile, fifteene thousand and fiue hundred of them slaine. The vanquishing of these bold warriors,A great ouerthrow of the Swizzers at Marignano. procured the reddition of Millaine, of Pauia, and of Cremona. In the end, the Castell of Millaine was constrained to yeeld it selfe to the French, by the arteficiall cunning of Pedro de Nauarre, a great Ingener. He had this Sir-name, not as being a natiue of Nauarre, but by being in seruice of King Ferdinand of Arragon, he was taken in the Battaile at Rauenna, and led thence into France, where he was detained as a prisoner, vntill the time of King Frances the first, who hauing set him at full libertie; made good proofe of his valiancie in Italie and elsewhere, and serued very faithfully to the Crowne of France.
By this surprizing the Castell of Millaine, and the Duke Maximillian Sforza,Charles Duke of Bourbon, Lieutenant generall and gouernour of Millaine. led prisoner into France, where he finished his life; King Francis the first remained some space of time, a peaceable possessour of the Estate of Millaine. Where he left Gouernor and Lieutenant generall, Charles, Duke of Bourbon, Constable of France, who but badly entreated the Mother to King Frances the first, Madam Louisa of Sauoye; loosing both honor and life in a strange Countrey, to the cost of France.
We haue already obserued the Genealogie of Monsieur Louis of France, Duke of Orleans, on the legitimate side: Let vs now take a view of that which descended (and endureth yet to this day) of his naturall Sonne Iohn, Count of Dunois.
The Chronicle of Iuuenal des Vrsins doth enstruct vs, that after the murder of

Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans: his Children were taken from the hands and gouernement of their Mother, the Duchesse Valentina of Millaine* Le Quatriesme Iour de December audict An. 1408. mourut de courroux, and d^ Dueil, la Duchesse d Orleans, Fille du Duc de Milan, and de la Fille du R^y Iean. Et astoit grande pitie, d^ouir auant sa Mort, ses regrets, and complaincts. Et piteusement regrettoit ses Ensants, and vn Bastard nomme Iean, lequel elle veoit volontiers, en disant qu'il luy a^oit Este Enible, and Qu'il N'y Auoit a peine des Enfants, qui fust si bien Taille de Venger la mort de son Pere, Qu'il estoit. The fourth day of December, in the said yeare 1408. deed with anger and griefe, the Duchesse of Orleans, daughter to the Duke of Millaine, and to the daughter of King Iohn. And it was great pittie, to heare before her Death, her mournings and complaints. And pittifully she mourned for her Children, and a Bastard, named Iohn, whom she willingly beheld, in saying, that he was enabled, and that he had hardly any of his Sonnes, that was so well shaped and formed, for the reuenge of his Fathers death, as he was.
Iohn the Bastard of Dunois his admirable seruices.This Propheticall kinde of speech (as it were) was verified vnder King Charles, seauenth of the name, called the Victorious, and well serued: when this Iohn the Bastard of Dunois, performed wonders against the Bourgongnons and Englishmen, to whom (all his life time) he was a capitall enemie, and a Butcher of them; reuenging the expence of his Fathers Blood, with slucing forth that of twelue thousand English and Bourgongnons, in diuers encounters, and vnder his conduct, making a miserable massacre of them.
And for the great seruices which hee had done to France, and which may remaine as a module, example and patterne, for all them concerned in his qualitie of Birth, to apply themselues in well doing, and not to teare the bowels of their Mother France,Iohn of Dunois made the legitimate Son o^ Orleans. by factions, reuolts and partialities: Hee was by full consent of the generall Estates, held vnder Charles the seauenth, made The Legitimate Sonne of Orleans. And in his Armes, the Filet de Gueulles a Gauche (which is said in deuise to designe Bastardie) altered and changed into that d'Argent, en Bande de la main Gauche a la Droitte. And that his Heires and Descendants of them should hold (for euer after) the rancke and title of French Princes, and goe immediately after the Princes of the Blood Royall, and before all the Princes issued and descended of the Soueraigne House habituate in France.
The m^rriage o^ the Count of Dunois to Iane Louuet.This Iohn Count of Dunois and of Longue-Ville, espoused Iane Louuet, the onely daughter to Messire Iohn Louuet, President of Prouence, wonderfully wealthie: in regard he had gouerned the Reuennues of France, vnder the miserable Reigne of Charles the sixt, and had receiued his part of the Treasures and Cheuances, gathered in many Monasteries of the Kingdome, for Queene Isabel of Bauaria, who made her Mittines of the Kings Treasure, to fill the Boudgets of her owne Countrey, although France paied dearely for it. The faction of Phillip, Duke of Bourgongne, second of the name, alwayes dammageable to France, dismounted the said President of Prouence. And when the President perceiued, that the Queene of Sicilie, Mother to the Queene of France, was not contented, that the President should gouerne the King and his Hostell: he departed from France, and tooke with him the Bastard of Orleans* who had married his Daughter, and went so farre as to Auignion: So speaketh the Chronicle of Iuuenall des Vrsins, vnder the yeare One thousand foure hundred twentie foure. By contract of this marriage, the President Louuet instituted his Heire, the said Iohn the Bastard of Orleans, whether he had children by the said Iane his daughter, or whether she died without issue, as it hapned she did.
The second mariage of the Bastard of Orleans.So that Iohn the Bastard of Orleans espoused in second marriage, Mary de Harcour, daughter to William de Harcour, Count of Tancar-Ville, and to Ioane, the Vicountesse of Melun.
For the great seruices that this Iohn had performed to his Bretheren, Charles, Duke of Orleans, remaining fiue and twentie yeares prisoner in England (and to Iohn, Count of Engoulesme, who continued there also prisoner eight and twentie yeares) the said Charles, being returned into France, gaue the Countie of Dunois to the Bastard his Brother, so that he was the first Count thereof. The Letters of this Donation are dated in the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirtie nine,

confirmed by other Letters from the same Duke of Orleans, in Anno One thousand foure hundred fortie and one. King Charles the seauenth acknowledging the great and faithfull seruices, which this Iohn the Bastard of Orleans had done for him: ouer and beside his legitimation, hee gaue him faire Seigneuries, as those of Parthenay, Vou^ans, Meruans, the Principalitie of Chastelaillon, and many other, throughout all the Prouinces of France: And this donation is dated in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fiftie and eight.
Of this Iohn, Count of Dunois, and Mary de Harcour, Countesse of Tancar-Ville:The issue of Iohn and Mary, and of them that descended of them. was borne a Sonne and a Daughter; Frances and Katharine, maried to the Count of Reussy.
Frances of Orleans, Count of Dunois and of Longue-Ville, first of the name, had to wife Agnes de Sauoye, sister to Queene Charlote of Sauoye, second wife to King Lewes the eleauenth, daughters to Lewes, Duke of Sauoye, and Anne of Cyprus. And of this marriage was borne three Sonnes, as namely Frances, Lewes, and
Iohn, who was a Cardinall, Bishop of Orleans, and Archbishop of Tolosa.
Frances of Orleans, second of the name,The Countie of Longue-Ville made a Dukedome and Peeredome. followed the part of King Lewes the twelfth, not being (as yet) Duke of Orleans, and ranne his fortune at the Battaile of Saint Aubin in Britaigne. In fauour of him, King Lewes the twelfth, being come to the Crowne; aduanced the Countie of Longue-Ville to be a Dukedome and Peeredome of France. The said Duke Frances espoused Frances of Alanson, daughter to Rene, Duke of Alanson, and to Margaret of Lorraine. And of this marriage issued
Renea, their onely daughter, who died an Infant, immediately after Duke Frances her Father: by the death of whom, the Dukedome of Longue-Ville, and the Earledome of Dunois, came to
Lewes of Orleans, first of the name, who married Iane of Hochberg,The Dukdome of Longue-Ville commeth to Lewes of Or^eans. Daughter to Phillip, Marquesse of Hochberg, and of Rothelin, Count of Neuf-Chastell (and of other great Seigneuries in Brisgauu, and in Bourgongne, where this Marquesse made his ordenarie abiding, and was high Marshall) and of Mary of Sauoye. These Marquesses of Hochberg, and those of Baden, are issued of the same stocke, and the very same name and Armes. Rodolphe, Marquesse of Hochberg and of Rothelin, Count of Neuf-Chastell by the Lake, and Lord of Susenbourg, had to wife Mary of Vien^^: and of this marriage was borne Phillip, the last Marquesse of Hochberg and of Rothelin, who by Mary of Sauoye his wife, had but one onely daughter; Ioane of Hochberg, wife to the said Lewes of Orleans. By death of this Phillip, the last heire Masle of the Family of Hochberg, and of Rothelin: the Marquesse of Baden, named Christopher, his Cousine farre enough off, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and three, possessed himselfe in the Marquisates of Hochberg and Rothelin, as also the Seigneuries of Susenbourg, and Badenuilliers. So that to the onely daughter of Phillip, there remained but the Countie of Neuf-Chastel, and the Seigneuries being in France.
By this marriage of Lewes of Orleans, and Iane of Hochberg, were borne three Sonnes and one daughter, to wit; Claudius, Lewes, Frances, And
Charlote, wife to Phillip of Sauoye, Count of Geneua, and of the Genewayes:Phillip of Sauoye Count of Geneua. And of this Marriage is descended the House of Nemoux, because therein were borne
Iames of Sauoye, Duke of Nemoux, and
I^ane of Sauoye, second wife to Nicholas de Lorraine Count of Vaudemont, Father to Queene Louisa, wife to the King of France and Poland, Henry, third of the name, of famous memory.
Claudius was Duke of Longue-Ville, who deceased without any Heires.
Lewes, second of the name, tooke to wife Mary of Lorraine,Claudius of Lorraine Duke of Guise. daughter to Claudius of Lorraine, Duke of Guise, and in this marriage was borne their onely Sonne
Frances, third of the name, Duke of Longue-Ville, who dyed without linage.
Frances, Marquesse of Rothelin, third of the name, Sonne to Lewes, first of the name, and Iane Lady Marquesse of Hochberg; had to wife Iaquelina de Rohan, daughter to the Lord of Guye, and of this Marriage was descended.
Leonardo; And
Frances of Orleans, married to Lewes of Bourbon, Prince of Conde; and in this marriage was borne Charles, Count of Soissons: Lewes, and Beniamin.
Duke of Longue Ville, and Count of Dunois.Leonardo of Orleans, Duke of Longue-Ville, and Count of Dunois, by the Succession of Frances, third of the name, his Cousine Germaine, dying without any issue: tooke to wife Mary of Bourbon, daughter vnto Frances of Bourbon, Duke d'Estoute-Ville, and Count of Saint Paul, and of Adriana d'Estoute-Ville. Of this marriage were issued two Sonnes, foure daughters, Henry, Frances, Margaret, Katharine, Antoinetta, and Leonora.
Katherine de Gonzagua of CleuesHenry, first of the name, espoused Katharine de Gonzagua of Cleues, daughter to Lodowicke de Gonzagua, Duke of Neuers, and of Retheil, and of this marriage is issued.
Henry, second of the name, of Orleans, Duke of Longue-Ville, d'Estoute-Ville, Count of Neuf-Chastell: who tooke to wife Louisa de Bourbon, daughter to Charles de Bourbon, Count of Soissons, and to Anne Countesse of Montafier.
Caumont and Fronsac a Dukedome and Peerdome newly made.Frances of Orleans, Count of Saint Paul, Husband to the Inheritrixe of Caumont, and of Fronsac: newly erected into a Dukedome and Peeredome of France, for the said Frances of Orleans, and his Sonne.
In fauour of this Illustrious House of Longue-Ville, of the Armes and Sir-name of Orleans: our Monarches (from time to time) haue made their Declarations for their Rancke and Sedence, immediately after the Princes of the Bloud; the last whereof is by King Charles the ninth, the tenure whereof thus followeth.




The Declaration of King Charles the Ninth, for the Precedencie and Rancke, which ought to be held by the Princes of the House of Longue-Ville.
CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of France: To all present, and to come, Greeting. Our intention hath alwayes bin, in imitation and example of the deceased Kings our Predecessours, to maintaine, cause to be kept and conserued to the Princes of our Bloud, and other Lords being in this our Kingdome; the Place, Rancke and Degree which to them belongeth. And although it is a matter to euery one sufficiently apparant, and knowne, that our most deare and best beloued Cousine the Duke of Longue-Ville, is extracted and issued from the Illustrious Bloud of the House of Orleans, for such a one knowne and auouched, bearing the House and Sir-name of Orleans, and that by occasion of this rancke and degree, which hath bin by the Kings our Predecessours giuen and attributed to him and his, and which they haue to this day held, and therefore ought not any way to be called in doubt, or committed to controuersie; yet notwithstanding, to cease all disputes that may hereon ensue: We are willing to declare and make knowne our purpose and meaning.
For these causes. after we had taken the aduise of the Queene our most-Honorable Mother; of our most deare and louing Brethren, the Dukes of Aniou, our Lieutenant Generall, representing our person throughout all our Kingdome, Countries, Lands and Seigneuries vnder our obedience; and of Alanson; and of our most-deare and beloued Cousine the Cardinall of Bourbon: Wee haue said and declared, doe say and declare, that wee doe hold and repute our said Cousine Leonardo of Orleans, Duke of Longue-Ville, to be a Prince of our Bloud, and our intent and will is (as euermore it hath bin) that hee, his Sonnes and Successours, in the direct line, shall be held and acknowledged to be such, as we doe hold and acknowledge them to be, and so will haue them to be knowne, alwayes to be issued and descended of the said House of Orleans.
And in this Degree, as well about vs, as in all other places, where hee, his Sons and Successours shall be: to haue the prime place, next to the Princes of our Bloud, and shall enioye all other Honors, Authorities, Preheminences, Rights, Ranckes, and Prerogatiues,

like and in the same manner as his Predecessors haue done, according as reason requireth to haue it so. And that he our said Cousin, for his great and most commendable Seruices, hath very worthily deserued of this Crowne and State, although that this place and Ranke which by vs is confirmed to him by these Presents, should bee questioned by any dispute or altercation: willing, if any such should happen, to haue them ceased, and likewise all other contrary hinderances. For such is our pleasure, hauing for the much greater approbation and testimony of this our will; Signed these Presents with our owne hand, which wee will to bee sufficient to serue any where, or where need shall require. And to the end, that this may bee an Act firme and stable alwayes: Wee haue heereunto set our Seale.
Giuen at Durestall,
in the Moneth of December, the Yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Three Score and Eleauen.Signed. Charles.And on the Fold in the bottome. De Neufuille. And Sealed with Greene Waxe on Strings of Silke, Red and Greene.







The Order of Bourbon, called of the Thistle, and of our Lady: Instituted at Moulins, in Bourbonnois: In the Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Three Score and Ten.
CHAP. XII.
THE Royall House of Bourbon,L'Ordre de Bourbon dit de Chardon, and de nostre Dame. at this instant Reigning happily in France; took his beginning in the Person of Monsieur Robert of France, Count of Clermont in Beauuoisis, Sonne to the Great King Saint Lewes, Ninth of the Name.
Robert married the rich Heyre and Inheritrix of Bourbon, named Beatrix of Bourgongne, Daughter to Iohn of Bourgongne, second Sonne of Hugh, Fourth of the name, Duke of Bourgongne, and to Agnes de Bourbon, Daughter to Messire Archambauld de Bourbon, called the Young, Seauenth of the name.
Of this Marriage issued Lewes de Clermont, tearmed the Great,Lewes of Clermont created the First Duke of Bourgongne. created the First Duke of Bourgongne, by King Philip de Valois, Sixt and Last of the name, in the Yeare One Thousand, Three Hundred, Twenty and Nine. By the mea^es of this erection, he quitted the Sirname of Clermont, and tooke that of Bourbon; which they of that Royall House (as well the youngest as eldest) haue to this day still retained. M^nsieur Robert of France, Porta Seme de France sans nombre au Baston de Gueules brochant sur le tout. Armes which Lewes the First Duke of Bourbon held,The Armes of Bourbon. with the Sirname of the Seigneurie belonging to his mother, of which Seigneurie (neuerthelesse) hee forsooke the Armes of the Archambaulx, which were D'Or au Lyon Rampant de Gueules, a l'Orle seme de Coquilles d'Azur. Because, since the Voyages which the King Saint Lewes made beyond the Seas, the Crowne of France was so much

famed and renowned throughout the whole world, that the Princes which afterward descended thereof, whom wee call Princes of the Blood, carried the plaine Armes of France, distinguished by Brizures. Contenting not themselues, to beare the colour and mettall,Houses of Bourbo, Dreux and Courtnay. as formerly had done the Princes of the Bloud, of the Houses of Bourbon, Dreux and de Courtnay; who ioyning in Marriage with the rich Inheritrixes of them, tooke likewise their Armes and Sirnames.
Lewes, First Duke of Bourbon, and of that name, tooke to wife Mary, Sister to the Count of Henault, and had by her three Male Children (wee will passe the Daughters in silence, and the Sonnes also, because they minister no matter to our Discourse) Peter, First of the name, Second Duke of Bourbon, whose Line is long since quite extinct and perished in the Distaffe.
The House of Bourbon that a^ yet continueth.Iames the Second Sonne, of the Sirname and Armes of Bourbon, was Count of Charolois, and Constable of France. Of this man the Royall Descent continueth euen to this day, and (God assisting) shall doe to infinite Ages, to hold the Scepter and Crowne of the noble Flower de Luce, which being founded on the Salique Law, called him to command, as the very nearest Prince issued of the Bloud Royall, from Lance to Lance, although hee stood in the Thousand degree off; yet by the right of Bloud, and perpetuall custome of the Kingdome, which the Ciuill Lawyer Baldus on the first Law De Senatoribus, at the Clode and elsewhere, aptly termeth Ius Gentium Gall^rum. By which right, the Illustrious House of Bourbon descended of the youngest from Saint Lewes, by infinite representation, came to the Crowne of France, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Foure Score and Nine. After that that Stocke of the eldest Race from the said Saint Lewes (which had reigned Three Hundred and Nineteene yeares) was quite ended, and suncke in the Female Sexe.
Accordingly is it prophesied of the Princes of the House of France, that they shall endure for euer. Lilium Francorum erit tanquam lignum quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum,Psal. 1.3. quod fructum suum dabit in tempore suo, in the first Psalme. The Lilly of the French shall be like a Tree planted by the riuers of waters, that will bring forth her fruite in due season. As meaning, that this Flower de Luce, exalted vp to Heauen, shall neuer fayle in producing Leaues and Fruits, that is to say: Princes succeeding one after another, to sustaine the Scepter of the French. This is the goodly Golden branch foretold by Sibylla.

--Vno auulso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit Virga metallo.

The Leaues of the Sacred Lillies of France, shall neuer want: Folium eius non defluet: So speaketh the Psalmist and Royall Prophet. Returne wee now to the eldest of Lewes the First Duke of Bourbon.
Peter Second Duke of Bourbon, and (...) issue.Peter, First of the Name, Second Duke of Bourbon, and Count of Clermont, tooke to Wife Isabell de Valeis, and had by her two Sonnes and Seauen Daughters. The The youngest Sonne was Iames of Bourbon, Count de la March, who was slaine with Peter of Bourbon his Sonne at the encounter at Brignais, three miles from Lyons, in Anno, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Threescore and One, the Third Day of Aprill. The Eldest Sonne
The Th^^d Duke of Bourbon, Lewes the Second.Lewes, Second of the name, Third Duke of Bourbon, and Count of Clermont, in Beaunoisis, of Forests and Beauioulois, had to Wife Anne, Daughter to Berauld, Daulphin of Auuergne, called the Count Camus, and to Iane Countesse de Forrests. And in this Marriage was borne Iohn, First of the name, Fourth Duke of Bourbon: who tooke to Wife the Daughter of Monsieur Iohn of France, Duke of Berry and of Auu^rgn^.
Lewes, (...) Bourbon.Lewes the Second was (for his rare vertues) called The good Duke. Hauing beene seauen yeares in England with King Iohn, hee returned to his Dukedome of Bourbonnois, in the Yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Three Score and Three, being then Aged Eight and Twenty Yeares. In the same Yeare, the first Day of Ianuary, the memorable time of giuing Newyeares-Gifts: hee called together the very chiefest Lords of his Lands, in the City of Moulins in Bourbonnois, and Instituted the Order of the Golden-Shield. These are the very tearmes of the

Chronicle, concerning this great Prince, made by a Picard, named Iohn d'Orronuille,The Chronicle of Iohn Cabaret of Orronuille. called Cabaret, at the request of Charles Count of Clermont, eldest Sonne to Iohn, Duke of Bourbon, and d' Auuergne, Count de Forrests, and Lord of Beau-ieu, the onely Sonne to Lewes the Second, of whom the Chronicle was made by the said Cabaret, on Tuesday, the Nine and Twentieth day of March, One Thousand, Foure Hundred* Twenty and Nine, after Easter.
In the Second Chapter are set downe these words.The Dukes words to his Barons. For the good hope that I haue in you, next vnder God (said the good Duke to his Barons) from this time forward, I will beare for my Deuice a Girdle; whereon shall bee written in ioyfull words, Esperance, or Hope.
In the Third Chapter, the First Day of the Yeare, early in the Morning, arose the gentle Duke, to gather his Knights and Noblemen together, to go to the Church of our Lady at Moulins. But before the Duke departed from his Chamber, hee hanselled them with Newyeares Gifts of a worthy Order by him deuised, which he called, The Golden-Shield. And in the Shield of Gold was a Bende of Pearles, whereon hee had written: Allen.
The First Lords honoured with this Order of The Golden-Shield, were these following.

1. Messires Henry de Montagu, Lord de la Tour, Sonne to Messire Gillesselin.
2. Guichard Daulphine.
3. Griffon de Montagu.
4. Hugues de Chastellus.
5. The Eldest of Chastelmorant.
6. The Lord de Chastel de Montaign.
7. The Eldest de la Palisse.
8. Guillaume de Vichi, Lord de Baissects.
9. Philippes des Serpens, or Desserpeine.The Order of the Golden-Shield, and the first Knights thereof.
10. Lourdin de Saligny.
11. The Lord de Chontemerles.
12. Regnauld de Basserne.
13. The Lord of Champroux.
14. The Lord of Veausse.
15. The Lord of Blot.
16. Guillaume de la Motte.
17. Pierre de Fontenay, in the Countrey of Berry.

And many other, who receiued the said Order of the Golden-Shield,The Dukes desire concerning those of his Order, and Articles enioyned them. or rather Deuice. In the giuing whereof, the Duke said to the Knights, that hee desired, that all they which should receiue the Order hereafter, and they that now had receiued it: should bee all as Brethren, to liue and dye one with another, if need should so vrge it. To performe and accomplish all those good Actions, which all Knights of Honour, and Noble Gentlemen in duty ought to doe. To abstaine from Swearing, and blaspheming the name of God. Aboue all things else, hee enioyned and commanded them, to honour Ladies and Gentlewomen, not permitting or suffering, to heare them slandered or euill spoken of: because, next vnto God, from them commeth part of the honour which men doe receiue. So that to blame or abuse Ladies, who haue not any meanes for reuenging themselues, by reason of their Sexes frailty; is to loose all Honour; yea, and for a man to villanize and shame himselfe.A vice too common in all Ages. That they should be no backbiters or ill speakers one of another: because it is the foolest vice, wherewith a Nobleman can bee taxed. For a finall Conclusion, hee exhorted them all to keep Faith and Loyalty; to beare respect and honour each to other, as it becommeth Knights of Praise and Vertue.
Hee told them within a while after, that ouerthwart his Golden Shield, hee had caused a Bende to bee painted, containing in it this Bourbonnois word or Motto, Allen; as if hee intended to say, Allons tous ensemble au seruice de Dieu,The meaning of the Motto in the Bende. and soyons tous vnis en la defence de nos Pais, and la eu nous pourrons trouuir a conquerit Honneur par faict de Cheualerie. Let vs goe all together to the Seruice of God, and let vs all bee vnited in the defence of our Countrey, and there where we can finde meanes to conquer Honour by Acts of Cheualrie. And it was his will, that all his Knights should sweare (himselfe beginning first of all) to promise and keepe the Articles formerly set downe.
Which hauing performed on his part, on the Faith of a Prince, and Knight of Honour: All the other Knights fell on their knees before the Duke,The Knights thankfull acceptation of the Order. and tooke the Oath betweene his hands. This being done, Messire Phillip des Serpents, a Knight Bourbonnois, and one of the most valiant in the Realme, deliuering the word for

all the rest; most humbly thanked the Duke that it had pleased him to ho^or them with his Order, offering him their Seruice, Goods and Liues, for which the Duke thanked them with a cheerefull heart.
The Golden-Shield no Order, but a Deuice.This Golden-Shield with the Bende d' Allen, was properly but a Deuice, and no Order: as wee see Princes and Great Lords to haue in Blazons and Deuices, ouer and beside their owne Armes and Orders of Knighthood. For the Duke of Bourbon had his Standards with the Golden-Shield, and with his Order of the Blew Belt, or Girdle, distinct and separate one from the other.
The Siege of Belle-Perche in BourbonnoisAt the Siege of Belle-Perche in Bourbonnois, surprized by the English, where the Dutchesse his Mother kept her whole Familie, it being her dwelling or abiding: the Duke of Bourbon, Author of this Discourse; Brought forth of his Armory, then Standard with the Golden-Shield, attended by Fifty compleat men of Armes, beside Fifty other with Crosse-bowes, and made a Sally vpon the English, killing (at the first affront) Two and Thirty Persons.
Now, concerning that of his Order of the Belt or Girdle of Hope, his Chronicle, in the Three Score and Eighteenth Chapter, speaking of the Siege at a City of Affrica in Barbary, which some tearmed Thunis, and others Algier, attempted by the said good Duke of Bourbon.The Duke of Bourbon at the Siege of Thunis. At that time the Duke of Bourbon first of all, and then* his Lords and Captaines, each man according to his place and rancke, ordered their Bands of Soldiers, and Crosse-bowes of Genewayes, wounding amongst the Sarazens, and running through the rankes, cut the cords of the Tents, and set fire on the Lodgings of straw. But the Duke of Bourbon continued with his Standard of the Golden Girdle, an houre and more in the middlest of the Sarazens Tents. The rest of this Siege is very remarkable. Thus you see what was this Order of Hope.
The bounty of Alexander to his Soldiers How our graue Elders pre^en^ed H^pe, and what they vnderstood therby.Alexander the Great, at the age of Twenty yeares, vndertooke the Conquest of the Indiaes, and departing from Macedon, gaue all his goods, and whatsoeuer else hee enioyed to the Souldiers, which enrowled themselues to doe him Seruice. Reseruing nothing for himselfe but Hope onely, to make himselfe a Monarch of the Persians: which succeeded to him, according as formerly in his hope hee had proposed; howbeit, oftentimes wee see that expectations doe fall out quite contrary. Whereupon, it was not without great and good iudgement, that our graue wise Ancestors represented Hope in the Figure of a Woman, cloathed in Greene, Crowned with a Garland and Wreathe of Flowers, holding a Whippe in the one Hand, and in the other a fragrant Red Rose, as also a Crowe placed at her Feete. Thus meaning, that while wee liue in hope of to Morrow, and then the next Morrow, as times to come, vnderstood and implyed by the Crowes Language, not hauing capacity of any other word but Cras, Cras: Pascimus ventos (so saith holy Iob) Wee feede our selues with the windes. The better part of our Age flyeth away like a shadow or Dreame, passeth, withereth, and consumeth it selfe, like to the Rose and other Flowers: Death entrappeth and betrayeth vs, and dyeth his Whippe bloudred in the vanity of our Hopes.
The religious Hope and perswasion of the good Duke.The good Duke had not planted his Hope in or on the world, but in God chiefly, as a vertuous Prince ought to do, and on those heauenly expectations, which such a Hope yeeldeth. The Diuine Wisedome instructeth vs, That the nature of a good Tree is to bring forth good Fruite. All this Royall House of Bourbon, issued of Saint Lewes, made it selfe famous for Deuotion, and namely, to the Lilly of the Valleyes, the Sacred Virgin, Mother to the Sonne of God, tearmed by a Title of Excellencie and Honour: Lilium Conuallium. In her this good Prince placed part of his Hope, and next to her, in the Apostle of the French, Saint Denis, the Areopagite; so speaketh his Chronicle, Chapter 96. and others following.
His workes of Piety and DeuotionIn honour of her, hee founded a Colledge (to perpetuity) of twelue Chanons, at Nostre Dame de Moulins. In that of Chartres, the most ancient of Christendome, (dedicated by the wise Druides, Priests and Soueraigne Iudges of the ancient Gaules, Virgini Pariturae, To the Virgin that should bring ferth the Fruite of Life, Fiue Hundred Yeares before her Natiuity) a perpetuall Masse. In that at Paris another, and two Obits for the dead. At Nostre Dame d'Orcinall in Auuergne, where hee offered his Pennon, after his taking La Roche Sennadoir another. At Clugny, Tolosa, Poictiers,

Tours; at Mans, Chasteau-Chinon, and at Moulins others. Hee was the Founder of Vichy, and Souuigny, where repose the Cinders of the good Duke, dying in his Towne of Mont-Lucon, after our Lady day in August, One Thousand,The death and buriall-place of the Duke. Foure Hundred, and Nineteene, hee being Aged Three Score and Thirteene Yeares.
In remembrance then of the succour and hope hee reposed in the prayers of the Queene of Angels: hee tooke for his Warre-Crye, Nostre Dame, Nostre Dame, Bourbon, Bourbon, so saith his Chronicle. And vpon the same subiect, hee established in the honour of God, and of the blessed Virgin, his immaculate Mother: The Order of Knights of our Lady, otherwise called Of the Thistle.
This Institution was made in the Moneth of Ianuary, the Yeare of Grace,The Dukes Marriage to the Daulphins Daughter of Auuergne. One Thousand, Three Hundred, Three Score and Ten; when he espoused Anne, Daughter to the Count Daulphine of Auuergne and of Forests Berauld, called the Camus, in the Towne of Arde, belonging to the Daulphine of Auuergne. But the first Solemnity was performed at Nostre Dame de Moulins, or (according to others) at Clermont, vpon Candlemasse day in the same Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Three Score and Ten.

The time when the Duke Instituted his Order of Knighthood.
HEe composed this Order to consist of Sixe and Twenty Knights,The number of Knights. (hee and his Successors, Dukes of Bourbonnois, comprehended as Chiefes and Soueraignes of the said Order) without any detection of blame or reproch, renowned for Nobility and Valiancy.
The Belt or Girdle of Knighthood.


Dayly they vsed to weare the Belt or Girdle, being made of Watchet-coloured Veluet, lined with Crimson Sattin, bordered with embroydery of Gold, and curiously wrought in the middest of the embroyderie, the word, Esperance. It was lockt and made fast with a Buckle and Thong of pure Gold, bearded and checquered with Greene enammeling, like to the head of a Thistle. The Knights of Bourbo^nois were knowne by the Girdle, and distinguished from the French Knights of the Starre: Because, in those times then, and a long while after, the Orders of Bourgongne, of Orleans, and of Aniou were not thought on, nor Instituted.
On sollemne Festiuall dayes,By our co^mon account the Eight Day of December. and namely that of the Order, it being the Day of the Conception of our Lady in December: whereon the Duke held this great Hospitality, with open Tables, free for all commers: Then were the Knights cloathed with Cassocks of Carnation Damaske, hauing wide large Sleeues, and girded with the Blew-Girdle, before described. The great Mantle or Cloake of

Blew Celestiall-coloured Dammaske, with broad welts of Gold embroydered on the deepe Collar, lined with Red Sattin, and the Chapperon or Mantlet of Greene Veluet, whereon they did weare the Great Collar of the Order of pure Gold, the weight of Tenne Markes, fastened with a Buckle and a Tongue of Gold (behind) in the same manner as the Girdle.The Great Collar of the Order. It was composed of whole Lozanges, and halfe a double Orle, enammeled with Greene, opened like Netting, and there filled with Flower de Luces of Gold, and the Motto or word, ESPERANCE, in Antique Capitall Letters, and in each of them a Lozange enammeled with Red. At the bottome of the Collar hung directly on the breast, an Ouall, the Circle enammeled with Greene and Red, wherein was the Image of the Virgin Mary, entoured with a Golden Sunne, Crowned with Twelue Siluer Starres, a Crescent of the same vnder her feete, enammeled with Purple and Skye-colour. And at the end of the Ouall, was the head of a Thistle, enammeled with Greene, but bearded with White.
The Bonnet of the Order.The Hat or Bonnet for the Head, was made of Greene Veluet, at the point of the Band hung a faire Tassell of Crimson Silke and Threeds of Gold, the lining or turning vp was (after the Antique manner) of Crimson Silke, whereon was embroydered the Golden-Shield, with the deuised word Allen.
Such as are Maisters and Doctors, in the noble Science of Armes and Blazons, doe represent or figure the vertue Esperance, or Hope (which the Scripture calleth, Vltimam post Naufragium tabulam) with Synople, which is the colour Greene, and by the Stone called an Emerauld,The Emerauld dedicated to the Goddesse Ve^^^. dedicated (if wee will giue credit to Poets) to beautifull Venus, the Marke or Symbole of Loue, and of Generation: designed in Armory, by the Element of Water, and by Flowers, Hearbs, and Fruits, Emblazoned ordinarily with Synople, to the Mettals of the Sunne, or of the Moone. For Armes emblazoned otherwise, then naturally they beare, are false, and vncapable of exception for enquiry. The Collar Greene, destinated to the Amorous, was anciently called the Hearb-colour, as Martiall witnesseth.
Martiall in (...) p^gHerbarum fueras indutus Basse, colores.
It was the Liuery of the said Duke of Bourbon, wherein hee tooke delight aboue all other, as wearing those Emeraulds in Rings. So that oftentimes dayly and ordenarily at good Feasts, He would weare a goodly greene Garland on his Head, his Chronicle telleth vs so.Commandations is attributed to the Greene Colour, but chiefly to the Emerauld, and the vertue thereof. In like manner this Colour is the note of an open heart, of a free Courage, of Gladnesse, Courtesie, and of Gentility. Among all the Stones which Nature affordeth from her fruitfull wombe in the Riuers of the Westerne Indiaes; there is no one more fitting, or correspondent with the Eye-sight, then the Emerauld, which to make knowne his excellencie and vertue; tarnisheth, yea meerely breaketh of it selfe, being worne by an immodest woman. This is witnessed by Pliny, Theophrastus, Albertus Magnus, and all the other Naturalists. It awaketh and recollecteth the visuall Spirits, which the Diamond and White Colour dispersed and resolued: so are wee taught by the learned Captaine Xenophon, in the expedition of Cyrus. It was no wonder then if this Duke of Bourbon, obserued for the most gentle and courteous Prince, amongst all the rest of his time; made choyce of this Greene Colour for his Liuery, and whereof also were his Banner, Guidon, Pennon, yea and his Cornet.
The Hostell, and Ch^ppell of Bourbon in Pari^.This Duke caused to bee builded and perfected the Chappell and Hostell of Bourbon, neere to the Louure, in the Citie of Paris. At the top of the principall Pauilion thereof, which looketh ouer the Riuer of Seine; is yet at this present to be seene, a little Corridor, or small Gallery, aduanced whollie without the worke. The Balesters and Supporters whereof are of carued Stone, shaped like Lozanges; enterlaced with Antique Capitall Letters, which collected by sense, doe forme the word Esperance;The Armes of ^bor. and this is the true fashion of the Great Collar of the Order of the Thistle. This Corridor is couered with lead, on the top whereof, are exalted the Armes of Bourbon, De France sans nombre au Baston de Gueules Brochant sur le tout. As is more plainly to bee seene in the Glasse-windowes of the Chappell of Bourbon, borne vp and supported by Angels. These Armes on the said Corridor, are

couched on the right side, Et Tymbrees au Mezail Tarre de front, according as appertaineth to and high an puissant Prince.
Ioyning to the principall body of this Hostel and Pauilion, is a very long Galery, in former times gilded, and enriched with exquisite Paintings: wherfore it was called The Golden Gallerie, wherein the Dukes of Bourbon vsed ordinarily to walke.The Duke of Bourbon^ Golden Gallery. At one of the ends vnderneath it, is the great Gate of the Court, belonging to this Hostell of Bourbon, which yet to this day is fastened with Battants, nailed with great Nayles of guilded Brasse.
In the middest of those Battants, is to be seene the forme of that ordinary Girdle, which was worne by those Knights of the Order of the Thistle: to wit,The fashion of the ancient Girdle. a large embroydered Girdle, locking or made fast like vnto a Belt or Girthe, with a Buckle and Tongue, bearded and checquered with Thistle-heads, and vpon both those Girdles in old fashioned Letters or Characters, was embossed the word Esperance.
The Steeple likewise of the Chappell of Bourbon, is circled and entoured with gilded Lead, formed in the fashion of a Dukes Crowne with Fowers de Luces, checkered with head of Thistles.
And the same ordinary Girdle of the Order of Bourbon,The ordinary Girdle of Bourbon. is yet apparantly to bee seene, in a Tapestrie belonging to the Louure, which long time since I haue seene hang vp on euery Corpus Christi day, and in winter, before the dore of the Kings great Chamber.
It is made in Quarters, as wee vse to say in Armes Escartelees.The Armes des^r^bed in the Arras. Le Premier and Quatriesme Quartier sont partis de Bourbon, and de France. Le Deux and le ^roifiesme de Rouge, chargez chacun de deux Lettres Capitales Cleschees a l' Antique P. and A. and de Tiges and Branches, Entrelassees de Chardons Verds, a la Teste Blanche. With Blew Girdles lined with red at the Hasps or Buckles, and the ends Checquie, in the manner of Thistles, with the word Esperance.
These Letters P. and A. and the Armes of Bourbon diuided with France,The Antiquity of the Tapestry. Sans Brizare, do make knowne that this Tapestry was made in the time of Peter, Second of the name, Duke of Bourbon, and Lord of Beaujeu, and of his Wife Madame Anne of France, Eldest Daughter to King Lewes the Eleuenth. Of which Marriage issued the Lady Susanna de Bourbon, their only Daughter married to Charles, Second of the name, afterwards Duke of Bourbon and Constable of France, of which Marriage ensued no Children: and the Males of the Elest Dukes, and of the Counts of Montpen^ier being failed; Les plaines Armes de Bourbon, The plaine Armes of Bourbon, came to the youngest Counts of Vendosme; and the Dutchies and Seigneuries of Bourbonnois, Farests, Beau-ioulois and others, revnited to the Crowne of France, by the Ciuill death of the said Charles, the last Duke of Bourbon.
The Order of Bourbon, was sought for,The loue and respect made of the Order of Bourbon. and requested (in regard of honour) by Lords Strangers, who desired to receiue it at the hands of this good Duke Lewes, the most valiant and magnanimous Prince of his time. I will heere relate two or three examples, drawne from an infinite number of other.
Bertrand de Guesclin, called Claiquin a Bretone,Concerning the Constable of France, Bertrand de Guesclin. Constable of France vnder the Raigne of King Charles the Fift, tearmed the Wise, (at whose feete this Constable, in regard of the great Seruices hee performed for France, lyeth enterred with the Marshall of Sancerre) going to the Siege of Chastel-naud Randon in Geuaudan (where hee dyed) came to salute the good Duke of Bourbon, who gaue him a goodly drinking Cuppe of Gold, enammeled with his Armes: wherein the Duke entreated him that hee would drinke dayly for his sake. Hee gaue him also a Faire Golden Girdle, very Rich, of his Order D'Esperance, which he did put about his necke. For which the Constable most humbly thanked him, and receiued it very ioyfully, this his Chronicle telleth vs.
At the Siege of Vertueill (a place held to bee impregnable, considering the seating thereof, being built vpon a most high Rocke, which made it free from all scaling, and brauely defended by a troope of Englishmen, of whom here was the last retreate in the Prouince of Poictois,) the Duke of Bourbon to become Maister thereof, and to

vnneastle the English thence, was driuen to vndermine it: within which Mine, the Duke himselfe was the formost in Armes against the Squire of the Castle, whom hee heard to bee called aloud, Regnauld de Montferrand. Both of them meeting at handy-blowes with their Swords, fiue stroakes one after another, and some among them hearing the blowes, could not containe themselues, but cryed out, Bourbon, Bourbon, Nostre Dame, whereat the Squire, Regnauld de Montferrand became much amazed,A Souldier that had but one eye being in the Mine and withdrawing himselfe backward, said. How is this Gentlemen? Is my Lord the Duke of Bourbon heere? Yes truely, answered the Borgne de Veausse, hee is here himselfe in person.
Hereupon replyed Regnauld de Montferrand, saying. I am bound to praise God, who hath this day afforded mee so great grace and honour, to meete heere in Armes with a Prince so valiant. And you Borgne de Veausse, tell him, that I desire hee would be so well pleased, as, in this honourable place where he is: That hee would make mee Knight with his owne hand, for I can neuer haue it giuen mee more Honorably. And for the Valour and honour I haue found in him, I am ready to yeeld him this place.
Heereon the Borgne conferred with the Duke of Bourbon, who well perceiuing that all these matters tended to his very great honour; made answer, that hee was well contented to doe it, prouided that Montferrand should bring him the keyes to the dore of the Mine. Whereto Montferrand condiscended, who gaue them to him,Regnould de Montferrand made Knight by the Duke of Bourbon in a Mine vnder the ground. and the keyes being deliuered; Euen there the Duke himselfe made him Knight. And Montferrand requested of him, that at his departure, he would be pleased to giue him the Prisoners, that had been in the Skirmish, or dyed at Marueill. Wherewith the Duke of Bourbon was well pleased, and it was appointed that Monferrand should surrender vp the Castle the next morning. Moreour it was appointed, that the Knights and Squires which were there with the Duke of Bourbon, should (on the Morrow) performe actions of Armes in the Mine, with them of the Castle (one against another) which Messire Iohn de Laye, Marshall, kept, to the end, that each man might be pleased with fighting in the Mine.
Th^ (...) o^ the (...) with th^ (...) of Bourbon.The Knights and Squires which were in Armes with them of the Castle, were the Lord of Partenay, the Lord Cousan, Messire Regnauld de Roye, Messire Iohn de Chastelmorant, the Borgne de Veausse, the Lord of Torsaye, Messire Guillaume de la Forrest, Messire Blain Loup, Marshall of Bourbonnois, Messire l' Hermite de la Faye, Messire Iohn de S. Priet,The (...) of the (...). called the little Marshall, Messire Boucicault. And the Squires were, Michaille Lagalle, Perrin Dussell, Blirberis Loup, Tachon de Glenier, Guicchard le Brun, and others.
Nor could they performe any other Armes but with their Swords, because the dore and passage was but a foot and an halfe in squarenesse; yet each man did well execute his duty, one after another, according to the straightnesse of the place, and darke obscurity of the night, when all the Companions returned to their Tents againe.
On the morrow morning the Duke of Bourbon sent one of his Marshals, Messire Iohn de Laye, to the Castle to Montferrand, Lieutenant to Bartholomew de Montpriuat, who (as yet) was not minded to returne for England, to summon him to surrender the Castle,The Castle of Vertueill (...) the Duk^ of Bourbon. which hee did yeeld vp according as hee had promised, sallying forth with all his men armed, and very brauely mounted. And comming before the Duke of Bourbons Pauilion, where hee was well accompanied with Knights; Regnauld de Monferrand alighted, and kneeling before the Duke, said. My most redouted Lord, I doe giue you thankes most humbly, for the goodnesse and honour you haue done vnto me, in being made Knight by the hand of so high and valiant a Prince, as you are. It is an honour done to me, and to all my Linage for euer hereafter.
(...) of the Du^e to Regnau^^ de Montferrand.Immediately the Duke thus answered. Messire Regnauld, Knighthood is worthily bestowed vpon you, for you are a valiant man, and of good descent. Forthwith the Duke sent for a goodly Courser, which as readily was brought to him, and he bestowed him on Montferrand.
Afterward, He caused to be brought him, by Messire Guillaume de la Pierre, his Chamberlaine, a Great Golden Girdle, weighing tenne Markes of Siluer, which hee also gaue to him. For which, Messire Regnault de Montferrand returned most hearty thankes, accounting himselfe to be very highly honoured, and said before them all; That hee would neuer arme himselfe, or serue in any place against the Duke of Bourbon.
At returne from the Siege of Affrica in Barbary, neere to Thunis, the Duke and his Caualery went on shoare in Sardaignia, where there was a strong Castle,A third History concerning the same Duke of Bourbon, and his worthy proceedings in Sardaignia. called Cailhe or Caillery, held by the Sarazens, which victualled all the Kingdome of Thu^^. At their arriuall, all the Shippes being in the Hauen, were taken, and (by degrees afterward) the low Towne belonging to the Port or Hauen: and on the morrow the Castle yeelded it selfe, which the Duke gaue in guard to the Genewayes. From thence the Duke went to doe as much at Languillastre, another well fortified place, where the Sarazens victualled themselues; and yet it was likewise giuen in charge to the Sarazens. Afterward, by a sodaine guske of winde, tempest, and rough storme, the Duke was transported thence with his Army, and carried into the Ile of Sicilie, to Messina, a City appertaining to a great Baron of the Countrey, named Messire Mainfroy, Lord of Clermont. There the Duke remained Eight dayes, to refresh his people, and prepare his Shippes in due and fitting order.
This Lord of Clermont (ouer and beside Messina) had power also ouer Trapes (Derpanum) distant three Leagues from Messina (Messana) and ouer Palermo, (Panormus,The (...) and author^ty of Mainfroy. Lord of Clermont, and his ente^tainment giuen to the Duke. and more beside) then halfe the Ile of Sicily. Hee was much troubled with the Gout, and hardly could permit himselfe to be conueyed, for receiuing and welcomming the Duke, whom hee caused to be serued by his houshold attendants, and defrayed all the charges during eight dayes space, so long as hee continued there, with extraordinary great cheare for the Lord Duke himselfe, together with the ^ord of Coucy, the Count d'Eu, and the Count Daulphine d'Auuergne. And when the Duke of Bourbon was to depart from Sicilie, the Lord of Clermont requested of him: That hee would be pleased to make him a Knight; For a more valiant Prince there could not be; whereupon, the Duke finding himselfe very highly beholding to him, made him Knight, for which kindnesse, the Lord of Clermont returned him infinite thankes.
At their parting, hee gaue the Duke two goodly Coursers, of the breeding of Clermont, neere to Palermo. To the Lord of Coucy one; to the Counte Daulphine one,The bounty of Lord Mainfroy. and to the Count d'Eu an other. Also, to the Gallies and Shippes of the Genewayes, Wines, Biskets, Salted Flesh and other prouisions, commanding that nothing should bee deare, for furnishing their other vessells, and it was instantly done vpon his commande. When the Duke of Bourbon perceiued such acceptable Seruices, performed to him in so remote a Countrey:A Golden Girdle giuen to th^ Lord of Clermont. he tooke them very thankfully at the Lord of Clermonts hands. And at his departing, hee gaue him a Golden Girdle, with the Deuice of his Knighthood, of Esperance.
I could not compasse the meanes, to get the Names and Qualities of the Knights of the Order of Bourbon, and the seuerall Chapters held of them: so much hath goodly and venerable Antiquity (in her wrincles of Age) bin contemned and despised, euen as it is at this present day (like to a woman out of date and ser^ice.
Laudamus veteres, sed nostris vtimur annis.
And yet notwithstanding it is a rare Treasure, which ought to be carefully sought for, by such as are true louers of that Science. Wherefore, wee will finish this Discourse, with the Genealogie of the Royall House of Bourbon, which hath serued vs for the Frontispice and Subiect of the same.



The Genealogie or Pedigree of the Royall House of Bourbon.
Of Monsieur R^bert of France, and Beatrix of Bourgongne.WEe haue already said, that of Monsieur Robert of France, Count of Clermont in Beauuoisis, and of Beatrix of Bourgongne, there came three Sonnes and as many Daughters. The eldest Son was Lewes of Clermont, called the Great, First Duke of Bourbon, Iohn of Clermont, Baron of Charolois in Bourgongne, and Lord of Saint Iust in Champaigne, who espoused Ioane, Heyre to the Count of Soiss^ns, and of this Marriage issued but one Daughter, Iane of Clermont, Wife to Iohn of Bologne, and likewise of Auuergne: And
Peter of Clermont, Great Arch-deacon of the Church of Paris. The Daughters were:
Blanche, Wife to Robert, the Great Count of Bologne, and of Auuergne.
Margaret, Wife to Iohn of Flanders, Count of Namur,Son, Brother Vncle and Father of K^^gs* and yet (...) no King. Sonne to Guy, Count of Flanders: And
Mary, who became a Nun, at Poissy.
Monsieur Robert of France, dyed the Seauenth day of February, One Thousand, Three Hundred, and Seauenteene, and l^eth buried at the Iac^bines of Paris.
The (...) of Bourbon.Lewes of Clermont, tearmed the Great, First Duke of Bourbon, tooke to Wife Mary of Henault, Sister to the Count of Henault, by whom he had three Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
The Eldest Sonne was
1. Peter, First of the Name, Second Duke of Bourbon in Succession.
2. Iam^s of Bourbon, First Count of Charolois, and Count de la March, and of Ponthieu, Constable of France, slaine at the Battell of Poictiers.
3. Philip of Bourbon, Lord of Beaujeu, deceasing without any Children.
The Daughters were
1. Iane or Ieane of Bourbon, Wife to (...), the Eldest Sonne of Iohn, Count de (...).
2. Mary, giuen in her first Marriage, to Monsieur Guy of Cyprus, the eldest Sonne to Hugh, King of Cyprus, and of Hierusa^^^. In this Marriage was borne Hugh of Lus^^nan, Prince of Galilee. In Second Marriage, shee was espoused to Robert, Prince of Tarentum, in the Kingdome of Naples, who entituled himselfe Emperour of Constantinople. In regard that Katherine of Valois, Empresse of Constantinople, Second Wife to Monsieur Philip of Sicily, Prince of Tarentum, and Father of the said Robert, had giuen to the same Philip her Husband, the Right which belonged to her in the Empire of Greece, and whereof shee had not any enioying.
The last Daughter was
3. Beatrix, Wife to Philip, Eldest Sonne to the said Monsieur Philip of Sicily, Prince of Tarentum, the youngest Sonne to the Second Charles King of Sicilie.
Lewes, First Duke of Bourbon, dyed the Two and Twentieth day of Ianuary, in the Yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Forty and One; hee also lyeth buried at the Iacobines of Paris.
II. Peter, First of the Name, Second Duke of Bourbon, tooke to Wife Isabell of Valois, Daughter to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois, Sonne, Brother, Vncle and Father to Kings of France, and yet himselfe not being a King. In this Marriage hee had one only Sonne, the maine Subiect of this Discourse; and Seauen Daughters, whereof the first was.
1. Ioane or Iane of Bourbon, endued with admirable beauty, Wife to King Charles, Fift of the Name; of him and of his Wife, the Portraicts (according to the life) are to bee seene on the Portall in the Conuent of the Celestines at Paris.
2. Blanch, Wife to the King of Castile, Dom Pedro the Cruell, who made this Wife a Prisoner, and kept Concubines in the liberty of his Conscience. But death reuenged her wrongs, by meanes of the French, who expelled him out of his Kingdome, and enstauled in his place Dom Henry, Second of the Name.
The Third Daughter was
3. Bonna, Wife to Amades, Count of Sauoye, Sirnamed the Green, in the Chronicle of our Duke Lewes the Second.
4. Katherine, Wife to Iohn, Count of Harcour.
5. Mary, Wife to Godfrey, Sonne to the Duke of Brabant.
6 Margaret, two seuerall times married. First to Iohn, the Sonne of Henry, Lord of Suilly: Last to Arnauld Amanion, Lord of Albret.
7 Another Mary, a professed Nunne at Poissy.
This Peter the first, second Duke of Bourbon, died in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred fiftie and sixe, the nineteenth day of September, in the Battaile of Poictiers, lost by King Iohn, against Edward of England, third of the name, and he likewise lieth buried at the Iacobines of Paris.
III. Lewes, second of the name, third Duke of Bourbon tearmed the Good, Author of this discourse, by Anne Daulphine his wife, had two Sons, and two Daughters. The Sonnes were Iohn; who was Duke after his Father: and Lewes, who died yong in the Hostell of Bourbon at Paris. Iohn Duke of Berry loued this man dearely, for hee was a goodly sweet Youth, towardly, and of a chearefull disposition. In regard of this intimate affection towards him, the Duke of Berry departed from his Castell of Nesle, and passing the Riuer of Seine, entred into Bourbon, the Hostell of Duke Lewes, to comfort him, and when the Duke of Bourbon knew that the Duke of Berry was there: he well vnderstood the cause of his comming, for then the sicknesse of his Sonne began to grow worse and worse. And yet although it did so, he could not forbeare seeing him, as he thought it an article of duetie in him, for the Duke of Berry was his great Vnckle, and this visitation of his, was in hope to free him from his sicknesse.
But when the Duke of Berry saw the Duke of Bourbon, his heart began to tremble, passion preuailing, and his eyes streaming forth teares, that he was not able to vtter one word. Whereupon Duke Lewes of Bourbon, causing him to goe foremost, went vp with him into an vpper Chamber, where were many people,The Duke of Bourbon his speechs to the Duke of Berry and then thus he spake to the Duke of Berry. My Lord, I thanke you for this louing visitation, and your compassion on my Sonne Lewes, who is now gon to God. Well I know, that you are come hither to me, to shew me the certainty of your affection; a much meaner Lord had suffised in this case: But good Bloud neuer is vnmindefull of the naturall loue, which ought to be in one towards another. Wherfore I tell you my Lord, that this passible life, is lodged but as in a Inne or Hosterie: but the life to come, firme, stable, and the dwelling house of the Immortall Soule, is the ready way of flying vp to God. For truely my Lord, in mine opinion, the end of liuing is very good, because a man hath sound thoughts, intire reason, and his naturall vnderstanding setled and certaine, for those Offices appertaining to the life of man. And you know my Lord, that Nature, the Mother of all things, hath giuen to vs men habitations, wherein we may dwell together: but she hath giuen vs no house for a perpetuall abiding. Wherefore my Lord, seeing God hath taken hence my Sonne; it was his pleasure so to doe, for he did but lend him me, he hath made him fit for him, and blessed be his name therfore. No doubt he is in better case then all his kinred; but Fortune, who bringeth the loftie low, and exalteth the humble, tooke him away somewhat too soone.
The Duke of Berry, and all the rest, hearing these words deliuered by the Duke of Bourbon, could not abstaine from teares. But the Duke of Berry going down the stairs, went with many noble Gentlemen in his company, to the Chamber where the dead Body lay (ready for carrying to the earth) whereto he did a seemely honour. And when Duke Lewes of Bourbon (who was in the Gallerie) beheld the Processions parting from his House, furnished with a world of lighted Torches, and the body of his Son lying on the Biere; his tender heart was ready to rift in twaine, and fatherly affection streamed forth at his eyes. Immediately he entred into his Chappel, where he called for his Confessor M. Peter de Chantelle, a good Diuine, and other Chaplains, who performed the Office for the youth so lately departed; all the Knights and Officers of the Hostel, admiring at the constancie and patience of the Duke their Lord and Master.
The Daughters were
Beatrix of Bourbon, twise maried: First to Iohn, the Duke of Luxembourg, King of Bohemia, and of Hungaria, or Polonia. And in second Nuptials, to Eudes, Lord of Grancey.
The said Lewes, the good Duke,The death of the good Duke of Bourbon. dyed (as we haue already said) at Mont-Luson, and his Body enterred at Souuigny. Hee was once determined, to finish his dayes at the Celestines of Vichy, by him

founded: if hee had returned in health from the Voyage of France, which hee vndertooke, comming to helpe his Nephewes the Sonnes of Orleans, against Iohn of Bourgongne, the murtherer of their Father. But he died on the way beginning his iourney.
IIII. Iohn of Bourbon, First of the name, Fourth Duke of Bourbon, tooke to Wife Mary de Berry, Daughter to Monsieur Iohn of France, Duke of Berry, and of Auuergne, Count of Poictou, and to Iane, Daughter to the Count of Armaignac. Of this Marriage there issued three Sonnes.
The First Sonne was.
1. Charles, First of the name, Duke of Bourbon.
2. Lewes, Count of Montpensier: And
3. Iohn of Bourbon, Bishop of Puy, (in Latine Auicium in Auuergne) and Abbot of Clugny.
The said Iohn, First of the name, was taken in the Battell at Azingcourt, fought betweene Hesdin and Therouane, and lost by the French, the Fiue and Twentieth day of October, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Fifteene. Hee was nineteene yeares prisoner at London in England, where he dyed in the yeare one thousand, foure hu^dred, thirty foure.
Next succeeded his Sonne
V. Charles. First of the Name, Fift Duke of Bourbon, who won the Battell of Bauge in Aniou, against the Duke of Clarence, slaine in the Field the Ninth Day of Aprill, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, and Twenty: And in the yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, Twenty Sixe; the said Charles espoused Agnes de Bourgongne, daughter to Iohn the Bad, and Sister to the Duke of Bourgongne, Philip the Second. In this Marriage were borne Sixe Sonnes, and Fiue Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Iohn, Second of the name.
2. Lewes, dying young vnmarried, albeit betrothed to the Daughter of the King of Cyprus.
3. Peter, Lord of Beaujeu.
4. Charles, Cardinall of Bourbon, and Archbishop of Lyons.
5. Lewes, Bishop of Liege: And
6. Iames of Bourbon, dying young at Bruges.
The Daughters were
1. Iane of Bourbon, Wife to the Prince of Orenge.
2. Katherine, Wife to Adolph, Duke of Gueldres.
3. Margaret, Wife to Philip of Sauoye, Count de Bresse, and de Baugie, afterward Duke of Sauoye, Father and Mother to Louisa of Sauoye, who was the Mother of King Frances the First.
4. Isabel, who was Wife to the last Charles, Duke of Bourgongne: And
5. Mary of Bourbon, who was twice married. First, to Iohn Duke of Calabria, Sonne to Rene, King of Sicilie, Duke of Aniou; The Second time to Gaston, who was Sonne to the Count of Foix.
Which Charles, First of the Name, was High Chamberlaine of France, and dyed in the Yeare, One Thousand, Foure-Hundred, Fifty and Sixe.
After whom succeeded his Eldest Sonne.
VI. Iohn, Second of the Name, Sixt Duke of Bourbon. In his young yeares hee won the day at Fourmigny, against the English. He was three seuerall times married: First to Madam Ioane of France, daughter to King Charles the Seauenth, Sirnamed the Victorious. His Second Wife was Katherine of Armaignac, Daughter to Iames of Armaignac, Duke of Nemoux. And his Third Wife was Iane of Bourbon, daughter to Iohn of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme.
The said Iohn the Second, Great Chamberlaine of France, dyed, without leauing any Heyres of his Body; so that his Successor was his Third Brother, the Lord of Beaujeu.
VII. Peter, Second of the Name, Seauenth Duke of Bourbon, who tooke to Wife Madame Anne of France, Eldest Daughter to King Lewes the Eleuenth of the Name, Regent of France, vnder King Charles the Eight his Brother. In this Mariage was borne their only Daughter Susanna of Bourbon, in whom ended the Ligne of the Males, being the eldest Dukes of Bourbon, and Counts of Montpensier, of whom the Appennage was Clermont in Beauuoisis, remaining in the house of the said Dukes of Bourbon, vnto Peter the Second, of whom we speake at this present.



The Second Branch of Bourbon, called of Montpensier. @. 2.
WE haue formerly seene and obserued, that Iohn, first of the name, fourth Duke of Bourbon, and Count of Clermont, had by Mary of Berry his wife, three Sons, Charles, Lewes and Iohn, Bishop of Puy. The Duke of Berry being deceased without heires masles, the Dukedome of Berry and of Poictou, returned to the Crown by the Law of Reuersion. Mary of Berry his daughter, inherited the Countie of Montpensier, which Duke Iohn of Bourbon gaue for an inheritance to his second Son.
1. Lewes of Bourbon, tearmed of Montpensier, a title taken by his descent and linage. This Donation of the said Countie of Montpensier, was confirmed to this Lewes, by King Charles, seauenth of the name, One thousand foure hundred twentie six. Il porta de Bourbon, comme son Pere, mais a la Bordure, de Gueulles pour Brizure: which are the proper Armes of the ancient house of Montpensier. He had two wiues, the first of them was Ioane or Iane Daulphine, daughter to Berauld the yonger Daulphine of Auuergne; and of a Sister to Bertrand de la Tour, Count of Bologne and of Auuergne, but by her had not any issue.
In second marriage hee espoused Gabriella de la Tour, by whom he had one onely Son, Gilbert of Bourbon; but diuers daughters, among whom were
Gabriella de Bou^bon, wife to Messire Lewes, Lord de la Trimouille: And
Charlotta de Bourbon wife to the Count de Bouchain, Wolsangus de Bourselles.
II. Gilbert of Bourbon, second Count of Montpensier that conducted the A^ant-guard, of the puissant Armie of Charles the eight, for conquering his Kingdome of Naples, whereof hee was the first Vice-Roye.
He tooke to wise Clare de Gonzagua, daughter to Fredericke, Marquesse of M^ntferrat, by whom he had three Sons and two daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Lewes.
2. Charles. And
3. Frances of Bourbon, Duke of Chasteleraud, slain at the Battaile of Marignano, on the day of Holy-Roode in September, One thousand fiue hundred and fifteene, fighting valiantly against the Swizzers, who thought to surprize King Frances the first, and his money.
The Daughters were
1. Louisa of Bourbon, who was twise married. First to Andrew de Chauuigny, by whom she had no issue. Her second Husband was Lewes of Bourbon, Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon, whose descent hereafter will be very remarkeable.
The other Daughter was
2 Renea of Bourbon, wife to Anthony of Lorraine, called the good Duke.
The Father of the foresaid Children, Gilbert of Montpensier, being not succoured in due time by Charles the eight, with men and monie: was enforced (by the League of Pope Alexander the sixt, the Venetians and Potentates of Italie) to forsake and leaue the Citie of Naples and Atella, to Ferdinand the second. Vpon condition, that he shold furnish the Gallies, for conueighing him and his men into France. But falsifying his word, hee compelled him to stay in a moist season at Baies (a pestilent place) where he died, and was enterred at Pouzzoli. Where likewise (within some few years after) vpon the Sepulcher of his Father, died Lewes his eldest Sonne, in extremity of passion, sighes and teares, and lieth buried by his Father: thus we are told by Guichardine.
So that by the death of Lewes the eldest
Charles of Bourbon, the second Sonne, was Count of Montpensier, Constable of France, and Duke of Bourbon.
He espoused Susanna of Bourbon, the onely Daughter and sole heire of Peter, second of the name, last Duke of Bourbon; And in right of the said Susanna his wife he was Duke of Bourbon, but shee dyed without any Children.
Afterward, the said Charles was moued againe to marriage, with Madam Louisa of Sauoye, Mother to King Frances the first: who being refused (according to the naturall disposition of her sexe) split all in pieces to compasse her will. Flectere si nequeo Superos, Achero^t a mouebo
All his goods being brought to compromise, and afterward sentenced by decree; this poore Prince became deboshed, and feeding on the promises of a Soueraigne power: tooke part with the coniured enemie of France, who to be rid of him: in meere charitie, sent him before Rome, to finish both his honor and life by the shot of an Harquebuze, discharged by a follower of his owne, the

sixt day of May, One thousand fiue hundred twentie seauen. His body was carried to Chasteau de Gayete, where he had this Spanish Epitaph for al his reco^pence.

Franzia me dio la Luce,
Spagna fuerca, y Ventura,
Roma me dio la Muerte,
Gaete la Sepoltura.

By this aduenture, the goods of the said Charles of Bourbon became confiscated, to serue (euen to this day) for assurance of Dowries to the Queenes of France. Before that time, the Princes of this royall House, speaking to the King, or in writing, said Monsieur, and couered themselues in his presence: But since then, they haue vsed the name of Sir, as well as others, and stand bare headed.
In this Charles, the last Duke of Bourbon, the Ligne failed of the eldest of Bourbon, in the Sir-name of Clermont in Beauuoisis, the Appennage of Monsieur Robert of France, Sonne to the King Saint Lewes. So that we must now needes reascend, and take the Ligne of Iames of Bourbon, Count de la March, second Son to Lewes of Clermont, called the Great, first Duke of Burbon, Sonne to the said Monsieur Robert of France.


The Third Branch of Bourbon, called Of Vendosme. @. 3.
IAmes of Bourbon, second Son to Lewes the Great, first Duke of Bourbon; was Count de la March, of Ponthieu, and of Charolois, as also Constable of France. He had to wife Iane, or Ioane of Saint Paule, of the House name and Armes of Luxembourg: by whom hee had three Sons, and two Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Peter.
2. Iohn. And
3. Iames of Bourbon, Lord of Preaux, and of Vebaine, who died at Rochell, kilde with the fall of a Plancher of the Chamber, where King Charles the seauenth held his Counsell, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred twentie two. This Iames left foure Sons; Lewes, slaine at the Battaile of Azincourt, one thousand foure hundred and fifteene: Peter, Iames and Charles of Bourbo^, who had not any issue.
The Daughters were
1. Katharine, wife to Bouchard, second of the name, Count of Vendosme. And
2. Isabel, Wife to Lewes, Viscount of Beaumont.
Iames of Bourbon before named, and Peter his eldest Sonne, were slaine on the skirmish day of Brignaies, three Leagues from Lyons, by the gathered troupes of French and English, Male-contents of the Countrey, who vnder the name of Tard-Venus, to the number of fifteene or sixeteene thousand, intended to forrage all ouer France, the third day of Aprill, in the yeare One thousand three hundred threescore and one.
So that the Succession fell to the Second Sonne.
II. Iohn of Bourbon, Count de la Marche, who espoused Katharine, Heire of the House of Vendosme. In which marriage was borne three Sonnes, and two Daughters, the first whereof was
1. Anne, that twise ioyned in marriage. First with Iohn de Berry, Count of Montpensier, Sonne to Monsieur Iohn of France, Duke of Berry: And in second marriage, with Lewes, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke in Bauaria.
The other Daughter was
2. Mary, wife to Messire Iohn de Beyn^ Lord of Croix.
The Sonnes were
1. Iames.
2. Lewes. And
3. Iohn of Bourbon, Lord de l'Escluse neere Dowaye, Carency, Busquoy and Duysant in Artois. Hee married Katharine of Artois, Daughter to Robert of Artois, third of the name, Count of Beaumont. By whom hee had foure Sonnes, and one Daughter.
The Sonnes were
1. Lewes of Bourbon, Lord of Escluse, who deceased, not being married.
2. Peter, who espoused Madam Phillip de Plaine, and by her had not any issue.
3. Iames. And
4. Phillip of Bourbon. The Daughter Mary of Bourbon, wife to Messire Iohn de Croy.
5. Phillip, last Sonne of Iohn, was Lord of Duysant, and married twise. First to Ioane de l'Alain, Daughter to Saulx de l'Alain, Lord of Robersat,

and by her he had a Son and a Daughter.
The Sonne was named
Anthony of Bourbon, husband to Iane de Habarch, of which marriage came Anthony of Bourbon, dying before hee was married.
The Daughter was
Ioane or Iane of Bourbon, wife to Messire Frances Roulin, Lord Beauchamp.
The other wife to the said Phillip of Bourbon, was Iane de Chauuigny, Lady of Saint Germain des Fossez sur Allier, hauing no issue
3. Iames the third Sonne, was Lord of Aubigny and of Rochefort, he tooke to wife Anthoinetta de la Tour, Widdow to the Lo^d of Monteil. Of this marriage issued Charles of Bourbon, Lord of Carency, and Iohn Lord of Aubigny, dying without children.
Charles of Bourbon tooke to wife Katharine d'Allegre, Daughter to Bertrand a Allegre, Baron of Puy-agur.
Of this marriage came Bertrand, and
Iohn of Bourbon, Father to Isabel of Bourbon, wife to Messire Frances d' Escars, Lord de la V^u-Guyon, of whom came no linage.
Bertrand left not any issue. So that the descent of the said Iohn of Bourbon, last and third Son of Iohn of Bourbon, Count de la Marche, and of Katharine, Countesse of Vendosme, is ended in Daughters.
Let vs now returne to his eldest Son.
III. Iames of Bourbon, Count de la Marche (second Son of the name of this Branch) and of Castres; was the very goodliest Prince among them all of his time. Whereupon, he was earnestly desired in mariage by Ianella or Ianetta, second of the name, Queene of Naples: from whom hee seperated himselfe, by reason of her incontinent and dishonest life, not hauing any issue by her. In second marriage he espoused Madam Beatrix of Nauarre, Daughter to King Charles the Noble, third of the name, and by her hee had Daughters, one of them named
Eleanor of Burbon, was married to Bernard of Armaignac, Count of Perdriac.
This King Iames, for so was hee named, deceasing without heires masle; the right of Primogeniture went to his yongest Brother
IIII. Lewes of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme, by the right of his Mother. Il porta de Bourbon au Baston de Gueulles, charge de Vendosme, qui estoit de Gueulles a trois Lyons rampants d' Argent. He had two wiues, the first whereof was Ioane de Roussy, Daughter to Rodolphe, Count of Montfort, and Anne de Montm orency, but by her he had no childe. The second was Iane, Daughter to ^uye, Count of Guare (there is a Guare in Normandie, and a Guare in Gascoignie, betweene Auch and Tolosa, the Capitall Citie whereof is Gimont, seated on the Riuer of Gimoua) and to Mary, daughter of Enguerran, Lord of Coucy. And by this second wife he had
Lewes, second of the name, Count of Vendosme after his Father.
In the Church of Chartres, built (as it is) by the learned Bishop Fulbert, Chauncellour of France to King Robert the Deuout, Sonne of Hugh Capet, very fairely without: in the South-side of the body thereof, is to be seene the Chappell of Vendosme, called the Annuntiation of our Lady, because vpon the Altar, is the Image of the Annuntiation. Before which, against the wall, is the Statue raised in embossed worke of Stone, of the said Lewes of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme, first of the name, and Founder thereof, standing in a long Red Roabe and Chapperon, Furred about the necke, as are the Presidents du Mortier in the Parliament of Paris: for so (in elder (...)) were habited the Princes and great Lords of France. By him is the figure of ^is Wife, cloathed after the Antique manner. In the Glasse window of the said Chappell, are the Portraitures of this Lewes, Count of Vendosme, and of his Wife, with their Sons and yonger Sons, with their Wiues and descendants; distinguished by their Armes each from other.
The Charter for the foundation of this Chappell, being in the Treasurie of the Church, beareth date the second day of Iune, One thousand foure hundred and thirteene. And therein is declared, that the Vigile of the Ascention, being the last day of the Moneth of May in the same yeare, when the discreete and venerable men of the Chapter and Colledge, belonging to the Church of Chartres, made their ordenary and accustomed Procession: the most Noble and potent Princes, the Lord

Lewes, Count of Vendosme, Lord of Espernon and Mondoubleau, meeting the said Procession without La Porte des Espars, alighted from his Horse, he and his followers, and holpe to conuey the Procession by the Churches of Saint Sernin, and Saint Faith, euen into the Cathedrall, where the same day he heard the whole diuine Seruice.
And on the morrow, early in the morning, being the Feast of the Ascention, a^ the ending of Mattines,Our Lady of Chartres. the deuout Prince, to accomplish the vowe of his Pilgrimage, by him made to Nostre-Dame de Chartres; went starke naked to the said Church. And so soone as he came to Porte Royale, he fell on his knees before the Sacred Virgin, holding in his hand a great Waxe Candle, weighing fiftie pounds or there about. And hauing ended his Prayers, hee addressed his speeches to the Chapter of the Church, being come before him: desiring them, that they would giue praise and thankes to the most Sacred Virgin, the Soueraign Lady of Chartres, by whose especiall fauour and contemplation, hee had receiued many great graces and benefits, in deliuering him from his aduersaries and enemies, who had detained him prisoner nine or tenne moneths space, compelling him to forgoe his goods and riches. But on the day and Festiuall of the Annuntiation of the said Virgin, without any spot or blemish; Adoring and seruing her, in her Church of Chartres, where he deuoutly vo^ted himselfe to her, and implored her ayde and succour; contrarie to all hope or helpe in men, hee was deliuered, and his goods restored againe vnto him.
Whereupon he did both acknowledge and auouch freely, that he held his deliuerance onely by her, and was reestablished into his goods and meanes, by grace and fauour of that most Sacred Virgin. Wherefore, in eternall memory thereof, he declared before God, and our Lady of Chartres, that he both then did, and for euer would dedicate himselfe in person, A man Subiect and Vassaile to the glorious Virgin Mary, and also to her Church of Chartres.
Hereupon the Chapter made answere, that they commended him, and humbly thanked the glorious Virgin, for the exceeding great Graces shee had extended to him. And conducting the Prince before the Image of the Virgin, they then sung this Hymne, which the Prince told them (in a perticuler deuotion) he had alwayes ready in his minde. O quam glorifica luce coruscas, and namely to this Verse; Quem cunclus venerans Orbis adorat. Which Prayer being sung by the Chapter, and the deuout Prince hauing finished his Meditations: hee offred the great Waxe Taper, which hee held in his hands, and an hundred other Tapers, held by the Knights, Esquires and Seruants of his House. And so departed the Chapter and the Prince.
The very same day, somewhat before high-Masse, the said Prince of Vendosme, hauing caused the Chapter to be assembled; he made vnto them a most ample relation, of the fauours and benefits he had receiued from the Virgin Mary; for which he would be thankfull according to his possibility, and leaue testimony thereof to future posteritie: which to effect answerably to his desire, most affectionately he entreated the same Chapter, that both in his life time, and afterward to perpetuitie: the morrow after the fiue Festiuals of the Virgin Mary, to wit, The Assumption, Natiuitie, Conception, Purification and Annuntiation, they would performe most solemne Seruices, namely, Masse, Procession, with Coapes Organes, Loude Instruments and Singing, euen as it was done on the same dayes of the Feasts.
That there might be likewise good store of Lights about the Altar and the Hearse, and at High-Masse, to say a perticuler Prayer for him: Deus qui iustificas impium during his life time, and after his death, the Prayer said at the end of the Procession. And when the said Chapter should come by the Chappell of the Annuntiation; there to say and sing De profundis, with the Prayer Inclina Domine, and cast holy water vpon his Tombe, especially where his heart did lye.
For performing and celebrating these Seruices, hee promised, and thereto bound himselfe, to assesse and assigne to the said Church of Chartres, as a yearely paiment to perpetuitie; the sum of threescore and fiue pounds Tournois of Rent, in monies comming freely as a quit Rent, thirteen pounds Tournois at each of the said annual feasts.
Moreouer, he founded one solemne Masse yearely in the said Church, to be celebrated in honor of the Sacred Virgin, the last Saturday before Aduent, so long as he liued. And after his death, the said Masse should be changed into an Obit, and Seruice for the dead, the same day as the same Prince of Vendosme should decease. For the Foundation of this Masse and Obit; hee bound himselfe to pay yearely on the same day eight pounds. Which the Chapter accepted, seconding the deuotion of this great Prince; to be a true imitator of S. Lewes, and of the good Duke of Bourbon Lewes, Second of the name, his most famous Grandfathers.
Beside the said Foundations of Lewes, Duke of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme; his Successours haue continued fatherly deuotion towards the holy Virgin, honored perticularly in her Church of Chartres. Wherein the Counts and Lords of Vendosme* principall Parishioners and Diocessanes there: haue (for the spirituall direction of their Vendosmois Countrie) an Archdeacon, stiled of Vendosme.
V. Lewes of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme, Great Maister of France, espoused Ioane of Lauall; and had by her one onely Sonne, named
Iohn of Bourbon, the Father of whom died (in the time of Lewes the twelfth) aged fouresco^e yeares and aboue, the fifteenth day of March, One thousand fiue hundred and three.
VI. Iohn of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme, espoused Iane de Beauuau, daughter to the Lord of Precigny: by whom he had two Sons, and sixe daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Frances of Bourbon: And
2. Lewes of Bourbon, Prince de la Roche sur-Yon, who deuided in twaine this Branch of Vendosme.
The Daughters were
1. Ioane of Bourbon, who was three seuerall times maried. First, to Iohn, Duke of Bourbon, second of the name The second husband was Iohn, Count of Bologne and of Auuergne, Baron de la Tour. And in her third Nuptials, to Messire Frances de la Fausse, Baron de la Garde, de Fort, Lord of Chasselles.
2. Katharine, wife to Messire Gilbert de Chabannes, Lord of Roche-fort. Another
3. Ioane, wife to Messire Lewes de Ioyeuse.
4. Charlotta, wife to Engilbert de Cleues Count de Neuers.
5. Renea, first Abbesse of Xainctes, and afterward of Font-Euraud: And
6. Isabell of Bourbon, Abbesse of Caen.
Iohn of Bourbon died immediately after his Father, a Prince that liued a very long Age.
VII. Frances of Bourbon, Count of Vendosme, married Mary of Luxembourg, of whom he begot foure sons, and two Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Charles.
2. Iames of Bourbon, who died an Infant.
3. Lewes Cardinall of Bourbon: And
4. Frances of Bourbon, Duke d'Estoute-Ville, Count of Saint Paule: who tooke to wife Adriana, the heire of Estoute-Ville by whom he had one Sonne
Frances of Bourbon, dying before hee was maried, and a Daughter
Mary of Bourbon, who was thrise married. First to Iohn of Bourbon, Lord d' Anguien. Secondly, to Frances, Duke of Neuers, and of these came not any issue. In third mariage she espoused Oleonor, Duke of Longue-Ville, by whom she had a Son and a Daughter.
The Daughters of Frances of Bourbon, and of Mary of Luxembourg, were
1. Anthoinetta de Bourbon, wife to Claudius of Lorraine, first Duke of Guise. And
2. Louisa de Bourbon, Abbesse of Font-Euraud. The said Frances died at Verceilles (returning from the voyage of Naples, with Charles the eight) the second day of Iuly, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred nintie nine.
We haue already told you, that the children of Iohn of Bourbon, deuided in twaine the branch of Vendosme. Let vs first passe with the yongest, and afterward speake more at large of the eldest.
Lewes of Bourbon, Prince de la Roche sur-Yon, had to wife Louisa de Bourbon, eldest Daughter to Gilbert of Bourbon, Count de Mont-pensier: And by the meanes of this marriage, Mont-pensier came to the third Branch of Bourbon. Of this marriage issued two Sonnes, and a Daughter.
The Sonnes were
1. Lewes of Bourbon, first Duke of

Mont-pensier: And
2. Charles, Prince de la Roche sur-Yon.
The Daughter, was
Susanna of Bourbon, wife to the Lord of Rieux.
Lewes of Bourbon, first Duke of Mont-pensier, tooke to wife Iaquelina de Long-Vy, and by her had a Sonne.
Frances of Bourbon: and fiue daughters, the most part of them Nunnes, to wit:
1. Frances, wife to Henry Robert de la Marke, Duke of Bouillon, and Lord of Sedan.
2. Anne, wife to Henry de Cleues, Duke of Neuers.
3. Charlotta, Lady Abbesse of Iouerre.
4. Iane; And
5. Louisa, Nuns, and afterward Lady Abbesses at Font-Euraud.
Frances of Bourbon, second Duke of Mont-pensier, Prince Daulphine d'Auuergne (the Armes of this Daulphine d'Auuergne, are like to those of the Daulphine of Viennois, D'Or au Daulphine Pasme pers) espoused the Heire de Mesiere, named Mary, by whom hee had a Sonne.
Henry of Bourbon, Duke of Mont-pensier, de S. Fargeau, and de Chasteleraud, Soueraigne of Dombes, Daulphine d Auuergne, Prince de la Roche sur-yon, etc. who tooke to wife Katharina Henrietta de Ioyeuse, onely Heire to the rich house of Ioyeuse, Daughter to Henry, Duke de Ioyeuse, Count de Bouchage, etc. And of this marriage ensued no issue, but a Daughter, the very richest Heire of France.
Mary of Bourbon, assured in the life time of her Father, to Monsieur d'Orleans second Sonne to King Henry the Great, fourth of the name, of famous memorie.
By the death of the said Henry of Bourbon, the third and last Duke of Mont-pensier, happening the eight and twentieth day of February, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and eight, this house of Mont-pensier fell the second time to the Female Ligne. Let vs now suruay that De la Roche sur-Yon.
Charles of Bourbon, Prince de la Roche sur-Yon, yongest Brother to Lewes first Duke of Mont-pensier; had to wife Phillip de Montespedon, by whom hee had a Sonne and a Daughter.
Henry: And
Ioane of Bourbon, both of them dying yong. Come we now to the eldest.
VIII. Charles of Bourbon (eldest Sonne to Frances of Bourbon, and Mary of Luxembourg) first Duke of Vendosme.
Hee espoused Frances d'Alanson, Daughter to Rene, Duke of Alanson, Sister to Charles the last Duke of Alanson, descended from Father to Sonne, of Charles de Valois, Count d'Alanson, second Sonne to Monsieur Charles of France.
This Charles de Valois, and his descendants of Alanson, Porterent de France, a la Bordure de Gueulles, chargee de Huict Bezans d'Argent. And this Charles, last Duke of Alanson, was the first Husband to Madame Margaret de Valois, Sister to King Frances, first of the name: who in second Nuptials married Henry d' Albret King of Nauarre, second of the name.
In this marriage of Charles, first Duke of Vendosme, with Frances d'Alanson, were borne seauen Sonnes and sixe Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Lewes, who died yong.
2. Anthony, Duke of Vendosme, and King of Nauarre.
3. Frances, Lord of Anguien, dying yong.
4. Lewes, dying yong.
5. Charles, Cardinall of Bourbon, and Archbishop of Rouen.
6. Iohn, Lord of Anguien; who married with Mary of Bourbon, Duchesse de Estoute-Ville, dying without issue at the Battaile of Saint Quentins. And
7. Lewes of Bourbon, Prince of Conde.
The Daughters were
1. Mary, deceased vnmaried, albeit twise assured.
2. Margaret, wife to Frances of Cleues, Duke of Neuers.
3. Katherine, Lady Abbesse of Soissons.
4. Magdalen, Abbesse of Saint Croix at Poictiers.
5. Renea, Abbesse of Chelles: And
6. Eleanor, Abbesse of Font-Euraud.
Lewes of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, the last Sonne, was twise married. First, to the Countesse de Roucy, Eleanor de Roye: and

by her he had foure Sonnes, and three Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Henry, Marquesse of Conty, afterward Prince of Conde.
2. Frances, Marquesse, after Prince of Conde.
3. Charles, Cardinall of Vendosme, afterward of Bourbon, called the yonger (for difference from Charles the Cardinall, his Vncle) Archbishop of Rouen: And
4. Lewes, a twin-Brother with Charles that died yong.
The Daughters were
1. Katharine.
2. Margaret. And
3. Magdalen.
In second marriage hee had Frances of Orleans, the Daughter of Longue-Ville; by whom hee had three Sonnes.
1. Charles of Bourbon, Count of Soissons.
2. Lewes. And
3. Beniamin, all of them dying yong.
Henry, Prince of Conde, eldest Sonne to Lewes, had likewise two Wiues. The first, Mary of Cleues, Lady Marquesse of the Isles, Daughter to Frances of Neuers, by whom he had but one Daughter
Katharine of Bourbon.
Deceasing before she was married, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and sixteene.
In second Wedlocke he married Katharine Charlotta de la Trimouille, by whom hee had a Sonne and a Daughter.
The Daughter was named
Eleanor of Bourbon, who in the month of February, One thousand six hundred and foure, married with Philibert of Nassau, Prince d'Orenge.
The Sonne was
Henry of Bourbon, first Prince of the Bloud, and first Peere of France, Prince of Conde, Duke d Anguien and de Chasteau-Raoull, Count of Clermont in Beauuoisis, etc. Borne at S. Iohn d' Angely after the death of his Father, the first day of September, One thousand fiue hundred and nine, he espoused Margaret Charlotta de Montmorency, Daughter to Messire Henry de Montmorency, Constable of France.
Frances, of Bourbon, Prince of Conty, had two Wiues. The first was Widdow to the Count of Montaffier, by whom hee had no childe. In second marriage hee espoused Katharine of Lorraine, Daughter to Henry, Duke of Guise: by whom hee had a Daughter, which liued but eight dayes. He dyed in the Abbatiall Hostell of Sant Germaine des Prex lez Paris, on Sunday, being the third of August, One thousand sixe hundred and foureteene.
Charles of Bourbon, Count de Soissons, and Great Maister of France, Sonne of the last bed to Lewes, Prince of Conde, and of Frances d'Orleans; maried the heire Countesse of Montafier, by whom he had one onely Sonne
Lewes of Bourbon, Count of Soissons, a Prince of great hope by his good breeding.
And three Daughters.
The said Charles died on the day of All-Saints, One thousand sixe hundred and twelue, in his Castell of Blandy, neere to Fontaine-Bleud. Now goe wee to the eldest Branch of Vendosme.
Anthony of Bourbon, first Prince of the Bloud, and Prime Peere of France, Duke of Vendosme; espoused Iane or Ioane of Nauarre, the onely Daughter to Henry, King of Nauarre, second of the name, Soueraigne of Bearne, Duke d' Albret, Count of Foix and of Begorre: and of Margaret de Valois, Sister to King Frances the first. Which Queene of Nauarre, Margaret dyed of a Pleuresie, at the small Castell of Audas, neere to Tarbes in Begor, in December, One thousa^d fiue hu^dred forty nine. By her death, the Duchie of Alanson and Berry, which she held by the liberalitie of King Frances her Brother, returned to the Crowne of France, the Countie of Armaignac remaining impropriate to the Heire of Nauarre.
In this marriage was borne fiue Children, to wit
1. Henry, Duke de Beaumont, who liued but three and twentie Moneths.
2. Henry, Count of Armaignac, afterward King of France, and of Nauarre,

Fourth of the name, Henry the Great.
3. Katharine wife to Henry of Lorraine Duke de Bar, who died without any linage at Nancy, in the moneth of March, sixe hundred and foure.
4. Lewes Charles, who died in his swadling cloathes. And
5. A Daughter, that died before Baptisme.
King Henry his Grandfather being deceased at his place of Agetmau in Bearne, the fiue and twentieth day of May, One thousand fiue hundred fiftie and fiue: Iane his onely Daughter, and Anthony of Bourbon her Husband, succeeded in the Kingdome of Nauarre, taking both the Armes and Title thereof.
King Anthony was slain at the Siedge of Rouen with an Harquebuze, the One and twentieth day of October, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and two: And Queene Iane died at Paris, the tenth day of Iune, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred threescore and twelue.
Henry of Bourbon, King of France, fourth of the name, and of Nauarre, third of the name; was twise maried. First to Madam Margaret of France, Duchesse of Valois, Countesse of Auuergne, of Lauregais, etc. Daughter to the King of France, Henry, second of the name: from whom hee was seperated by the Buls of Pope Clement, eight of the name, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred, the fift day of October. He espoused in second marriage Madam Mary of Florence, Daughter to Frances de Medicis, the Great Duke of Tuscanie. And in this marriage was borne three Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
1. Lewes, Daulphine of Viennois.
2. N. Duke of Orleans, dying yong.
3. Gaston Iohn Baptista of France, Duke of Aniou, of Valois, Count of Auuergne, Lauregais, etc.
The Daughters were these Ladies.
1. Madam Elizabeth of France, wife to Phillip the fourth, Prince of Spaine, eldest Son to the King of Spaine, Dom Phillip, third of the name.
2. Christina.
3. N. A third Daughter.
King Henry the fourth, called the Great, dyed at Paris on Friday, being the foureteenth day of May, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and tenne; After whom succeeded his eldest Sonne
Lewes, King of France the thirteenth, and of Nauarre second of the name, who married in the Moneth of October, One thousand sixe hundred and fifteene, in the Citie of Bourdeaux Madam Anne of Spaine, eldest Daughter to the King of Spaine Dom Phillip, third of the name. To which Lewes our King, God giue long and happy life, Vita and Victoria.




The Order of Aniou, called of the Crescent or Halfe-Moone, Instituted in the Citie of Angiers, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred threescore and foure.
CHAP. XII.
COncerning the first Branch of Aniou,L'Ordre D' Auiou Dit Du Croissant. the vsuall or ordenary stile and title, which is giuen to the third Sonne of the most-Christian Kings; was begun by Monsieur Charles of France, the fift Sonne of King Lewes, Eight of the name, Sir-named of Mont-Pensier, Father to the good King Saint Lewes, and to Blanch of Castile, daughter to Alphonso, eight of the name, King of Castile, and Queene Eleanor, daughter to Henry the second, King of England.
Monsieur Charles of France, had for his portion or Appennage, the Counties of Aniou, and of Maine, and in the right of Beatrix his wife by his first marriage, fourth daughter to Raimond, Count of Prouence, and to Beatrix, daughter to the Count of Sauoye, he was Count of Prouence. And by Pope Vrbane, Fourth of that name, he was inuested with the Kingdomes of Naples, and of Sicilie. Nor is this first Branch any otherwise the subiect of this discourse: but onely to serue as a preamble and direction, for speaking the better and more aptly, in the true vnderstanding of the auncient rights and prerogatiues of the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, appertaining or belonging to the house of Aniou.
The second Branch whereof, deriued their stemme or originall and roote from Monsieur Lewes of France, second and onely Sonne to King Iohn,The first Duke of Aniou and Count of Maine. and Madam Bonna of Bohemia (whom our auncient Chroniclers doe call Behaigne) daughter to the King of Bohemia, and was made the first Duke of Aniou, and Count of Maine, Seigneuries which he had for his portion and inheritance. He bare the same Coate of Armes, as Charles of France did, Author of the first Branch of Aniou, which was de France L'Orle and Bordure de Gueulles, and the same are the Armes of the Branch of Valois, which did hold the Crowne of France, euer since Phillip de Valois, vnto King Henry, third of the name, of famous memorie.
Monsieur Lewes of France, was adopted Sonne of Iane or Ioane, Queene of Naples and of Sicilie, and was inuested with the said Kingdomes in Auignion,Lewes the adopted Sonne to Iane the Queen of Naples and Sicilie. in the Countie of Venisse, by Pope Clement, sixt of the name. Hee tooke to wife Mary, daughter to Charles de Blois, and to Iane of Bretaigne, called La Clope, that is to say, The Lame, or The Cripple (for in the old French Language, Clopin is tearmed Halting, Limping, or going Lamely, Inde Club-footed, as when one legge is shorter then the other.) By her he had a daughter, Yoland, first wife to Francis, first of the name, Duke of Bretaigne, and afterward two Sonnes. The yongest was Monsieur Charles of France, Prince of Tarentum. The said Lewes of France, King of Naples and of Sicilie, lieth at Bisegle, in the Kingdome of Naples, deceasing the twentieth day of September, in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and foure, and after him succeeded his eldest Sonne.
Lewes, second of the name, King of Naples and of Sicilie, who had to wife Yoland,Lewes of France King of Naples and Sicilie. daughter to Dom Iohn, King of Arragon, first of the name, and to Yoland de Bar, daughter to King Charles, called the Wise. Of this marriage issued three Sonnes, and one daughter, which was Mary of Sicilie, wife to our King Charles the seauenth, tearmed the Victorious. The said King Lewes the second, died in his Citie of Angiers, where he lieth enterred in the Cathedrall Church, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred and sixeteene: After whom succeeded his eldest Sonne
Lewes, King of Sicilie.Lewes, third of the name, King of Sicilie, who tooke to wife Mary, daughter to the Count of Sauoye, of whom hee left no issue: deceasing at Cosence in the Kingdome of Naples, One thousand foure hundred thirtie foure, and then succeeded him his second Brother
Rene, King of Sicilie and Duke of Aniou, who had to wife in his first marriage Isabel,Iohn Duke of Calabria. Duchesse of Lorraine and of Bar, and in this marriage was borne Iohn, Duke of Calabria, deceasing in the life time of his Father: leauing (neuerthelesse) by Mary of Bourbon his wife, one Sonne and two Daughters, the yongest whereof was Margaret of Sicilie, married to Henry, King of England, Sixt of the name. And Yoland his eldest daughter, was wife to Rene of Lorraine, Count of Vaudemont, and Duke of Lorrain soon after. The Son was Nicholas, Marquesse du Pont, deceasing before he was maried.
In second marriage King Rene espoused Iane, daughter to the Count of Lauall, and Isabell of Bretaigne; but by her he had no linage.
Charles of Aniou, last Sonne to King Lewes the second, was Count of Maine and of Mortaigne:Cou^t of Main and Mortaigne he tooke to wife Isabel of Luxembourg, by whom he had a Sonne and a daughter. The Sonne was Charles, Count of Prouence, who died without any childe in his Fathers life time. The Daughter was Louisa of Aniou, wife vnto Iames of Armaignac, Duke of Nemoux. So ended in daughters (falling to the Distaffe) this Second Branch of Aniou.
Charles, after the death of good King Rene his Brother (who had adopted him for his Sonne, and instituted him his sole heire) tooke the Title of King of Sicilie. And seeing himselfe destitute of Masse issue;King Lewes the eleauenth heire to Charls of Aniou. instituted as his heire vniuersall, in the said Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, as also the Countie of Prouence; King Lewes eleauenth of the name: who in regard of his Mother Mary of Aniou (Sir-named of Sicilie) had right to the Kingdome of Arragon, and Counties of Cathalogna and Cerdaignia, of an hundred thousand Florins of Gold, the Coyne of Arragon, assigned in Dowrie by Iohn, King of Arragon, to his Daughter Yoland of Arragon, wife to Lewes of Aniou, second of the name, King of Sicilie. Of which marriage was issued the said Mary of Aniou, Mother to King Lewes the eleauenth, as also appertained to the said Lewes the eleauenth, on the behalfe of his Mother, the Seigneuries of Consentania, Maghalon, Borgia, and many other, being in the Kingdomes of Arragon and Valentia, and Principalities of Cathalogna and Cerdaignia, assigned in Dowrie to Yoland de Bar, wife to the said Iohn, King of Arragon. By the death of whom (without issue masle) Martin his Brother had succeeded in the said Kingdomes and Principalities: and so consequently stood bound in the obligations, contracted by the late King his Brother, and his deedes and promises.
Yoland widdow to Iohn King of Arragon.The donation of Yoland de Bar, Widdow to King Iohn of Arragon, made to the Queene of Sicilie, Mary of Aniou, her Daughter, was dated in the Towne of Beaucarie the third day of May, One thousand foure hundred thirtie two. Signed Yoland, Queene of Arragon, Donnaresse, and Yoland, Queene of Hierusalem and of Sicilie, Donatarie, and by the Notaries: in the presence of Frances de Verly, Vice-Castillian, and Potestate Royall of Beaucarie.
The Donation of the aboue named things, by the said Yoland of Arragon, Queene of Ierusalem and of Sicilie, made to her Daughter Mary of Aniou, wife to King Charles the seauenth,The testification of the Queens dona^. and to their Sonne the Daulphine Lewes, eleauenth of the name: is receiued by Henry de Fresnoy, Notarie Apostolicall at Tours, passed in the Towne of Saulmur, in the Hostell of Stephen Bernard, otherwise called Moreau; Peter de Breze, Lord of Sairant, Knights: of Maister Gilles, Iudge of the Royaltie of Aniou; Robert des Roches, Maister of the Kings Accounts; Iohn de la Poissonniere, Lieutenant to the Captaine of Angiers; And Alain Crieux, President of the Accounts for the King of Sicilie, and dated the sixteenth day of February, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirtie and nine.
The ^nuesting of Lewes in the Kingdome of Ie^usalem, Naples, and Sicilie.Monsieur Lewes of France, was inuested in the Kingdomes of Hierusalem, Naples and Sicilie, by Pope Clement the sixt, and Buls giuen in Auignion, in the yeare One thousand fourescore and two: vnder signed by the said Pope, and by seauen Cardinalles. But it is necessarie to obsrue, as summarily as wee can deuise to

doe (because the whole discourse would rise to a large volume) the subiect of the Armes, as also the Titles of the Kings of Hierusalem, Naples and Sicilie, happening to the two Houses of Aniou.

A briefe Relation of the Armes and Titles belonging to the two Houses of Aniou.
RAoul being come from Denmarke, vnder the declining of the second Ligne of our Kings, and being made a Christian of an Idolater,Neustria, now tearmed Normandie. as formerly hee was; inuested with Neustria, at this present called Normandie: was the Father to William, Father of Richard, Father of William and of Richard; who by a Concubine had three Sonnes, Richard, Raoull (that is Robert) and William.
Richard of Normandie, was Father to Tancred, who finding himselfe charged with sixe Masle Children; encouraged them to runne the course of their fortune, with fraight and furnishment of a Nauie. They sailed into Italie, vnder conduct of their eldest Brother Guiscardo of Normandie; who had for his Armes De Gueulles a la Bande Eschicquete d Argent and d'Azur de Deux Traicts, the first Armes of Sicilie. This enterprise is counted vnder the yeare One thousand fourescoure and eight; and yet neuerthelesse, there is vncertainty of the yeares.
Guiscardo, or Robert, with his Bretheren Roger and William, called Fierabras,William with the Iro^-Arme or Bras de Fer, for his valiancie, expelled the Sarrazins out of both the Sicilies: in the time of Pope Nicholas the second, who created the said Guiscardo the first Duke of Apuglia, and Roger Duke of Sicilie, in the yeare One thousand one hundred and one.
Rogero, Sonne to Roger, succeeded in the Dukedome of Apuglia, after the death of his Vncle Guiscardo, and created him King of Sicilie, in the yeare One thousand one hundred twentie nine, a most remarkeable date of this Inuestiture.
But others are of opinion, that Robert before his death,The great seruices of Robert to the sacred Seate. performed great Seruices to the holy Seate, and that hee deliuered Pope Gregory, seauenth of the name, besiedged in the Citie of Lyons (by Henry the Emperour of Germanie) and conducted the said Pope in safetie to Salerno in Sicilie. That hee burned and sacked the Citie of Rome, being reuolted against the Pope, and that in acknowledgement of so many famous Seruices receiued from this Robert: he infeoffed him in the Lands which he had conquered in Italie, as namely all Sicilie, Calabria and Campagnia of Rome; bestowing on him the Title of a King, vnder certaine dues and debts, yearely payable to the Sacred Seate. And that after this Inuestiture, the same Robert went to war vpon the Sarrazins in Greece, from whom he conquered Achaia, Duraz,His conquering of Achaia Duraz* and Dalmatia from the Sarrazins. and part of Dalmatia. And that hauing receiued command from Pope Victor, the third (tormented by the Emperor or Henry) to come succour him: he found that the said Pope had bin poisonned, and seeking to haue satisfaction in the case; he died of a burning Feauer, leauing behinde him two Sonnes.
Boemond and Rogero. This Boemond being gone into Greece; his yonger Brother possessed himselfe of the Succession to his Father, which remained to him;The holy wars of Godfrey of Boulogne. in regard that Boemond affected rather to warre vpon the Sarrazins, and to follow Godfrey of Boulogne to the Conquest of Hierusalem; then to returne backe againe into Sicilie.
This Rogero had two Sonnes, William and Rogero, the eldest being dead in the Holy-Land: Rogero, without the consent of Pope Innocent the second, hauing stiled himselfe King of Sicilie, was besiedged by the Armie of the Church within Galuce, the Siedge being raised by William Duke of Calabria his Sonne. The Pope being taken prisoner, and constrained (for his deliuerance) to Crowne Rogero: he grew to agreement with him, onely to draw him to his seruice. It was this Rogero, that passed into Greece, to be a safe conduct to the King of France, Lewes,The passage of Rogero into Greece. seauenth of the name, called the Pittifull, returning from the Holy-Land, ill entreated by the Emperor of Greece, Emanuel, who, in fauor of the Sarrazins, had wrought the death of a great number of the French, by mingling a poisoned plaster among the Meale which was

sent to the Christian Armie. In reuenge of which detestable iniurie, Rogero proclaimed warre against him.
Wi^liam succeeded after his Father Rogero.After Rogero, succeeded his Sonne William, who made warre vpon Pope Alexander the third,Wi^liam succeeded after his Father Rogero. and from whom he tooke many places, belonging to the demeanes of the Church: in regard that he would nor Crown him King, which he was compelled to doe within a while after.
Next to him succeeded his Sonne, named William likewise, a valiant and couragious Prince, who warred very powerfully in fauour of the Church, vpon the Emperour of Germanie, Fredericke the first, and on him of Constantinople, conquering from him the Citie of Sidonia. He was called The good King William, and deceased without issue;The last King of Sicilie of the Norman ^e. being the last King of Sicilie, descending from the Stocke of the Dukes of Normandie. And by his death, the Kingdome of Sicilie returned to the Seate Apostolicall.
And yet notwithstanding, Tancred, a Bastard Sonne to William, Father of the last King, contemning the holy Seate, possessed himselfe of Sicilie. But to resist against him, Pope Celestine called the Emperour of Germanie, Henry the sixt, Sonne to the Emperour Fredericke Barba-Rossa, sworne enemie to the Popes of his time, and tooke out of the Monasterie of Saint Clare at Palermo in Sicilie, Constance, Sister to the last King William (albeit she was a professed Nunne, and aged fiftie yeares) yet he vn-uailed her, and gaue her as wife to the said Emperour Henry, sixt of the name, with the Inuestiture in the Kingdome of Sicilie. This Emperour being of the house of the Dukes of Suaba, Portoit d'Argent a Trois Leopards de Sable, l'vne sur l'autre: and carried not them of Sicilie, borne by the Normans; howbeit, in right of Constance his wife, he was the fift King of the said Kingdome.
Of this marriage issued their onely Sonne, bearing the name of his Father Fredericke of Suaba, sixt King of Sicilie, who afterward was Emperour of Germanie, second of the name; a great enemie to the Popes, for the dispensation granted by them to his Mother Constance, in putting off her holy habite, forsaking Religion, and returning to the vanities of the world.
Yoland of Ierusal^m married to Frederick the secondThis Fredericke the second had three Wiues; Yoland of Ierusalem, in which marriage, some make to be borne Henry, King of Ierusalem, in regard of his Mother, and (soone after) elected Emperour of Germanie, seauenth of the name, whom the Germaine Chronicles auouch to be elected against his Father, causing him to be betraied, and to die in prison, hauing reigned eight yeares. But others doe hold, that in this marriage was borne Conrarde (which is the more certaine opinion) who was after the death of Fredericke his Father, King of Sicilie, and of Ierusalem.
Io^n de Brenne King of Ierusalem.Now, marriage thus made with the said Yoland, it was conuenanted by Iohn de Brenne, King of Ierusalem, on the behalfe, or with consent of Mary of Ierusalem his wife, Mother to this Yoland; that the said Fredericke the second, should haue with his wife the Kingdome of Ierusalem, with this condition, that so soone as possibly he could, he should Arme himselfe for the Conquest thereof, which should remaine to him and his Children, descendant Kings of Naples and Sicilie. And hence it came,How the K^^g of Naples (...) be Kings of Ierusalem. that the Kings holding and pretending right to the Realmes of Naples and Ierusalem, stiled themselues likewise Kings of Ierusalem, and bare their Armes for Enquirie: D'Argent a la Croix Potence, Cantonnee de quatre Croisettes d'Or. And for our better vnderstanding the Genealogie of the Kings of Ierusalem; it is very necess^ry for vs, to begin in this manner.


The Pedegree or Genealogie of the Kings of Ierusalem.
1. GOdefrey of Boulogne (Sonne to Eustace of Boulogne) a French Prince, chosen chiefe in that most famous enterprise, for the recouery of Ierusalem: was the first Latine King of Ierusalem, hauing conquered it from the Sarra^ins the fifteenth day of Iuly, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and nineteene. He Reigned but one yeare, and had for Successour.
2. Bauldwine of Boulogne his Brother, Second King of Ierusalem; who raigned Eighteeene yeares and then Succeeded after him
3. Bauldwine, Second of the name, Count of Rethell, or of Monts, who raigned Thirteene yeares leauing behind him but one Daughter
4. Margaret, married to Foulques Count of Aniou, in right of his Wife, he being the Fourth King of Ierusalem. And hauing raigned Eleuen yeares left the Kingdome to his Sonne
5. Bauldwine, Third of the name, who raigned Twenty yeares, and left the Kingdome to his Sonne
6. Amaury, whose Raigne continued eleuen yeares. Hee had for Sonne and Successor
7. Bauldwine, Fourth of the name, Sirnamed the Meazeled or Leaprous,Bauldwine, Sirnamed the Leaper. because hee was a Lazar, and raigned but Three yeares, leauing the Kingdome of Ierusalem to his Nephew, the Sonne of his eldest Sister Sybilla.
8. Bauldwine, Fifth of the name, who raigned but Eight Monethes, and dyed at the Age of Two Yeares. And by his death, the Crowne of Ierusalem came to
9. Isabell, Sister to Bauldwine the Leaper, who had fiue Husbands.
The Third whereof was Conrard, Marquesse of Montferrat, and in this Marriage was borne a Daughter named Mary. The Fourth Husband was Henry de Champaigne, and the Fifth Amaury de Lusignan, in which Marriage were borne Hugh and Iohn. Of whom and of their Descendants,The Noble and Royall House of Lusignan. wee will speake (by Gods assistance) in the Tract of the Order of the Sword: Instituted by that ancient and Royall House of Lusignan.
Iohn de Brenne, espoused Mary of Montferrat, in the right of whom, hee entituled himselfe King of Ierusalem, and by her hee had two Daughters, to wit; Yoland, married to Henry the Second, the Subiect of this digression: And the other Daughter named Martha, was married to Bauldwine de Courtenay, tearmed of Auxerre, Fift and last Emperour of Constantinople of the Latine name: who tooke the Title and Armes of King of Ierusalem, according as did the Kings of Cyprus, Sirnamed of Lusignan.
After Fredericke Succeeded his Sonne Conrard, First of the name,Conrard, First of the Name King of Ierusalem. King of Ierusalem, Naples, and Sicilie; who was poysoned by Mainfroy, Bastard Sonne to the said Frederick: He was likewise stifled or smothered by the same Mainfroy, in hatred and despight, that he had instituted the said Conrard his Sonne to be his sole Heyre. Against this Conrard arose Mainfroy,Mainfroy vsurped Naples and Sicilie. and possessed himselfe of the Kingdomes of Naples and of Sicilie: but in opposition of him, the Popes (according to their wonted manner) made their recourse to the house of France. Mainfroy was excommunicated for his vsurpation ouer the Fiefe of the Church: As it is written at the Chapter, Ad Apostolicae de Re Iudic. and dying so, was cast forth vpon prophane ground, without any other Buriall.
Pope Vrbane inuested with the said Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Aniou and of Maine by Appennage, and in Right of his Wife Beatrix, Fourth Daughter to Raymond of Prouence, and Beatrix of Sauoye Count of Prouence.
After the decease of this Pope Vrbane, Fourth of the Name, Pope Clement the Fourth his Successor, continued the appointment of his Predecessor: infeoffing the said Kingdomes of Ierusalem, Naples, and Sicilie, to the same Charles of Aniou,Ierusalem, Naples, and Sicilie enfeoffed to the House of Aniou. Brother to the good King Saint Lewes, perpetually for him and his Successors, Heyres Females as well as Males, which should descend in the direct Ligne of Marriage. And through want or defect of them, hee willed and ordained, that the Children of France should Succeed in them, as appeareth by the Bull of the said Inuestiture giuen at Perugia, the Fourth of the Calends of March, and in the First Yeare of the Pontificality of the same Pope Clement. Of which Bull, mention is made by Iohannes Andreas in the nouell addition to the former alleadged Chapter, Ad Apostolica. Notwithstanding this Inuestiture made to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Aniou, there were some Prelates, who fauouring the part of Mainfroy, were degraded

and depriued of their Prelatures and Dignities, by the same Pope Clement: as it is obserued by the Speculatour at the Chapter de Accusationib. Deponitur autem quis.
Charles crowned King with his Queene in Rome.Saint Lewes, by the aduise of his Counsell, gaue a puissant Armie to Monsieur Charles of Aniou, his Brother, who accompanied with Beatrix of Prouence his wife, went into Italie: where he was welcommed, and Crowned (with his wife) King of Ierusalem, and of both the Sicilies, the one beyond the Pharos of Messina, which is properly Sicilie, and the other on this side, being otherwise more vsually tearmed the Kingdome of Naples.
A matter well worthy the obseruation.It appeareth to me, that there hath bin some fatalitie, or matter so appointed by destenie (if we may be allowed to speake so) depending on the Sonnes of France, and of the Sir-name of Aniou: to be called to rule and beare swaie in strange and remote Kingdomes. For this Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Aniou, Brother to the said King Saint Lewes, was called to this Kingdome of Sicilie. And his Ligne being fallen to the Distaffe, another Monsieur Charles of France, first Duke of Aniou, Brother to our King Charles the fift, was called to the same Kingdomes. And, in our time, Monsieur Henry of France, Duke of Aniou, Brother to King Charles the ninth, was called to the Kingdome of Poland. Here then we are truely giuen to vnderstand, that all their Conquests haue bin to little or none effect, and whereof France neuer receiued any aduantage or benefit, though it hath made profuse expence of her monies, and buried them in the appointments of warre farre enough off. Yet not th^ough any lacke of valiancie, but rather of wise Councell, and prouident foresight for keeping our Conquests; wherein I hold it for an assured maxime, that the whole glorie and honour of a Prince doth consist. For, if in meane things
Non minor est Virtus, quam quaerere parta tueri:
By farre greater reason then, ought State affaires to be held in admiration. Distance of places, are no warrantable essoines or excuses, but by cowardise. Our neighbours since those times) haue possessed the inheritances of the Lillies, and brought vnknown people vnder their obedience; while in deuisions, and nice points of honor (the imaginary subiect of our fights and Duelles:) we make our selues contemptible to Strange Nations. Serua Lilium.
The victory obtained by Charles at Beneuentum.Charles then, after the Inuestiture of his new Kingdome, marched against his enemie Mainfroy; whom he ouercame, and slew in a ranged Battaile neere to Beneuentum, in the Moneth of February, the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred threescore and sixe. As wee learne by these riming Verses, formed according to the times then, reported in the Manuscript Chronicle of Simon de Montfort.

Car^lus Athleta Christi, prout ante Cometa
Haec praesignauit, Manfredum suppeditauit.
Plus Decies Centum quater iuxta Beneuentum
Victor prostrauit. Hic Ecclesiam releuauit.
Sunt anni Christi Victoria cum datur isti,
Mille Ducentenus Sexagenus quoque Senus,
Belli sit finis, Februi lux tertia finit.

The same Pope Clement made the said Charles of Aniou, Lord of Tuscanie; And gaue him the titles of Vicare of the Empire, Gouernour of Rome, and chiefe Standard bearer of the Church.
This Victorie thus wonne against Mainfroy, was seconded with another: For, after the death of Mainfroy in the said Battaile, his wife and children clapt vp in prison, whereto Charles had confined them: Conradine, within some few yeares after (sollicited thereto by certaine of the Gibelines) went to Italie with an Armie of Germaines,Conradin^ vanq^ish^d (...) Charles of Aniou. supplied with the Italian Gibelines, where neere vnto Arezzo hee vanquished the French Armie. But in another Battaile, whereat Charles was himselfe in person, Conradine was foiled, neere to the Citie of Alba, and Lancia Fuscina, in the Field called (to this day) The Field of Lillies. In a disguised habite, seeking to shift

for himselfe, hee was taken, and conducted thence to Naples: Which Victorie happened in the yeare One thousand two hundred threescore and seauen.
About two yeares after, by the meanes of bad Councellours, Charles was procured, to soyle his hands in the Bloud of Conradine and his friends. Vpon this perswasion: Mors Conradini Vita Caroli. Whereupon,The death of Conradine, his securitie of life to Charles. Charles caused Conradines head to be smitten off, as also Fredericke of Austria his Cousine, and many other great Lords, that tooke part with Conradine, this being done with detestable cruelty: but Henry Bother to Alphonso King of Castile, he was still detained prisoner.
By this Victory,Ease and Idlenes are the causes of all euils. King Charles of Aniou saw himselfe (for some time) in peaceable possession of his Estates of Naples and Sicilie: but this repose became the cause of following warre. For the French gaue themselues to all kindes of insolencies and youthfull vanities, especially in the Ile of Sicilie, where they made it a matter of triumph, to corrupt the Chastity of Wiues and Maides, and namely such as were of the very best Houses, perswading themselues, that all this lubricity and dissolution, was lawfull in them, and without impunity.
The Wife to the Physitian of King Mainfroy,Iohn of Prochi^a, Physitian to King Mainfroy, an enemy to the French in Sicilie. hauing beene one of this abused number: her Husband being a man of courage well aduised, and a great Lord in Sicilie, could not digest such a foule offence; which a man of honour can hardly endure, without reuenging his wrong at what rate soeuer it bee This Physition called himselfe Iohn de Prochida, a Natiue of the City of Salerno, in Sicilie, (sometimes renowned for a Schoole of Physicke, according as Montpellier in France) but originally of the Ile of Prochida, neere to Naples. Hee resolued with himselfe to root out the French from Sicilie, which he brought to effect.
Hee compassed the meanes to set saile for Arragon, his Voyage being intended to the King Dom Pedro, Third of the Name, who had marryed Constance of Suaba,D^m Pedro the Third King of Arragon, sollicited for the Conquest of Sicilie. Daughter to King Mainfroy, ouercome and slaine in Battell. Hee solicited him to make preparation for the Conquest of Sicilie, where hee should bee fauoured and respected by all the Inhabitants, who could no longer support the Insolencies of the French. The King of Arragon had not the reines strong enough in his owne hand, to vndertake such an enterprise out of his owne Countrey: For hee should need a powerfull Nauall Armie, and bottomlesse bagges of money, to sit and furnish such an expedition.
Prochida disguised in the Habit of a begging Fryer, made his passe to Constantinople, where hee compassed to haue speech with the Emperour, Michael Paleologus,Michael Paleologus Emperour of Constantinople, fauoureth Prochidaes offer. a Cap^tall Enemy to the French; hee perceiued (albeit very enuiously) the prosperous successe of King Charles of Aniou, whose neere neighbourhood was nothing welcome to him. Of him he obtained fauourable respect, and money to discharge a potent Nauall Army, on the behalfe of Dom Pedro of Arragon. In briefe, Prochida went to Rome, and conferred with Pope Nicholas, Third of the Name, borne in the City of Rome, a deadly enemy to the French; who gaue him assurance to inuest the said King of Arragon in the Realme of Sicilie; whither the same Prochida still iourneyed like a Gray Fryer, and prepared all the affaires fitting to King Pedroes minde, and according to his owne purposed reuenge. These goings and commings were performed within the compasse of two yeares.
But during these entercourses, Pope Nicholas dyed, after whom succeeded in the Pontificall dignity, Pope Martin, Fourth of the name, a great friend and fauourer of the French.
To found the bottome of his Soule,Hugo de Meta^lana, Ambassadour to Pope Martin the Fourth, from King Pedro. King Pedro sent to his Holinesse Hugo de Mat^ylana, (borne in Cathalogna) as his Ambassadour, and in outward appearance (to couer his intended Voyage) to request the Canonization of Fryer Raymond of Peg^^fort Inquisitor of Arragon and Cathalogna, against the Albigeois, Heretiques of his Prouinces. For hee dyed with great renowne of sanctity of life, and was Author of the Monasticall Order de la Merced, for the Redemption of Captiues, detained by the Moores of Affrica. The men of this Order went cloathed all in white, wearing on their brest a Crowne of Red Cloth, or of Siluer gilded ouer, with the Armes of Arragon: Au Chef de Gueules a la Croix pa^^ee d'Argent. They are to be s^ene at Paris, in the Chappell de Bracque, before the Hostell de Guise.
This Fleete departed from Tortosa in Spaine, to saile all along the Coast of Affrica,Saint Augustine, Bishop of Hippo. and to take in fresh water at Bonna, heretofore called Hippo, or Hippona, famous by S. Augustine, that worthy Light in Gods Church, and Bishop thereof; and then to take Port in the Ile of Corsegua, in expectation of tydings from Sicilie, from whence King Charles was absent in Tuscany.
Prochida got possession of the Shippes and Vessels belonging to King Charles, which were in the Ports of Messina and Palermo. And on the sollemne day of Easter, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Two, at fiue of the Clocke in the Euening (A good Day,Bon Iour, Bonn C^ure. A good Deeede) through all the Cities, Townes, Bourgades, and Villages of Sicilie: all the French had their throats cut, were massacred, and murdered, without distinction either of Age or Sexe. All the Women which were thought to bee conceiued with Childe by the French, had their wombes ript vp, and their fruite dashed against the walles; all the Streets ran with bloud through all Sicilie.
A bloudy Sicilian Euen-song to the French vpon Easter day, 1282.At sound of the Bell to this Sicillian Euen-song, Dom Pedro King of Arragon landed in the Port of Palermo, where he was welcommed by the Sicillians, (with extraordinary reioycing) as their Prince, and they caused him to bee crowned King of Sicilie, in the said Citie of Palermo, the Tenth of May, in the same yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Two.
Vpon receipt of these sad newes, King Charles (in all haste) made his recourse to the Holy Father Martin the Fourth; who detesting the perfidious dealing of Pedro of Arragon,Pedro of Arragon and the Sicillians excommunicated. and the Sicillians: excommunicated them, according to the forme practised by the Church Pedro of Arragon contemned these Censures; but the Sicillians within some few yeares after, sent their Ambassadors to the Pope, to plead their excuse by the extraordinary insolencies of the French, and to require their absolution, albeit in a remarkable manner.
For they being arriued at Rome, and presented to the Pope, fell on their knees as his feete,Abhominable blasphemy. vsing this Prayer to him, which appertaineth to none but God only. Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata Mundi, miserere nobis. Lambe of God, which takest away the sinnes of the World, haue mercy vpon vs: repeating the same three seuerall times, and at the fourth, said; Da nobis pacem: Grant vs peace. Which the Pope did, remitting their offence; although the cruelty of the crime, deserued an exemplary punishment and correction.
Charles, to recouer Sicilie againe, went and besieged Messina; but to no purpose or effect. And Dom Pedro of Arragon, taking good order for this his new Conquest, left to gouerne in Sicilie, Queene Constance his Wife and his three Children. Hee established also a Councell of State in the Iland, wherein gouerned (by title of highest Iustice) Alanus Leontinus,The foure supreame Magistrates of Sicilie vnder the Queene and her Sonens. Iohn Pr^ehida, Author of the Sicillian Euen-song* Willelmus Galseranus, a Cathelane, and Rogerus de Loria, his Admirall, to whose charge^ hee left a Fleete of Fiue and Twenty Gallies, in each whereof, was appointed two Captaines, one a Cathelane. and the other an Italian. The Soldiers all Cathelanes, the Marriners Italians and Cathelanes, the Gally Slaues all Italians; which being th^ done, Dom Pedro of Arragon passed into Spaine.
The Kingdomes of Arragon and Valencia excommunicated.Pope Martin, hauing excommunicated the Realmes of Arragon and Valencia, and the Counties of Catalogna and Cerdaignia, to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois, youngest Sonne to the King of France, Philip the Hardie, Third of the name^ For and against the thunder of this Excommunication, there were riming Verc^ of those times made, which flew through all the corners of Christendome. Concerning them of the Pope which touched his power, and passed vnder his name, these were they.

Vassalli praui Petri, qui fraude sua vi,
Non sine caede graui, Petri patrimonia, Claui
Noxius and Naui rapuit, delicta notaui.
Hunc in Conclaui Fratrum Bis primo citaui,
Ac expectaui satis: hinc Anathemate straui:
Post condemnaui, Regnisque suis spoliaui:
His aeque fidele Audegaui genu^ infoeda^i:
Adsis ergo bonis Fidei Rex Christe Colonis,
Pro veniae donis, quibus arra paratur agonis,
Huius and Arragonis priuati rite coro^
Iuribus, and terris per Iudicium rationis,
Res cum Personis, spernentis te Regionis
Iussibus alti-tonis Francis tibi subijce pronis,
Qui res disponis placitae tibi conditionis.

In Defence of the King of Arragon, against the Censures of the Pope; these went abroad vnder the Kings fauour and name.

Non me iustifico, sed forte reum te dico,
Sed pro Catholico me iudico Legis amico,
Cur ita pro modico me damnas illico, dico,
Praesul Apostolico contempto ritu pudico,
Ac Euangelico mage indulgens Frederico,
Quondam Scismatico Fidei quamuis inimico,
Nequiter obliquo me iure grauas, and iniquo,
Adscribo sceleri magno, debebatque videri
Omnibus hoc fieri, qui censeor exul haberi
Passu tam celeri, meaque volo iura tueri.
Iudicis austeri sententia nescia veri
Est tua, qui mihi debes potius misereri,
Nec Fidei, Cleri, Populi vis damna vereri,
Vt me deleri videas, vel morte teneri.

This Pedro of Arragon, to auoid the iust Armes of King Charles, which throughout all his Prouinces of Aniou, of Maine, Prouence, and in Italy hee had leuyed,Stratagems of pollicy in War are reputed lawfull. to make vp a potent Armie, bethought himselfe of a Warre-subtilty, disloyall and perfidious.
Dolus an virtus, quis in hoste requirat?
Hee caused it to bee made knowne to King Charles, that, to make spare of mens bloud, is the best beseeming part in Christian Princes, and expedient ^o descide the matter betweene them, either man to man, or an hundred to an hundred of their house and Court: the quarrell for the Kingdome of Sicilie, should rem^ine at the charge of him that proued the Victor, as the Prize and Trophe of the Victory; without (at any time after) the vanquished should retaine Armes, nor name of King of Sicilie, or pretend right so much as to an handfull of Land in all the Ile.A Combat^ intended for the Kingdome of Sicilie. Charles accepted this Combate, which was appointed before the City of Bourdeaux, then held vnder the homage of France, by the King of England, the Seauen and Twentieth Day of May, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Three.
Pope Martin did all that possibly lay in him, to hinder and breake off this Combate, which was vtterly forbidden by the Church. And so much the rather, because the Kingdome of Sicilie depended vpon the Sacred Seate, by the Donation which was made thereof by King Charlemaigne. In which respect, neither could Pedro King of Arragon lawfully offer this combate at extremity of life,A Prerogatiue of strange and large allowance. nor Charles accept it. Because the maine point of this difference, depended on the onely knowledge and allowance of the Pope, and the Kingdome ought to remaine in his power and prerogatiue, to giue it with open hand, to him whom the Pope should iudge best worthy of it.
Heerevpon there was found out a Decretall of this Pope Martin the Fourth, sent to King Charles, and beginning with these words. Carolo Regi Siciliae Illustri.The words of the Popes Decretall. His quas sincerae charitatis zelus afficit, etc. Finishing with these that follow. Nulli tamen suffragaturo in eiusdem Sedis priuilegio, vel indulto cuiuscunque tenoris, vel expressionis existant, quo ad id omnino viribus vacuantes. By this hee manifested to him, That all

Duells and Combates are prohibited That Sicilie depended vpon the holy Seate,The Popes vtter disallowance of Duelloes and Combates. and being so, the Duell for strife about this Iland, could neither bee challenged, nor accepted. That Combates were Diabolicall, and the Kings of Arragon had not any right in Sicilie, nor could the Kingdome bee put to compromise. Moreouer, that it was an infallible note of fayling in courage, to fight in single Combate; for hee denied all grace and pardon to such as sought after Duells, opposing himselfe plainly against the parties, proclaiming; that such people were Anathematized, Excommunicated, and meerly accursed to all eternity.
The reading of this Decretall is very remarkable, and therefore wee will speake more at large thereof; in the Chapter concerning Duels; as well to stop the mouths of some ill-instructed in Faith, who are not ashamed to write, that this Combate was authorized by the Pope, a thing vnbefitting a Christian High Priest, these are the very words: as also to make a true representation, concerning the vniust vsurpation of the Kingdome of Sicilie,Sicilie and Naples giuen by the Holy Sea to the Princes of France, and afterward recouered by Charles the Fift, Emperor. done by this Pedro of Arragon, and his Successors against the Princes of France, to whom it was giuen by the Apostolicke Seate, with that of Naples, paying an Annuall Quit-rent of Eight Thousand Ounces of Gold, which make fourescore thousand Crowns of French money, with a white Hackney beside. This Quit-rent was paid before the Sacke or Surprisall of Rome, done by the Emperour Charles the Fifth, who drew from Pope Clement and his Cardinals, Prisoners with him in the Castle of Saint Angelo, the abolishing of this yearely payment, and all the arrearages which were due, amounting so high, as Charles the Fif^h was not able to pay. Moreouer, hee procured from the same Pope, that (alwayes afterward) both he and his Successors Kings of Naples, should not pay to the Popes for all debts and duties, yea, and yearely Quit-rents, any thing but the white Hackney only. Beside, he exacted from the said Pope Clement and Cardinalls (to set them at liberty) the summe of foure hundred thousand Duckats in Siluer, and all the fairest priuiledges, belonging to the Patrimony of Saint Peter.
Heereby wee may perceiue (as a matter most notorious) that the Kingdomes of Naples and of Sicilie,Sicily and Naples conquered from Infidell Nations by the French. had beene vniustly vsurped from the House of France, lawfully inuested in them: because the Princes of France had conquered them from Infidels and other Nations, enemies to the holy Seate, as wee said in the beginning of this Tract. And yet notwithstanding, the learned Cardinall Caesar Baronius, hauing (some few yeares past) made a Discourse, concerning the vsurpation of Sicilie by the Kings of Arragon, against the Seate Apostolicall: Dom Philip, Third of the name, at this present King of Spaine, caused the said Booke to bee burned, throughout all the Townes of Sicily, with prohibition, vnder paine of life, to all them of his Realmes, Countryes and Seigneuries vnder his obedience, to read or keepe them.
Pope Leo de Medicis, Eleauenth of the name.In like manner, after the death of Pope Leo de Medicis, Eleauenth of the name, the same Cardinall Baronius, hauing had the voyces of many Cardinalls to preferre it to the Sacred Seate: the Cardinall d'Auila, principall Agent for Spaine at Rome, stirred vp all ancient acknowledgements, and hindred it to his vtmost power, as not allowing any vsurpation of the Kingdome of Sicilie.
Now notwithstanding this Decretall of Pope Martin, King Charles, who from Italy, was passed into France; fayled not to appeare at the Day before the City of Bourdeaux, with an hundred Knights, all of them very well prepared. Long time he attended there for his enemy, who appeared not, vntill fiue daies after, when he well vnderstood the retreat of Charles.The (...) at the Combate di^a^pointed by Pedro of Ar^on. For then it was when Pedro of Arragon, being come from Spayne in a disguised habite, came and presented himselfe in the Field for Battell, brauing his enemy, that he durst not looke him in the face. Hauing thus made his presentment like a Foxe, protesting in the absence of King Charles to Iohn (...) ^raille, Captan de Buch, Gouernour of Bourdeaux, and Seneshall of Guienne, for the King of England: that he would leaue his Armes for the Combate with him, as his wages and due, to wit his Helmet, Shield, Lance and Sword. And so returned in haste to Arragon, with two of his people, who accompanied him, in sted of an hundred men at Armes, according to the former agreement.
(...) de Loria A^ (...) Arragon.During the Voyage of King Charles into France, the Admirall Rogero de Loria, a Calabrian, on the behalfe of Arragon, put a Fleete to the Sea, consisting of Fiue and

of fiue and forty Gallies, which hee vnmoored from Sicily,Rogero de Loria Admirall for Arragon. and rifled all the Coasts of Naples; continuing some space before it, to draw forth to fight the Prince of Salerne Charles, called the Cripple, only Sonne to the King. This young Prince ill conducted, and forgetting the command of his Father, who had charged him not to leaue the City; would needs with sixe and thirty Gallies, aduenture to pursue his Enemy, who was very expert and skilfull in Nauall affaires. Hee inuested the Prince, tooke him Prisoner with a great number of Princes and Lords, as also nine Gallies, which hee tooke with him to Messina: where the Prisoners, some had their heads smitten off,The Cripple Prince of Salerno taken Prisoner. others kept in Prison, and slaine within a few dayes after. The Prince of Salerne was sent Prisoner into Cathalogna, where euery day he stood on the point of beheading.
King Charles leuyed an Army in Prouence, where hee heard the sad tydings of his Sonnes surprizall, in so fondly aduenturing at Naples, hee being ready to dye with conceit of greefe, as soone after hee did the Seauenth day of Ianuary, in the yeare of Grace One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Foure,The death of King Charles of Aniou. and lyeth buried in the Cathedrall Church of Naples. By reason of his death, the Gouernment of the Kingdome, and Children to the Prince of Salerne, detained prisoner; was giuen to Robert, Count of Artois, who very faithfully performed his charge.
King Philip the Hardie prepared an Armie both by Sea and Land, intending to conquer the Kingdome of Arragon, and other Seigneuries beside, giuen by the Pope to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois his Second Sonne. The Nauall Army was conducted by Enguerran de Bailleul, Lord of Coucy,The first Admirall of France. First Admirall of France by title of Office.
The Land Armie was led by the King in person, accompanied with Philip le Bell, his Eldest Sonne, as also by Iohn Cholet, Cardinall of Saint Cecilie (Legate to the Pope) Founder of the Colledge Des Cholets at Paris: by Raoule de Neesle Constable, and Iohn de Harcour, Marshall of France, and likewise the greatest that were in the Kingdome.
From Narbonna the Land Armie marched directly to Perpignan,The Land and Naual Armies prepared against Dom Pedro of Arragon. which appertained to Dom Iames of Arragon King of Maiorica, Brother to Dom Pedro, King of Arragon.
And the Sea Forces Anchored at the Port des Roses d'Ampuries, and de Collioure: from whence they sailed with a full winde before the City of Geneway la Superba, which was surprized in the assault, the Inhabitants being put to the edge of the Sword, as excommunicated persons, for fauouring the part of Pedro of Arragon. At the taking whereof they had some prisoners, the principall of them being the Bastard of Boussilion.
From Perpignan the French Army passed Le Pertuch,The proceedings of the French Army descending thence to Ioncqui^re; Higuieres was taken in the assault by Philip le Bell, Sonne to the King, and Gironn^ besiedged: the Towne and City very strongly Seated, so that they sustained the fury of the French with most valiant courage, during the space of two Moneths, and vntil the death of Dom Pedro of Arragon, when they yeelded themselues to the French: who much sooner had beene Maisters of them, but by the treason of the Bastard of Roussillion, prisoner with the French.
The Vigill or Euening of mid-August, during the Siedge of Gironna, a Towne and Cathedrall City of Cathalogna; Dom Pedro of Arragon, being aduertised of a Conuoy of victuals and money to pay the wages of the French Army:Soldiours on foote. put himselfe into an Ambuscado, with Fiue Hundred Horse, and Two Thousand Fantassins, to make sure thereof, so soone as they should descend from the Gallies of France, which made the Conuoy from Narbonna, to the Port des Roses, and from thence by Land to Gironna.
Raoule de Neesle, Constable of France, Iohn de Harcour, Marshall, and the Count de la March, tooke Fiue Hundred French Horse, and by the breake of day, threw themselues on Pedro of Arragon, cut in pieces the most part of his Troopes; yea, and wounded him in such sort,The death of Pedro of Arragon at Villa-Franca. that hee dyed within three dayes after at Ville-Franque, in the Moneth of August, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Fiue.
Charles the Cripple, Second of the name, Foure yeares after his surprizall, paid

for his Ransome the Summe of Twenty Thousand Markes,The fortunes of Charles the ^ipple, Son to Dom Pedro of Arragon. to Alphonso King of Arragon; the Brother of whom (named Iames) published himselfe King of Sicily, by the death of Pedro of Arragon their Father. After his deliuerance, Charles went into France, where hauing gathered an Army, conducted by Amarie of Narbonna (of whom is said to descend the Vicounts of S. Girons, neere to S. Lize, a City of Coz^rans in Comenges) hee returned into Italy, was Crowned King at Rome of both the Sicilies, by Pope Nicholas Fourth of the name, in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Nine. Hee tooke for Armes the said Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, as also of Ierusalem; Party de France sans nombre au Lambeau de Gueules,Iames st^ng himselfe King of Sicilie his Armes. and Iames terming himselfe King of Sicilie, retained as his Armes those of Arragon, which were, D Or a Quatre Paulx de Gueules Flanquees de celles de Mainfr^y* le Bastard, who bare D'Argent a deux Aigles de Sable, the Armes of Sicily, which they of Arragon haue euer since retained.
The Issue of Charles the Second, hauing nine Sonnes.Charles the Second had Nine Sonnes, and Fiue Daughters, by Mary Daughter to Stephen King of Hungaria.
The Eldest Sonne was Charles, Sirnamed Martell, Crowned King of Hungary after the death of King Stephen his Grand-father, he dyed in the life time of his father and Mother.
The Second Sonne was Lewes of Sicilie, a Gray Fryer, Bishop of Tolosa, deceasing the Nineteenth day of August, in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Seauenteene. His Body lyeth buried at the Gray Fryers of Marseilles, Canonized by the Pope Iohn the Two and Twentieth.
The Third Sonne was Robert Duke of Calabria, and King of Naples and Sicilie after his father.
Philip, Prince of Tarentum was the Fourth, Father to Charles Prince of Morea, slaine on the day at Mont^atin: and to Philip of Tarentum, Husband to Beatrix of Bourbon, Daughter to Lewes the first Duke of Bourbon, and of this Marriage issued three Sonnes, Robert, Lewes and Philip, all three dying without Children.
The Fift Sonne was Iohn, Duke of Duras, Prince of Morea, dying young likewise.
The Sixt was Tristram, borne in Cathalogna, during the imprisonment of his Father.
The Seauenth* was Raymond Berengarius, Regent of the Vicariat.
The Eight, was Lewes, who was Duke of Duras: And the last was Peter of Sicilie, Sirnamed the Tempestuous, Duke of Grauina.
He had likewise (...) Daughters.The Daughters were, Margaret, First Wife to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois, who had in Marriage with her (as we haue already said) the Counties of Aniou, and of Maine. The Second was Blanche, Wife to Iames, King of Arragon. The Third Eleanor, Wife to Frederick, tearming himselfe King of Sicily. The Fourth Mary, Wife to Iames, King of Maiorica. And the last was Beatrix of Sicily, Wife to Azzo, Marquesse d Este, and Lord of Ferrara.
Charles Ma^tel King of Hungaria.Charles Martell, the Eldest Sonne, Crowned King of Hungary, had to Wife Clementia, Daughter to the Emperour Rodolphe, or Raoul, called the Red; and of her hee begot a Sonne and a Daughter; Clementia of Hungary, Wife to Lewes Hutin, Second of the name, King of France and of Nauarre.
Charles Robert Charobert.The Sonne was Charles Robert, called by abbreuiation Charobert; who had three Sonnes, to wit, Lewes, King of Hungary, Andrew, King of Sicily by his Wife, the first Ioane, Queene of Sicilie; and the last was Stephen of Hungary. These two latter named dyed, without hauing any Issue. The Eldest
Lewes, King of Hungary, left but a Daughter, Mary Queene of Hungary; Wife to Sigismond,Sigismond, Ma^quess^ of Brandenbourg* Marquesse of Brandenbourg, Sonne to the Emperour Charles, Fourth of the name, King of Bohemia, who was Emperour after his Father, and King of Bohemia, and of Hungary, by his Wife.
And thus this Branch came to the House of France, holding the Crowne of Hungary; entred by the Wife) into the House of Luxembourg, issued of Lusignan, and comming in like manner of France.
^bert, Third Sonne to Charles rhe Second, and the Cripple, held the Realme of Sicilie by Sentence of Pope Clement the Fift: who preferred to that Kingdome

this Robert Vncle to Charobert of Hungary, his Nephew, according to the containdure of the Decretall, inserted at the Clementines. He had to Wife Donna Constance of Arragon, Daughter to Dom Pedro, Fourth of the name, King of Arragon, and of Mary the Infanta of Nauarre, by whom he had one Sonne named Charles of Sicilie, who was Duke of Calabria, and who espoused Mary of Valois, Daughter to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Valois, by whom hee had no linage. By his Second Wife hee had three Daughters, and the said Charles dyed Duke of Calabria, in the life time of King Robert his father.
The Eldest of the Daughters (the other are no way pertinent to this Discourse) was Ioane Queene of Sicilie, First of the name, who had foure Husbands.Of Ioane, the first Queene of Sicily, and her foure Husbands. The first was Andrew of Hungaria, as we haue formerly said, but him she caused to be strangled. The second was Lewes of Tarentum, Sonne to Philip of Sicilie, Prince of Tarentum, Brother to the King of Sicilie, Robert.
This Lewes was (by his Wife) stiled King of Naples and of Sicilie, and among other benefits, him he had by her the Siegneurie and Vicounty of Reilhane in Prouence, which she gaue in the yeare* One Thousand, Three Hundred, Forty and Nine; sold by him to the Lord of Darcigny, from whom also this Seigneurie passed to them of the house of Boliers. In her third Marriage she espoused Iames of Tarrascon, Sonne to the King of Maiorca, whom she called nothing but Duke of Calabria: And her fourth Husband was Otho, Duke of Brunswicke.Her vnchaste life de^riued her of the Kingdome. Yet by so many Husbands she had not any Issue, she being a Princesse, that, in regard of her vnchaste and incontinent life; was depriued of the Kingdome, by Sentence of Pope Vrbane, Sixt of the Name, who inuested therein Charles of Duras, Sonne to Lewes of Duras, Brother to King Robert. The said King Charles of Duras, caused Ioane the first to be strangled; according as she had dealt with his Cousin, and her Husband Andrew of Hungary.
King Charles of Sicily, Third of the name, tooke to wife Margaret, Daughter to the Sister of the before-named Ioane, Queene of Sicily, and by her hee had a Sonne named Ladislaus (whom we call Lancelot in French) of Sicily; and a Daughter, Ioane of Sicily. After the death of Charles the Third, his Sonne
Ladislaus was by the same Pope Vrbane,Pope Vrbane giueth the King^omes of Nap^es and Sicily to Ladislaus. inuested with the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie. Hee had two Wiues, the first was Daughter to Mainfroy of Clermont in Sicilie, a House descended from that of Neeslle in France. His second Wife was a Widdow, formerly Dutchesse of Tarentum, and by her he had no Children: So that dying without any Heyre by him begotten, Madame
Ioane of Sicily his Sister, was Queene of Naples and of Sicily, Second of the name.The two Adoptio^s made by Queene Ioane the Second. She had two Husbands, but no Issue by them. The first was Duke of Esterlic, and the second was Iames of Bourbon, Counte de la March, who all his life time was called King Iames. Queene Ioane seeing her selfe frustrated of Linage, did first adopt for her Sonne Alphonso of Arragon, of whom being neither beloued, nor succoured in her necessities: she adopted afterward Rene, Duke of Aniou.
But for our better obseruing the particularities of these Adoptions,Reasons yeelded concerning the Adoptions and Marriages of the two Queenes. and sundry Marriages of these two Queenes, both bearing the name of Ioane: wee are to vnderstand, that the first was married by her Father, to Prince Andrew of Hungary, and vpon this Subiect. Charles, Second of the name, called the Cripple, being vpon the finishing of his daies, by his Will and Testament instituted (as his vniuersall Heyre) in the Kingdomes of Naples, Sicily, and the Counties of Prouence, Forcalquier, and Lands adiacent, his third Sonne named Robert, excluding Charobert, Sonne to his eldest Sonne Charles Martell of Hungary, dead in the life time of his Father, as you haue heard before, and this Testamentarie disposition was confirmed by Pope Clement the Fift. In the same Testament was contained a notable clause for Succession in the Counties of Prouence, Forcalquier and the adiacent Lands, that after the death of Robert his third Sonne, his Male Children should succed in the said Kingdomes and Counties, The Order of Primogenoture alwayes to be kept.The first born are alwaies to be preferred before the younger. But if there should be want of Heyres Males, and that the Kingdome must fall from the Lance to the distaffe, then he willed and ordained that his Daughters should be called thereto, but neuer to the County of Prouence, fro^ which he would haue his Daughters excluded, not only in the direct Ligne, but likewise in the Transuersary Ligne; so that the Sons

of Brothers should excluded the Daughters, The Order of Pr^mogeniture still reserued and kept, with expresse prohibition of all Detraction, or of Fourth Trebellian^^^ addition. These are the very words of the Testament made by the said King Charles, Second of the name, reported (word for word) by Messire Accurse Maynier, Third President in the Parliament of Tolosa, who, from his youngest yeares, followed the Seruice of the last Dukes of Aniou, Kings of Naples and Sicilie, and Counts of Prouence, and had beene Chiefe Iusticer of Prouence: in a Treatise made by him, and sent to King Frances the First, Of the Rights which the Kings of France haue to the Realmes of Naples, Sicilie, and Count de Prouence.
Charles the Second departed out of this life, in the yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred and Twenty, and then succeeded his Sonne Robert: against whom arose Charobert of Hungary his Nephew, being disinherited by the Testament of his Grandfather, who married Ioane of Calabria, eldest Daughter to his Sonne Charles of Sicilie, Prince of Hungary. Andrew, youngest Sonne of Charobert, to pacifie the warre made on him by Lewes of Hungary, and the said Andrew, who in right of Primogeniture, and representation of their Father, maintained that the Kingdome of Naples appertained to them, and not to King Robert their Vncle, who dyed in the yeare,The clause in the will conte^ded against by Warre. One Thousand, Three Hundred Thirty Eight. Ioane by force of Armes kept and defended Prouence, against the expresse clause, contained in the Testament of King Charles her Grandfather. Only through iealousie, shee caused her Husband to bee strangled, a most abhominable murder and Assassinate, which yet (in the end) cost her her owne life.
Lewes of Hungary (...) for hi^ Brothers d^^th.For Lewes, King of Hungary, being aduertised of his Brothers death, made warre vpon I^ane of Sicilie, his Cousin; but in such powerfull and cruell manner, as she was enforced to forsake the Kingdome of Naples, and seeke for her owne safety in Prouence. During the absence of Lewes in Italy, the Hungars made diuers reuolts and commotions against him: whereby he was compelled to giue ouer his enterprise, and returne backe againe into Hungary. In this time of his absence, Queene Ioane made her repaire to Naples* and to bee deliuered from the Excommunication which the Pope thundred against her* for the murdering of her Husband, and to be cleered of some arrearages in regard of the Kingdome of Naples, due to the Sacred Seate, vnder a f^igned engagement,Vnder (...) Queen Ioane (...) Pope. and a dissembled Summe of Forty Thousand Crownes shee acquitted to the holy Chaire the City of Auignion, wherein, the moity belonging to the Crowne of France, had beene giuen by the King Saint Lewes, to Monsieur Charles of France, Count of Aniou and of Prouence, his Brother.
From hence it is, that the holy Seate holdeth the Patrimony and City of Auignion, so s^rie as to the Riuer of Rhosne, which the Prouincialls call the Roze. For the Riuer appertaineth intirely to the Crowne of France, and so it was adiudged to King Lewes the Eleauenth,The Riuer of Rhosne belonging to the Crowne of France. by decree of Parliament at Tolosa, contradictorily giuen against the Pope then sitting, and the said Lewes the Eleauenth, in the Moneth of One Thousand Foure Hundred.
And concerning the County of Venisse, which containeth the Diocesses of Carpentras, Cauaillon, and Vaizon; it came to the holy Seate by Confiscation, made on the old Count of Tolosa, Raymond of Turaine, said to bee an Albigeou Heretique.
Charles (...)Ioane liued a very long time in peace, and vntill it chanced, that her repose was troubled by Charles of Duras, Sonne to Charles the Second, and Brother to Robert, Grandfather to the said Queene Ioane, who had nourished him from his young yeares, as her Nephew and Heyre to come.
But beholding himselfe now aged, and that his Aunt liued too long a time for his liking: hee trauelled towards Lewes King of Hungary, his Vncle, with whom he complotted reuenge for the murder, committed on the person of King Andrew. And to conceale his Armes, hee tooke grant and transport of those Rights, which he pretended to the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, as also in the Counties of Prouence. So, being assisted with forces from Hungary, hee went and besiedged his Aunt, whom he tooke prisoner: while she expected succour from the Prouencialls, too slow and tardy in their comming.
Ioane, seeing her selfe a prisoner, and considering the harsh entertainment,Queene Ioane descended of the ancient Race of Aniou. and great ingratitude in Charles of Duras her Nephew, whom shee had nourished vp so tenderly; remembred her selfe, that (from Father to Sonne, and in the direct Ligne) she was descended of the House of France, and of the Stocke of Aniou.
Wherevpon, by her Testament and Ordinance of her latest Will; shee instituted for her Heyre in the Realme of Naples, Sicilie, Counties of Prouence, and other Seigneuries, Lewes, First Duke of Aniou, Second Sonne to King Iohn,Lewes of France originall of the second branch of Aniou. and Brother to King Charles the Fift, Sirnamed the Wise. She adopted (as her Sonne) the said Monsieur Lewes of France, Chiefe and head of the second Branch of Aniou. And he substituted his Sonne Lewes the Second, and after him his Male Children; The Order of Primogeniture still kept, with charge and condition: That the said Kingdomes and Counties should neuer part from the Crowne of France, but hold from Lance to Lance, without falling to the Distaffe. Which Testaments, Adoptions, and Substitutions, for that which concerned the Realmes of Naples and Sicilie, were approued and ratified by the Apostolicall Seat, effectuated in the person of the said Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Aniou, and Count du Maine,Lewes crowned King of Naples and Sicily, in Auign^^n by the Pope. Crowned King of the said Realmes in the City of Auignion, by Pope Clement the Seauenth, according as it is written in the Chapter, Licet, de for. compet. Which Inuestiture was in the yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, and Foure Score: And Queene Ioane dyed, strangled in Prison, by the commande of her kinsman Charles of Duras.
Against whom the Duke of Aniou marched into Italy with a powerfull Armie, fitted both for Sea and Land, which shrewdly shooke Italy at the beginning. But through bad counsell, it yeelded and made more noyse, then benefite, so saith the President Maynier: by the sorry intelligence of King Lewes with the Lords of Italy, whom he made his enemies, by contemning and ill respecting them.
Charles of Duras, a wary and well aduised Prince, educated from his Infancie*The discreet prouidence of Charles of Duras. answerably to the ayre of Italy, perceiuing the fault and lacke of good and wise Councellours (whereof Lewes stood in greatest need) and the humour of the French, who were without wit and Conduct: concluded, to arme himselfe rather with good councell, then with strength and power. Hee planted Garrisons of Horse and Foote, in all Cities and Townes through the Kingdome of Naples, and burned all the Champaigne Countrey, Granges and Villages, which could serue his enemy but for Trophees of Straw and Bonfires.
By this meanes, King Lewes was compelled during the heates of Summer (which are so great in Italy as they can no way be endured) to keepe his Army in the Field. And the French, disordred in their eating and drinking, ouercharged their stomacks with the strong wines of Italy, which so warmed them, and with the violent season of the Summer; that they became filled with diuers diseases,The death of King Lewes in the Rea^me of Naples. and especially King Lewes, who dyed at Bisegle in the Kingdome of Naples, the Twentieth day of September, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Foure Score and Foure. And by his death the French Army grew scattered.
By this prouident and wise Conduct in Warre, Charles of Duras subsisted for a time, and reconquered suddenly, that which Monsieur Lewes of France had won from him in the Kingdome of Naples. And hee seeing himselfe setled in a peacefull Conquest, hearing newes of the death of his Vncle Lewes King of Hungary: resolued to iourney thither, as hee did, and to possesse himselfe of that Kingdome, against the Daughter to the said Lewes, Inheritrixe thereto by the death of her Father.
Charles, at the beginning was so well entertained by the Lords of Hungary; that they Crowned him, scorning the Empire and Command of a Woman, according to the custome of Warlike Nations, who at all times haue contemned Gin^cratie. Mary,The gouernment of women. the onely Daughter to deceased Lewes King of Hungary, fearing least Charles of Duras her Cousin would put her to death, as formerly he had done Queene Ioane her Aunt; preuented him, and procured him to be poysoned (a kind of death ordinary to Princes there) in the yeare, One thousand, Foure Hundred, and Tenne: leauing a Sonne, named Ladislaus, that is Lancelot,The Death of Charles of Duras. and a Daughter, named Ioane, afterward called Ioanella, to distinguish the History, from

that of her Aunt Queene Ioane of Sicilie, First of the name, strangled in Prison, by this Charles of Duras.
The proceedings of yong Lewes of Aniou.Lewes of Aniou, Sonne and Successor to Monsieur Lewes of France, being come to the yeares of reason, and fauoured by Pope Alexander the Fift: vndertooke to Conquer the Kingdome of Naples, which Ladislaus, Sirnamed of Sicilie, Sonne to Charl^s of Duras vsurped. He forced him to forsake the City of Naples, and all the other Townes and Fortresses; so that there remained nothing to him but Gayetta, whether he was retreated. This is the same Ladislaus, which engaged Nice (a dependant on the County of Prouence) to the Count of Sauoye Amades, Seauenth of the name, for a suppply of Sixe Thousand men, which he receiued from Amades, against Lewes of Aniou.
The Marriage o^ King Lewes to Yoland of Arragon.Lewes, Second King of Naples and of Sicilie, espoused Yoland, the onely Daughter to King Iohn of Arragon, by right of whom, it was indubitably, that the Kingdome of Arragon appertained to him: because the Kingdomes of Spayne are held by Women, in the defect of Heyres Males, and they are called to the Crownes of them. And yet notwithstanding, Martin of Arragon, Brother to the said deceased King Iohn, possessed himselfe of the Realmes and Siegneuries of his Brother, without giuing to his Neece the Dowry couenanted for her Marriage, as we haue already said before.
The Death of King Lewes the Second in Angiers.Lewes the Second, deceased in the City of Angiers, in the yeare, One Thousand; Foure Hundred, and Sixteen, and lyeth buried in the Cathedrall Church there. By Yoland of Arragon his Wife, Daughter to the said King Iohn of Arragon, and Queene Yoland de Bar, Daughter to the Duke de Bar, and Madame Mary of France, Sister to Charles the Fift, King of France; he had the Children before remembred. This Lewes the Second before he dyed) made his Testament, whereby he instituted his vniuersall Heyre,The Heyres Males still to succeed* but Daught^rs excluded. Monsieur Lewes of Sicilie his eldest Sonne, and his Heyres Males. And through defect of them, he substituted Rene his Second Sonne, and his Heyres Males, After whom hee substituted his last Sonne Charles, and his Heyres Males; and and their Male descendants of the name and Armes; Primogeniturae ordine seruat^, with the clause, Ex legitimo Matrimonio procreati; and their Daughters excluded in these Successions. By the Contract of Marriage of the said Lewes the Second, and Yoland of Arragon, which passed in the yeare, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Foure-Score and Ten, in the presence of Pope Clement the Seauenth: Afterwards ratified by the King of Arragon, Martin, Brother to the said King Iohn, the Twentieth day of the Moneth September, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, vnder-signed Iohn, Charles de S. Amand, and Bernard Caplana, and by the said King Lewes the Second, on Monday the Ninth of August before, in the same Yeare One Thousand, Foure-Hundred;The Titles giuen to Lewes the Second. Lewes the Second had these Titles. Lewes, by the Grace of God, King of Ierusalem and of Sicilie; Duke of Apuglia; Prince of Capua, Duke of Aniou; Count of Prouence, of Fol^^lquier, Maine, Piedmont and of Roussy.
Ladislaus (...) Lancelot v^peth ^uer Sicilie and Naples, and his proceedings.Now in regard that the Children of the said King of Sicilie, Lewes the Second, were in their minority of yeares, and in France: Lancelot, Sonne to Charles of Duras, very easily possessed himselfe of the Kingdome of Sicilie, that is to say, of Naples, comprehended vnder the same name.) And yet not satisfied therewith, vndertooke the Voyage for Hungary, as well to reuenge the death of his Father Charles of Duras, as to conquer the Kingdome at the Swords point. As hee was proceeding in these affaires, he heard tydings, that Lewes of Aniou, Third of the Name, prepared for the Kingdome of Naples, to make himselfe Maister thereof. Lancelot, to compasse his owne intention, and to counter-check his aduersary: sold the Dukedomes of Duras, of Achaya, and of Dalmatia, whereby he raised a great summe of money, paying a very potent Armie therewith, and so made war vpon the Pope (who fauored,The Pope driuen out of (...) and tooke part with the House of Aniou) compelling him to flye Rome, which he pilled, and went to besiedge the City of Florence. But in pursuing the course of his prosperities, he dyed a very exemplary death, which may well serue as a cleare looking Glasse to Kings and Princes, for a President of diuine Iustice, on Princes lustfully addicted to whoredomes, to be punished (soone or late) with a miserable and tragicall end.
Lancelot had a Physition, that had bin a follower of his Father,The tragicall relation of the wretched end of Lan^t. who hauing a Daughter of pleasing beautie; Lancelot grew earnestly amarous of her, and to enioy the floure of her fairest honor; hee made his meanes to the Physitian himselfe, to vse him as a Broker in so base a businesse. His Fatherly and honest excuses, had no power to quench the fierie heate of immodest loue in his lustfull Prince: but, instead of milde and commendable answers, hee receiued nothing but rude threatnings and frowning countenances. The Physition, although hee vtterly abhorred this detestable desire in his Prince; yet (vpon a further intent) his labour slacked not to his Daughter, to haue her satisfie his deuillish appetite, yea, and commanded her not to delay it.
Hereupon, he gaue her an Vnguent, whereof he made copious declaration to her,An impoisoned Ointment giuen by the F^ther to his Daughter of many imaginarie vertues to consist therein; and at such time as the King would endure no longer deniall, but she must needes yeelde to loose her Virgin modestie: she should annoint her brest and bellie therewith, which would so settle his enflamed affection, to her onely; that he would not delight in other changes (as daily he was wont to doe) but solely keepe himselfe to her. The faire maide was obedient to her Father, and now you shall see the effect of the Vnguent. So soone as Lancelot was in the heate of his amorous embraces, triumphing in the rape and spoyle of her honour: the Vnguent (being a strong and violent poison) did instantly so fierily knit and combine their bodies together; that immediately they both dyed, being vtterly vncapable of any helpe or remedie.The death of the Physitian after the King and his daughter. The Physition hauing beheld with his owne eyes, iust vengeance inflicted on the lustfull King, for thus wronging both his and his Daughters honor: being fully satisfied and well contented, desired to liue no longer, but dyed likewise by poysoning himselfe. Princes and great Lords, that (bearing your selues on the wings of your power and greatnesse) presume all ill courses to be lawfully allowed in you: noate well this example, not any way for you to imitate; but rather to moderate such frantique passions, and by quenching such irregular affections, with immortall glory to triumph ouer your selues.To conquer Lust in the greatest of all other victories.
Maxima cunctarum Victoria, victa Voluptas.
This was the excellent Epitaph, engrauen on the Tombe of Scipio Affricanus, the mirrour of Continencie. If you would follow Dauid in the sinne of adultrie; imitate him in the long repentance, which he performed all his life time after. If you would liue with fame and renowne, pursue this generous act of Charles, eight of the name, King of France and of Sicilie. This great Prince, at the age of twentie yeares, attempted the Conquest of his Kingdome of Naples; and it returned to his honour, notwithstanding all the hinderances laboured by the Potentates of Italie, whom he trampled on at Fornoua. Ferron, about the ending of this Princes life, informeth vs, that returning to Naples, which felt the rigours of warre, and of a victorious Souldiour, insolent and cruell both to men and women, in being put to the edge of the Sword, or their (best fauour) to passe vpon ransome, and yet exposed to the violence of their chastitie, The greatest griefe that can happen to the vanquished.
Among the rest in this sacked Citie, was taken an affianced Gentlewoman,A notable Historie deseruing to be duly considered. of admirable beautie, who being falne into the hands of certaine Souldiours that would dishonor her: had no other meanes of helpe or refuge in this perplexitie, but onely teares, entreates and earnest imprecations, whereto the rude Souldiours lent but a deafe eare. At length (by good hap) she got free from them, and sought for safety in the Kings Tent, where falling prostrate before his feete, for a while, shee was secured by his Royall presence. But at length, the King aduisedly contemplating the rare beautie of the yong Gentlewoman, began to grow amorously passionate, and vrged on by loue whom the Poets paint blinde, and starke naked, describing thereby, that he is robd of all modestie, feare or shame) resolued to enioy the issue of his lustfull desire. And as he went about the sinfull act, once more she threw her selfe at his feete, and casting her eyes (almost blinded with teares) round about his Tent; espied the picture of the Virgin Mary, with her sweete Sonne in her armes, hanging on the wall by his Beds side. She made feete of her knees, and thereon followed

him about his Chamber, humbly entreating him, to looke vpon it, and for her sake, a Mother, yet a chaste Virgin, to shield and saue her honour from violation. The King, suddenly looking vpon the Picture; lost all apprehension of his former frenxie, and found his royall iudgement so sollidly setled, that, not onely he became ashamed of his folly, in being hurried away with such wanton distemperature: but also deliuered the Virgin safely to her betrothed husband, hee being a prisoner in the Campe. He set them both at libertie, and gaue with the vertuous Gentlewoman (by way of Dowrie to her future Husband) the summe of fiue hundred Crownes of Gold; beside life and freedome, to all that concerned the Gentlewoman in parentage or affinitie. Intactam Virginem Sponso captiuo liberato reddidit, dote constituta de suo Quingentorum nummum Aureorum, liberatis vna Sponsae omnibus proximis, and affinibus.
Ioanella, Sister to Ladislaus, that dyed without issue, was Queene of Naples and Sicilie, and seeing her selfe not likely to haue Children; carried with the same considerations,The answere of Lewes of Sicily to Queen Ioanella. as Queene Ioane her Aunt was; adopted for her Sonne Monsieur Lewes of Sicilie, Duke of Aniou, Count of Maine, and of Prouence. But he returned her answere, that without any adoption; he was Legitimate Successour to his Grandfather and Father, King of Sicilie, and of her, she being but an vsurpresse of his Paternall inheritance. And coupling effects with words, made warre in such sort vpon her: that she was enforced to implore the ayde of the King of Arragon, Alphonso, fift of the name, who then made warre vpon the Genewayes in the Isle of Corse, with a mighty Nauall Armie.
The marriage of Ioane the second (...) Iames of Bourbon.This Ioanella or Ioane the second, being the Widdow of the Duke d'Esterlic, fell in loue (contrary to her honor and her qualitie of being a Queene) with a Neapolitane Knight, named Pandolfello Alope, reputed to be one of the goodliest Gentlemen in his time. Yet to conceale and palliate this dishonest kinde of life, she espoused in second marriage Iames of Bourbon, Count de la March, Prince of the Bloud, and the onely come^y Gentleman in France. Iames getting intelligence of the secret loue, betweene his wife and the Neapolitane Pandolfello; caused him closely to be slaine; and tooke away the Gouernement from his wife, sharply reprouing her for her incontinencie, not offering any other violence to her. Within a while after, she recouered the Gouernement againe, and, to reuenge the death of her Adulterer, commanded the Count her Husband to prison: but he being thence deliuered, by the command of Pope Martin the Sixt, who sat then at Rome, returned backe into France, and there requited the kindnesse of his wife; whom Pope Martin proclaimed vncapable of reigning, inuesting in the Realmes of Naples and Sicilie Lewes of Aniou, third of the name, who in his enterprize for Naples, was assisted by the Genewayes with thirteene Gallies which were conducted by Baptista Fregosa.
Ioanella seeing her selfe so pursued by Lewes of Aniou; sent her Ambassadour Antonio Carassa to Alphonso, King of Arragon, who at his first arriuall, refused to accept the offers of Ioanella: because he knew well enough, that this Lewes of Aniou could pretend claime to the Realmes of Arragon, Valentia, and Principalitie of Cathalogna, in regard of Queene Yoland his Mother. Wherefore, he desired rather to make him his friend, then his enemie, fearing still the French, who had so many times enfranchised the Pyreneans, and laid their hands on the Prouinces of Spaine. Hereupon, he aduertised him,The King of Arragon refuseth to a^d Ioanella at the (...) yeelded afterward concerning the intentions of Ioanella, making a plaine demonstration to him, that if he would grant and set ouer to him, the rights which he pretended to Arragon and elsewhere, by meanes of his Mother: he would lend him such assistance, as should make him Maister of the whole Estate of Naples. Which Lewes hauing refused, by the instigation of his Mother: Alphonso tooke Ioanella at her word, sent her a succour of eighteene Gallies, and foureteene Galliots, conducted by his Ambassadours Raymond de Perillos, Bernard de Centillas, and Dom Iuan de M^ncide* who in the name of the King their Maister, receiued the Chasteaux Neuf, and de l'O^uf at Naples, and tooke possession of the Dukdome of Calabria, the Title and Seigneu^ie of eldest Sons, and likeliest heires to the Kingdome of Naples.
But this constrained, and not naturall amitie, betweene this Adopted Sonne and putatiue Mother, was not of any long continuance, for the maske or vizzard being

put off: Alphonso of Arragon sought to despoile Ioanella of her gouernment,Alphonso of Arragon dealeth iniuriously with Ioanella. and tormented her in such sort, that she was besiedged in the Citie of Naples, and in danger to finish her dayes in prison, as her Aunt did. But for the succour sent her by Lewes of Aniou, third of the name, which came very conueniently for her deliuerance, conducted by the braue Captaine Sforza, who was then at Beneuentum, compelling him of Arragon to leaue his prize behinde him, being enforced to make for Spaine.
Ioanella, in acknowledgement of this worthy Seruice of Lewes,Lewes adopted by Ioanella caused him to come to the Citie of Auerzo, where as then she was, and reuoaked the Adoption of Alphonso, for the intollerable wrongs he had done her: Adopting as her Sonne and sole heire in the Kingdome of Naples and other Seigneuries, the said Lewes the third. Who deceased in the Realme of Naples at Cosenza, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirtie foure, and the said Ioanella immediately after.
Rene of Sicilie, Brother and Successour to the said Lewes the third,Successour to Lewes the third was Rene of Sicilie, then prisoner at Di^o^. deceasing without issue, was then (at the death of his Brother) prisoner at Dijon, being in the power of Phillip the second, Duke of Bourgongne, as we shall declare more at large in the Tract of the Golden Fleece. This Rene had in first marriage espoused Isabell of Lorraine, Duchesse of Lorraine and of Bar, and by her he had Iohn, Duke of Calabria, deceasing in the life time of his Father, and leauing by his wife Mary of Bourbon, Nicholas, Marquesse du Pont (who dyed without Children while his Father liued) and two Daughters, the eldest whereof was named Yoland, married to the Count of Vaudemont, Rene of Lorraine, to whom shee brought the Duchies of Lorraine and Bar: And the other was wife to the King England Henry, Sixt of the name.
Now, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirtie and eight,Pope Eugenius sent an Armie to Naples, conducted by a Pat^^arch. Pope Eugenius then sitting in the holy Seate: sent an Armie to Naples, conducted by a Patriarch, to expell the Arragonians out of the Kingdome. But the Patriarch ill acquitting him selfe in his charge, by bad intelligence which he had with the partakers of Alphonso of Arragon: the Pope commanded to seize his body, which as the Captaines of the Armie would haue done, the Patriarch being a Cardinall, was slaine.
Rene compounding with the Duke of Bourgongne for his deliuerance,Rene crowned King of Naples by Pope Eugenius. went to Florence, where he was Crowned King of Naples by Pope Eugenius. Hauing peaceably reigned in his Kingdome for some time. He lost the Citie of Naples by the treacherie of a Mason, who gaue aduise about a Gutter of the Citie, through which himselfe had diuers times passed, and whereby the Arragonians surprized the Citie of Naples, and afterward the Castels belonging thereto; So that Rene was enforced to forsake Italie, and returne backe againe into Prouence.
Alphonso of Arragon gaue the Kingdome of Naples to his Bastard Sonne Ferdinand,Ferdinand Bastard Sonne to Al^honso of Arragon. against whom Iohn, Duke of Calabria passed into Italie, prouing at the beginning very reasonably successefull. But refusing to marry, and take to wife Hippolita, daughter to Frances Duke of Millaine: the Duke tooke part with Ferdinand the Bastard, to whose Sonne named Alphonso, he married the said Hippolita his Daughter, and preuailed so well by money with Pope Pius the second, a mortall enemie to the French: that Ferdinand (albeit a Bastard and his Sonne) was inuested in the said Kingdome of Naples, to the preiudice of the House of Aniou. The Ambassadors of France made opposition against this Inuestiture: yet notwithstanding all that they could doe, the Pope gaue not ouer pursuing the point.
The Arragonians and Cathalanians, reuolting against Iohn of Arragon their King;The death of Iohn of Sicilie at Barcellona. Iohn of Sicilie was sent to be inuested in Arragon and Cathalogna, and in this pursuite dyed at Barcellona, in the life time of King Rene his Father, as also did Nicholas his Sonne, his Grandfather still suruiuing, who perceiuing that his heires masles, procreated and issued of his body were dead and gone: Adopted for his Sonne, heire and Successour his Nephew Charles, Sonne to Charles his Brother. In his life time, he caused his Nephew to be receiued as Count of Pr^uence, and Lord of all his other goods, whereof he made him to take homage during his life. To his two Daughters, the Duchesse Yoland, and Queene Margaret he gaue what he pleased; prohibiting

them expresly, to trouble the Duke of Calabria his Nephew, in the possession of those goods which he had giuen him.
Of all the Monarches and Soueraigne Princes of Christendome, there is not any one,The Kings of France onely seale with white Waxe, and no other. but the Kings of France onely, that doe Seale with white Waxe for excellencie and honor: the other Potentates Seale with Waxe Greene, Red, Yellow or Blacke. King Lewes the eleauenth gaue Priuiledge to the good King Rene of Aniou, and to his heires in the direct Ligne, to Seale with White Waxe, in the Kingdomes of Ierusalem, Sicilie and other Seigneuries, as well within the Realme of France, as out of it. The two Priuiledges are dated the eight and twentieth day of Ianuarie, One thousand foure hundred threescore and eight, and the Moneth of May, One thousand foure hundred threescore and nine.
The titles of Charles adopted son^e to King Rene of Naples.After the death of King Rene, the said Charles his adopted Sonne, tooke the titles of Naples and Sicilie, and the Count of Prouence, with other territories, and sent for his Ambassadours to Rome, his Cousine Frances of Luxembourg, the Bishop of Digne, and his Chancellour Monsieur Iohn Gerento, to kisse the foote of Pope Sixtus Quartus, of whom he demanded Inuestiture in the forenamed Kingdomes of Sicilie and Naples.
Now, without regarding the Testament of the last Rene, King of Sicilie; Yoland his Daughter, and his Sonne Rene of Lorraine, would needes contend for the Countie of Prouence, against Charles their Cousine. Rene of Lorraine had bin nourished from his infancie in Prouence,Contention about the Cou^tie of Prouence in the Court of King Rene his Grandfather, which made him perticularly affected of the Prouenceals. Whereupon raising vp his auncient acquaintance, he made commotion in Prouence against Charles, and numbring vp his men of Warre; passed to the said ^ountie, in name of the Duchesse Yoland, who (after the decease of her Father) stiled her selfe Queene of Ierusalem and of Sicilie, Countesse of Prouence, Duchesse of Aniou, Lorraine, Bar and other Seigneuries, and tooke the Armes of her Father (whom the Prouenceals called the Good King Rene) as they are emblazoned in his Chappell at Dijon, and which are yet to be seene (at this present) in the Celestines, and at Saint Clare of Auignion, founded by him, at Aixe in Prouence, at the great Roze of the Pallace which answereth vpon the great place, and in all the Churches and Monasteries throughout Prouence.
The Prouenceals commotions appeased by King Lewes the eleauenth.These mutinies of the Prouenceals, in fauour of the House of Lorraine, were qualified by the succour of King Lewes, eleauenth of the name: so that King Charles of Sicilie enioyed peaceably (all the rest of his life time) the Countie of Prouence. And by his Testament made at Marscilles, in the Moneth of December, One thousand foure hundred fourescore and one, he Legacied (for sundry worthy seruices receiued) to his Cousine Frances of Luxembourg, the Viscountie of Martigues (in Latine Vicecomitatus Martici) with the appurtenances and dependances, high, meane and lower Iustice; yea, and named for his Heire vniuersall the most Christian King Lewes the eleauenth: to whom he substituted Charles Daulphine his Sonne, and after him willed,The Testament of King Charles of Sicilie. that the Countie of Prouence, and Lands adiacent, should be annexed, and inseperably reunited to the Crowne of France. In memorie of which reuniting, the Citie of Aix (the chiefest of Prouence) tooke for her Armes and Banner, which yet at this present is carried in all Processions (as I haue seene in my time) the auncient Armes of Prouence: Qui sont d'Arragon, au Chef de France sans nombre.
The possession taken by King Lewes the eleauenth.King Charles of Sicilie being deceased, King Lewes the eleauenth (his vniuersall Heire) tooke reall possession of the Counties of Prouence, Forcalquier, and the Lands adiacent: he receiued of the people of the said Countie, as well in generall as perticuler, Faith and Homage in the accustomed manner, by Messire Palamedes Forbin, Knight, Lord of Soliers, whom he delegated wholly and expresly, to be his Gouernour and Lieutenant Generall in Prouence. Beside the said Countie, the Duchie of Bar, an auncient Fiefe to the Crowne of France, returned (by the death of the Duchesse Yoland, Daughter to King Rene of Sicilie) to King Lewes the eleauenth, and he reunited to the Crowne the said Duchie of Bar, by decree of the Court of Parliament at Paris. Grounded vpon this, that Rene, Duke of Lorraine, Sonne to Yoland,

was not a naturalized Frenchman, and therefore could not hold any Seigneuries: but such as were permitted to him in his Lands of the French, to be there held as heritages if they were not naturalized in Lorraine.
By the death of Lewes the eleauenth, King Charles the eight his Sonne and Successour, hauing assembled his estates Generall in the Citie of Tours, at his new comming: receiued Faith and Homage of the Prouenceals, by their Deputies sent to the said Estates, confirming their Priuiledges, and prouiding for vacant Offices. So that it appeareth plainely, that from the time of our King and Emperour of the French,The ancient acquisition of Sicilie, Naples and Italie to France. Charlemaine; Sicilie, Naples and Italie, had bin acquired to the Crowne of France, possessed by diuers Branches, and Houses of Princes issued thereof: First, by the same Charlemaigne, Pepin his Sonne and his Successours, from Father to Sonne, for the space of an hundred and thirtie yeares: yea, euen to the very inuasion, which was made for those Seigneuries, by the Berengars, descended of the Lombardes, expelled out of Italie, by the said Charlemaigne.
Secondly by William, Sonne to Tancred, Duke of Normandie and his Successours, Princes of the House of France: vnto Constance, Sonne of William the fourth, last King of Sicilie, of this Branch of Normandie, for two hundred yeares wholly, and the Sons of Constance, vnto the Bastard Mainfroy, about fortie yeares.
Thirdly, by the first Ligne of Aniou, beginning at Monsieur Charles of France, Brother to Saint Lewes; vntill Iohn, sonne to Charles, sonne of Robert and Ioane,The first and second branches of Aniou. Daughter to Charles of Duras, Sister to Lancelot. And by Lewes, first Duke of Aniou, sonne to King Iohn, second Branch of Aniou of the House of France, euen vntill King Rene, ouer whom Alphonso of Arragon vniustly vsurped the Kingdomes of Sicilie and Naples, whereof he seized his Bastard (as wee haue already said) against whose Successours:
King Charles, eight of the name,At what time Kings may best vndertake warre. vndertooke to recouer his Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, seeing himselfe in the floure of his age (for he had compleated but twenty yeares) and France in quietnesse; a most remarkeable consideration, to vndergoe any great enterprise: but he should haue had a bottomlesse Bagge of Treasures, as (in our time) King Henry the Great, of eternall memorie, had, and then is a King best enabled for warre.
Alphonso at that time possessed (quietly enough) the said Kingdomes; but Auarice, ordenarily attended on by Cruelty,The Prince of Salerne escaped from Alphonso into France, and other friends with him. caused commotions among the States of the Realme. Among them of Nobilitie, the Prince of Salerne, and the Sonnes to the Prince of Bizignan, escaped the Massacres of Alphonso, and Ferdinand his Sonne, Duke of Calabria, who came into France with their friends, and faithfull confederates. Who hauing wonne the fauour and eare of the Lady of Beaujeu, Madam Anne of France, Sister to the said King Charles the eight (wife to Peter, Duke of Bourbon, and Lord of Beaujeu) of William Brissonnet, then Intendant Generall for the Reuennues, afterward Bishop of Saint Malo, and Cardinall, and of the Seneschall of Beaucarie, Stephen Vers, then prime President of the Accounts at Paris, who onely gouerned the King: they put into his h^ad, to vndertake this Voyage, making the conquest of Naples so easie for him to compasse; that his Harbingers might meerely chalke him the way with their hands thither.
Whereto were added the offers and perswasions of Lodowicke Sforza, called the Me^re; who had proiected, how to possesse himselfe of the Dukedome of Millaine, as he did, against Iohn Galeas his Pupill: with the Predications and Prophesies of Fryer Ierenimo Sauanarola of Ferrara, published throughout all Italie.The Prophesies of Fryer Sauanarola. That the French should beare their victorious Armes to Naples: That they should conquer it without a stroake: And that at their returne, willing or nilling all the Potentates of Italie, the Noble King of France should trample them vnder his feete.
But that which most of all aduantaged and furthered this businesse, was the Lady of Beaujeu, who, by the absence of the King her Brother, promised her selfe the Regency of the Kingdome: by meanes whereof,The purposes of an ambitious woman. the Crownes Reuennues should passe thorow her hands, wherewith she would fill her owne Bouldges, to cut and shaue all the State affaires after her will.
Iames, King of Maiorica had bin despoyled of his Kingdome, by the King of Arragon

his Cousine, and was enforced to flye for refuge into France, to the Court of King Iohn,Humbert D^^^^hine of Vie^^^is. and of Humbert Daulphine of Viennois his Brother in Law. To supply the charges necessarily required in warre, Iames sold the Viscountie of Montpellier to King Iohn, paying the price of Sixe hundred thousand Florines of Gold, and within a while after, the Countie of Roussillion, at the same rate: prouided neuerthelesse, that he repaying backe these summes; he, and his Successours, Kings of Maiorica in the direct Ligne, and of his Stocke (but not any other) might reenter vpon the Countie of Roussillion, and Citie of Perpignan. Conditionally likewise, that the said Iames,Iames King of Maiorica. King of Maiorica (during his life time) should haue and enioy the title and qualitie of Count of Roussillion, as indeede afterward he did.
And the said Iames happening to dye without Children, as also the Prince Daulphine of Viennois, and Count of Valentinois and Diois, and his wife, Sister to the said Iames King of Maiorica, with two Sonnes which he had, the one slaine in the Isle of Maiorica,The Daulphins two Sons, the one slaine, the other drowned. where King Iames his Vnckle, and the Daulphine his Father had for three yeares space maintained the warre; the other Sonne was drowned in the Riuer of Rhosne: By consent of the said Humbert Daulphine, and of his wife, the said Iames granted, gaue and transported all rights appertaining to him in the Kingdome of Maiorica, and the Lands of his Patrimonie in Arragon and Valentia, Cathalogna and Cerdaignia, to the said Iohn, King of France, his Heires and Successours in the Crowne of France.
Now Iohn, King of Arragon, second of the name, in his first marriage had to wife Blanch,Charles the lawfull Prince of Nauarre. Queene of Nauarre, the Daughter to the King of Nauarre, Charles, third of the name, called the Noble, and by her he had Charles Prince of Nauarre, legitimate heire of Nauarre. And in second marriage Iane, Daughter to Frederigo Henriques, Admirall of Castille, who to aduance his Sonne Ferdinando, second of the name, King of Arragon (vsurper of the Realme of Arragon, against the King Iohn d'Albret, and Katharine his wife) supposed the crime of Fellonie against the said King Iohn her Husband, by Prince Charles his Sonne in Law, imprisoned by King Iohn his Father, in L'Alia-Feria of Sarragossa.
This imprisonment caused a generall reuolt of the people of Arragon and Cathalogna, who compelled Iohn of Arragon, to set his Sonne at libertie. But before his release out of prison, the Physition to Iane Henriques, his Stepmother, gaue him a Iulep,Prince Charles poysoned by Iane his Stepmother. whereof he dyed (within a short while after) in the Citie of Barcellona, on Wednesday the three and twentieth of September, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred threescore and one, being aged fortie yeares, three Moneths and foure and twentie dayes.
To reuenge his death, the people rose in Commotion, vnder conduct of the Count de Paillars, issued of the House of Arragon, marched in ranged Battaile, besiedged the Towne and Citie of Gironna; where then Iane Henriques resided, with Ferdinando, Duke of Monblanck her Sonne.
Iohn of Arragon mediated by contract with King Lewes, eleauenth of the name, Father to Charles the eight, the free enioying the Countie of Roussillion, sold to his great Grandfather,The Countie of Roussillion obtained in King Lewes the eleauenth. as we haue said before. With promise, that for the ouer-plus of the said saile, he should giue and pay vnto him in ready money, the summe of Three hundred thousand Crownes of Gold, in Coine of France: Hee should aide him also with two thousand fiue hundred Souldiours on Horsebacke, seauen hundred whereof should be compleate Lances. Here you may reade the very words of the Bonds, which were made by the said Iohn King of Arragon, to King Lewes the eleauenth.




The Couenants and Contracts, which were passed substantially betweene the two Kings.
PAteat vniuersis quod nos Ioannes, Dei gratia Rex Aragonum, Nauarrae, Scicilia, Valentiae, Maioricarum, and Sardiniae, and Corsicae, Comes Barcinonae, Duce Athenarum, and Neopatria, ac etiam Comes Ruscinionis, and Ceretaniae, attendentes and confiderantes

vos Illustrissimum and Christianissimum Principem Ludouicum eadem gratia Francarum Regem Consanguineum and Confoederatum tanquam fratrem nostrum charissimum, dum superioribus diebus Celsitudo vestra in Villa Saluatierra Comitatus Benarui, nos autems in loco sancti Pelagit (Sainct Palais Capitale de la basse Nauarre, ou est l'Audience Royale and la Monnoie) Regni nostri Nauarrae adesset, and adessemus, propter sincerum affectum, and beneuolentiam praecipuam quam erga nos, and nostrum honorem geritis obtulisse nobis succursum contra inobedientes and aduersantes nobis in Cataloniae principatu, hoc videlicet modo quod mitteritis ad nos ad eundem Cataloniae principatum Septingentas lanceas munitas sagittarijs vel alijs gentibusde tractu, cum peditatu competenti, artillerijs, and alijs munationibus iuxta formam, and modum Regni vestri Franciae, vestrisqui proprijs sumptibus and expensis, and in seruitio nostro manebunt vsque quod ipsi Catalani inobedientes deuenerint, and red^cti fuerint ad nostram veram obedientiam, and similiter si a vobis dicto Serenissimo Francorum rege habere voluerimus ex dictis gentibus vestris pro seruiendo nobis in guerra in Regnis Aragoniae, and Valentiae, vel in altero corumdem regnorum mittetis nobis Quadrigentas. Lanceas duntaxat munitas, modo, and forma praedictis, vestris pariter sumptibus and expensis, and quidquid iustum fore censentes and consonum rationi, vt pro maximis sumptibus and expensis quos and quas pro stipendijs dictarum gentium serenitatem vestram agere oportebit condecens per nos eadem fiat satisfactio, and emenda. Idcires tenore presentis deliberationis, ac de nostra certa scientia conuenimus, and paciscimur vobiscum dicto illustrissimo Francorum Rege: atque promittimus and nos obligamus Celfitudini vestrae performam, and validam stipulationem, quod in primo casu quo ad nos miseritis ad dictum Cataloniae principatum dictas septingentas lanceas munitas sagittarijs vel alijs gentibus de tractu cum peditatu competenti, artillerijs and alijs munitionibus ^iuxta formam and modum dicti Regni vestri Franciae, vt est dictum, and in nostro seruitio vestris sumptibus and expensis manserint vsque quo dicti Catalani inobedientes nobis, deuenerint, and reducti fuerint ad nostram veram and completam obedientiam, dabimus, and trademus vibis, aut, cui, seu quibus volueritis loco vestri realiter and defacto Ducentos Mille Scutos aureos veteres monetae Regni vestri praedicti Franciae, (Les Vieux Escuts faisolent Soixante and Quatre au Marc, le Poids de Huict Onces au Marc, and d'alloy a Vingt-quatre Carats, vn Quart de Carat de Remede) vel valorem verum corumdem, isto videlicet modo quod soluemus, aut solui faciemus vobis, aut cuicumque, scu quibuscumque a vobis legitimam potestatem habentibus Centum Mille Scutos intra vnum Annum computandum, eo tempore quo dicti Catalani inobedientes, deuenerunt, and reducti fuerunt ad nostram veram, and completam obedientiam; and alios Centum Mille scutos veteres vel verum valorem eorumdem soluemus seu solui faciemus vobis, aut cui volueritis and mandabitis nomine vestro intra tempus alterius Anni computandi a fine termini primae solutionis faciendae de dictis prioribus Centum mille scutis. In sicundo autem casu quo ex dictis Septingentis lanceis de quibus supra mentio habetur quo ad Catalauniae principatum a Celsitudine vestra habere voluerimus quadringentas lance as munitas modo and forma praelibatis, and illas cum effectu mittetis vestris proprijs sumptibus and expensis pro seruiendo nobis in guerra in regnis Aragoniae and Valentiae, vel in altero eorumdem regnorum, and ibi quantum opus fuerit permanserint dabimus, and trademus vobis, aut cui, seu quibus volueritis, and mandabitis loco vestri, realiter and de facto Trecentos Mille scutos auri veteris monetae dicti vestri Regni Franciae, in hunc videlicet modum: Quod soluemus aut solui faciemus vobis, aut cuicumque, seu quibuscumque a vobis sufficientem potestatem habentibus Centum Mille scutos infra Annum vnum, computandum a tempore quo dicti Catalani inobedientes deuenerint and reducti fuerint ad nopram veram and completam obedientiam; and alios Centum Mille scutos vetere, vel eorum valorem soluemus scu solui faciemus vobis, aut cui volueritis and mandabitis nomine vestro, intra tempus alterius Anni computandi a sine termini primae solutionis faciendae de dictis prioribus centum Mille scutis. Reliquos autem Centum mille scutos ad complementum autorum trecentorum mille scutorum suo casu soluemus* seu sol^i faciemus vobis aut cui voberitis, and mandabitis nomine vestro intra tempus alterius Anni computandi a fine ter^ini secundae solutionis faciendae de alijs Centum Mille scutis. Promittentes vobis dicto serenissimo Francerum regi Consanguineo, and Confoe derato, tanquam fratri nostro charissi^^, atque Prothonotario, and Notario infrascripto tanquam publicae, and authenticae personae quorum, modo pro omnibus interest aut interesse poterit quomodo libet in futurum legit ime

stipulanti in nostra bona fide, and verbo regio quod eosdem Ducentos Mille seutos casu, and ali^ trecentos mille s^utos in suo singula singulis referendo soluemus, seu solui faciemus, and me^ dabimus vobis, seu cui, aut quibus volueritis, and mandabitis nomine vestro iuxta mode^ seu formam superius mentionatam, atque tandiu, and terminis supra designatis and statutis quibusuis vlterioribus dilationibus, subterfugijs, ac exceptionibus reseratis and penit^ procul pulsis, and adeo omnia and singula prout per nos supra, and infra promissa and oblig^ sunt tenendum, complendum and inuiolabiliter obseruandum omni cum effectu obligauim^ vobis dicto serenissimo Francorum Regi; generaliter omnes redditus, and introitus, iura, and emolumentae querumlibet Regnorum and terrarum nostrarum, omniaque bona nostra mobilia and stabilia quaecumque and vbicumque reperientur haebita, and habenda: Et specialiter and expresse obligamus vobis, quoscumque redditus; introitus, iura, and emolumenta quae nes habemus, si tamen aliquae sui factae gratiae, vel assignationes super iuribus, and redditibus dictorum Comitatuum Rossilionis, and Ceretaniae vltra ordinari^s quod decedentibus ill^ qui eas recipiunt, vos dictus illustrissimus Francorum Rex haheatis, and recipiatis, and b^bere debeatis cum omni iuris plenitudine, and integritate, is^o videlicet, modo quod po^quam quantitates praementionatae Serenitati vestrae debitae fuerunt, and quae dicto ordine non fuerint exsolutae modis, and formis superius memoratis, eadem Celsitudo vestra intro^tus, iura, and emolumenta dictorum Comitatuum Rossilionis and Ceretaniae deductis omnibus modo quo supra dictum est habeat and recipiat per manus magnifici ac dilecti Consili^ nostri Caroli de Vlmis Militis Procuratoris regij in eisdem Comitatibus Rossilionis, and Ceretaniae, vel alt^rius successoris sui in officio supradicto. Ita quidem quod huiusmodi redditus recipiendi n^n computentur in sortem principalem dictorum ducentorum mille, aut trecentorum mille scutorum singula singulis referendo. Et nihilominus ad maiorem and vberiorem vestri tuitionem, and securitatem conuenimus, paciscimur, and nos obligamus quod faciemus, and operam dabimus efficacem, quod dictus Carolus de Vlmis idoneam faciet obligationem quod aduenientibus casibus supradictis in quibus iura, redditus, introitus, and ^molumenta dictorum Comitatuum Rossilionis and Ceretaniae vigore huiusmodi conuenti^nis, pacti, and obligationis, ad vos pertine^unt, de illis respondebit Sublimitati vesirae vel cui voluerit, and mandabit iuxta formam superius mentionatam, and quod quicumque succe^ suus in dicto officio Procurateris regij, suo loco, and tempore consimilem obligationem qua^ fecerit super his Carolus de Vlmis procurator regius, qui nunc est in dictis Comitatibus E^ssilionis and Ceretani^e. Et insuper cupientes vos eundem Serenissimum Francorum Reg^ in, and super praemissis reddere tutiorum eum hac eadem conuenimus, paciscimur, and nos ^bligamus quod illustris Ioannes de Aragonia filius noster charissimus, Administrator perpet^us Ecclesiae Caesar-Augustanae, Nobiles Petrus Durea frater Bernardus Vgonis de Rupebertino Commendator Montissoni Ordinis sancti Ioannis Hierosolymitani, Petrus de Peralta, and F^rrarius de Lannes Iustitia Regni Aragonum milites Consiliarij nostri idoneam fac^ent obligationem: quod si dictus Carolus de Vlmis Procurator regni, aut eius successor (...) eodem officio deficeret in solutione reddituum, and iurium dictorum Com^tatuum Rossilia^ and Ceretaniae quandiu quantitas dictorum Ducentorum mille scutorum in suo casu vobis m^ solu^tur, ipsi, and quilibet eorum in solidum tenebitur, and tenebuntur quoad solutionem d^taxat iur^um, and reddituum dictorum Comitatuum Rossilionis and Ceretaniae quae annis singulis, deductis omnibus modo praedicto soluenda erunt vobis quousque Celsitudini vestra quantitas dictorum Ducentorum Mille scutorum suo casu, and Trecentorum Mille scutoru^ in suo, vel valoris ipsorum soluta fuerit cum effectu. Nos eam pro maiori omnibus and singulorum supra and infra scriptorum fortificatione and corroboratione renunciamus, quoad que^mu^, Iuri Canonico, and Ciuili, foris, constitutionibus, vsaticis, legibus, and alijs iuribus, and auxili. Iuris, vel facti, qui, and quae ad ista nobis prodesse, aut vobis dicto Illustrissimo Francorum Regi^n cere, aut obesse possent quouismodo, ratione, seu causa qui and quae dici, scribi, and agitari valerent, etiam in fauorem Regum, Principum introductis. In quorum omnium, and singulerum testimonium presens publicum instrumentum confici iussimus per Protho^^tarium n^strum, and N^tarium publicum infrascriptum. Quod fuit datum, and actum in Palatio Archi^piscopali Ciuitatis Caesar* Augustae die Vigesimo tertio mensis Madij, Anno a Nat^u t^te Domini Millesimo Quadringentesimo Sexagesimo secundo, Regnique nostri Nauarrae Tregesimo septimo, aliorum vero Regnorum nostrorum Quinto.

 Signum Ioannis, Dei Gratia Regis Aragonum, Nauarrae, Sciciliae, Valentiae, Maioricarum, Sardini^, and Corsicae: Comitis Barcinonae, Ducis Athenarum, and Neopatriae, ac etiam Comitis Rossilionis, and Ceretaniae praedicta concedimus, and firmamus, huicque publico instrumento Sigillum nostrum apponi iussimus impendenti.
Testes sunt qui ad praedicta praesentes fuerunt magnifici, Martinus de Lannes Baiulus generalis Regni Aragonum Miles, Ludouicus de sancto Angelo Iurisperitus Fisci Aduocatus Consiliarij, and Ferdinandus de Vaquedano Secretarius dicti Domini Regis Aragonum.


Signum mei Antonij Nogueres serenissimi Domini Regis Aragonum Prothonotarij, ciusque ^horitate per vniuersam ipsius ditionem publici Notarij, qui praedictis vna cum praeno^inatis testibus interfui, eaque per alium scribi feci, and clausi* Signatum supra plicam B. ^ra Est. Sealed with Red Waxe.
Et nos Ioannes de Aragonia filius praelibati serenissimi Domini Regis Aragonum, ac Dei, and Apostolicae sedis gratia Administrator perpetuus Ecclesiae Caesar-Augustanae. Petrus Du^ea Cubernator Regni Valentiae, Frater Bernardus Hugonis de Rupebertino Preceptor siue Commendator Montessoni Camerlingi. Petrus de Peralta Magister Hospitij, and Ferrerius de Lannes Iustitia Regni Aragonum praelibati Domini Regis consiliarij, qui praesentes fuimus, and vterque nostrum in solidum conuenimus, and nos obligamus vobis Sere^issimo ac Christianissimo Principi and Domino Domino Ludouico, Dei Gratia Francorum Regi, in praesentia Prothonotarij ac Notarij infra scripti tanquam publicae and authenticae personae recipientis, and legitime stipulantis, quod si praelibatus Carolus de Vlmis procurator ^egni in Comitatibus Rossilionis and Ceretaniae, aut eius successor quicumque in eodem officio deficient in solutione reddituum and iurium dictorum Comitatuum Rosilionis and Cere^iae quandi^ quantitas dictorum Ducentoru^ Mille scutorum suo casu, and dictorum Trecen^^rum Mille scutorum in suo, singula singulis referendo vobis dicto Serenissimo Domino Francorum Regi debitae fuerit, and Maiestati vestrae non soluetur iuxta formam obligationis

desuper factam per dictum illustrissimum Dominum nostrum Regem Aragonum, nos, and quilibet nostrum ex nostris certis scientijs tenebimur, and tenebitur Serenitati vestrae quo ad solutionem dumtaxat iurium and reddituum dictorum Comitatuum Rossilionis and Ceretania; quae omnia singulis deductis oneribus m^do ^ontento in dicta Regis obligatione soluenda erunt Maiestati vestrae, quousque sibi quantitas dictorum Ducentorum Mille Scutorum su^ casu, and Trecentorum Mille scutorum in suo vel valor i^^orum soluta fuerit cum effectu, quemadmodum in dicto publico instrumento obligationis praedictum Dominum nostrum Regem Aragonum facto dicitur, and continetur, atque omnia, and singula prout supra dictum est, and ad nos attinet and spectat tenendum, complendum and inuiolabiliter obseruandum, nos, and vterque nostrum simul and in solidum obligamus personas, and omnia bona nostra and vniuscuiuscumque nostrum; and immobilia habita and habenda vbicunque and renuntiamus quo ad haec nostris iudicibus ordinarijs and localibus, and iudicio eorumdem submittimus nos and vtrumque nostrum Iurisdictioni, coertioni, and compulsu cuiusuis Iudicis Ecclesiastici vel Secularis, coram quo nos simul vel diuisim conuenire malueritis, and nihilominus renunti^mus legi Iurisperitorum, quae dicit quod fideiussor conueniri non potest nisi prius bona principalia discutiantur, and alicuius iuri canonico and ciuili, foris, constitutionibus, vsaticis legibus, and alijs iuribus, and auxilio iuris vel facti qui and quo quoad haec quae ad nos attinent, Maiestati vestrae nocere aut obesse possent: in quoram omnium and singulorum testimonium presens publicum instrumentum confici Volumus ad indemnitatem vestri serenissimi Domini Regis Francorum, Prothonotarium, and Notarium publicum infra scriptum, praesentibus testibus ad ea vocatis, and rogatis dictis Martino de Lannes Baiulo generali regni Aragonum Milite, Ludouico de sancto Angelo Iurisperito, Fisci Aduocato, Consiliarijs, and Ferdinando de Vaquedano Secretario dicti Serenissimi Domini Regis Aragonum. Quod actum fuit in dicto Palatio Archiepiscopali Ciuitatis Caesar-Augustae, dicto Vicesimo tertio die Mensis Madij, anno a Natiuitate Domini Millesimo Quadringentesimo Sexagesimo Secundo.


Signum mei Antonij Noguerij, Serenissimi Domini Regis Aragonum Prothonotarij, eiusque auctoritate per vniuersam ipsius ditionem publici Notarij, qui praedictis vna cum pranominatis testibus interfui, easque per alium scribi feci, and clusi.

Signatum supra plicam. B. Ita Est. And Sealed with Red Waxe.





King Lewes the Eleauenth was not satisfied and contented with these Obligations, but would needs haue intire enioyment of the things which were obliged to him so that the said Iohn, King of Arragon, sold, gaue, quitted and transported to the said King Lewes the eleauenth, and to his Successors Kings of France to perpetuitie; the said Countie of Roussillion, and that of Cerdaignia for euer, with all Iurisdiction and Soueraigntie. And King Lewes the eleauenth was put in reall and actuall possession; and (for him) Messire Tanneguy du Castell was made Gouernor in the said Cou^ties of Roussill^ and Cerdaignia. The Conducter of the French Army was Gaston, Count of Foix and Lord

of Bo^. The Contract of this Engagement, Grant and Sale was dated the fiue and ^wentieth day of Iune, in An. One thousand foure hundred threescore and two, at the Archbishops Pallace of Sarragossa. Signed by the said King, and answered by Nota^ies and Witnesses, with their hands and Seales.
And thus King Lewes the eleauenth enioyed those Seigneuries sold vnto him,The Counties enioyed by the Sonne after his Father. and placed Gouernours in them: And after him King Charles the eight his Son, conformably to the Couenant made with Iohn of Arragon. After whom succeeded King Ferdinand, second of the name, who was his Sonne.
But Madam de Beaujeu, who then gouerned France, vnder the name of King Charles the eight her Brother plaied two slippery parts at once,Two great dishonors ^en to France by the Lady of Beauie^. not much to be commended. One was, taking and tearing the Registers, belonging to the Court of Parliament at Paris, especially the Decree concerning the Reuniting to the Crowne of France, of the Duchie of Barrois, on Rene Duke of Lorraine, who was not Naturalized in France.
The other was rendering to Ferdinand of Arragon, the Coine and Cloath for the Counties of Roussillion and Cerdaignia, without vntying the purse, charges repaied, or any agreement whatsoeuer. The Mediators of this Merchandise were the Generall Brissonnet, the Seneschall of Beaucarie, and two holy Fathers Gray Friers, Oliuer Maillard, and Iohn Mauleony. The two last named men, gouerned the Kings conscience,A businesse o^ great importance passed away ouerlightly. and the other disposed of the rest. Merchandise deliuered in exchange of a promise, made on the behalfe of Ferdinand of Arragon, not to hinder the King in his voyage of Italie* a shadow or smoake, an imaginarie exchange, and oath for an handfull of feathers cast vp in the open Aire, concerning the part of Ferdinand of Arragon.
The treatie of this Restitution, without repaiment of one penny, made in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and thirteene, the nineteenth day of Ianuary, betweene King Charles and Ferdinand and Isabell, Kings of Arragon and Castile; bare these contents. That the said Ferdinand and Isabel doe make perpetuall peace with the King, League offensiue and defensiue against euery Prince liuing and dying,The Articles agreed on in the Treatie. without excepting any. And that the said Ferdinand and Isabell, shall not contract any alliance with the Kings of England, and the Archduke of Austria Ferdinand, Count of Flanders, and other Princes whatsoeuer they be; without the expresse consent and agreement of the King. There were named in the said Treatie, the Children of Ferdinand and Isabel, to wit, Dom Michele eldest Infant of Spaine, and Iohn, Prince of the Asturies;The two Sons of Iohn Ferdinand and Isabel. who with their Father and Mother sware this Treatie on the holy Euangelists laid vpon the Altar. And by the same Oath thus solemnely sworn, the said Ferdinand and Isabel, and likewise their Sons, renounced all such rights, as they could haue and pretend to the Kingdome of Naples, in any sort or manner whatsoeuer, which might ensue to them: they acquitted, gaue, granted and transported them to the said King Charles, and his Successors Kings of France, to al perpetuity. Conditionally, that the said King Charles without the Counsell of the Princes of his Bloud, and Officers of the Crowne, and contrary to all Remonstrances in the Court of Parliament at Paris, many times repeated and reiterated; acquitted and released the fiue hundred thousand Crownes of Gold, contained in the Bond of King Iohn of Arragon.
And hereupon it was further conuenanted, that the Ecclesiasticall persons, prouided of Benefices and Liuings in diuers places, giuen, granted and put ouer by the King,Concerning Ecclesiasticall Benefices and liuings. to the said Ferdinand of Arragon, held as well by Frenchmen, as Naturals of the Countrey, since the Kings of France had enioyed the Lands and Seigneuries sold: should peaceably hold and possesse their said Benefices.
But if it should so happen, that the King enioyed not freely the Kingdome of Naples, which appertained to him: in this case,Reentrie vpon B^each of former concluded couenants the King and his Successours Kings of France, might reenter on the proprietie of Perpignan, and the Counties of Roussillion and Cerdaignia, and that within a Month after, the said Ferdinand and his Successors had bin thereto required by the King, and his Successours, being come to the Crown of France. And thorow defect of not performing this; the King, and his said Successours, Kings of France, might reenter on the proprieties of the said Seigneuries, giuen and engaged: by force of Armes, without any other neede of summons, or forme of Iustice.
In the execution of this Treatie, the King decreed and deliuered his Letters Patents, in forme of Commission, to the Count of Montpensier, and to Le^^^, Bishop of Alby, to giue possession of the Seigneuries (very vnaduisedly) released to ^er^^nand of Arragon; notwithstanding the protestations of the Parliament of Paris, Conseruatour of the Maiestie of our Kings, and of their Sacred Patrimonie and demea^es (which cannot be alienated, but by Engagement and condition of perpetuall Redemption,) Thus were matters carried, by the Lady of Beau^eu, Brissonnet, and De Vers, at the deare cost of France.
Now beginning to make spare, when all was spent to the bottome, the next recourse was to Borrowing;The borrowing of monies to supply vnaduised wants yet not of the people of France, whom the King would not oppresse: but of Strangers, and at the caution of the French Nobilitie. The Banck de Soly of Gennes furnished an hundred thousand Franckes, which cost foureteene thousand pounds Interest for foure Moneths. The Duchie of Sauoye lent her Iewels, which wee engaged for twelue thousand Ducates. As much did the Marquisate of Montferrat: And Lodowicke Sforza, vsurper on the State of Millaine, offred for the passage, fiue hundred men at Armes, waged with his money, and the lending of two hundred thousand Ducates.
The fu^ni^^^ment of the Armie appointed for the Land.With such small meanes did King Charles (yet neuerthelesse) set on foote a goodly Armie for the Land, and another for the Sea. In that for Land-Seruice, there were sixeteene thousand Men of Armes, two Archers for one Lance: Sixe thousand Archers on foote, and sixe thousand Crosse-bowes: eight thousand Harquebusiers, and men that carried two handed Swords: twelue hundred pieces of Canon, as well of lion as B^asse: two hundred Canonniers: eleauen hundred men to cast Bals of Artillerie, and to make Coales, Cords and Cables: eight thousand Horses of Artillery: foure thousand Carters to driue them: six thousand two hundred Pionners: sixe hundred Maisters Carpenters, and three hundred Masons.
The Armie for Sea seruiceThe Nauall or Sea Armie, consisted of eighteene Gallies, sixe Gallions, and nine great Ships. Lewes, Duke of Orleans, a yong and valiant Prince, was Lieutenant Generall of the Fleete. And the Lord Honoreo d Vrfe, the Maister of the Horse, prouided this Armie at the Port of Genewaye, a Common-wealth (at that time) subiect to the State of Millaine.
Attendants on the King in this Warlike expedition.Such as followed the King in this expedition, were the Count of Angoulesme, Father to King Frances the first; Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier; the Prince of Orenge; the Duke of Nemoux Iohn de Foix (formerly Viscount of Narbo^na) the Counts of Neuers, of Ligny, of Boulogne and of Bresse: The Lord Alain d'Albret, Father to the King of Nauarre, Iohn d'Albret; Lewes de la Trimouille, Viscount of Thouars: The Marshals de Gie, de Baudricourt and de Rieux: The Lords of Cruss^ll, of Tournon, of Piennes, of Suilly, of Aubigny, of Guise, of Chandenier, of Maule^^, of Prie, of Montezon, of Alegre, of Bonneuall, of Genouillac, of Chastillon, de la Palice, de Frainezeles, de Chaumont, de Vergy, de l'Hospitall, de Beaumont; the Bastards Mathew of Bourbon, and hee of Bourgongne, with many other Lords of noate.
In this braue furnishment, Charles departed from Vienna in Daulphine, to make for the Citie of Ast, belonging to the Duke of Orleans, the three and twentieth day of August,The setting forward of the Armie. in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and thirteene, leauing for Regent in France Peter, Duke of Bourbon, his Brother in Law.
Charles had (before) made surrender of the Counties of Roussillion and Cerdaigma to Ferdinand of Arragon, who, in the doing thereof, had promised to the King, to giue no succour, aide or fauour any way, to the Kings of Naples and of Sicilie his Cousines and Brother in Law, and so did he solemnely sweare vpon the Crosse and holy Euangelists in the Citie of Barcellona: An Oath immediately after violated by himselfe, when he saw that he was quietly seated in the surrendred Lands. For,(...) Ferdi^^nd of Arr^^on (...). perceiuing that it was fully couenanted, that the King should passe himselfe in person into Italie, for Conquering the Kingdome of Naples: he sent his Ambassadour Antonia Fonsequa, to protest, that he would aide (with his best meanes) the Kings of Naples, if so be the King would attempt vpon their Estate. He met with

the King at Velitres beyond Rome, to whom hee deliuered his Ambassage: whereto hee receiued not any answere; so much did the King hold in detestation, the perfidious disloyaltie of the Arragonian, without either Faith or Conscience.
The King continuing on his way for Ast,King Charles his Royall entertainment in the Cities of Italy. was magnificently welcommed into the good Cities of Italie, as at Pauia, Placentia, Luka, Pisa and Florence: Afterward at Viterbo, Sienna and at Rome, where he made his entrance into it like an Emperour (borne, and being the eldest Sonne of the Church) on the last day of the Moneth of December, in the same yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and thirteene, his whole Armie in Battaile arraye, and the Artillerie appointed about the Pallace of Saint Marke, where the King lodged. Pope Alexander the sixt (a natiue of Valentia in Arragon, and a partaker with Alphonso and Ferdinand) affrighted at such a Martiall entrance; lockt vp himselfe in the Castell of Saint Angelo. But at the same time, a great part of the same Castell wall being miraculously falne to the ground;The Pope affrigted at the Kings entrance the Pope was glad to submit himselfe to the Kings kindnesse, by the meanes and mediation of Iohn de Foix, Duke of Nemoux (hee had that Dukedome of the King, in counter-change for the Viscountie of Narbonna) the Counts of Bresse, and de Lig^y, as also the Marshall of Gie, and the Bishop of Angiers, Maister Iohn d^ Rely.
These two Princes being thus reconciled together,King Charles crowned Emperour of the Easte and of Constantinople by the Pope in Rome. the Pope keeping Chappell at the High Altar of Saint Peter in Rome, the Twentieth day of Ianuary, in the said yeare the King was Crowned Emperour of the East, and of Constantinople by the Pope; he being assisted with Fiue and Twenty Cardinals, Thirty Arch-bishops, Forty Bishops, and an infinite number of Prelates, Then was made Cardinall Bris^nnet of Saint Malo, principall motiue of this Voyage, with the Seneshall of Beucarie. And the same day the King handled the diseased of the Euill, who were instantly cured, the Italians admiring at such wonderfull power.
In the said City of Rome, where the King soiourned Eight and Twenty dayes,The power and authority of King Charles in Rome. were great places appointed and prepared for Iustice, and there erected Iibbets, Strappadoes in the Kings name: some were beheaded, others hanged, some beaten, their eares cut off, and diuers drowned as Theeues and Malefactors; especially in the great Market place, called Campo Fiore. Whereby the Italians might vnderstand, that as the Most Christian King, Eldest Sonne of the Church, whereto the Noble Kings of France (his Predicessors) had giuen the Riches and Seigneuries which she possessed: hee had in Rome all power in those three kindes of Iustice, tearmed high, meane and middle Iustice, and all Right of Soueraignty; euen as in the City of Paris, and other Cities of France. Contrary to the opinion of such, as, forging an imaginary Donation of Constantine, granted to the Pope S. Syluester: make the Popes to be absolute Princes, and Soueraigne Lords of Rome.
From whence Charles being departed the Eight and Twentieth day of Ianuary,The departure of King Charles from Rome towards Naples, and his good successe. to shape his course directly for Naples: the Castels of Montfortin, and of Mont Saint Iohn, the very strongest places in the Neopolitane Estate, were ouercome by assault; yet Alphonso had lien seauen yeares before the last of these Castles, and could not surprize it by force; which the French performed in lesse then Eight dayes, entring thereinto by a Breach, cutting the throats of Nine Hundred Fifty and Fiue men of Armes, for hauing so audaciously refused to render the place, the King then being before it himselfe in Person.
Ferdinand, Duke of Calabria, Sonne to Alphonso of Naples, was at Saint Germaines,Ferdinaneo and his Father get away out of Naples, and make for Sicilie. a place well fortified with three good strong Castles, as being the Key for entring into the Kingdome of Naples: but hauing heard the newes, that Mont Saint Iohn was surprized, where hee hoped that the French Army would bee vtterly defeated; hee forsooke that Towne to retreate himselfe to Naples. And thence also hee departed with his Father, directing their course toward Sicily, for plainly they perceiued, that (perforce) they must giue way to the victorious Armes of King Charles, whom God euen guided by the hand, to conquer Italy.
The King hauing brought Saint Germaines vnder his power, the men of Capua went and deliuered vp their City Keyes: whether hee went to lodge,Capua yeelded her Keyes to the King. and made

his entrance on the Eighteenth day of February. And the Twentieth day of (...) same Moneth, his Maiesty being lodged in the Towne of Auerzo: the Dep^i^^^ of Naples came and offered the Keyes of the Citie, and aduertised him withall that Alphonso and his Sonne Ferdinand had quitted the place, being fled secretly by S^^ into Sicily.
Into the City of Naples the King made his entrance in pompe and magnificenc^ on Sunday,The Citie of Naples surrendred to King Charles. the Eight and Twentieth day of February. Afterward both by Land and Sea he caused the Cittadell to be assayled, and the two Castels Ne^f and (...) ^Ocuf. The Cittadell was taken in the assault, and the Spanyards, Italians and other^ which were within it, hauing burned the houses which stood round about it; g^^ themselues into the Castell Neuf, where being pressed by a furious batt^rie, they yeelded vpon composition, to haue their liues and goods saued. Which place being taken, the whole Armie inuested the Castell de l'Oeuf, the batterie beginning (...) Wednesday the fourth day of March, and continued very violently vntill Thursday,The Cittadel. Castels and al the strong places won* and the Kings entrance the twelfth day of the same Moneth, when the resistants were then constrained to yeelde. So the King hauing conquered all the strong places of the Citie, he determined to make his entrance againe thereinto, as Emperour of the Romaines, King of France, of Naples, of Sicilie and of Ierusalem, on Tuesday the twelfth day of May, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and foureteene.
At this his entrance, he tooke the title of Charles Caesar Augustus, being cloa^hed in a great Cloake or Mantle of Scarlet, Furred with Ermines, the Imperiall Crowne on his head, the round Ball in his right hand, and a Scepter in the left, mounted on a Horse most richly harnessed.The fort^^ and order of the Maiesticall pompe. Ouer his head was carried a Canopie of rich Cloath of Gold, embrodered all ouer with Pearles, raised on sixteene Pillers or Staues, and supported by sixteene of the very worthiest Lords in all the Kingdome of Naples. About his person waited his Footemen, attired all in massie Cloath of Gold; the Prouost of the Hostell, and the Archers of his Guard. Before him went the Seneschall de Beau^arie,The Officers of State* and o^ others according to their ^an^ and places Gouernour of Gayetta (which was taken by force) representing the Constable of the Kingdome, and Monsieur Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier, Vice-Roy and Lieutenant Generall of the Realme. After the King followed the Prince of Salerne, who was became French; with the great Lords of France, Kinsemen to the King: then the Knights of his Order, all of them wearing long Cloakes of Scarlet, like vnto that of the Kings, and according to the fashion of the auncient Romaine Senators, Assistants and Councellors to the King, as those that formerly had bin to the Emperours of Rome.
The Seneschall or Steward of Naples.At dinner and Supper this day, the great Seneschall or Steward of Naples, cloathed all in white, and mounted on a white Courser, serued in all the meates before the King: who that day (with his owne hand) made many Lords Knights, and other Gentlemen of the City of Naples. In which Kingdome hauing left for Gouernour and Viceroy, Gilbert of Bourbon, Count of Montpensier: hee resolued to returne for France, and departed from the said City of Naples the One and Twentieth day of the same Moneth of May.
But before hee had set downe this firme resolution, hee had a purpose for the Conquest of Constantinople,King Charles hi^ ^otent (...) the conque^t of Constantinople. and for his better effecting the same, hee had constrained the Pope to deliuer into his hands Zizime, Brother to the Great Turke Bai^zeth the Second: who standing in feare of the Christians; paid yearely to the Pope Forty Thousand Duckats, because hee should not see him at liberty. The Popes vrging necessity, of deliuering him to King Charles, and loosing so much yearely money, made him to poyson him; so that hee liued but fifteene dayes at the most. Moreouer, the same Pope (in all hast) gaue aduertisement to Baiazeth by a Bo^c^r of Geneway, concerning the precedent purpose of King Charles.
And the same Pope named Alexander the Sixt, an Arragonian by Nation, and (in that quality) partaker with the House of Arragon; practised a League against the King, of the Emperour, the Castilian, the Venetians, Florentines, Duke of Millaine, and other Potentates of Italy, who fearing the Conquests of the French, had no desire at all to deale with them. For notwithstanding all faire outward apparances*

^hey hated the Dominion of the French; and in no better manner affected the Spaniards; but reputed them both proud and arrogant, not to be endured.
Since the beginning of the Kings passage on his Iourney, Duke Lewes of Orleans,The fortunes of Duke Lewes of Orleans, Lieutenant of the Nauall Armie* ^is Lieutenant Generall in the Nauall Army, on the Sea had vanquished Fredericke of Arragon, Vncle to Ferdinand, whom Alphonso the Father (before hee forsooke the City of Naples) had caused to bee published abroad, yea, and proclaimed King of Naples and of Sicily. The same Duke of Orleans perceiuing, that Lodowicke Sforza had vniustly vsurped the Dukedome of Millaine against his Nephewes, whom hee had put to dea^h by poyson, and that the said Duke was entred League with the Pope and other Potentates of Italy, to enclose the King at his returne; possessed himselfe of the City of Nouara in the Estate of Millaine, which (as indeed it was true) belonged to him, in regard of his Grandmother Valentina. On the contrary side,Lodowicke Sforza his hope for the surprizall of Ast. Lodowicke Sforza maintained himselfe in his vsurpation, and (in counterchange) laboured to surprize the Towne of Ast, appertaining to the said Duke of Orleans, thinking to finde nobody there to defend it; as hee might haue done, if hee had sooner thought on it: for the Marquesse of Saluces had sent thither Fiue Hundred men, and other troupes of well appointed Soldiers, which the Duke of Bourbon (Regent) had sent out of France to assist the King. But these Forces came very conueniently to coape with the men of Millaine, conducted by Count Galeazzo of S. Seuerino. So the Towne of Ast continued in obedience to Lewes, Duke of Orleans, who being possessed also of the City of Nouara (which is ten miles from Millaine) and the Castle thereof; was immediately after assailed by the said Lodowicke Sforza.
Now, the King being parted from Naples,The returne of King Charls the ^^ght from Naples, and his fortunes by the way. came backe by Auerso to Rome (from whence the Pope was gone) and won the Estate of the Venetians, Sienna and Pisa, (which hee tooke into his protection against the Florentines, and gaue the Gouernment to Lewes of Luxembourg, Count of Ligny his Cousin) with Luca and Petra Sancta, where is the passage of the Alpes. And from thence he went to Scura, Serezana, and Pontremo, the entrance of the Alpes mountaines, where the Germaines by maine strength passed all the great Artillery.
From Pontremo, the King came to lodge at Fornoua, the foote of the Alpie Mountaine: neere to which Borrough the Italians were enca^ped, to giue the King Battaile. The Marquesse of Mantua was Captaine Generall of the Venetians, and for the Duke of Millaine was the Count of Gayazza, who hauing forsaken the French side* tooke part with Lodowicke Sforza, to whom hee was then Lieutenant Generall. This Army of the Enemy consisted of very neere Forty Thousand men, all in good furnishment; and the Kings amounted not to the fourth part of them.
On Monday the Sixt day of Iuly, One Thousand, Foure Hundred,The memorable B^tta^le fought at ^orno^a, in Anno. 1495. Foure Score and Fifteene, was fought this memorable Battell of Fornoua; the honour whereof remained to King Charles the Eight. The Marshall of Gie conducted the Auantgarde, wherein, next vnder God, the King had placed all his hope. The King was in this Battaile armed at all points, his Armour most richly engrauen and gilded.The Royall presence of the King in his Army. Vpon his Cuirasse he ware a Cassocke of Cloth of Siluer, Dammasked with Red, (for his Liueries were Carnation and white) semed in embroyderie of Gold with the Crosse of Ierusalem. The Helmet on his head was of pure Gold, couered with a most rich Crowne, and hee was mounted on a goodly Courser, blacke haired, and named Blacke Sauoy, because Charles Duke of Sauoy had sent the Horse to him as a present, richly barded, with the Chanfraine of great value, whereon was exalted a braue plume of Feathers, Carnation and White, the Caparisons and other furniture being answerable to the Coate of Armes, semed with the Crosse of Ierusalem.
In this Royall equipage and manner mounted, this Prince (aged but Foure and Twenty, or Fiue and Twenty yeares) appeared farre otherwise then his nature carried, or his stature, or complexion: for the horse shewed him, to bee great, and his countenance had a cheerefull coulour, his words likewise discreet and bold. For all these respects was his person particularly obserued by his enemies,A braue King is an eye-so^e to his enemies. who purposed to beset him soundly; but neere to him was the Basta^d of Bourbon, Mathew, who that day performed wonders, to saue and guard the person of the King.
The beginning and prosecution of the Battaile.The Enemies (who were ten to one) began the fight, close ioyning to the Valley of Tarro at a place called Vergera, two miles from Fornoua, and foure miles from Parma: but the fire and fury thereof was about the Kings person, who acted maruailes in his fighting, being brauely seconded by Mathew of Bourbon, Lewes de la Trimouille, and Iohn Iaques de Triuulce, a Millanois, expulsed the City of Naples by Alphonso and Ferdinand. Since which time of his disgrace, he tooke part with King Charles, whom he serued both profitably and very faithfully, as being a very valiant and wise Captaine.
The enemies Armie felt (as yet) more feare then harme, for part of them being falne vpon the baggage, to make prey thereof, seemed to minde nothing more: but the French, making no account of so poore a losse, and perceiuing that the person of the King was safe; fell with such fury vpon the Italians, that they who were most valiant in the Army, began to flye in a most strange confusion, as appearing to haue neither manly feare nor shame.
The small French Army relieued almost by miracle.A small Riuer which they had formerly passed, to come and enclose the Kings person, had so enlarged it selfe in a moment, by meanes of a storme of Raine, Thunder and Lightening, which happened while they were at fierce handy stroakes (God fighting for the noble King of France, whom he guided by the hand) that such as aduentured to passe it againe (which was no small number) neuer thinking on the perill they ranne into, were all furiously carried away and drowned in the water,The Army of the Italians foyled and put to flight. and the greater part of the Infantery slaine in the field, but the Lords of worth were taken. Of the French there was slaine Seauen Hundred in all, and among them onely Ten Gentlemen of note.
The Bastard of Bourbon, by pursuing the runnawayes ouerfar, without being seconded, was take^ prisoner by the enemies, who sent, to the King the next morning, to craue fauour for carrying away their dead, to giue them buriall. Which he would not permit, but as a signal of the victory, which God had bestowed on him, contrary to all humane hope: lodged that night in the Field of Battaile, and remained there on the morrow till towards the Euening, when hee went to lodge two miles thence, at an appointed place,The Artillery placed about th^ Kings royall Pauilion. named Magdelane, whither the Artillery was brought from the Field, and placed about the Kings Pauilion.
On hee iourneyed in the despight of his enemies, and came to Nouara in good time for the Duke of Orleans, besiedged there by them of Millaine: who were compelled to rais^ their Siedge, and get them gone to Millaine againe. From Nouara the King went to the City of Ast, and thence to Verceillis, where dyed the Count of Vendosme, (a worthy Prince of the House of Bourbon) to the no little griefe of the French. His death happened on Friday, the Second day of October, in the said yeare, Foure Hundred, Foure Score and Fifteene: his Obsequies were celebrated in the principall Church of Verceilles, but his dead body was carried to Vendosme.
The reuolt of Neapolitanes so soone as King Charles was gone thence, and the extremity of the French.Charles at his returne to France, addicted himselfe to Iusts and Tournaments, and to bee familiar with Ladies; without much remembring them whom hee had left in Italy, scarsly well entreated by the Neapolitanes; who reuolted (in fauour of Ferdinand) so soone as the King was departed. And in such manner, that the Count of Montpensier was constrained to withdraw himselfe to Salerne with the Prince thereof, who still continued honestly French.
In Calabria was the Lord of Aubigny; in Brescia the Lord Gratian des Guerres; Georges de Suilly at Tarentum, all of them in miserable case and brought to extreame necessity, through want of Victuals and money, hauing remained a yeare and an halfe without any succour or money sent from France. So that the French were enforced to yeeld themselues to Ferdinand of Arragon, who (as then) stiled himselfe King of Naples and of Sicilie boldly.
The Count (...) Montpensier poysone^ by the Neap^l^tane.Charles being aduertised of these bad newes, and likewise of the death of the Lord de Montpensier (impoysoned by the Neapolitane) which brought along with it more then hope for reddition of the City of Gayetta, the sole entrance for regaining the State of Naples: resolued to set another puissant Armie on foote, and repasse it againe to Naples; hauing named for his Lieutenant Generall the Duke of Orleans. But he refused that charge, alleadging one while one excuse, and then againe another. Now

indeed the truth was, that being well informed of the Kings condition, to be so weake and impotent of nature, as presaged no long continuance for him; hee would not leaue France, the Crowne whereof appertained to him, because the King had not any Sonnes.
In regard of these refusals, the King determined to goe himselfe in person thither,The sudden death of King Charles the Eight. which he could not doe, in being preuented by sudden death, as hee was looking out of his Gallery window, at his Castle d'Amboise, (which hee caused to bee newly rebuilded euen as now it is at this day) beholding the Princes and Lords of his Court, playing at Tennis. Hee dyed the Seauenth day of Aprill, the end of the yeare Foure Score and Seauenteene, before Easter, at which day sollemnly begin the yeares in France. In Guienne they begin on the day of the Incarnation of our Lord, which is the Fiue and Twentieh day of March.
This Prince some while before his death, made a vow to God,The Kings vow before his death. no more to commit any mortall sinne: he withdrew himselfe from the worldly vanities of his Court, forsooke the loue of Ladies, and liued chastly wth his wife Queene Anne, a beautifull and wise Princesse.
At the houre of his death, hee entred into the Flower of his Age,The age of the King at his death. hauing finished but Seauen and Twenty yeares. Of his owne naturall disposition, he was humble and courteous to euery one, bountifull and magnificent, a good Catholique, without hypocrisie, faithfull, an vpright Iusticer without dissimulation, and well beloued of his people. Of whom, and of all strangers hee won the reputation, to be the most valiant and couragious Prince of his person, that had beene seene in an hundred yeares before. From Amboise his body was carried to Paris, and from thence to Saint Denis,His body carried from Amboise and buried at S Denis. in France, where his Figure is to bee seene in Brasse, kneeling on his knees, and his hands closed, but aduanced towards heauen, with this Epitaph, as a testimony of his valiancie.




The Epitaph hanging in a goodly Table by his Tombe.
HIc Octaue iaces Francorum Carole Regum,
Cui victa est forti Britonis ora manu.
Parthenope illustrem tribuit captiua triumphum,
Claraque Fornouio pugna peracta solo.
Coepit et Henricus regno depulsus auito,
Bellare auspicijs sceptra Britanna tuis.
O plures longinque dies si fata dedissent,
Te nullus toto maior in Orbe foret.




Hee was deformed in face and body, but in recompence thereof,His deformity recompenced with greater blessings. God had giuen him a faire minde, susceptible and capable of haughty enterprises: which (without all question to the contrary) would haue beene executed, if his life had lasted longer time.
The Conquests of Charles the Eight in Italy, were trauersed by the King of Castile, Ferdinand of Arragon, contrary to former promise, and by Pope Alexander the Sixt* pertaker with the House of Arragon, a coniurd Enemy against our Charles, from whom (in violence of passion) hee laboured to take the name of most Christian King, for transferring it to the said Ferdinand of Castile.The Cardinals in opposition against the Pope. But the Cardinals opposed themselues couragiously against him, so that this Pope deuised another name or title, giuing to the said Ferdinand and his Wife the Sirname of Catholique Kings; a name which hath euer since remained to them, for hauing brought to end the warres of Granado.
King Lewes hauing succeeded in the Crowne, repudiated Madame Iane of France, whom hee had espoused perforce, and tooke to Wife Madame Anne of Bretaigne, widdow to King Charles the Eight. After this Marriage, he made his preparations for recouering his Dukedome of Millaine, (which belonged to him,Preparation to recouer Millaine. in the right of Valentina of Millaine, his Grandmother, as wee haue formerly related in the Order of Orleans) and for the expulsion of Lodowicke.
Hereupon, and to effect what he intended, he caused a potent Army to passe the mountaines, conducted by the Lord d' Aubigny^ Robert Stuart, an honourable S^, Marshall of France, called the good Father of Cheualrie, and Iohn Iacques d^ Tri^le^, a Millanois (afterward Marshall of France) who at their first approach, tooke Ni^ and Rocque, laid Alexandria in the dust, the spoyle whereof serued for recompence to the Souldiours. Pauia fearing to runne the same ryot, yeelded it selfe freely to the French:Millaine ta^ (...) the (...). so that within the compasse of fifteene dayes, they conquered the Dukedome of Millaine. All this while was Lodowicke within the City, who growing distrustfull of the people; got secretly thence with his two Sonnes, escaping by the Lake of Coma, and fled toward Maximilian, King of the Romaines, to deriue some succour from him. By his departure, Millaine was taken by the French, the fourth day of September, in the yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, Foure Score and Nineteene; the Castell still holding out for Lodowicke the Moore.
King Lewes his entrance into Millaine.Lewes the Twelfth receiued tidings at Lyons, concerning the surprizall of Millaine; whether hee went with all diligence, and made his entrance into it. The Captaine of the Rocquet or Cittadell, who could well haue held it two yeares space at the least, so strongly it was furnished with all things necessary; did yet neuerthelesse yeeld it into the Kings hand, to haue the moity of the goods and riches that were in it.
Lodowicke, assisted by the forces of Maximilian, preuailed on so farre, that hee got entrance into Millaine, by intelligence and reuolt of the Inhabitants, this was done the third day of Ianuary, in the said yeare foure hundred fourescore and Nineteene; the French yet keeping st^ll the Casteli, which Lodowicke could not get by friendship nor force.
The yeare of Iubile at Rome.The Iubilie for the Seculer yeare, One thousand fiue hundred, being open at Rome (the Eeuen of Christmasse, in the said yeare foure score and nineteene, on which day the Romaines begin their yeare) by Pope Alexander the Sixt: great concourse of the p^ople (of all Nations) flocked into Italy, namely of the French, whose deuotion was much troubled by the bad dealing of Lodowicke, who did set their liues at open sa^e giuing a Duckate for euery head brought him: so that in all the Innes and Hosteries throughout Italy,The blood^ cruelty of Lod^wicke to the (...) their (...). vpon the high roade w^yes conducting to Rome, French Pilgrimes throats were cut most cruelly. Which was no sooner discouered, but the French Army, remaining in the parts about Millaine, made warre (without any pity) on them of Millaine, and so fast as any of them could be taken, bloud for bloud seru^d to expiate and appease the Ghosts of the French. And for example to the Hosteries and Innes (all crimson ^incturd with their blood:) diuers were burned with their Maisters, Wiues, Maid-seruants and Men-seruants, without sparing sparing so much as their Cats, which serued as no meane terror an affright to others.
The first Voya^ of K^ng Charle^ beyond the AlpesNow, that which gaue subiect to the Millanoises (by their owne confession) to reuolt from Lewes the twelfth, was this extreame bad behauiour in the French. At the first Voyage which King Charles the Eight made beyond the Mountaines; the Italians (so speaketh our French Salust Philip de Commines) adored the French, reputing them to bee Saints, and saying, that they had not their like for goodnesse, Faith, mildnesse and discretion. But this good opinion of them lasted not long, fo^ our French misgouerned Libertines, by their riots and robberies, declared the quite contrary: and gaue apparant subiect of being accused, for taking mens wiues perforce from them, and goods from the people, wheresoeuer they could find them by night or day.
Concerning the women, it may be that they lied not; and for the rest, doubtlesse somwhat was done;(...) for the French could not finde any thing too hot, or too heauie; a disease neuerlesse) as common to the Italians, Germaines, Spaniards, and other Nation* as to the French. But this was it that confounded the Kings affaires, which otherwise had carried themselues formally: but being conducted without any order, and the French Souldiers transported with pilferies; this was the reason, of al^^nating the Italians from their former affection to the French, to the great griefe

and discontentment of honest mindes, for the extraordinary honour and renowne, which the French nation might haue won to themselues in this Voyage.
And such bad behauiours,The naturall disposition of the Italians. are meanes vtterly contrary for attaining to any great Conquest, in what part soeuer it is (but especially in Italy) and to keepe it long: because the Italians are the most iealous and couetous Nation, beyond all other in the world. Wherefore, whosoeuer would make him selfe a Potentate in Italy; hee must hold it for an infallible Maxime, to be very modest and retent in all his actions; but especially towards women, and to lay no oppression vpon the people.
The Italians are inconstant, and desire nothing more then change;Distrust is the mother of ^surance. they contemne the facility of the French, and hate the rigor of the Dutch, a Nation diuers wayes proud and tyrannicall, yet can better conserue their Conquests, then we: who of all our Voyages to Piedmont, Millaine, Naples, and Sicilie, haue not reserued one inch of ground. Diffidence is the Mother of Assurance, and to make our owne best beginning, it behoueth vs first to conquer our selues.
Maxima cunctarum Victoria, victa voluptas.
A graue Verse,The Epitaph on the tombe of great Scipio well seruing for an Epitaph on the Tombe of Great Scipio the Affrican: who abstained from all force and violence towards men and their goods. Moreouer, to containe the people subiected to duty, by a moderated gouernment betweene mildnesse and power: is to stand vpon good guard night and day, and not to trust ought else, but in good behauiour towards the Italians, with whom to communicate and be the least familiar, is the best and safest.
Now the men of Millaine being thus reduced vnder the obedience of Lord Lodowicke; the King was constrained once more, to bring an Army into the Field;King Lewes raiseth anothe^ Army against Lod^wicke. which he committed to the conduct of Messire Lewes de la Trimouille, Viscount of Th^nars: who hauing made an agreement betweene the Lords of Aubigny and of Tri^lce; all three ioyned together, and gaue such order and direction to the Army, that Lodowicke standing in feare thereof, was inforced againe to forsake Millaine, with an hundred horse onely, and so withdrew himselfe to Nouara, where was his Army and Artillery. As speedily was he followed by the French Army, whereto a Bot^gongnon Captain, named Des Yottieres, yeelded himselfe, being come forth of the said Towne of Nouara, wherein (at that time) for Ledowicke were foure thousand Swizzers, eight thousand Lans-kenets, about sixe or seauen thousand Lombards, and eight hundred Bourgongnons, who with the said Captaine Des Yottieres, ioyned themselues to the French Army on the one side, and the foure thousand Swizzers, won by the Bailiffe of Dijon, on the other side.
Lodowicke came forth into the Field, and presented Battaile to the French,The Army of Lodowicke faileth him in the Field. which they accepted very willingly, and Lodowicks Army comming to handy blowes; they submitted to the French without striking one stroake: because the Swizzers and Lans-kenets being not paid their Wages, they would not by any meanes fight. Such misfortunes as this, doe often happen to Princes, that make vse of Strangers seruice, who when need requireth; will bee sure to hold their hands, making three or foure demands for money before the Battaile, when they well know it is not to be had. Let a Prince therefore prouide his Army of his owne Subiects,A very worthy aduice giuen to Princes of whom he shall bee better and more profitably serued: for strangers soules are meerely mercenary, and they affect not Princes, but in regard of the benefit they can deriue from them; They are for their seruice that will giue them most, and their loue is poysed in the Ballance with their wages, but no otherwise. Lodowicke being thus betrayed, disguised himselfe in the habite of a Gray-Frier, as hoping so to saue himselfe. But the Lord of Trimouille, causing a passage to be made betweene two Pikes crossed, for all them of the enemies Army, departing with their liues and goods saued, one after another: Lodowicke being knowne, was taken,Lodowicke taken and sent Prisoner into France. and sent Prisoner to Chasteau de Pie^re Encise at Lyons, from whence he was (not long after) transported to the great Tower of Bourges, and there he finished his dayes.
The Towne of Nouara by this meanes yeelded it selfe to the King, who had for (...) part of the victory (won on the thursday before Palme-Sunday in the same yeare fourescore and nineteen) Lodowicke, and all his Artilery, with the Towne of Nouara, very rich and mighty in goods.
Ascanio Sforza brother to Lod^wicke.The Cardinall Ascanio Sforza, lest Gouernour at Millaine by his Brother, hauing heard the tidings of his surprizall: departed thence, accompanied with sixe hundred Horse, belonging to the richest Inhabitants, and some pieces of Artillery, taking his way towards Bologna. On the way hee was met by a Venetian Captaine, th^^ came with his troupe to ioyne with the Armie Royall. This Captaine was named Soncino Biansono, who crying out aloud France and Saint Marke; set vpon the Cardinalls Company, conducted by Count Iohn, Brother to the Marquesse of Mantua, (...) whom hee gaue charge, to pursue him fighting to Chasteau de Riuolles, where the Cardinall was as soone inuested by the Venetian, who had prisoner in his power Count Iohn of Mantua, of whom hee had a great ransome. With him was taken the Abb^t of Sanzeles, foure of the Viscounts, Captaine Bardo, and an hundred thousand Duck^^ in ready money, with all the Iewels of the Cardinall Ascanio, who likewise was contented to yeeld, onely his life saued. Hee was deliuered into the hands of Stephen de Vers, Seneschall of Beau^aire, Lord of Montoison, and the Iudge Mage of Prouence: who brought him safely to Chasteau de Pierre-Encise at Lyons, euen where before his Brother was imprisoned.
The lamentable condition of the Millain^ises vpo^ losse of their Duke and his Brother.The Inhabitants of Millaine much daunted at the surprizall of their Duke, his Brother also, and the discomfiture of their Armie, by that of the Kings which had inuested them; sent their Deputies to the Cardinall George d'Amboise; who by the King was established Lieutenant Generall ouer the Millainers; entreating him to take compassion of them, to saue their City from pillage, and to make his entrance into it, crauing most humbly pardon of him, for their offence committed, by admitting Lord Lodowicke into their City. The Cardinall made it manifest to them, by Master Michaell de Ris, Doctor of the Lawes, and Councellour in the Parliament of Bourgongne, that the enormity of their rebellion was punishable with death: because (without any subiect) they had withdrawne themselues from obedience to their King and Soueraigne Lord, who had so mildly and mercifully dealt with them. And that the summe of a million of Pounds which they paid yearly to Lodowicke in taxes and tallages, hee had moderated it to the summe of sixe hundred and two and twenty thousand pounds (here is to be noted,The Dukedome of Millaines yearely valuation. that the Dukedome of Millaine valued yearely fifteene hundred thousand Duckats) which gentle and mild vsage in the French, they had neuerthelesse vtterly forgot.
All which notwithstanding, hee declared to them in the Kings name, that hee would spare the liues of the Inhabitants, and exempt their City from pillage, and all the people from death, which they had iustly deserued, vpon condition: that they would yeeld and deliuer to him, the principall Authours of the rebellion, to bee iustly punished, and themselues (for euer after) continue faithfull to the King, and to his Successours the Kings of France, their Dukes and Soueraigne Lords.
Moreouer, to defray the charges of this last warre, the City of Millaine should (for an honourable amends) pay three hundred thousand Ducates; to wit, fifty thousand in the present Moneth of Aprill, One thousand, fiue hundred and fifty thousand the first day of May next followng; and the other two hundred thousand at the end of the same yeare, except the King would be pleased in clemencie, to prolong them a further time for the last payment.
The Card^nall d'Amb^^se his entrance (...) Millaine.Which being agreed vnto, the Cardinall d'Amboise entred into Millaine vpon Good Friday, it being the seauenteenth day of Aprill: accompanied wih Ioh^ Iacques de Triuulce (Marshall of France in the time of King Frances) the Bishop of Luc^n, Chancellour of Millaine, the Lord of Neuf-Chastell, with other Lords and Captaines of the Armie. Hee went to lodge at the Hostell called La Cour-Vi^^ll^, the Pallace belonging to the first Viscounts of Millaine, whether the three Estate^ thereof went in solemne procession, bearing the Crucifixe and Banner of the Virgin Mary; after which followed all the Children of the City, Sonnes and Daughters, cloathed all in white, and in this manner the Cardinall welcomed them in the Court of his Pallace, sitting aloft vpon a Theater, and round about him his French Lords and Captaines. For the Inhabitants, the man most famous among their Aduocates,The Cardinals mercy to the Citizens. named Maister Michael Touse, made the Oration, desiring grace and mercy o^

^heir behalfe. The Councellour de Ri^ returned a kinde and mercifull answere, more then the inconstant people deserued: which being concluded, all the young Children (innocent in the guilt of their Fathers) passed two and two together ^efore the French Lords, crying with lowd voyces, France, France, Mercy, Mercy.
Now King Lewes the Twelfth, hauing recouered his Dukedome of Millaine, (wherein he established as his Lieutenant Generall Iohn Iacques de Triuulce, Marshall of France, a Lord naturally affected of the Countrey, and most faithfull to the Crowne of France) with the Seigneuries of Geneway, where gouerned (for his Maiesty) the Prince Philip of Cleues, Lord of Rauastaine,The Kings purpose to conquer Naples and Sicily. his Cousin by the Mothers side: hee resolued to conquer the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicily. To effect his intention, he caused to passe into Italy his Lieutenant Generall Lewes of Armaignac, Duke of Nemoux, and Messire Robert Stuart, a valiant Scottishman, Lord of Aubigny, Knight of his Order, and Marshall of France, worthily called, The Father of Chiualrie, who (in short time) reconquered the City and Kingdome of Naples, against Dom Fredericke of Naples, who after the death of Dom Ferdinand his Nephew, had possessed himselfe thereof.
His resistance was but of small continuance,Dom Frederick conquered and sent ^nto France. being compelled to yeeld himselfe to the Lord of Aubigny, who sent him into France, whither (within few dayes after) his Wife and Children, excepting the Eldest Dom Ferdinand of Arragon, Duke of Calabria, who had fortified himselfe in the City of Tarentum) followed him. So came the Kingdome of Naples againe to her legi^imate and naturall Lord the Kings of France, in the yeare of our Saluation, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred and Two.
Ferdinand of Arragon King of Castile (to whom the French gaue the name of Iohn Gippon) was most highly offended at these Conquests of the French in Italie,The Conquests of the French in Italie enuied by Ferdinand of Arragon. and practised all meanes hee could deuise, to turne the winde a contrary way. Particularly he dealt with the Venetians (at all times held a^d knowne to be wise and well aduised worldlings) to assist these partakers of Arragon, for the kingdome of Naples; as they did within a while after. He (for his owne part) making an outward shew of being well pleased, at the successefull fortunes of the French, gaue charge to his Sonne in Law Philip, Arch-duke of Austria (Father vnto Charles the Fift) that, at his returning into the Netherlands or Low-Countries, hee should resolue on a brotherly amity, in him towards King Lewes, who as then soiourned at Lyons, as being neerest to him of his Estates, that were in Italy.
Philip being there well entertained,The County of Flanders a Peeredome of France. performed to the King Liedge homage for the County of Flanders, a Peeredome of France: so practised and done in fauour of King Ferdinand his Father in Law, when they made this agreement; to wit. That the said Ferdinand should enioy the Realme of Sicily, and beare the title, renouncing for the King, all right which he had or could pretend; and her yeelding it to the said Ferdinand and his Successors; moreouer and beside the Countries of Apuglia and Calabria, neighbours to Sicilie.The accord betweene Ferdinand and the Kings of France. As Ferdinand (for his part) acquitted and released to the King, and to his Successors Kings of France, the Title of King of Naples, and of Ierusalem, with all that hee could pretend thereto, without any time afterward, either he or his Successors should take the titles, or vse the Armes. And that vnto the Kings of France should remaine Abbruzzo and Terra di Laucuro (wherein is the City of Naples) which Lands of Abbruzzo and di Laucuro, assigned to the French with the said Titles and Armes of Kings of Naples and of Ierusalem, and those of Calabria and Apuglia, assigned to the Arragonnois, should bee a conquered and wonne by these two Kings each at his owne cost and by power, without any damage or disturbance ensuing by the one to the other.
This Partition or diuision was approued by Pope Alexander the Sixt, and peace sworne betweene these two great Princes, Lewes the Twelfth,The peace sworne betweene France and Spaine. and Ferdinand the First, King of Spaine, called th Catholique. Wherein were comprehended Maximilian King of the Romanes, and his Sonne Philip, Arch-duke of Austria: published and proclaimed in the City of Lyons, the Fourth day of Aprill, after Easter, in the yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred and three.
Lewes had vsed (very fauourably) Fredericke of Naples, to whom, and to his Wife and Children hee had assigned in Aniou the principall Cities and Townes for their Estate,Fredericke of Naples dies in France in the City of Tours. to the value of Thirty Thousand Crownes of Rents, which hee enioyed to his decease, and which hapned in the City of Tours. Hee had beene foure yeares King of Naples, hauing succeeded his Nephew Dom Ferdinand, Successor to his Father Dom Alphonso: euen he who (pressed by the victorious Armes of King Charles, after hee had made knowne for King his said Sonne Ferdinand) fled into Sicilie, where hee dyed a Monke; who was Sonne and Successour in the same Kingdome to Ferdinand, the Bastard Sonne to Don Alphonso of Arragon, Adopted by the Second Ioane Queene of Naples, as wee haue formerly reported to you.
Gonsalo Ferdinande^ de Cord^ua sent into the Kingdome of NaplesFerdinand, to the preiudice of the accord and peace, which had beene sworne to Lewes the Twelfth; sent into the kingdom of Naples Dom Gonsalo Ferdinandes de Cordua, to whom the Spaniards had giuen the Sirname of a great and valiant Captaine, who receiued secret command, that possessing himselfe of Apuglia and Calabria: he should find some apt and conuenient means, wherby to expell the French out of the Kingdome of Naples: which Realm is diuided into sixe principal Prouinces, as name. Terra di Lauouro,The (...) of Nap^es. La Principalita, La Basilicata, Calabria, Apuglia and Abruzzia. Pouilla or Apuglia is subdiuided in three parts: the Land of Otranto, that of Bari, and the Capitanate ioyned to Abruzzo, and separated from Apuglia, by the Riuer of Ofanta; so that the Capitanate had beene at all times esteemed and ceenzed ioyned to Abruzzo.
This is the most fertile Countrey of Italy, as well for all manner of Corne, as feeding of Cattell: so that the Custome thereof valueth (at the least) Fo^^e Se^^^ Thousand Duckats yearly, and comprized with the Partage of the French.
The naturall disposition of braue Leaders and Captaines.Gonsalo neuerthelesse, according to the disposition of a Commander, whose naturall inclination is, alwayes to p^eferre the enlarging of their estate before the feare of God, and saith sworne and promised with most exquisite solemnity; laying cla^me to the Capitanate, possessed himselfe thereof perforce, alleadging, that it belonged to his partage, as ioyning to Apuglia, which it could not doe.
But this Captaine hath beene said in all his actions and course of life, to be a man faithlesse and without feare of God, and was euermore wont to say. That a Soldiour who desireth to make himselfe famous to Posterity,(...) right or wrong. should build his fortune according to those occurrences, whereby hee findeth the best meanes to doe it, and to warpe the cloath of his hon^ur with a grosse woofe: without caring what men may iudge concerning the right or wrong of his Armes; prouided, that hee doe aduance the affaires of his Maister.
And now the French are to seene in Armes, standing on their Guard against their enemies, appearing at their first arriuall milde as Lambes, loath to be moued: Afterward like Lyons, against such as would take their Pasturage from them. In all occasions else, men of Warre, of long foresight and prouidence, in managing and conseruing their Conquests, the honour and the profit of them.
A second agreement and pacification.The French being succoured, regained the Capitanate, and shut vp Gonsalo in Barleta; who aided likewise by his men, had his reuenge. Hee made a second agreement and pacification, notwithstanding which, albeit sworne againe by the King, and Ferdinand of Arragon: yet Gonsalo left not the pursuit of his intent. And by surprizing the Lord of Aubigny, by the death the Vice-Roy of Naples, Lewes of Arma^^nac;(...) the Spaniards became Maisters of that which we held there, and namely of the City of Naples, whereof the said Ferdinand Gonsalo de Cordoua, possessed himselfe the Thirteenth day of May, in the yeare Fiue Hundred and Three.
The Pope (...).This surpriz^ll happened by default in the Venetians, who had promised succour to the King but they performed it not: which made him conclude to giue them battaile at A^nadell, which was won by the French, the King being there in person, on Friday the eighteenth day of May, One thousand, fiue hu^dred and nine After which Pope Iulius the Second (turning his back on the King, who had co^quered and rendred those Townes which the Venetians held of the Churches Patrimony) inuested in the Kingdome of Naples, One thousand, fiue hu^dred and ten; Ferdinand of Arragon paying

Eight thousand Ounces of Gold, payable yearely on the day of the Prince of the Apostles, and from three yeares to three yeares, a white Hackney, Fifty thousand Crownes of Siluer in ready money, and the wages of three hundred men of Armes, at all times, and as often, as hee should bee summoned thereto, on behalfe of the Sacred Seate.
Against this Pope and his pertakers, was won the Battaile of Rauenna,The famous Battaile of Rauenna fought on Easter day. by the Gentle and Couragious Prince Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemoux, Counte de Estampes, Nephew to the King, and his Lieutenant Generall in Italie, by the death of Charles de Amboise. The victory of this Battaile, wonne vpon the sollemne day of Easter, being the Eleuenth day of April, lbeginning the yeare one Thousand, fiue hundred and twelue; was on the French side, albeit they lost their chiefest Leader there.
This good Pope Iulius the Second, brought troubles quite throughout all Italie, onely to expell the French nation thence. He excommunicated King Lewes the Twelfth; Maximilian, King of the Romanes, and other pertakers with the French. The Bull of the said excommunication, was giuen at Saints Peters the foureteenth of the Calends of August, One thousand, fiue hundred and eleauen, and of his Po^rificalitie the eight Subsigned Iulius Ecclesiae Catholica Episcopus;The King of France excommunicated by Pope Iulius the second. which fulmination was declared to be of none effect or vertue, by the Galicane Church. It was also the same Pope, who seconding the desseignes of Ferdinand of Arragon, whom he had inuested in the Kingdome of Naples; gaue him a secret Bull of dispensation, to possesse himselfe of the Kingdome of Nauarre, against Iohn de Albret, and Queene Katharine his wife, for being allied and of kinred, and taking part with King Lewes the Twelfth. This Bull beareth date the Eighteenth day of Februry, in the yeare for Inuesting the said Ferdinand in the Kingdome of Naples, One Thousand fiue hundred and tenne, the seauenth of his Pontificalitie, at the Pallace of Laterane.
Vrbanus Reuersus, Chanon and Chaunter of the Citty of Sens, and Doctour in Diuinitie, in his Booke of the liues of the Archbishops of Sens writeth, that after the Battaile at Rauenna, won on the sollemne feast day of Easter,Concerning three Verses composed by the Pope in honor of the Virgin Mary. beginning the yeare fiue hundred and twelue against Pope Iulius the Second, the elected Emperour Maximillian, and the Venetians; the said Pope Iulius, ouer and beside his fury against the French, and King Lewes the twelfth, King of Naples, Duke of Millaine and Lord of Geneway; composed three verses and small Prayers, in honour of the Virgin Mary, to expell the French out of Italie. And he ordained, that they should be said thorow all the lands vnder his obedience, and of his Allies and Confederates euery day, at Morning and Euening, at towling the Bell for Aue Maria; with great Pardons and Indulgences to all such as said them. To meete equally with this kinde affection in Pope Iulius, (a Martiallist and warriour) good King Lewes the twelfth, father of his people, obtained of the Prelates and Cleargy of France; that euery day, in all Churches Cathedrall, Collegiall, Conuentuall and Parochiall, at the eleuation of the body of our Lord in the Masse, this Versicle should be sung.

O Salutaris HostiaVerses made to answer the kindenesse of Pope Iulius.
Quae Coeli pandis ostium,
Bella premunt hostilia
Da robur, fer auxilium.

But in the Oratorie and Chappell of the King, the Chaunters in that place, instead of Fer auxilium, vsed to say.
Da robur, Serua Lilium.
Which was afterward was put in practise, by all the Cathedrall and Parish Churches thorow France.
But the good King Lewes the twelfth, being deceased in his hostell Des Tournelles at Paris, the first day of Ianuary, one thousand foure hundred and foureteene,King Frances the first his comming to the Crowne. King Frances the first, his cousine, the very neerest to succeed him, came to the Crown of France, and to the pretensions of Ierusalem, Naples and Sicilie, as also of Millayne, Countie of Ast. etc.
Et ad huc spes durat Auorum.
The Armes of the Norman Princes.The Armes of them that were Kings of Sicilie and of Naples, haue beene changed diuersly, according to the mutations of Families and Houses: because the Norman Princes, so many wayes and times allied to the most Sacred Crowne of France, Porterent de Gueules a la Bande Eschiquetee d'Argent and d'Azur de deux Traicts. Which was continued vntill the death of the last King of Sicily, William the Good, who deceased without any issue, as we haue already related.
Constance, Sister to this last William, was married to the Emperour Henry, Sixt of the name, who being of the House of Suauba; Porta d'Argent a Trois Leopards de Sable, passants l vn sur l'autre: Armes likewise borne by her Descent, and to the Bastard Mainfroy, Qui porta d' Argent a deux Aigles de Sable.
The Kings of Arragon, Successours to this Bastard in his Vsurpation, of the said Kingdomes of Sicily and Naples, against the Houses of Aniou, haue euen to this present, Porte d' Arragon, qui est d Or, a Quatre Paulx de Gueules Flanquees with those of the Bastard Mainfroy, which they tearme of Sicilie.
The beg^nning of the two Houses of Aniou.Of the two Houses of Aniou, the first began in the person of Monsieur Charles of France, Brother to the King Saint Lewes, Porta seme de France sans nombre au Lambel de Gueules mouuant de Chef, as haue done, and doe all the descendants.
The Second began with Monsieur Lewes of France, Sonne to King Iohn* Porta de Ierusalem; party de Sicilie, qui est de France sans nombre au Lambel de Gueules en Chef: Tierce d' Aniou, qui est de France sans nombre, a la Bordure de Gueules.
^^land of Arragon, onely Daughter to Dom Pedro.Lewes, Third of the name, King of Sicily, and Duke of Aniou, Eldest Sonne to King Lewes the Second, and Yoland of Arragon, onely Daughter to the King of Arragon, Dom Pedro First of the name, to whom app^rtained without any difficulty the Kingdome of Arragon vsurped, (according as many other Seigneuries were) by the Brother to the said King Iohn, Dom Martin of Arragon against his Niece. The same King Lewes the Third, Porta d'Arragon sur le Tout de ses Armes, according as did his Brother and Successour.
Rene, King of Sicily, called the Good, who varied his Armes of Alliances of his Predecessours Dukes of Aniou, and Kings of Sicily: because that he, Porta d'Hongrie, in regard of Charles Martell,The Armes of Charles Martell. (Sonne to Charles, Second of the name, King of Sicily and of Naples) Crowned King of Hungary, Party de Sicilie, (as did Monsieur Lewes of France) Et Tierce de Ierusalem: en Chef soustenu des Duchez d' Aniou, and de Bar: Sur le Tout d' Arragon. Wee may see these carried in most part of the Armes, belonging to the Illustrious House of Lorraine, descended of the House of Aniou, in the person of Madame Yoland of Sicilie and of Aniou, Daughter to the good King Rene.
And the difference in Armes of the said King, maketh it selfe easily knowne, by the Escutcheons of the Princes of this House, Knights of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, whereof we haue formerly spohen.
They haue placed Arragon in the fourth part of the Chiefe, and parted the Armes of Gueldres betweene that of Aniou and of Bar, and aboue all, for them of Lorraine, La Deuize bien Blazonnee,The Deuice for the Armes of Duke Godfrey of Bullen. of the First King of Ierusalem, of the Latine name, Godfr^y de Bologne, Duc de Lorraine, and de Bouillon. This Deuice is richly Blazonned, D'Or a la bande de Gueules chargee de Trois Allerions d'Argent. Those of Bologne were, D'Or au Gonsanon de Gueules frange de Synople. And them of Lorraine (before the said Godfrey of Bologne) were D' Argent au Cerf passant de Gueules, somme d'Or sans ^^mbre.
The good King Rene Blazoned his Armes, as in like manner did his Father, and of the fashion described in his Armes by his Herauld, and King of Armes of his Order called Croissant d'Or.

De Trois puissants Royaumes sous Tymbre coronne
Porte en Chef en ses Armes le Noble Roy Rene
Hongrie, and Sicile, Hierusalem aussi
Ainsi que voir pouuez en cest Escrit icy.
D' Aniou, and Bar en Pieds, Duchez de Grand renom,
Et vn Royal Escu sur le Tout d'Arragon.
Si est l'Excellent Prince Cheualereux Courtois
Pour vray Roy, Fils de Roy, Frere, and Oncle de Roys:
Il crie Mont-Ioye-Aniou, cartel est son plaisir.
Pour Deuise, Chaufettes, porte D' Ardant Desir.
Et par deuotion amoureuse sans blasme,
Les Patenostres porte pour l'amour desa Dame.

The same thus Englished.

Of three great Realmes, vnder a Crowned Crest,
Noble King Rene beares, as Chiefe and best
Hungaria, Sicilie, and Ierusalem,
As here you may behold the Royall stemme.
Aniou, and Bar en Pieds, Duchies of Renowne,
And aboue all Great Arragons rich Crowne.
These Honors to this Knightly Prince Fame brings;
A King, Kings Sonne, Vncle and Brothering Kings.
His crie, Mont-Ioye-Aniou, such his flames-fire.
Chafing-Dishes his Deuise, in Ardent Desire.
In Amorous deuotion, blamelesse as maybe,
Pure Pater-nosters to his louely Lady.

Which is thus spoken for enquirie, and to make it known,Concerning the related Deuise of King Rene. that like as all the Princes, issued of the Noble and Sacred Lillies, doe beare Armes with the Crest and Supporters of France; so in like manner doe they beare the Warre-Crye. And as concerning the Deuise of the said King Rene, in the lifetime of Queene Isabel (Duchesse of Lorraine) his first wife. He carried Warming-Pannes, or Chafing-Dishes full of Fire, and for the Soule or speaking part of this Deuise D'Ardant Desir, Enflamed Desire. He placed it within a Chaplet or wreath of Pater-nosters or Beades, and in the middest thereof this Legend in Italian Letters, Deuot Luy Suis; I am deuoted to her. I haue seene the Armes of this Prince in the Churches of Auignion and Prouence, entoured with Cappelets, instead of Collar* of the Order: which giueth sufficiently to be vnderstood, that they were made before the Institution of the Order of the Crescent, whereof we are to speake hereafter. And I do not remember to haue read, that the Illustrious House of Lorraine had any Order, or Collar about the Armes; but onely a Chappelet of Pater-nosters.
After the death of the said Queene Isabel, Duchesse of Lorraigne,The death of Queene Isabel Duchesse of Lorraine, and a new Deuise happening in the end of the Moneth of February, One thousand foure hundred fiftie three: hee left this first Deuise, and tooke for a second; A Turkish Bowe, the String whereof was broken, and had for the Motto or word, this Italian Legend.Dechander l'Arc, ne guavit la playe.

Arco perlentare piaga non sana,
To vnbend the Bowe, cureth not the wound.

Which deuise he caused to be painted in many places of the Citie of Angiers. He seemed to expresse and signifie thereby, that the death of the Queene his Wife (to whom he was so intimately affected) had not the power, to make him loose the remembrance of her, and that
Qui bien ayme, tard oublie.Who truely loues forgets not hastily.
The first House of Aniou conserued (so long as it endured) The Order of the Double Crescent; Instituted by the King Saint Lewes, according as we haue formerly ob^d.
Vnder the second Ligne, this good King Rene set on foote, and Instituted that Or^^r ^f the Crescent, to the end, that the memory of the first might be preserued, which (...) ^bolished in Sicilie by the Arragonians, and so likely to haue run into vtter obli^ which he could no way like or allow of.




The Order of Aniou, or of the Crescent or Halfe-Moone: Instituted in the Citie of Angiers by the good King Rene; in the year One thousand foure hundred threescore and foure.
CHAP. XIIII.
THis good and worthy King, being loath to let slip his Age in silence,L'Ordit D^ C^s^nt* and not performe some act worthy of eternall memorie; his thoughts likewise meditating among themselues, that euery good and Noble Courage, in duetie ought to attempt, and bend his whole aime at all Actions Generous and Magnanimious, proceeding from vertue to vertue, and alwayes to encrease in well doing, as well in mildenesse and courtesie,The reason^ of the Order^ Institution. as in valiancie and glorious deedes of Armes; to the end that his renowne might still goe on by encreasing, and neuer taste of diminishing: For this cause, and in the honor of God, support and ma^tention of the Church, as also the exaltation of Knighthood; in the yeare One thousand foure hundred threescore and foure, the said good King Rene deuised and erected a new Order of Knighthood, tearmed Of the Crescent, or Halfe-Moone, whereof he declared himselfe to the the Chiefe and Soueraigne; and after him his Successors, Dukes of Aniou, and Kings of Sicilie.

The Symbole of this Order, was a Crescent of Gold,(...) the Ord^^ whereon was aptly and conueniently engrauen, as likewise expressed by red enamelled Letters, this word, Loz, which would signifie; Praise by Encreasing; Loz E^ Croissant, which the Knights did weare on the right side of their Cloakes or Gownes. At this Crescent was tyed and made fast as many small Staues of Gold, fashioned in Collomnes or like Tags of Points, of Gold enamelled with red: as the Knights of this Order, had bin seene or present in Battailes, Mines vnder ground, or Siedges of Townes and Citties; which made due acknowledgement of their Valour and Prowesse.
(...)I haue read, that the Knights of the said Order of Aniou (composed of sixe and thirtie in number) did weare Cloakes of Red or Crimosine Veluet, and the Mantelet of White, with the lining and Cassocke of the same. At the first Chapter of this Order were made Knights, King Rene, founder therof, whose qualities are here thus remembred.
(...) Puissant Prince Rene D'Aniou, Roy de Hierusalem, de Scicilie, d'Arragon, de

Valence, Sardeigne, Maillorque, and de Corseg^e, Duc d' Aniou, and de Bar; Comte de Prouence, de Forqu^lquier, and de Piedmont: Chef de L'Ordre.
The High and Potent Prince Rene of Aniou, King of Ierusalem, of Sicilie, of Arragon,The Titles appertaining to King Rene.of Valentia, Sardaignia, Maiorica, and of Corfica; Duke of Aniou, and of Bar: Count of Pro^ence, of Forcalquier, and of Piedmont; Chiefe of the Order.
Monsieur Iohn of Aniou, his Sonne, Duke of Lorraigne: Monsieur, the Vicount of Saint Ballory.
Monsieur Saladine d' Angleure, Viscount d'Estanges, Lord of Nogent.
Monsieur Bertrand de Beauuay, Lord of Precigue, de Sille le Guillaume, and of Brian^; President in the Chamber for the Kings accounts at Paris, and Great Maister of the Hostell for the King of Sicilie, and Captaine of the Castell of Angiers.
Of whom are yet to be seene (for the most part) the names and Armes in the Church of Saint Maurice of Angiers, in the Chappell,The Chappel of Knights at Angiers. which (in regard of them) was called The Chappell of Knights.
Here you may reade, what is said, concerning this Order, by Messire Iohn Bou^^gne, in his Historie of Aniou, the seauenteenth Chapter of the third Part; without ^epresenting the said Coates of Armes, and names of the Knights, made after the ^ue before remembred.
By the fauour of Monsieur Chapelle, Councellour to the King, and Maister in his Chamber of Accounts at Paris, a man studious and learned (Il porte d'Or an Boeuf de ^ueulles Acerne, and Ongle d' Azur, au Chef de Gueulles, charge de Trois Annel^ts d'Or) haue seene the Armes of eighteene Knights of this Order of the Crescent, and the ^ost part of their Names (for there are Armes which are not noated or named at ^l.) Of Monsieur ^asnier, Councellour to the King, and Lieutenant Generall in the Duchie of Aniou: Qui porte d' Argent a Trois Testes de Lasnier de Sable, Deux en ^hef, and l'autre en Poincte, au Cheuron d'Azur, charge de Trois Aigles d Or. This house ^f the Asniers is the most remarkeable of Aniou, and from thence haue descended a ^eat number of worthy persons, both for learning and knowledge.
Messire Iohn Bourdigne, describing the entrance of King Frances the first, into his Citie of A^giers, in the Moneth of Iune, One thousand fiue hundred and eighteene, ^peaketh in this manner.
Ala premiere Porte, appellee la Herce, estoient les Venerables Recteur, Scholastique,The entrance of King Frances the first into Angiers. Do^curs, Pocureurs, Bourgeois, and autres Officiers de l Vniuersite, leurs Bedeaux deuant eux, ^ies^eu Dix ou Douze en nombre, auec leurs grosses Masses d' Argent, aux Armes de ^ations and Facultez de ladite Vniuersite. Et pour accompagner les Recteur, and Docteurs ^unt plusieurs Gens Lettrez, Escoliers Bacheliers, and Licenciez qu'il faisoit tres-bon ^oir. Le Roy ou ils estoient arriue, luy fut faict par iceux Recteur, Docteurs, and Scolasti^es treshumble reuerence. Et le Roy de tres-bon co^ur, and ioyeuse ^here leur Salut leur ^endit, se arrestant la par quelque espace de temps a escouter vne Oraison Que le Tres^octe, and Renomme Docteur Francois Lasnier Angeuin Luy fit, de laquelle le Roy fut ^es-content, and bien edifie, and promit de l Vniuersite d'Angiers garder les Droicts, and Pri^ledges garder. L'Ordre de ses Armes est tel.
The same in English.
AT the first Gate, called the Port Cullis, were the Reuerend, the Rector, Scholasticks,Or Harrow-Gate. Dodours, Atturneys or Aduocates, Bourgesses and other Officers of the Vniuersitie, their ^dles before them, which were Ten or Twelue in number, with their great Maces of Sil^r, bearing Armes of the Nations and Faculties of the said Vniuersitie. And to accom^^ the R^ct^r and Doctors, there were many learned men Schollers, Bachelers and Licen^tes, which made a goodly sight to behold. The King. being come to the place where they ^re; reuerence was done vnto him by them, the Rector, Doctours and Scholasticks in most ^ble manner. And the King, with a most kinde heart and chearefull countenance, ren^ed them faire salutations, there slaying himselfe for some space of time, to heare an Oration, ^hich the most learned and renowned Doctour Frances Lasnier, an Angeuin by ^ith, made to him: Whereby the King was very highly conten^ed, and well edified, and

promised to the Vniuersities of Angiers, that he would keepe the Rights and Priuiledges thereof.
The Armes thereof are thus.
1. There is not any name at all: But the Armes is Face d'Or, and d'Azur in Poinctes, chacune de Quatre pieces.
2. Aloft aboue the Armes, is written in old Gothish Characters, Senate^r en l' An Quatre Cents Cinquante Deux. And beneath in new Italian Bastard Letters, Bertrand de Beauuau, Cadet. And benea^h or vnder that Line, is an Escutcheon D'Argent a Quatre Lyons de Gueulles, non Armez, ny Lampassez, and en Abisme vne Estoile d Azur a^ Six Raiz. On either side of the Escutcheon is written in Gothish Letters, Preci^gne au Sicur, and below in new Italian Letters; Gouuerneur du Chasteau d' Angiers, and Seneschal d' Aniou, enterre aux Augustines. 2. Whereby it appeareth, that in the yeare foure hundred fiftie two, Bertrand de Beauuau, a yonger Brother, was there Senatour. And that he was Gouernour of the Castell of Angiers, and Steward of Aniou, buried at the Augustines.
3. There is likewise not any name, but onely a Shield D' Azur, a Trois Cheurons d'Or.
4. Without any name, a Shield Frette d' Argent, and de Sable, au Chef d' Argent, charge d'vn Lyon naissant de Gueulles. On both the sides of this Armes, is this Deuise repeated. Sta ferme. Sta ferme.
5. Iohn du Plesseys, called Le L^rgne, Esquire, Lord of Pinnay, D' Azur au Lyon d'Or, Coronne, Lampasse and Arme de Gueulles. On both sides this deuise: A Iamais-Celle. She for euer and euer.
6. Guiscardo de Monteberon, Lord of Mortaigne. L'Escu Face d' Argent and de Sable de Six pieces: Escartele de Gueulles a Deux Bars adossez d'Or, seme de Trefles de mesme.
7. Andrew de Haracourt, Lord of Brandembourch and of Delletff. D'Or, a la Croix plaine de Gueulles, au Quartier d' H^^neur d' Argent, au Lyon de Sable.
8, Iohn Count de Salme de Gueulles a Deux Bars ado^sez d'Argent, seme de Croix recroisettes au pied fiche d'Or. Aboue, there is on the one side, the Letter I and an M. on the other.
9. Aboue the Shield is written; In the yeare One thousand foure hundred and fiftie. Betweene this word Cos-sa, Est l Escu d'Argent a Trois Bandes d'Azur, au Chef de Gueulles a vne Chausse d'Or en Pal au mitan, a la Bordure engres^ee de Or.
10. Without name, D'Or a Trois Vi^ures de Gueulles, a la Bordure Compn^ d' Argent and de Sable. Vnderneath is written in new Italicke Letters: Breze, M^ille, Cadet.
11. Without name. D'Or a vn Renard rempant de Sable.
12. Aloft aboue the Shield is written. In the yeare One thousand fo^re hundred fortie and eight. De Lanal, as Quartier d Honneur de Beaumont, qui es^ d' Azur, seme de France, au Lyon d'Or. Vnderneth is written Laual, Loue; l^ Premier Quartier de Beaumont.
13. Is written. Of the said King of Sicil^e, Senatour in the yeare One thousand foure hundred: The Shield, D^ Hongrie, Party de Scicile (which is o^ France without number Au Lambel d^ Gueulles) Tierce de Hierusalem; Scu^ie^nants, Aniou, Bar, and Lorraine.
14. According as the seauenth, which is D'Or a la Croix plaine de Gueulles, (...) Canton d' H^nneur d' Argent, au Lyon d^ Sable. Vnderneth is written, Messire Iu^ques De Passetis.
15. Le Promiere Senateur en L' Au^ Vnder that name, such a man it appeareth, was Senatour in the yeare On^ thousand foure hundred fortie and two The Shield is the same as the thirteene (...) and in the one part and the other i^ written in Gothish Carracters, Anio^ Yoy.
16. For the Count of Bandem^^ Senatour in the yeare One thousan^ three hundred, the Shield D' Or, a la Ba^ de de Gueulles, chargee de Trois Alleri^ d'Argent.
17. Without writing, L'Escu (...) Bar. Vnderneth is written De Barts, (...) Lorraine.
18. Which is De Cossa, formerl^ obserued. And this Shield is flanc^ qued with these two words, Gasp^ Cossa.
These are all that I could compasse concerning this Order, contrary to the promise of good store of persons, which were liberall in protestation of many more: th^

^rned (no doubt) will supply what is wanting herein. Monsieur Perez, Councel^ur in the Parliament of Prouence, promised vs his Recherches, and the Iousts ^d Tournaments of this good King Rene, with the perticularities of his Or^ers, and others beside, which hath made vs come short of a much larger mea^ng.

In magnis voluisse sat est.
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Non omnia possumus Omnes.

Rene of Aniou was a very deuout Prince, among all them of his time and Reign; he ^as liberall and magnificent towards men of the Church, and other persons of know^dge and Studie. He was well practisde and expert in the Noble Art of Painting; ^r I haue seene many Tables of his owne handie worke in Prouence, and elsewhere,Painting and the Mathematicks commendable in Princes. which haue made good proofe of his skill and knowledge. Painting and the Ma^ematickes haue bin (at all times) thought expedient, and to be commended in ^rinces: because they are beneficiall to them, either in the times of Peace or Warre. ^his King tooke great delight in Iusts and Tourneyes, as Bourdigne telleth vs in ^s Chronicle, vnder the yeare One thousand foure hundred threescore and ^ne.
Le Roy Louis (Vnziesme du nom) estant en sa Ville de Tours, le Roy de Scicile, and la Royne ^nne de Laual son Espouse par deuers luy se transporterent; lesquels le Roy a grand ioye ^cent, and sit venir plusieurs Princes and Princesses, Seigneurs and Dames pour les festoyer. ^t peur leur bien-venue fit faire Ioustes, Tournois, Mommeries, and tels Esbattemens, ^ource Quil scauoit que le Roy de Sicile les aimoit.
King Lewes (eleauenth of the name) being in his Citie of Tours, the King of Sicilie,The same in English.and ^ne of Lauall his Wife, came thither to visite him: whom the King welcommed with ^reat ioye, and caused the appearance of many Princes and Princesses, Lords and Ladies, ^r their feasting. And for their better entertainement, he procured to be performed Iusts, ^ourneys, Mummeries and such like sports; because he knew and saw, that the King ^f Sicilie affected them.
This is the same King Rene of Sicilie, to whom King Lewes the eleauenth gaue ^he priuiledge to Seale with White Waxe, for an especiall grace and fauour, as we ^aue said in the second Booke of these Recherches, and elsewhere.The Generall Estates apparance at Tou^^ He was present ^ith the Generall Estates, held at Tours in the great Haule of the Archbishops ^allace, by King Lewes the eleauenth of the name, the sixt day of Aprill, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred threescore and seauen, before Easter, and other dayes following, vntill the foureteenth day of the same Moneth included.
In the first Parquet (for there were three, the second for Lords of the Bloud,Courts or Seats of Dignitie. the Constable, Chancellours and Prelates in midst of the Hall; and the third for Noblemen, Counts, Barons, such as were of the Kings Counsell, and Deputies of great Cities) was seated the King in an high Chaire, whereto he was to ascend by three degrees (...) height; which Chaire was couered with Blew Veluet, powdered with Floures de Luces ^p^n golden Lances, the Canopie and Vallans being also answerable to the same. The ^ng was attired in a long Roabe of White Damaske, thickly stitched with fine Gold very ^se together, and Buttond before with Golden Buttons, Furred with Sable Martines: ha^ing a little blacke Cappe vpon his head, with a Feather of fine Gold Wiers in it. On either side of the King there were Chaires, distant (backward from his) some seauen or eight foote space, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left, but both of them couered with rich Cloath of Gold vpon Crimosine Veluet. In these Chayres, as that on the right hand, was seated the Cardinall of Saint Susanna, Bishop of Angiers, cloathed in a sumptuous Cardinals C^^pe. And in that on the left hand sate The King of Ierusalem and of Sicilie, Duke of Aniou, hauing on an Ashe-coloured Veluet Roabe or Gowne, Furred with Mar^ins.
Thus much haue we learned, concerning the Order of the Crescent, or halfe Moone; attending for more ample memories, as well as of others, and whereof we are desirous to haue certaine knowledge. What we haue to this purpose now spoken, is from Frances de l' Alouette, who in the first Booke of his Genealogie of Coucy, alleadgeth

vnto vs: That many Princes and great Lords of France, haue made Orders of their ^ses, which they had for themselues.
Orders made of Deuises.The ancient Lords of Bourbon, had that of the Golden Shield.
The Lords of Luxembourg made theirs, A Parke round Faled with Woods.
The Counts of Foix (whereto should be added Lords of Bearne) Of (...) Cowe.
The Lords of Coucy; Of a Lyon, to perpetuate the memory of the same Lyon which Enguerran de Coucy, first of the name, tearmed the Great, fought with^ and killed in his Forrests: where afterward he caused to be builded the Abbey of Fremonstre, Chiefe of the Order, in the Reigne of King Lewes, called th^ Deuout.
Hereto he might haue added.
Bouchard Lord of Montmorency.The Lords of Montmorency, who carried for Deuise, The Dogge, the Symbole (...) faithfulnesse; with the common saying, that Bouchard de Montmorency (by other called of Mont-Remy) came to offer his seruice, with all his followers, to King Phillip, first of the name, and who (as the same man auoucheth) that Bouchard and his followers, Portoient au Col vne Chaine d'Or, composee de Testes and Cimiers de Cerss, and de^siu l'Estomach vn Chien. Did weare about his necke a Chaine of Gold, composed of Crests (...) Heads of Harts, and vpon the Breast a Dogge.
Such Princes and great Lords, might both make and maintaine the Order of their Deuises, in regard of their Greatnesse, and wealthinesse of their Houses. But we haue since then seene, in time of the Generall Estates of the Kingdomes being at Paris: (...) meane Gentleman, to be the Instituter of a new Order of the Crescent, called of Sain^ Magdalen. Of which Order here is to be seene the Crosse, with the Statutes beginning and ending thereof.


L'Ord^e idem Saincte Magdelaine.The Order of Saint Magdalen; Instituted at Paris in the yeare of Grace, One thousand sixe hundred and foureteene, by a Noble Gentleman, named Messire IOHN CHESNEL.
CHAP. XV.
The time of this Orders Institution.DVring the time as the Generall Estates of France, were present at Paris, in the yeare of Grace One thousand f^e hundred and foureteene; a Breton Gentleman, issued of a Noble House, renowned both for valiancy and Nobility, as well in Bretaigne as Aniou, beside other Prouinces of the Kingdome: being returned from the East and ^lie, moued by deuotion, and partly a zealous passion, to see (against Gods Commandements, and Sacred Ordenances of the King) such Diuelles, rude Encounters and Garboiles, as daily happened among such, as, standing on tearmes of Honour, grounded on an ill kinde of goodnesse, as taking the wall, or a word scarsely well spoken, but farre worse vnderstood, or taken with a wrong Bias,Q^rr^o ra^ ^n ^lend^r occasions. the subiect being about a Strumpet (the commonest quality of all other) cut the throates of one another, euen as Butchers serue Swine, loosing both bodies and soules foreuer in the pit of eternall fires, which they would not do for defence of the Catholique Faith, and seruice for the King. Vpon these considerations, hauing collected together some few good and memorable noates; he presented them to the Nobilities Chamber, for the stablishing of a new Order Military, erected on the former

ground. The principall vow whereof was, to abiure Duels, Fights and Frayes, with all other kindes of quarelling: but onely to regard the honor of God, the ser^ce of his Maiestie, and conseruation of the Kingdome.
The King looking vpon the Papers,Honest intentions can haue no bad actions de^ared


by his gracious behauiour, that the Gentlemans purpose was pleasing to ^im; and so much the rather, because he ^ainely perceiued, that Charitie vrged ^m meerely thereto: without seeking af^^r his perticular profit, priuate fauours, re^ards, Wages or Pensions.
He prouided the Order, and Crosse be^nging thereto, according to his owne ^inde and meaning, which onely tended (...) this end, to entreat his Maiesties liking ^nd consent; that this nouell Institution ^f French Knights, might be vnder the in^ocation on Saint Magdalen, the Mirrour ^f Penitence and Repentance. Within ^ompasse whereof, such Noble French^en (ill borne, and worse bred) making ^ccount and profession of swearing, blas^heming the holy name of God, and of ^he blessed Virgin his Mother, fordging ill ^rounded quarrels, and thereon murde^ng one another like bruite beasts: might ^eturne to better vnderstanding, by exam^le of that sinfull Woman, who as of a Sinke; filled with all vice and abhomination; ^y meanes of her t^ue and vnfeigned repentance, became a Vessell full of precious ^alme and all perfection.
The Crosse of this Order, which serued for wearing about the necke,Concerning the Crosse of the Order. and on the Cloake; finished with Floures de Luces at three Branches; for reuiuing againe the ^emory of the Order of the Lillie, which was of Nauarre; and the foote stood, or ^egan in a Cr^s^ent. The Order was Baptized with that name by Rene, Duke of An^, outwardly cantonned with small Palmes, made aptly in a roundure, as a noate ^r signale of the voyage to the holy Land, made by the Institutour of the said Or^er, according to the example of the auncient French Paladines,How Trauailer came at the fi^st to be called Palmers who were called ^y the name of Palmers, returning from the Holy Land; as at their going thither, ^hey were tearmed Crosiers. The shape of Magdalen her selfe, was presented Ouall^ise in the midst, as giuing name to the Order, the Crosse whereof is Cantonned with Floures de Luces, glittering out of Sunnie-beames, as shewing the Excellency of the Kingdome, the most famous of Christendome.
The Inuentor of this Order,Messire Iohn Chesnell Institutour of the Order. was named Messire Iohn Chesnell (whose Grandfathers ^e renowned (for their valour) in the History of Bretaigne, vnder the name of Ches^ell, Lord of Chappronnaye) who describing the habite, Crosse and Collar, with the Statutes of the Order (which follow after) presented them and himselfe to the King. He made him Knight, putting vpon him the Cloake of the Order, and the Collar with (...) Crosse of Gold about his necke* And euer since that time, thee tooke the title of Knight of Saint Magdalen, being so named, as well in the Court, as elsewhere. The Scutcheon or Shield of his Armes is composed of sixteene Quarters, 4.4.4.4. and one ouer all, which are in this manner Emblazoned.
Au premier,The Emblazon of the Armes of Messire Iohn Chesnell.and sur le Tout de sa Maison De Sable a vne Bande Fuzelee d'Or de Six pie^s. Au Deuxiesme Eschiquete d' Argent, and de Gueulles; Au Troisiesme de Bretaigne. Au Qu^tri^sme d'Or a Deux Fesses nouees de Gueulles a l'Orle de Six Merlettes de Sable, au Chef de Gules au Lyon passant d'Or. Au Cinquiesme de Gueulles a vn Lyon d' Argent Coro^ne de mesme. Au Sixiesme de Sable a vn Croissant d' Argent, supportant vne Estoile de mesme



Cantonne de Quatre Be^ans d' ^gent. Au Septiesme d'Azur a V^ Billettes d'Argent, qui est de Bea^noir 4.3.4. Au Huictiesme Cyra^ de Gueulles and d'Ermines de Seize p^ces: Au Neufuisme de Sable a Trois P^ces d'Argent, accompagnees de Tr^ Coquilles de mesme. L'Vnziesme co^ le Sixiesme. Au Douziesme de Gueulles a Deux Leopards d'Or mis l'vn sur l^ autre. Au Treiziesme d'Azur Fretted A^gent. Au Quatorziesme d'Azur a vn Ly^ d'Argent. Le Quinziesme d'Azur a t^ Lyon d'Argent. Et au Seiziesme d'Argent a Deux Faces nouees de Gueulles.
The Shield or Escutcheon is adorned and entoured with the Order, (...) Heaume tarre de front: hauing fo^ Crest an Eagle with her Wings desplayed De Sable, L'Estomach brise d'vne Croix dudit Ordre. With this Deuise in two pendants, thus.

The loue of God is peaceable.L'Amour De Dieu.
Est Pacifique.



Rules and Statutes to be obserued by the Knights of the Order of Saint Magdalen.
CHAP. XVI.
The Kings prerogatiue in the Order to appoint a Prince etc.I. THE King is to continue alwayes (if he be so pleased) Chiefe of this Order: as well for his Honour, a^ for the good of his Seruice. And he may commit o^ allow a Prince, to be the Generall, and as his Lieutenant (vnder his owne good pleasure) ouer the whol^ Order. To whom the Knights shall stand oblige^ to be obedient, next vnto the King. The same Princ^ shall haue power and authority, to conduct th^ Knights of this Order to Warres, and elsewhere; according to the command of his Maiestie, during the time of his charge, but n^ longer.
II. Vnder the said Prince, shall be the Great Maister of the Order, whom the Knights shall make election of from three yeeres to three yeares. He shall haue th^ care and charge,Great Maister of the Order and his charge. L'Heberg^ Royale. of all the Reuennues belonging to the Order, and to whom all th^ Knights shall render their obedience. During the yeares of his charge and Office^ he is to make his continuall residence in the principal Academy of the Order, which shall be named The Royall Lodging; whereon shall depend all the other Academi^ of the Kingdome.
For admission ^nto the OrderIII. Such as shall be admitted and receiued into this Order, shall be Noble by three Races or Descents. They shall not be tyed or engaged to Iustice^ They shall be well enstructed in the Catholique and Apostolique Religion: They must be sound, healthfull, and well disposed of body, without any difformitie eithe^

Corporall or Spirituall, whereof may be receiued any apprehension. And ^ereof they must be bound to bring true attestation from their Bishop (espe^ally) for matter of Religion: from three worthy and well knowne Gentle^en, concerning their Nobilitie: and from a skilfull Physition, for their ^ealth.
IIII. On the day of entertaining or receiuing any Knight,At any Knights receiuing into the Order. either by the King, Prince Committee, or Great Maister of the Order; hee is to make a so^emne Vowe and profession, to renounce all doubtfull and hazardous Play or Ga^ing. Not to blaspheme the name of God, nor to commit any act that shall be ^icious, and vnbefitting a Christian Knight. He shall not reade prohibited and ^nlawfull Bookes, without the permission of his Superiours in the Order, and the Ordenaries of the places, wheresoeuer the Academies are seated. Hee is to ^hunne the reading of Bookes that are of wicked Doctrine, which corrupt good manners; and dissolute Songs, scurulous talke, and dishonest companies of euill fame.
V. The Habite of the Knights on the day of their reception, must be of Skie-Colour, and the Collar of the Order, of the Letter M. doubled with Lambda,Concerning the Habite and Collar. and the Letter A. representing the names of Saint Mary Magdalen; of Lewes and of Anne, King and Queene of France; enterlaced and enchained with double Harts, trauersed and wounded with Darts of Gold Crossed, and the said Ciphers or Letters enamelled with the Colours and Liueries of his Maiestie, Carnation, White and Blew. The Cordon or Riband must be Red or Crimosine, whereon to hang the Crosse of Gold enamelled with Red, with an Ouale in the middest, wherein must be (on the one side) represented or figured, the Image of the holy penitent Saint Mary Magdalen, and S. Lewes on the other. And on the Mantle or Cloake, the Crosse of Red or Crimosine Sattin, embroidered with Gold and Siluer, hauing the like Ouale as is said before, and a Magdalen. And for the deuise round about it, these words; L'Amour De Dieu Est Pacifique.
VI. These Knights are to haue a House neere to Paris,The House for the Knights. which his Maiesty may bestow vpon them, if he be so pleased, wherein there must be a Chappell, and wherein also the Knights are to be entertained. There shall ordenarily attend sixe Religious Priests (who are to weare the Crosse as the Knights doe) there to say daily diuine Seruice, and to assemble (in the same Chappell) the Knights of the Order, who are there to be receiued at their presentment, vpon the conditions before specified. At which Reception, and at the end of the Masse, shall be said by those Religious Priests the Veni Creator; the Letanies of the Sacred Virgin, and the Prayers of Saint Mary Magdalen, and likewise of Saint Lewes. Which being done, the Knights must take the Oathe before the King, or the Prince his Committee,The taking of the Oath, and receiuing of the Knightly dues. or the Great Maister of the Order. From whom he is to receiue the Sword hallowed, the Habite for Knighthood, the Great Order, the Crosse and Cordon. Afterward is to be sung the Te Deum, and the Psalme Laudate Dominum omnes Gentes; at the end whereof, the Knights Assistants must goe and embrace the new Knight; giuing him the kisse of Peace, Vnion and Concord, euery man in his Ranke, according to the order as they haue bin entertained.
VII. Concerning the House, which the Knights are to haue neere to Paris;The time for probation of the Knights. it must be called and named The Royall Lodging, wherein must ordenarily be fiue hundred Knights: all bound to abide therein, during the time of two yeares Probation, beginning at the day of entertainement, and yet they may abide there longer, if themselues thinke it good. At the ending of those two yeares for their Probation, they shall take the solemne Oathe of the Order (in presence of the Religious Priests of The Lodging Royall) Of Charitie, Obedience and Coniugall Chastitie; and to weare the Collar and Crosse of the said Order, during all their life time.
VIII. In like manner, they are to renounce and abiure all Duelles or Combats,What they ought to renounce. all rude Encounters and Assassinates, yea, and all quarrels out of the Kings Seruice: except such wherein they shall be taxed, in which cases, they may lawfully

defend themselues by Armes, which they are to weare by their profession. In the Oath is likewise included, that they are to liue and dye in the Kings seruice; without adhering or ioyning themselues to any Leagues or Parties whatsoeuer, vnder what cause, pretence or subiect that can be alleadged. For this perfect knowledg^ ought to be engrauen in the depth of their soules, that the very greatest seruic^ which they can render to God; is, first to serue him, then their King, and lastly their Countrey, for exaltation of the truely Catholique Faith, and honour of th^ Kingdome.
Appearance once yearely at the Royall Lodging.IX. Euery Knight of the said Order, after their Approbation, shall stand bou^ to appeare in person at the Lodging Royall, euery yeare once, on the day and Feast of Saint Mary Magdalen, Patronesse of the said Order. To the end, that they may Communicate together, and render an account of their actions to the Great Maister, and to twelue Knights more, elected and chosen as his Assessours and Councellours: who are to iudge of all their differences, and the transgression of their Vowes, which are to be kept inuiolably; vnder paine of being casheerd, and degraded of the Order, if their recidiuation extend to the third time.
X. The Knights abiding and dwelling in the Lodging, must stand obliged, to be assistan^ on Sundayes and Feastiuall dayes at Diuine Seruice, celebrated by the Priests of the Order;For them dwelling in the House. and to receiue the holy Communion euery first Sunday of the Moneth, at the least. To say daily the Letanies of the Sacred Virgin, with the Prayers of S. Mary Magdalen, and of S. Lewes; their Chappelet and Salue Regina.
XI. The Exercises of the Knights, are to be ruled according to the houres of the day,Of Exercises for the Knights for auoiding Idlenesse, the Fountaine or well-spring of all vices. And for this effect, in the Lodging Royall, and elsewhere, there must be maintained Esquires, Maisters in actions of Armes, Learned Mathematicians, and some number of well experimented Souldiours, to enstruct Milita^y agilities, and exercises fit for Horse and Foote For other houres of Recreation after these Exercises, there shall be a Tennis Court, Stoole-Baule-Play, and other pastimes, fit for maintaining a knight in the expertnesse of Armes, for better disposition of the body. And from the Knights lodgings or chambers shall be banished (as hatefull and detestable for euer) all play at Dice, Cards or such like.
For maintenance of the Priests and House OfficersXII. For nourishment and maintenance of the sixe Keligious Priests, the King is most humbly to be petitioned; for the annexing and ioyning to the House, some good and especiall Benefice, for the better continuance of Diuince Seruice. And for maintaining the Officers of the Lodging, each Knight that shall enter into the said Order, must be engaged to giue a thousand Francks at his entrance, for the first yeare, and an hundred Pistolets for the second yeare, by way of Pension, which is to be paied to the Reiuer of the Order, established by the Great Maister: as well for himselfe, as for two Seruants and two Horses, which must be his furnishment; vntill there shall be some better meanes established. Which is to be awaited, either by the charitable gifts of Princes or Great Lords, or by Conquests made by the Knights themselues, on such as are enemies to the Church; or by the stocke moued to his Maiesty for his owne memoriall, which was presented to him in the Moneth of Iuly, One thousand sixe hundred and foureteene, when it shall be graciously granted and Signed.
For married mens ent^ into the OrderXIII. Concerning maried Gentlemen, such as would enter into this Order, they are to be obliged; ouer and beside the attestation of their Nobility, Catholique Religion, and good habitude and disposition of body: to bring with them the full consent of their Sonnes, for making their two yeares probation, to be admitted and receiued as Knights, which otherwise they cannot be. And such as be formerly entertained Knights, and vnmaried: may lawfully marry after their Probation, if themselues do so thinke it good; considering, that the Order bindeth nor restraineth, but for the Vow of coniugall chastity.
XIIII. And in regard of them, which (at all times) haue had the habitude of vertue, and are knowne for such by common reputation, perfected in their Exercises by maturity of their yeares, more capable to enstruct others, then to be enstructed, and being tied to the duties of Mariage, and cares attending on a Familie,

^nd yet (neuerthelesse) desirous of admittance into the said Order: they may be re^eiued, with charge of the precedent proues, and onely fifteene dayes of exercise,For such as are of ripe yeares and well enstructed, comming into the Order. ^ecessary for a Knight. Which time being past, they shall notwithstanding be en^aged, to assist on Feast dayes and Sundayes at Diuine Seruice, in the Lodging of ^e Order; except there be some sufficient essoine or excuse. And submit themselues, to receiue direction in their Conscience, that their Spirits may be the more ^rongly enabled, and fit for maintenance of all vertues, among the vicious thornes ^d briers of this wicked world, and to chastise and correct themselues for such im^erfections and behauiours; as they had contracted before their receiuing into the ^rofession of the Order. They shall likewise stand obliged, to be personally pre^ent at all Assemblies of the Knights, and one day in the weeke (by allowed ^iscretion) to continue the exercises necessary for a Knight, the space of two ^eares: yet neuerthelesse, without binding them to a continuall abiding, whereto ^e tied those Knights which be not married. And they must be such as are rich, of good degree and quality: because they will be engaged, to maintaine the exercises ^f the Order, and such poore Gentlemen, that haue no meanes for entrance, that they ^ay the better satisfie the Vow of Charity.
XV. Married Gentlemen, which haue deuotion to the Order,Concerning farre distance fro^ the Schools and Academies and yet notwith^anding, are far off from the places where the Academies be, and haue not meanes ^o maintaine their Family in the neerest Townes to them; may yet receiue the gol^en Crosse of the Order, at the hands of the Great Maister, euen as well as Knights of Honour. Alwayes prouided, that they first haue made proofe of their Catho^ique Religion and Nobilitie; oblidging themselues to the Prayers of the Order, and yeelding fauour and assistance to the Knights of the Order, like friends in affaires of importance, whereto they shall be required, and in so doing, they become partakers of the Orders Prayers. Yet they may not enioy any Commanderies, nor a^ise to the charges and dignities of the Order; nor weare the Crosse on the Cloake; ^ut (as Friends) may be holpen by Knights of the Order, when any such neede shall be.
XVI. These Knights may not be compelled by their bodies,Priuiledges appertaining to the Knights. for the paiment of ciuile debts: and their equipage or furnishment shall stand exempt from all ex^cutions. They can but oblige the benefit of their patrimony; because they are not ^o be impeached from following the Kings Seruice, at what time soeuer they shall ^e thereto commanded. And these Knights may also make choice (at once for all o^her) of some one of the Parliaments in France; whereto they may be called, there ^o be iudged and sentenced definitiuely.
XVII. If there shall be in the Lodging more money,Consideration for poore Gentlemen. then is required to pay ^he Officers thereto belonging; the ouer-plus may serue for entertaining poore Gen^lemen to the Exercises, that haue no meanes for their learning, for satisfying the ^ow of Charity.
XVIII. And to the end, that there may be alwayes about the King,The Kings daily visitation by the Order. some of ^hose Knights for his seruice: there shall daily goe to visite him, fourescore or an ^ndred of these Knights (the number of fiue hundred remaining ordenarily com^leat in the Lodging) departing from the Order vnder conduct of some one of them ^hereto appointed by the Great Maister, each Company going on his day in the ^eeke, while the rest stay at home about their exercises.
XIX. Such as are Brethren Seruants,For Seruants that be of the best condition called Breth^ren Seruants. shall be had from the most honorable Families in Townes and Cities, next to the Nobility: who shall be bound to ^ring attestation of three races, and that their Grandfathers and Fathers haue alwayes liued honorably, without any noate of infamie, and in the faithfull be^^efe of the Catholique Church. They shall be bound to the same Vowes and Offices as the Knights. They shall weare as a noate on their Cloakes, a Scar^et Crosse, purfled with Siluer, and a Siluer Crosse of the same fashion, as that of Gold worne by the Knights, which is to hang at a round Cordon of Crimosine ^ilke. For entring into the Lodging, and Exercises vsed among the Knights, they shall pay to the Receiuer of the Order at his entrance an hundred Crownes, and two hundred pounds of Pension the yeares following; as

well for himselfe, as maintenance of a Horse to performe his seruice on. And (...) Bretheren Seruants may be admitted to Millitary charges, as members of the K^ Companies going to Warre. And if they attaine to the performance of some w^thy Act of Armes, and for the Kings seruice; they are to be ennobled, that they (...) the more lawfully aspire to that honorable quality. And they may establi^h (...) Stocke or Bancke of money, for maintaining them of their owne condition that lacke the meanes for entring into the said Exercises, and Order of Bretheren S^uants; by the Charities conferred on them, by those of their condition, and by the T^staments of such, as shall be deuoted to this holy Order.
For Seruants of the meaner qualitie.XX. The Groomes or meaner Seruants attending on these Knights, shall be (...) the most honest Families of Mechanicall Artezans; who shall bring testimony o^ their good life and manners, by two or three of the principall men of the Parish, a^ and of the Curate. Their Garment shall be of Blew Cloath, with a Galloune L^ of Crimosine Silke: And they must be skilfull in one Trade or other, for their b^ter seruice in the Lodging, and for the Knights that are to make vse of them. E^ning and Morning they must attend the Knights seruice, as is appointed them by the Great Maister: but the rest of the day, they are to trauaile faithfully for the co^mon benefit, euery one in his Art and profession, as they shall be employed by Maisters experimented in them. They must be bound to the same Vowes and Prayers as their Maisters, for auoiding all vicious example in so holy a Company. A^ for attaining to this happinesse, they are to bring no thing but their proues appointed, and must remaine in the Lodging all their life time: if so themselues thin^ (...) expedient, or may withdraw themselues thence (if they will) after the two yeares of their Probation. All their life long, they shall be priuiledged by some fauours of the Order; in recompence of such good seruices, as they shall performe thereto.
This intention came to no purpose.These were the Articles deliuered to his Maiesty by the said Lord of Chappr^naye; which sorted not to any effect, by reason of many impossibilities, as well about the Lodging, as the Stocke and Banke, with other difficulties beside. So th^ this Order tooke both birth and death, in the person of the same Chappronnaye, wh^ hauing lost all hope, of seeing the execution of these his good intentions; left all hi^ goods to his friends, retreating himselfe from the World, and liued confined to a^ Hermitage (by him erected) neere to Valuin in Gastinois, at the end of the Forrest o^ Bierre, or of Fontaine-bleaud, vpon a Rock, which discouereth the course of the goodly Riuer of Seine. He remaineth in this place, knowne to the Countrey neighbours and at Paris, by the name of L'Hermite Pacificque de la Magdelaine; The Peacea^ Hermite of S. Mary Magdalen.


The Order of Bretaigne; called of the Hermine, and of the Eares of Corne; Instituted by Frances, Duke of Bretaigne, Sonne to Iohn the sixt, Sirnamed the Conquerour: In the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred and fifty.
CHAP. XVII.
L'O^d^e de Bretaigne (...) de ^'Hermine and de l'(...).FRances, Duke of Bretaigne, last of the name, yongest Sonne (but not i^ fortune) to Iohn, sixt of the name, called the Conquerour, by imitati^ the steps of the Princes of the Bloud of France, his Cousines, and (...) whom he was most Nobly descended: Instituted the Order of Knighthood, tearmed Of the Hermine, in the yeare of Grace One thousand fou^

^undred and fifty. Which order was otherwise called, Of Eares of Corne in regard,The forme of the Great Collar. (...) the Great Collar thereof, was composed of Gold, in the true forme of Eares of Corne, enterlaced like to a Saultour, and bound both aboue and beneath, with two ^ies and circles of Gold.
At the end of this Collar, hunge by two or three small Chaines of Gold, a little Beast, white as Snow, vulgarely called an Ermine; but in writing it more truely,A Beast caled Ermine or Hermine. it is ^earmed an Hermine, appearing to passe or runne ouer a word or motto, vnder a Bancke or faire Tufte of greene grasse, diapred with goodly flowres. Beneath which, was the deuise of the said Duke Iohn the Conquerour, Three wordes, to expresse the foule or sense thereof, to witt, A. MA. VIE.For my Life. Whereby he would make knowen to the world, that the greatnesse and hieghst of his courage was such, as rather then to fayle in his honour, he would expose himselfe to a thousand and thousand deaths.
The meaning of this deuice,Concerning the naturall disposition of the Hermine. conueigheth it selfe perticularly to this creature the Hermine, whose nature and kinde is such (according to the testimony of the best naturallists) that when he is pursued, in regard of the excellencie and raritie of his furre: ^he will suffer himselfe to be taken, rather then to runne or thwarte thorow any boggy, foule or filthy passage, so proudly doth he stand on the purenesse of his coat or skinne. For huntesmen, well acquainted with his naturall inclination, to take him; will soile his hauntes and trackes with mud, mire and dirte. In like manner, hee is as earnestly coueted and sought after for his whitenesse, euen (as in elder times) was the Genett for his blacke furre, speckled or spotted with red, and which (in those times) for excellency, was called, The Richest Furre. These two Animalls, the Genett and Hermine,The Hermine compared with the Gennet. haue serued for Subiest to two seuerall Orders of Kinghthood, in France and Bretayne: as the Hedge Hogge or Porcupine, and the Weather or Sheepe, to them of Orleance and of Bourgongue, called at this present Flanders.
The Hermine, for his excellent whitenesse, is the very richest furre, sought for and put in vse by Princes, at their highest and chiefest Feasts, and dayes of greatest Sollemnity, worne in their Gownes, Robes, Cloathes, mantelets and Su^coates,The Hermine furre for Princes in life and death. as the fayrest furre to grace their life time. And after their death, their Polles and Coates Armours are furred therewith, being layed vpon them; and vsed beside in their Obsequies and Funeralles.
For purity and excellency, it goeth farre beyond the Lettice, next vnto which is accounted the Menu-Vair. In a worde, it is white as milke, and thereupon (in former times) it was the occasion of the Aunciest French name of Lettice, by way of Antonomasia, farre aboue all other white furres, whereof there are many kindes.
Plinie maketh mention of the diuersity of these Beasts, whereof the Romanes made great reckning in those times then, and describeth their nature in his eight Booke and seauen and thirty chapter. Conuntur Hyeme, et Pontici Mures, hi dumtaxat Albi, quorum palatum ingustu sagacissimum est. Hac cute expoliuntur Vestes. That the Rattes of Pontus (for so are the Hermines called, by comming from those parts in great abundance) and namely the Whites, which all the length of Winters time, keepes in their holes or dennes. That this creature hath a wonderfull capacity and vnderstanding, for discouery of any Game that may serue for his nourishment. With skinnes of this Beaste, the Romane Senatours had their robes furred.Men that traded in the sale of Furres. But merchants for lucre and gaine, which they made by the sale of these exquisite Furres, procured many fraudes and deceites: so that the Emperours and Senate had dayly their patience much disturbed, by continuall complaintes against those Regraters and Monopolizers. Whereunto also may be added, that these Hermines haue some kinde of notion and future knowledge, as is obserued by Aelianus, in the first Booke of his various History, where he tearmeth these Animalles in this manner, Mures futurorum praescios.
For addition of a further grace to this rich Furre, and to make it appeare much whiter then it is, by the luster and beauty of his contrary: the Furriers or Skinners, as matter belonging to their arte and skill, doe spot or speckle it with little quantities or morsels, of Lambes skinnes of Lombardy,Beautiful black Lambes of Lombardie. famous and much commended for their Blacke shining splendour. For the Hermine is a little creature, wholly white, of the likenesse and bignesse of a Rat, the nose or snoute pointed and sharpened. The Furriers or Skinners doe make vse of this beasts tayle, to grace Aumusses, which are worne

by Bishopes, and Chanons of great reuenewes. But oftentimes (which is not so much knowen) they deale like the Regraters spoken of by Plinie, they deliuer M^ Vaire or Lettice, instead of Hermines, as Martines of Foxes, and Cattes of Spoyne (...) Gennets.
The Dukes of Bretaigne, which followed after the Conquerour, in such sort affected the whitenesse of this little beast:Chaunge of the ancient Armes of Bretaigne. that they chaunged their auncient Armes, to take De Sable seme d'Hermines d'Argent, sans nombre. And yet notwithstanding ignorant Painters haue emblazoned Bretaigne contrary to trueth, and the Rules of the Noble Art of Painting: according to which course, we may make naturally, or after the life, Roses of Gueulles on d'Argent, because Nature produceth them Redde and White. Lillies are (of their owne nature White and Yellow, as the Pauillee: to figure and present them with Gueulles, like to them of Florence; is not for Enquirie, but rather ignorance in Armes, howsoeuer the art and cunning of man, may make variation of naturall colours, as in the Scripture, the spotted Ewes to deceiue Laban. In all things Nature ought to be imitated. Ignorant Painters haue scarsely so much vnderstanding to informe them,Nature should be followed in all things. that the Colour and Mettall of Bretaigne are Sable and Argent. The Crosse in her Banners and Cornets, is alwayes made with white; and that the Armes of the later Dukes of Bretaigne, were De Sable, seme d'Hermines d'Argent. Such as are Maisters in Blazons, doe note these Armes by this onely word: Il porte de Bretaigne, for breuities sake; As De France, de Nauarre, Daulphine, d'Orleans,Emblazons for the Kingdomes. d'Aniou, d'Alanson, or de Valois for France. For Kingdomes of England, Scotland, Leon, Castile, Arragon, Portugall, Hungaria, Bohemia, Polonia, Denmarke and Sweden, without emblazoning them any otherwise: because these being the principles and grounds of the Art, he who maketh profession thereof, ought not (by any meanes) to be ignorant therein.
Duke Frances the first, caused his Castell of the Hermine to be newly builded, in memory and honor of the said Order;The number of the Orders Knights, and their Habite. which he composed of fiue and twenty Knights, without taxation of blame or reproach. They were garmented with Cloakes of white Damaske, lined with Carnation, the Mantelet or Chaperon of the same; whereon was worne the Great Collor of the Order, composed of Eares of Corne, accordingly as before you see the same figured.
The reason for the Eare^ of Corne.The Subiect for these Eares of Corne, is (by some) reported, and referred to the care of Agriculture or Husbandrie, which the Kings, Dukes and Counts of Bretaigne alwayes had, to the end, that their Prouince might be the more fertile and aboundant.
Poets, in their wonted humour of gracefull fiction, haue feigned, that the Gods being assembled on a day,In the Sea called AEgeum. for their recreation in Euboea, in the Island of Boeotia: Iupiter their Chiefe and Great Maister, commanded them to speake their mindes in some thing, which was the best and most profitable for the life of men. Vulcane said, that it was Fire; Neptune Water; Mercurie a House to dwell in; Ceres Corne; and Minerua the Oxe.
These opinions were diuersly bandied among them, each of the Gods and Goddesses maintaining what themselues thought best. Some preferred Fire, to be as the Spiracle or infuser of life.Opinions debated among the Gods. Others auouched, that men might liue without Fire, and many Nations there were, that had no knowledge in the vse thereof. Others affirming, that both the one and other were altogether necessary for the life of Man, according to the saying of Pindarus.

Water is the best Element,
And Gold as the Fire resplendent,
Shineth aboue all other substances.

Mercurie said to be the preseruer of humaine society.Mercurie the guide and directer of Societie among men, fearing to be preuented in his opinion; defended dwelling in an house, affirming, that the forenamed Elements were necessary for man, who yet remained left and exposed to the Ayres iniuries, and the violence of furious Beasts, wilde, saluage and cruell, without the inuention of buildings, which make Townes and villages by multiplicity. Ceres and Minerua being ioyned together, hoping to winne the day from the other Gods, said, that they

had better considered on the case, For men haue (indeed) like lodging, dwelling and ^eeding as the Beasts haue.
Silua domus erat, Cibus Herba, Cubilia Frondes.
But yet Ceres had thought on a better distinguishing for nourishment, and giuen man Corne, in stead of wilde Acornes.

Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere Terram
Instituit, cum iam glandes, atque arbuta secrae
Deficerent syluae, and victum Dodona ne garet.

Then, that the Oxe was the most necessary creature for the seruice of men, as being the Symbole of Rest, and of Husbandry. Hereupon Iupiter, who alwayes was a well willer to Ladies, according to his wounted behauiour, and for whose sakes he had so often times disguised himselfe; adiudged the victory to Ceres and Minerua.Read Ouid for the wanton disguises of Iupiter. Adding moreouer (for reason in a Iudge) that Tillage, Husbandry, the Countrey and Fieldes ^ife was the most perfect, most innocent and iust, beyond all other kindes of life that men could make election of. Husbandry is the absolute Elixar (without any com^ounding) that maketh a man satisfied and contented, euen as if hee possessed a Kingdome.
Post aliquot mea regna videns mirabor aristas.
Others haue held and maintained, that the Auncient Kings, Dukes and Countes of Bretaigne, caried the Standard and Banner of the great Prince Gomer, who was sonne ^o the Patriarche Iaphet, first peopler of the plenteous Gaules,Gomers Banner borne by the Kings of Bretaigne. which was L' Escu d' ^zur au Lyon rempant d'Or. Armes afterward changed De Gueules en Macles d'Or, ^y a certaine King named Maclianus, who reigned in the time of our King Clouis; Armes still held by the Lords of Rohan, descended of this auncient Stocke and Linage.
But others are of the minde, that the proper and naturall Armes of Bretaigne, were D'Azur a Trois Gerbes de Bled lices d'Or, retained by the Lords of Ponthieure, Escar ^el^s de Bretaigne Moderne. And
That a certayne Duke of Bretaigne, hauing seene in heauen an Image of the Sacred Virgin, clothed in a mantle of Hermines;The opinion of Richard de Vassebourg. he forsooke Les Espics et Gerbes de Bled d' Argent en champ d'Azur, and tooke De Sable seme d'Hermines d'Argent. This is the o^nion of Richard de Vassebourg, and other reporters of nouelties, to such as they would ^aue to credit them.
It is a matter most certaine, that the Prouince of Armorica (called at this present ^retaigne) was first of all inhabited by the Gaules.Armorica now called Bretaigne. Wee learne in the tenth Chapter ^f Genesis, that Iaphet (whom the Rabbines make to bee the eldest sonne of the Patri^rche Noah, Cham the second, and Sem the third) in the deuision of the world, made ^hree hundred and so many yeares after the Flood: had in his lot and partage, the ^eptentrionall or Northerne partes of Asia, Europe and their Ilands, which his seauen ^hildren deuided among them.
Gomer, the Eldest sonne of Iaphet, first exposed himself vpon the licquid or moist ele^ent, that is to say, to saile on the Ocean-sea: and that he made or Carpented Gallies,Iesephus in flutipuit. Iudaic. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.6. ^hippes and vesselles, by the module or patterne of the Arke, formed by his Grand^ather Noah. And being followed by his Brethren with their Families, peopled the ^rme land and the Isles; according, as Iosephus informeth vs in the first of his Antiquities, the fift and sixt Chapters.
Zonaras, in his first booke and fourth history, writeth,Zonaras in Lib. 1. Hist. 4. that Gomer and his Brethren ^arting from the mountaines of Taurus and Amanus; shaped their course ouerthwarte Asia towards the North, and came to the riuer Tanais, which rowling from the North ^o the South, runneth on to ioyne with the marishe Moetides, which crossing Scythia, ^eperateth Asia from Europe. And then soiourning in the North, sought for shelter in Europe* proceeding on so farre as Cades, a straight at this instant called Gibraltar, but beforenamed of Gomer or Hercules. And coasting along the land, the brethren of Gomer tooke vp their dwelling, some heere, some there; but Gomer went vp to the Ar^oricane Ocean, that is the coaste of Bretaigne, a Prouince first inhabited by the Gaules:The Gaules called Gala^es and Gomorites. ^nd of this Gomer, the Gaules were called by the Greekes Galates, and by the Hebrwes Gom^rites, this is related to vs by Iosephus, in the place before alleadged.










Lucian a Greeke Author, in his Gaulish Hercules reporteth, that the wise Druid^, Priests and Soueraigne Iudges of the Gaules, called their first Founder (...), which^ signifieth in their mother tongue (improperly called Greeke, saith he, for it was Gaulish) Father of Wisedome, and of Eloquence. That they figured and presented him in the shape of an old Man, wrinckled, blacke, swarthie and Sun-burnt, like to an auncient Mariner,The picture of the Gaulish Hercules. with small store of haire, or rather like a Balde-headed man; his body wrapt in a Lyons skinne, holding his Clubbe in his right hand, and a bended Bowe in his left, his backe charged with a Quiuer, which was well furnished with Arrowes. From his tongue were extended forth small Chainets of Gold, wherewith were tied and bound by the eares, an infinite number of men, with smiling countenances.
The morall interpretation of the figure.These Diuine Druides gaue hereby to vnderstand (so saith the same Lucian) that their Prince Gomer, hauing aduentured himselfe vpon the vnknowne Seas; came to inhabite and people the flourishing Gaules, and had first (before all men else) tamed* and ouercome that fierce stearne Element the Ocean, represented by the Lyon, a^ vnconquerable creature. Also, that by his Eloquence or well speaking, he had (in so perillous an enterprise) attracted all the way along with him, Men, who had followed him on their owne meere good will, with glad hearts and pleasing lookes; hauing pollicied and gouerned them in all vertues and Sciences, compared to Gold. That hee brought these faire designes of his to passe, by wisedome and prouidence, by pregnant arguments and reasons, whereby he pierced thorow their eares, and penetrated to the very depth of their hearts that heard him.The Greekes Hercules a tamer of Monsters. From hence it is, that the Greekes inuented their Hercules, to be a queller and tamer of Monsters, and celebrated the memory of Iaphet, Father to Gomer, vnder the name of Iapetus; to whom they gaue the title, To be the first Discouerer of vnknowne Lands and Countries.
Audax Iapeti genus primum se credere transtris.
How and from whence the Gaules name is deriued.From this first kinde of Nauigation, the Gaules deriued their appellation. The name of Gallus is Syriac and Chaldean, Gallin, which signifieth disposed to floate vpon Waters, Brookes and Riuers. And thence is deriued the word Gallerin, which properly in Hebrew and other Easterne Languages, signifieth so much as a Shippe, Arke, Boate, Ferry Boate, Wherrie, Cocke-Boake, Gondeloe and Barcke for passage, made by craft of Carpenters, to passe freely ouer Floods and Waters. As we haue made repetition of in the matter of Marine or Sea businesse, by the names now in vse of Gallies, Gallotes, Galliottes, Galleasses and Gallions; especially lightly and arteficially made by Ioyners and Carpenters skill; by meanes whereof me^ may passe the Seas at pleasure. And by this obseruation, our Gaulish Hercules wa^ named Gomerus Gallus, because, by aduenturing himselfe vpon the Seas; he had warranted and defended his followers from Shipwracke, onely in such Vessels made of Wood.The Gaulish Hercules named Gomerus Gallus. Hence was it also, that Forrests were (in times past) called Gaules in generall, and a Wood perticulerly was named Gaull: A Tree alone, high and straite, fairely exalted, Gaule, a word whereof we make vse yet to this present, whereby to denoate and signifie a Beame or Pearch. The Romant of Reynard of Montauban, composed in the time of Phillip Augustus, hath these relations, according to the aunci^ French in those dayes.

Iama^. Eins Carpentier en Bo^^ Bos, Sceut. Sot si charpenter
Ne mena telle noise en Prosond. parfond Gaul rame.

The Romant of Aye d Auignion made in the selfe same Reigne, forming a Periphrasis concerning the end of the Spring time, whereunto Summer succeedeth.

^o^ fu^lleCe fu apres la Pasque, que Ver met a declin,
Que florissent Cil Pre, and Cil Gaul sont foueilly
Que chantent cil oysel haut, and clair, and Le^^ ^emp^ vi^eut. sery
Lors change folle Dame Gaillard and serin. l'Amor de son Mary.

And this is the reason why the Bretons, the most ancient people of the Gaules, hau^ retained (euen to this very day) the name of Goy for a Wood and Forrest. And among^ vs, the ordenary Oath of honest plaine meaning Country men, is by Ver-goy, as if they would say, By the Greene-Wood. And let me tell you, that (from all Antiquitie) peop^

liuing and dwelling in the fieldes, were called Bagaudes, or Bagaules,Bagaudes or Bagaules. whereof mention is made by Eutropius, and Paulus Orosius, These were of the Gaules Christians, that had re^reted themselues into the woods, during the persecutions of cruell Dioclesian, only to ^iue in their owne Religion. Since which time, this name or word hath bin taken in the worst sense, and referred to such, as hide themselues lurkingly in Woodes and Forrests, only to prey vpon, and rob all passengers, and so, by corruption of Letters, ^re tearmed high-way-men, Theeues and robbers, of whom we ceasse to speake any fur^her, and returne againe to our Bretons.
The countrey of Bretaigne hauing bin first of all inhabited by Gomer and his fol^owers (who afterward peopled the rest of the Gaules, Spayne,Bretaigne first peopled by Gomer and his followers. Allemaigne or Germa^ie, Italie and Greece) the Druides made there their principall abiding, from whence afterward they dispersed themselues into the neighbouring Prouinces. And although ^t was so, that their Prince, high Priest and president of the Gaules, hold the Seate of his Principality at Dreux, In finibus Carnutum, as Caesar saith in his Commentaries: yet notwithstanding, the chiefest Colledge of those Drudes, was in the Gaulish Bre^aigne whereof we now discouse, euen the very same; and not in England, so ought the same passage in the sixt Booke of Caesars Commentaries to be vnderstood.
Disciplina Druidarum in Britannia reperta est, atque inde in Galliam translata:Bretaigne Armorica, not England which ^s meant of Bretaigne Armorica. And thither it was that the Noblemen of the Gaules sent their sonnes, to learne those Sciences whereof the Druides made profession, as the same Caesar reporteth in the place before alleadged,
England, which is now named Great Bretaigne, was peopled by the Gaulish Bretons, who gaue it their name, as heere you may see for further assurance, by the Noble Romaine Historian Cornelius Tacitus, in the life of his Father in Law Iulius Agricola. In ^niuersum aestimanti, Gallos Vicinum solum (of England) occupasse credibile est. Eorum sacra deprehendas: Sermo haud multuum diuersus, in deposcendis periculis eadem auda^ia. Strabo maketh a perticuler description of the Breton Gaules passage into England, whether they caried their Religion, Discipline, Language and boldnesse in Fights, which it seemeth he hath borrowed of Caesar in his fift Booke, where he speaketh in this manner.
Britannicae maritima pars ab ijs incolitur qui praedae, and belli inferendi causa Ex Ar^oricis transierunt; qui omnes fere iis nominibus Ciuitatum appellantur, quibus orti ex Ciuitatibus eo peruenerint, and bello illato ibi remanserunt, atque agros colere coe^erunt.
Venerable Beda, an Englishmen by nation, in the first Booke and first Chapter of his Ecclesiasticall history of England, speaketh thus. Britannia Oceani insula cui quondam Albion nomen fuit, inter Septentrionem; (and Occidentem locata est. In primis haec Insula Britones solum, a quibus nomen accepit, Incolas habuit qui De Tractu Armorica (vt ^ertur) Britanniam aduecti, Australes sibi partes illius vindicarunt.
So is it very certaine, that the maritime Coastes of England, inhabited by the Gaulish Bretons, had their Townes and Villages called (as Caesar, telleth vs) by the names of those of Bretaigne Armorica, which causeth the same Caesar speaking of them of Walles which he tearmeth Cantium, to say: That in Manners and fashion of behauiour, they differed not much from the Gaules. Qui Cantium incolunt, non multum differunt a consuetudine Gallorum. Who by the meanes of Nauigation (whereto they were made aptly prepared, more then any other people) caried into that Isle of Albion, their fashions, Manner of life, their Language and their Religion: For they had learned it of the Druides, as Tacitus writeth in the fourteenth Booke of his Annales.
We are creedily informed, that at Lions, Authun, Neuers, with other places in the Prouinces of France, there had bin Druides, and namely in Normandie, Ausonius the Bourdelois, speaking of Professours famous and renowned in his time: maketh mention of one Patera, a nation of Bayeux in Normandy, Sexton of the Temple of Apollo called Belenus.

Tu Baiocassis stirpe Druidarum satus
Si fama non fallit fidem.

But yet, that he was extracted of the race most Noble of the Druides of Bretaigne Armorica, the Sourse and Fountaine of the Auncient Druides, whose Learning and

diuine Science, as well as their language, was knowne and renowned through a^ parts of the habitable world.

D^ Baptas en Se^aine secondesAuant le Nom Latin, and que les Romulides
Eussent le champ d'Euandre en poinctes aiguise,
Le parler Docte-Sainct des Bardes and Druides
En Grece, en Italie en Memphe estoit prise.


Before the Latine name, and the Romulides
Were by Euander sharpened in such sort,
The learned-holy speech of Bards and Druides
In Greece, in Italy and Memphis held report.

So effectually speaketh our excellent Du Bartas.

Nec reticebo senem
Nomine Phoebicium,
Qui Beleni A^dituus
Stirpe satus Druidum
Gentis Aremoricae.

Learnedly deliuered by Ausonius.
Theeues of Robbers on t^e highwayes.Bretaine had heeretofore the Title of Armorica, as wee haue seene by the precedent obserued passages, and may also read in Aeghinard, Secretary of State, or Chancellour to our King Charlemaigne; speaking of the onset in the Pyrenean Mountains, made by the Bandouliers of the Countrey, vpon the Baggage of the French Army, where there were slaine some of ours, and but three onely of any note. In quib^ (saith hee) ^uitlandus Praefectus littoris Armorici, betweene which was Roland Amirall des Costes de la B^etagne Armorique. For it is to be especially obserued, that the ancient Gaules called by this name of Armorique and Morique, the Countries, strands and shoares engirt with the Sea, and likewise such Townes and Villages as were seated on the Coasts thereof. Ciuitates quae ipsorum Gallorum consuetudine Arm^rica appellantur. And the same is obserued by Casar: Armorica ripa, vel Ciuitas dicitur, quae supra mare sita est.
The Piccards and Flemmings seated on the Coasts of the Ocean Sea, are by the same Authors called Morini Populi, as meaning Maritimi: and from thence hath been deriued our name D'Anurall,The de^tion of the name Admirall. Salt Sea. a Gouernour on the Sea. From the ancient Gaulish Language Arl which signifieth before or after, and More, which signifieth the Sea. Or else Als-M^re, Haute-M^r, H^gh-Sea (and not Mer-Salee, such an Epithite were ouermuch) changed into Almeras, so say the English, Ammirante in Spanish, and by Caesar in Armorica, to deck or clo^th (as with a Romane habite) this ancient Gaulish Diction* as very boldly hee hath done the proper names of our Cities, Townes, Riuers and Mountaines,An errour committed by Caesar. reuested, turned and returned in disguised habits, according to his owne fancie, and imitated afterward by strange Geographers, who haue made a micton or Gallimaufry of vs.
Bretaigne sometimes gouerned by Kings.Now, concerning Bretaigne (as wel as many other beside) it hath heretofore been gouerned by Kings. Within some while after by Dukes and Counts, who were Li^dgemen to the Crowne of France, from the time of our first Christian King Clouis, who subdued this Prouince of Bretaigne Armorica: according as it is written by our auncient Annalist, Saint Gregory Victor, Archbishop of Tours, in his History of France, the fourth Booke and fourth Chapter. Semper Britanni sub Franc^rum potestate post obitum Regis Clodouaei fuerunt, and Comites non Reges appellati sunt.
Charles the Simple, King of France, to restraine the rude courses of Normane Pyrates, who spoyled and rauaged France: made alliance, by the mariiage of his Daughter to Rollo,(...) called Normandy. who hauing embraced the Christian Catholique Religion, was (by the said Simple) made hereditary and patrimoniall Duke of Neus^ria (afterward called Normandie) of which Prouince Bretaigne Armorica bearing the title of a County onely, was giuen in Arriere Fief or Mesne Fief to the Dukes of Normandy,

(...) whom the Counts of Bretaigne were as Seruants and Vassailes, vntill the time of ^hillip Augustus, called the Conquerour and Gods Gift, King of France, second of ^e name, who by the death of Richard King of England, his mortall enemy, hap^ening at the Siedge of Chaluz in Limosine, the sixt of the Ides of Aprill, One thou^nd, one hundred fourescore and nineteene; inuested in the Countie of Bretaigne ^ong Arthur, Nephew to the said King of England.Yong Arthur of England Count of Bretaign and Aniou So that this yong Arthur com^ing (an Infant) with his Mother into the Citie of Mans, where then King Phillip ^as: he did him Liedge Homage, as well for the said Countie of Bretaigne, as also ^r that of Aniou, whereof this yong Prince was seized by force, after the death of ^e said King Richard his Vnckle.
By the Treatie of peace, made betweene the said Phillip and Iohn, King of Eng^^nd, Brother to the deceased King Richard, who died without Children; the same ^eace was made and sworne betweene Vernueil and the Isle of Andely, in the yeare ^ne thousand two hundred, in the Moneth of May, and on Ascension day. On ^e behalfe of the said King Phillip, it was namely stipulated and couenanted,Couenants past betweene the two Kings of France and England. that ^ex Anglia recipiet Arturum in hominem, ita vt Arturus Britanniam tenebit de co ^nd on the part of King Iohn without Land. De Arturo sic erit quod nos non amoue^us cum, and minuemus, neque de feudo, neque de dominio Britanniae citra mare, nisi ^er rectum iudicium Curiae nostrae. This Arthur was Sonne to Geoffrey, Count of ^retaigne, Sonne to Henry, King of England, who being come to Paris to see Phi^ip Augustus, that dearely affected him; he fell sicke and died the foureteenth of the Calends of September, One thousand one hundred fourescore and fiue, and was ^uried in the Quire of the Church of Paris, before the high Altar; The King being ^ssistant at the Conuoye in person, followed by Thibault, Count of Champaigne and ^rie, Seneschall (that is to say, Great Maister) of France with Count Henry his Bro^her, the Countesse of Champaigne their Mother, and Lady Margaret of France, Sister to Phillip Augustus, Widdow to the King of England, Henry the yonger, married to Bela, King of Hungaria, Croatia and Dalmatia. Within some few daies, ^he same King Phillip; Quatuor Sacerdotes in Ecclesia beatae Mariae Parisius, in ^s Comes sepultus fuerat, pro seipso, and pro anima pijss^mi patris sui Ludouici, and ^o anima dilecti sui Gaufridi Comitis Britanniae perpetuo instituit. This we learne ^rom Rigordus, in the life of the Emperour Augustus, vnder the yeare before re^embred.
Now, the same yeare of the Peace,King Richard slaine at the Siedge of Saluz. accorded (as before) betweene King Phillip Augustus, and Iohn King of England, Successour to King Richard, who dyed at ^he Siedge of Chalux (to get a massie Treasure of the Emperour Lewes the Debon^re, his Wife Ermingard, their three Sonnes Kings, Lothaire, Lewes and Pepin,Arthur made Knight of the Starre. as ^lso their wiues, all made sitting at a Table, which was composed of the purest Gold) ^he Count of Bretaigne Arthur, was made Knight Of the Starre, in the Towne of Gu^rnay in Normandie; and affianced to Madam Agnes, or Mary of France, Daugh^er to the said King Phillip Augustus, and Agnes of Morauia. Which Daughter of France, and Phillip of France her Brother, were made Legitimate by Pope Innocent, Third of the name: And here you may reade the very words of that Marriage con^ract.




The Popes dispensation for the Contract of Marriage.
PHilippus Dei Gratia Francorum Rex. Notum sit omnibus praesentibus and futuris, Quod nos concessimus dilecto nostro Arturo Comiti Britannia, quod nos trademus ei Mariam filiam nostram in Vxorem, quando id poterimus facere de iure secundum consuetudinem Ecclesia; and modo fecimus ea, quae facere possumus ei de iure, de securitate dicti futuri ma^tagij, and hoc fecimus ei iurari sicut praedictum est de parte nostra. Et ipse iurauit nobis quod ipse accipiet eam in Vxorem, cum ipsa ad aetatem debitam peruenerit, and numquam

vita Comite, dimittet eam aliquo modo. Actum Parisius Anno Domini Milles^ Due^tesimo Secundo, Mense Aprili.




Indirect dealing in King Iohn to King Phil^ip Augustus.But vpon the bad and indirect dealing, which King Iohn of England vsed towar^^ him; he inuested himselfe in the Countie of Bretaigne. Qui iure haereditario ad c^ pertinebat, this is affirmed to vs by Rigordus. Adijciens Comitatum Pictanenfium, and^ Aneidegauensium, quos armorum iure sibi acquireret. Qua de causa Rex Artur^m perpetuo in hominem ligium accepit, and accepta a Rege licentia, mense Iulio recessit. And here is the Charter of the Homage, and of the Inuestiture of the said Arthur Count of Bretaigne, in the Counties of Bretaigne, Aniou, Maine, Touraine and P^ctou.




A Copie of the Charter.
PHILLIPPVS DEI GRATIA FRANCORVM REX. Notum, etc. Quod nos recipimus Arturum Comitem Britanniae in Hominem L^gium contra omnes qui possunt viuere, vel mori, nemine dempto, de fo^dis Britanniae, Andegauiae, Cenomaniae, and Turoniae, quando, Domino volente, vel (...) vel ipse ea acquisiuerimus saluis omnibus teneamentis de quibus nos vel homines nostrit^nentes eramus eo di^, quo disfiduciauimus Ioannem Regem Angliae pro interceptionib^ quas nobis f^ceret de hac vltima guerra, de qua nos obsedimus Botauant, tali modo. Qu^ quando recipiet hommagia de Andegauia, Cenomania, atque Turonia, ipse recipiet hommagia illa, saluis conuentionibus inter nos, and ipsum factis. Ita quod si Arturus resilierit (...) conuentionibus inter nos, and ipsum factis, ipsi cum feodis suis ad nos venient, and nos inn^bunt contra ipsum. In super autem de Dominio Pictauiae, recipimus eundem Arturu^ in Hominem Ligium, si Dominus dederit quod nos, vel ipse eam quocumque modo acquis^rimus. Barones vero Pictauiae qui imperij nostri sunt, and alij quos voluerimus, facient nobis hommagium ligium contra omnes qui possunt viuere, vel mori de terris suis, and de pracepto nostro facient ei hommagium ligium, salua fide nostra. Si autem Charissimus Fr^t^r, and amicus noster Rex Castellae in terra aliquid iuris clamauerit, per iudicium Curi^ nostrae definietur, si ipsos de assensu vtriusque non poterimus pacificare. De Normannia vero sic^rit, quod nos id quod acquisiuimus, and de eo quod Dominus nobis concedet (...) quirere, ad opus nostrum retinebimus, quandiu nobis placuerit: and hominibus nostris, (...) pro nobis terras suas amis^runt, dabimus id quod nobis placuerit de terra Normanniae. Actum apud Gornacum Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Secundo, Mens^ Iulio.




The peace (...) the two King broken.This Peace of Andely or of Gournay, was broken by the occasion of Iohn, King of England, who refused to performe Liedge Homage, for the Counties of Poictiers, Aniou, and the Duchie of Aquitaine, which he then held and possessed in Franc^ of the Crowne, and violating his Oath, was entred into Armes against his Soueraigne. This Iohn, tearmed as well without Faith, as without Land, hauing got possession of his Nephew Arthurs person, had caused him to be strangled in prison, and had taken into his custodie also Eleanor, eldest Daughter to Geoffrey Count of Bretaigne (deceasing at Paris, as we haue formerly said, and Sister to the same Arthur* being both of them Children of Geoffrey, the elder Brother to Iohn without Land whom hee had closely shut vp in a strong prison in England, as fearing, lea^ she should driue him forth of the Realme of England, which appertained to her, in the right of her Father Geoffrey of England.
King Iohn (...) to ^s N^^hew to h^s (...) ArthurWhereupon, and for this cause, King Iohn of England, was by Decree of the Co^ of Peeres, in the Parliament of February One thousand two hundred and thirteene attainted and conuinced in the crime of high Treason, for the death of his Nephew Arthur, who was Liedgeman to the King, in regard of the Counties of Bretaign^ Aniou and Poictou, Fiefes which he held of the Crowne of France, acquired and con^fiscated to the King. Who moreouer leuied a great Naual Army, for the Conquest o^ England, which (as he presumed) did belong to him, as being the neerest Heire, and

^lest to succeede in the Crowne, Causae quae Philippum Regem magnanimum moue^t ad hoc, vt vellet in Angliam transfretare, hae fuerunt, vt Episcopos qui diu a sedi^ suis eiecti, in Regno suo exulabant, suis Ecclesijs restitueret: vt diuinum Seruitium ^od iam per septennium in tota Anglia cessauerat, faceret renouari: Et vt ipsum Ioan^ Regem, qui Nepotem suum Arturum occiderat, poenae condignae subijceret. So speaketh ^gordus, and vnder the same yeare before set downe.
Now, this Arthur dying in this manner by violence, and without issue,Alice sister to yong Arthur by the same mother, married to Peter de D^eux. Alix his ^ster, by one and the same Mother, Daughter to Guyon Viscount of Thouars, and to ^nstance, Countesse of Bretaigne (Widdow in her first marriage to Geoffrey of Eng^nd, of whom we haue spoken before) Daughter and sole heire to Conan the yon^er, Count of Bretaigne: Alix, I say, was married to Peter of Dreux, and by mari^ge was couenanted to him the Countie of Bretaine, wherein hee was inuested by ^hillip Augustus, in the same yeare One thousand two hundred and thirteene, as Ri^dus informeth vs concerning the said yeare. Petrus filius Roberti primogeniti Ro^rti Drocarum Comitis cognati Philippi Regis magnanimo, duxerat in vxorem filiam ^donis de Toartio sororem vterinam Arturi, ex parte matris suae Cimitissae Britanniae* (...) ^^acum acceperat a Philippo Rege magnanimo totum Comitatum Britanniae minoris. ^he Homage performed by this Peter of Dreux to Phillip Augustus, is set downe in ^e yeare One thousand two hundred and thirteene at Paris: and not in the time of ^aint Lewes, yongest Sonne to Phillip Augustus, as is vainely reported by the Pennes ^f some Historians, that write more liberally, then wit or gouernment are able to ^arrant.
This Geoffrey of England, fauourite of Phillip Augustus, Count of Richmont,An Order begun by this Geoffrey, and called the Custome of Bretaigne. and so ^y his wife Constance made Count of Bretaigne; was Authour of the Assise and Or^er, for the intire Feodale succession to eldest Brothers or Sisters, without any par^ge or deuision made to the yongest: and likewise, concerning the yonger, to whom ^as giuen Money at their marriage; and to the yongest of all, a Nagge and Armes or all their portion. This Assise or Assessement was heretofore called The Custome (...) Bretaigne (whereof we shall speake more hereafter) and said to be done in the ^eare One thousand one hundred and fourescore, published by the Estates of the Countrey, to serue (in following times) for a firme, ordained and setled Law. ^ut concerning Peter of Dreux, Husband to Alix of Thouars, Countesse of Bre^aigne: he was of the House of France, and in this manner (as wee vnderstand) his Originall.

The GENEALOGIE and Originall of the Counts of Dreux.
KIng Lewes le Gros, sixt of the name, and Alix of Sauoye his wife, had sixe ^afle children, the fourth whereof was Monsieur Robert of France, Count of Dreux, as also of Perche and Brenne, Lord of Vienna in Daulphine, of Bray (called by his name) Count Robert of T^rsy in Brie, and of Chaille in Biere. This Monsieur Robert had to wife Agnes, Countesse of Breme, and of this marriage issued a Daughter and fiue Sonnes, the eldest whereof was Robert, called the yonger, second of the name, Count of Dreux, who tooke to wife Yoland, eldest Daughter to Raoull, Lord of Coucy: by whom hee had sixe Daughters, and foure Sonnes, the fourth and last where of was
1. Peter of Dreux, Husband to Alix, Countesse of Bretaine, and of this marriage issued a Sonne and a Daughter, which was
Yoland of Bretaigne, and was wife to Hugh of Lusignan, called the Browne, Count de la March, and of Engoulesme.
The Sonne was
II. Iohn of Bretaigne, Sirnamed the Red Count (in regard of his Haire) first of the name. He espoused Blanch, daughter to Thibault, sixt of the name. Count Palatine of Champaigne and Brie, and King of Nauarre, first of the name: of whom came two Daughters, and sixe Sonnes, as namely
1. Iohn.
2. Peter, who dyed yong, buried at

the Gray-Friers in Paris.
3. Thibault the eldest.
4. Thibaulte the yonger.
5. Nicholas. And
6. Robert.
The Daughters were
1. Alix of Bretaigne, who was twise married: First to Iohn de Chastillon, Count of Blois and of Chartres, And in second mariage to Bouchard, Count of Vendosme.
2. Eleanor the second Daughter died yong.
III. Iohn, second of the name, eldest Sonne to Iohn the first was made Count and Duke of Bretaigne. He tooke to wife Madam Beatrix of England, daughter to Henry, King of England, third of the name: And of this Alliance proceeded three Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Arthur.
2. Iohn, Count of Richmond in England. And
3. Peter.
The Daughters were
1. Blanch, wife to Phillip of Artois, eldest Sonne to the second Robert, Count of Artois.
2. Mary, wife to Guy de Chastillon, Count of Saint Paule, Brother to Huon, Count of Blois. And
3. Anne, a professed Nunne at Font-Eurauld.
The said Iohn of Bretaigne died at Lyons, at the Crowning of Pope Clement the fift, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and fiue: And then succeeded his Sonne
IIII. Arthur, Duke of Bretaigne, who was twise married. First to Beatrix, Viscountes^e of Limoges, and by her he had three Sonnes, to wit
1. Iohn the third.
2. Guy, Count of Pointieure, who espoused the onely Daughter to Henry, Baron d'Auaugour: and by her he had one onely Daughter, named Ioane the Cripple, wife to Charles of Blois. And
3. Peter, who died yong.
In second marriage he tooke to wife Queen Yoland, widow to Alexander, King of Scotland, Countesse de Montfort l Amaury, sister to Iohn the second, Count of Dreux, and by her he had one Sonne
Iohn, tearmed of Bren^n, who w^ Count of Montfort: And foure daughters, to wit.
1. Iane, wife to Robert of Flanders, Lo^ of Cassel, Alluye and Montmirall, yonge^ Son to Robert, Count of Flanders.
2. Alix, wife to the Count of Ve^dosme.
3. Beatrix, wife to Guy, Lord of Laual.
4. Mary, a Religious sister at P^issy.
V. Iohn, third of the name, Duke of Bretaigne, who was maried three times. His first wife was Isabel of Valois, daughter to Monsieur Charles of France* Count of Valois, without issue. The second was Madam Isabell of Castille, Daughter to the King of Castille Sancio, fourth of the name, without issue likewise. And i^ third marriage he had Ioane of Sau^^e, Daughter to Guy, Count of Sauoye, issuelesse also. So that by his death, the Succession grew to be questioned, between
Charles of Blois, yongest Sonne (...) Lewes, Count of Blois, and Margaret of Valois: husband to Ioane of Bretaigne the Cripple, Niece to the party deased, And
Iohn of Brenne, Count of Montfort l^Amaury, Vnckle to the same Cripple.
By a Decree (the King sitting in his Parliament, well furnished with Peeres) dated at Conflans the seauenth day of September, in the yeare One thousand three hundred fortie and one, The D^chie of Bretaigne was adiudged to the said Count of Blois and his wife. And yet notwithstanding
VI. Iohn de Brenne of Montfort, fourth of the name, being assisted by the English; maintained himselfe in the Duchie of Bretaigne, so that a Battaile was fought in Bretaigne the nine and twentieth day of September, One thousand three hundred threescore and foure, where the said Charles de Blois was slain; and (within a while after) Canonized by the Pope Vrbane. To resist against Iohn de Brenne, King Charles the fift sent his Brother the Duke of Aniou, and the Lord of Clisson to make warre vpon him. So that Iohn the fift, Sonne to Iohn the fourth, was constrained to agree with the Widdow and Children of Charles de Blois, in giuing to them the

Countie of Pointioure, and to come and yeelde homage to the King, for the said Duchie of Bretaigne, and Countie of Montfort l'Amaury, Lands of Niuernois ^nd of Rethelois, deliuered into the Kings ^ands. And which were restored again by a Treatie, made betweene the said Charles and Duke, the fifteenth day of ^anuary, One thousand three hundred ^nd fourescore, ratified by the same Duke at Guerrande the tenth day of Aprill, in the same yeare One thousand three hundred and fourescore. He tooke ^o wife Margaret, daughter to Lewes eldest Sonne to Robert Count of Flanders, third of the name: and of this mariage came
VII. Iohn, fift of the name, Duke of Bretaigne, who was twise married. First ^he espoused Madam Mary of England, daughter to King Edward, third of the ^ame; but had no issue by her. His second wife was Madam Iane of Nauarre, daughter to Charles the Bad, King of Nauarre, second of the name: And by her hee had three Sonnes and foure daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Iohn the sixt, to whom his Mother gaue the Countie of Richmont, with all her moueables, gaines and winnings.
2. Arthur, Constable of France, And
3. Richard, Count d'Estampes, Lord of Clisson; who tooke to wife Margaret of Orleans, daughter to Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, and Madam Valentina of Millaine. Which Margaret of Orleans brought to the said Richard (in marriage) the Countie of Vertus. In this mariage was borne two sons and three daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Frances of Bretaine, Count d'Estampes and Vertus.
2. Lewes, who deceased very yong.
The daughters were
1. Katharine of Bretaigne, wife to William de Chalon, Prince of Orenge.
2. Margaret, Lady Abbesse of Font-Eurauld: And
3. Isabel who dyed yong.
The foure daughters of Duke Iohn the Fift, the eldest was
1. Mary, wife to Alain, Viscount de ^^ban.
2. Mary wife to Iohn, first of the name who was Duke of Ala^son.
3. Blanch, wife to Iohn, Count of Armiagnac: And
4. Bonna, wife to the Viscount of Lomagne, eldest Son to the said Iohn, Count of Armaignac.
VIII. Iohn, Sixt of the name, and fift Duke of Bretaigne, had to wife Madam Iane of France, second daughter to King Charles the sixt; and by her he had borne to him three Sonnes and two daughters.
The eldest Sonne was
1. Francis, the first.
2. Peter, Husband to Frances d^Amboise, only daughter to Lewes d'Amboise, Viscounte of Thouars. And
3. Gilles, Husband to Frances de Dinan, Lady of Chastea^-Briand, Monta-Filand, and of Beaumanior.
Peter and Gilles, not hauing any issue.
The Daughters were
1. Isabell, wife to Guy, Counte of Lauall; And
2. Margaret, who died young.
IX. Frances, first of the name, Duke of Bretaigne (the Authour of this subiect) had two Wiues. The first was Madam Yoland of Cicilie daughter to Lewes, first of the name, King of Cicilie, and Duke of Aniou of the Second Ligne; but by her hee had not any children. His Second Wife was madam Isabell of Scotland, daughter to the King of Sotland, Iames, first of the name; Sister to Madame Margaret of Scotland, first wife to King Lewes the Eleuenth. And by her he had three Daughters.
The first daughter was,
1. Margaret of Bretaigne, wife to Frances of Bretaigne, Counte d'Estampes, eldest Sonne to Richard Counte d'Estampes, Lord of Clisson, and Brother to Duke Iohn, Sixt of the name.
2. Katherine, wife to Iohn, Lord of Rohan, Viscounte of Lyons, Sonne to Alain Viscounte of Rohan; And
3. Frances, Wife to Iohn d'Albret, Eldest Sonne to Charles d'Albret, Second of the name.
Frances the first being deceased without any heire male,No daughters succeeded in in the Duchie of Bretaigne. not one of his daughters succeeded in the Duchie of Bretaigne, but Peter, Second Brother to the said Frances the first. Because, by a Treatie made at Guerrand the Twelfth day of Aprill, in the yeare of Grace One Thousand,

Three hundred, Threescore and foure, betweene Iohn, Duke of Bretaigne, Fifth of the name, and Iane of Bretaigne Countesse of Pointhieure, it was couenanted: That thenceforward, Females should not succeed in the Duchie of Bretaigne, all the while, and so long as heire Males should be found, issued of the Ligne of Bretaigne. So that, according to these Conuentions and Agreements made and sworne:
X. Peter succeeded in the Duchie of Bretaigne; but he deceasing without any Issue, the said Duchie of Bretaigne fell to the second Sonne of Iohn the Fift.
XI. Arthur of Bretaigne, Constable of France, Second of the name, was thrise maried. His first Wife was the eldest Daughter to Iohn, Duke of Bourgongne, widdowe to Monsieur Lewes of France, Daulphine of Viennois, and Duke of Guienne, Sonne to King Charles the S^. His second wife was the daughter to the Lord d'Albret. And the third wife was Katherine of Luxembourg, daughter to the Counte of Saint Paule: but by the^ hee had not any children. So that the Duchie of Bretaigne came t^
XII. Frances, Second of the Name, Eldest Son of Richard of Bretaigne, Brother to the said Arthur the second, according to the Treaty held at Guerr^nd. By his wife Margaret, Sister to the Counte of Foix, he had two Daughters, the Eldest whereof succeeded in the said Duchie, through defect of heires males, issued and descended of the true Ligne of Bretaigne.
The daughters names were
1. Anne: And
2. Isabell, who died young.
In the life time of the said Frances the second, deceassed King Lewes, Eleuenth of the name, the last day of August, in the yeare one Thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and three.Madam Anne of France Regentesse of the King and State. After whom succeeded his Son Charles, Eight of the name; who being as yet in yeares of Minority, and not able to gouerne his Kingdome: his Eldest Sister Madam Anne of France, wife to Peter, Duke of Bourbon, Second of the name, Lord of Beauieu, was proclaimed Regentesse, according to the will of deceased King Lewes the Eleuenth. Shee being sole Gouernesse, and hauing in her possession the person of the King her brother, disposed of the whole State, Offices and Reuennues of the Kingdome, euen according to her owne mind. She estranged from the Kings seruice, first all the Auncient Officers of the Crowne; and within a while after, the Princes of the Bloud, and other Princes that were strangers.
Lewes, Duke of Orleans, prime Prince of the Bloud, who afterward was King of France,The Duke of Orleans his opposition against the Regentesse. Twelfth of the name, had formerly pretended, that the guarding of the Kings person, and Regencie of the Realme, appertained to him. But he not being (as yet) of competent age to gouerne himselfe, the Estates Generall of France, being assembled at Tours after the death of King Lewes the eleuenth; adiudged that prerogatiue to the Lady of Beauieu, a Princesse of a proud surlie minde, and one that had very high aspiring humours. Lewes playing one day at the Tennis, neere to the Court of Paris, there happened a stroke to grow in question and difference; which the Lady of Beauieu (being then and there present) iudged against the Duke of Orleans. He wexing offended at her peremptory forwardnesse, replied out aloude: That hee was badly sentenced, and the Iudge had lied.
The Lady of Beauieu, hardly enduring to put vp the lye, caused the Councell to be assembled, where, by consultation passing among them, it was thought conuenient, that the Duke of Orleans should be committed to safe custody. But he being aduertized thereof by a Gentleman,The Duke of Orleans esc^peth from Paris p^^u^lie. named Iohn de Louuaine; suddenly escaped from Paris, accompanied with his Cousin the Counte of Dunois, Frances of Orleans, Messire Guy Pot, and Louuaine that had bin his Intelligencer. He rode directly towards Pontoise, from whence departing to Vernueill and Alanson; he stayed there for some time with the Duke, whom he perswaded to take part with him, and the greatest Lords of the Kingdome, only to disturbe the peace thereof: vnder the ordenary and common couller of them, that couet to fishe in troubled waters, for Reformation of the Realme; Contrary to the Law of God, which forbiddeth a Subiect to rise against his Prince, what specious pretence soeuer may be alleadged for it.
When these newes were come to the Court, all the Princes and Lords were disappointed, and all their Companies quashed from their former meaning; which hauing in great measure incensed and displeased them, they made great mustrings and

Leuies of men throughout all their Prouinces, as the King did the like for his owne ^arte. On either side happened sharpe bickerings and encounters, and in this busie ^me of turmoile* Peter de Rohan, Lord of Gie, Marshall of France, and the Lord (...) Grauille, mediated to pacifie the Duke of Orleans. Conditionally,Labour to winne the Duke of Orleans, and cease the disturbance. that he should ^ome to the Court, there to hold the rancke and qualitie of his place, as was fitting for the prime Prince of the Bloud. And that the Counte of Dunois, Frances of Or^eans, his Cousine (who was reputed to bee the matche, tinder and fire of these ^ommotions:) should absent himselfe from the Realme for some space of time, withdrawing into the Countie of Ast, which belonged to the Duke of Or^eans.
And so by this accord (which was but of very short continuance) all men (on ei^her side) layde downe their Armes,Troubled waters are best fishings for Souldiours to the great discontentment of martiall minded men, cheated and deceiued in their chiefest hopes, of speeding best in strifes and ^arboiles, as is ordenarily noated in all Ciuill dissentions. This dawbed agreement with the Duke of Orleans, was concluded at Boisgency, in the yeare of Grace One Thousand, Foure hundered, Fourescore and fiue.
No long tarying made the Counte of Dunois at Ast, but,The Counte of Duno^s his sudden returne into France. without licence from the King, returned backe into France, and fortified himselfe in his Castle of Parthenay (...) Poictou. The Lady of Beauieu, seruing still as Sentinell to these contrary courses, ^nd suspecting this returne of his; aduertised the King thereof, who, to cleare him^elfe in this businesse; by councell of the Regentesse, sent to the Duke of Orleans, who then made his abode in his Citty of Orleans) to come speedily, and yield him^elfe to him.
The Duke (well informed of these charitable and kinde offices, which the Lady of Beauieu perfourmed to him, and quite against the haire:) assured the Marshall de Gie, ^hat he would be as soone at the Courte, as he. And on the morrow, being the Fift day of Ianuary, in the yeare fourescore and sixe, he departed from Orleans,His queint escaping to the Duke of Bretaigne. and came to ^lo^, from whence he went with his Houndes and Haukes, as if he intended to goe see (...) Flight. Withall possible diligence hee went to Nantes in Bretaigne, where hee was ^indly welcommed by Duke Frances, Second of the name: who Shipte himselfe in ^is cause and quarrell, with all them of his first intelligence.
Which were Charles, Counte of Engoulesme, Lord of Espernay,Their names that tooke part with the Duke of Orleans. of Fere and of Ro^orantin; Iohn, Duke of Bourbon, Second of the name; Madam Magdalen of France, Mother to the King, and Queene of Nauarre; the Cardinall of Foix; the Duke of Neuers; Francis, Second of the name Duke of Bretaigne, Counte of Montfort, Riche^^nt, d'Estampes and de Vertus; Alain, Lord d'Albret, Counte of Dreux, Gaure, Pointi^re and of Perigort, Viscounte of Limoges and Lord of Auesnes; the Counte of Co^enges, Rene Duke of Lorraine and de Bar, Counte de Vaudemont and de Harcour; Maximilliam, King of the Romanes, Arch-Duke of Austria, Duke of Lothier, Brabant, Lembourg, Luxembourg and Gueldres, Counte of Flanders, Artois and Bourgongne, Pa^atine of Henault, Holland, Zeland, Zutphen, Frizeland and Malines; Iohn de Chalon, Prince of Orenge, Nephew to the Duke of Bretaigne; Frances of Orleans, Counte de D^nois and of Longue-Ville, Lord of Parthenay, Great Chamberlaine of France; Frances de Dinan, Countesse of Lauall, Lady of Chasteau-Briand; Iohn de Rieux, Lord of Rieux and Ancenis, Counte d' Aumale, Viscounte of Donges, and Marshall of Bretaigne; the Bishops of Alby, and of Montauban; the Lords of Miolants, of the Isle, of Bou^^age, of Granuant, and many other great Lords beside, who tooke for their Chieftaine and Guide in this action Lewes, Duke of Orleans, who stiled himselfe Duke of Orleans, Millaine and Valois, Counte of Blois, Pauia and Beaumont, Lord of Ast and Coucy.
Thorow all France (by Poastes and Courriers) they declared and proclaimed,The reasons published of their entring into Armes. the manifest reason of their entring into Armes, and the agreement of their Sealed League, bearing this Title.


A Briefe of the Leagues Proclamations.
SEaled and confirmed by the Confederated Princes, for seruice of the King, Reformation of the Kingdomes Pollicie, and his Royall Court (where open sale is made of all things) for ease of the people, and maintenance of those Orders agreed on by the

Estates in Parliament. For gouerning his highnesse Reuennues, and reestablishment (...) the Officers of the Crowne: Against disturbers of the weale publique; Breaker (...) the Ordenances, done in the generall Assembly of the States, and who (according to their owne willes) possessed and ruled the King in his minority; hauing expelled and thrust away from about his Royall person, the Princes of his Bloud, and chiefe Offices of the Crowne.
These Proclamations are dated the tenth day of February, in the yeare One Thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and six, at Cognac, at La Flesche, at Nantes, and sundry other places beside.
When the King had intelligence of these rebellious proceedings; forthwith he se^^ an Army into Poictou,The Kings proceedings against his reuolted subiects and besieged Parthenay, which was taken and raced downe ^o the ground. As much he caused to bee done in Guienne, on the Lands and Castles of the Counte of Comenges, and other pertakers with Orleans, who (for the greater part) were retreated into Bretaigne.
The King summoned the Duke of Bretaigne, to restore him his Subiects, of whom he made vse in this his reuolt. Vpon his refusall, he dealt with the Noble men of the Countrey, of whom hee withdrew the most part, to fight against their owne Duke. And in the meane while, hee entred a puissant Army into Bretaigne, where ioyning with the Bretons of his intelligence;The Kings army in Britaigne. he wonne Redon, Ploermell and other places, for beginning the yeare Fourescore and Seauen. In which yeare also, they of Vannes yielded themselues to the French: who afterward went valianly and besieged Nantes in the moneth of Iune, surprising Moncontour, Ancenis and Chaste^-Briand.
At the beginning of the yeare fourescore and eight, the French Armie tooke Fougeres, and Saint Aubin du Cormier on the one side; while the King (on the other) tooke into his hands, all the goods of the Lord of Albret, as returning to his Crowne. The Confederated Princes, to draw to their faction the said Lord d'Albret (a very riche and powerfull Lord) Father to Iohn d' Albret, King of Nauarre, Great Grandfather to Lewes the Thirteenth of the name,A mariage intended for the Lord Iohn d'Albret. King of France and Nauarre, at this present reigning) in Bretaigne and Guienne: had propounded a mariage to him, of Anne of Bretaigne, eldest daughter to the said Duke Frances the second; who, imitating the last Duke of Bourgongne Charles, promised his daughter in mariage to all the Princes, from whom hee hoped to deriue any aduantage and seruice, helpefull for his owne affaires and occasions,
For she was first promised to the Prince of Wales, Eldest Sonne to the King of England,Arme of Bretaigne diuers times promised in Mariage and all disapointed. Edward, Fourth of the name* Afterward to this Alain d' Albret; then to Maximillian of Austria, King of the Romanes, widdowed of Mary of Bourgongne, daughter to the last Duke Charles: And secretly (but in good earnest) promised to Lewes Duke of Orleans, who was resolued to diuorce Madam Iane of France, a wise and vertuous Princesse, but somewhat mishapen of body, and whom he had espoused against his will, to obey King Lewes the Eleuenth, a Prince difficulte to be endured, and whom he durst not deny in any matter whatsoeuer. Neuerthelesse, not one of these purposed mariages sorted to any effect, God hauing otherwise disposed for the good of France* as we shall see by the successe, and the pretendants lefte all deceiued.
Alain d'Albret feeding vpon these new promises of Loue: beside his owne forces, and those of his friends,The voyage of Al^ain d'Albret into Spayne to King Ferdinand drawne by him into this quarell; made a voyage into Spayne, to King Ferdinand and Queene Isabell of Castile (vsurpers of the Kingdome of Nauarre, against the King Iohn d'Albret) enemies to Lewes the eleuenth. Hauing visited them at Valentia, hee obtained of them the assistance of a thousand men of warre, conducted by their Grand Maister d'Hostell Iuan Graile, a Catholognian: with whom Alain d Albret being embarqued at the Port of Saint Sebastian in Biscaye, he ariued safely in Bretaigne the third day of Maye, One thousand foure hundred, twenty and eight.
Lewes de la Trim ^spab^ Generall of the Kings Armie.In the meane time, the King soiourning in his City of Angiers, gaue order to his Army, whereof (in absence of Gilbert de Bourbon, Count of Montpensier) hee gaue the conduct to Lewes, Lord de la Trimouille: albeit young in yeares, yet a wise Captaine, and of high attempting, also (of his time) he wonne the faire title of Cheualier sans Reproche, A Knight without detection.
The Army of the Leagued Princes, enlarged with the succour of England, Spaine ^nd Eight hundred Germaines, sent by Maximilian of Austria; was fully determined to set vpon the French. On they proceeded to handy blowes, neere to Saint A^bin du Cormier, on Monday being the Eight and Twentieth day of Iuly,The Battell fought neere to S. Aubin^ 1488. in the said yeare Foure Score and Eight: the honour and benefit whereof remained to the French, through the wise carriage of the Lord de la Trimouille, who was Lieute^ant Generall thereof.
The Lord d'Albret and the Marshall de Rieux saued themselues (with the first) by ^rusting to their Spurres. The Count d' Escales and Claudius de Montfort Englishmen, were slaine in the Field of Battaile, with Three Hundred English, to whom, and to Twelue hundred Bretons (ioyned with them, and bearing badges of the red Crosse) fell vtter ruine and slaughter, and not a man saued. The Duke of Orleans was arrested Prisoner among the Germaines, whom the Generall put to passe the Pikes.
The Prince of Orange perceiuing all to be in disorder;The Duke of Orleans and Prince of Orenge taken Prisoners. rent his Blacke Crosse (the Ensigne of Bretaigne) and threw himselfe on the ground among the dead: but being known to be liuing, was taken prisoner, as the like was Iuan Graille, Maiordome to Ferdinand of Arragon. Of the Bretons Army Sixe Thousand lay slaine in the field, and of the French but Twelue Hundred.
Which Victory thus won by the French,Duke Lewes sent to the Tower of Bourge^* brought to them also the Conquest of Dinan, Saint Malo, and other Townes beside, which yeelded themselues to the victorious Generall. After the Battaile, Lewes Duke of Orleans, was sent Prisoner to the strong Towne of Bourges, where hee remained two whole yeares in one of those Cages, which yet are to be seene at this day: in danger to haue continued there a farre longer time, but for the teares and entreates of Madame Iane of France ^his Wife. The Prince of Orenge was sent with a sure Guard, to the Castell of Font de Sec, to verefie the ancient Oracle, which neuer fayled to speake the truth; that
Celuy: qui contre son Prin^.Esleue le front trop haultEt qui trouble sa ProuinceEn fin trebuche d' vn sault.Et sent la Iuste IusticeDe ce grand Dieu punissant,De son foudre rougissantL'horreur and tel malefice.
Thus conuerted into English.

He that against his Prince
Exalts his head too hye,
And troubleth his Countries peace,
At length full low may lye.
And feele the iudgement iust,
Of that offended God:
Who punisheth such horrid sinnes
With his reuenging Rod.

The losse of this Battaile afflicted the Duke of Bretaigne in such sort;The death of the Duke of Bretaigne. that he died on Tuesday being the Ninth of September, in the same yeare Foure Score and Eight. His death was followed with that of his last Daughter, Madame Isabell of Bretaigne, His Eldest Sister
XIII. Anne, Duchesse of Bretaigne, was by the Testament of the last Duke Frances the Second her Father, left in the Guard and Tutelage of the Lord de Rieux,Anne, the young Duchesse of Bretaigne. Marshall of Bretaigne, and of the Lady de Loual, Step-Sister to the Lord Allaine d'Albret; in regard that the said Anne was then but twelue yeares old, being borne in the yeare, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, Three Score and Sixteene.
It was the meaning of the Marshall and Lady of Lauall, to espouse her to the Lo^^ Alaine d'Albret: but he being ouer-farre stept into yeares, the young Princesse made it appeare plainly, that she would not haue him. The Count of Commenges and Philip of Montauban, Chancellour and Gouernour of Bretaigne (during the minority of Anne, by the Testament of her Father) being both together otherwise minded, began to grow offended with their Lady,The Lord d'Albret submitteth to the Kings Seruice. at her refusing the Lord d'Albret: who displeased also therewith; by the meanes of Peter of Bourbon, Lord of Beaujeu, husband to Maddam Anne of France; yeelded himselfe to the Kings Seruice, who (within a while after) released all his Seigneuries to him.
By this businesse concerning the Duchesse of Bretaigne, this Prince brought such benefit to France; that he deliuered vp to the French, both the City and Castell of Nantes, which being surrendred in the end of March, Foure Score and Ten: The King came speedily thither, and made his entrance the Fourth day of April following* And there he kept the Feast of Easter, vntill the Eleauenth day of the same Moneth of Aprill, beginning the yeare Foure Score and Eleauen, when hee resolued to goe and besiedge Rennes, whereunto the Duchesse had retreated her selfe, and (by that meanes) at one aduenture to subdue Bretaigne, and so annexe it for euer to the Crowne of France.
A Marriage purposed for the Duchesse of Bretaigne.The taking in of Guincamp by the French, began this Instant yeare, and ended with the hopefull happy Marriage of the young Duchesse to the said King Charles the Eight: to the no small benefit of that poore Duchy, miserably ruined by wars of the French and English. For the young Duchesse being badly succoured by the King of the Romaines, her pretended Husband; could not expect any great matter of defence from him, nor from his Germaines, whose weapons hung heauy by their sides, and therefore made them march the slower.
Both the higher and lower Bretaigne (Rennes reserued and very few other places) were reduced vnder the French Command, and it had beene no meane dishonour to them, to leaue the rest for Maximilian. And King Charles hauing set at liberty the Duke of Orleans, through the instant intreaties of his Sister, Madame Iane of France, Wife to the said Duke of Orleans, and granted the same grace to the Prince of Orenge: his side became very strongly fortefied, as well by those two Princes, as also the Lord d'Albret,The Kings part very greatly strengthened. the Count of Dunois, and the Viscount de Rohan, a potent Lord in Bretaigne, as now it was an easie matter for him, to make himselfe absolute Lord of the Dutchy.
On the other side, the Dutchesse (perswaded by her faithfull followers, who made plaine demonstration to her of her misery, and the calamity of a poore Princesse, despoyled of her goods, and now driuen to such distresse, as, either to see her selfe exiled, or else confined to some Monastery (began to lend an eare, of faire agreement with King Charles. And the meanes for attaining thereto, was onely but by one way, namely Marriage; she being then aged fifteene yeares, and the King Twenty, wherein there was little inequality.
The King receiued into Rennes.For full^ resolution in this case, his Maiesty hauing won the Suburbs of Rennes, was (within three dayes after) receiued into the Towne with all magnificence, in the Moneth of Nouember, and the same yeare Foure Score and Eleauen. The Marriage being concluded on, he sent his promised Margaret of Austria, to her Father Maximilian, King of the Romanes, who had declared himselfe an enemie to him, making war against him, in fauor of the confederated Princes. Albeit, in the life time of King Lewes, the Eleauenth, his Daughter had beene granted to the Prince Daulphine Charles, and sent into France, where she was nourished some yeares, attending due age for the performance of Marriage.
The King married to Anne Duchesse of Bretaigne.The Nuptialls of the King and Anne Duchesse of Bretaigne, were sollemnized a^ Langeois in Touraine, the Sixt day of December, in the same yeare Foure Score and Eleauen: in the presence of Lewes Duke of Orleans, Charles, Count of Engoules^^, Peter Lord of Beauieu, both before and then Duke of Bourbon, and Frances, Count of Vendosme, Princes of the Bloud; there were also present Iohn Vicount of Narbenn^, Guy of Rochfort, Chancellour of France, Mesire Lewes d' Amboise, Bishop of Al^y, and Messire Iohn de Rely, Doctour in Diuinity, Bishop of Angiers, and Ordinary

^onfessary to the King, all these were on the Kings behalfe. And with the Du^esse came Iohn de Chalon, the Prince of Orenge, Philip of Montau^on, Chancellour Bretaigne, the Lord of Guemene, and diuers other great Lords, as well French as ^retons.
In this Marriage was borne three Male Children,The death of King Charles in the City of Amboise. all dying in the life time of their ^ther; who hauing reigned fourteene yeares and somwhat more, deceased (with^ Issue) in the City of Amboise, the Seauenth day of April, ending the yeare yeare ^oure Score and Seauenteene, before Easter, and the Seauen and Twentieth of ^s age. A Prince deformed of face and Body, but in recompence thereof, God had ^ued him with a capable spirit, very susceptible of lofty enterprises; which doubt^sse hee would haue effected, if heauen had spared him longer life time, being edu^ted (from his tender yeares) in the feare of God, works of piety and deuotion* and ^ese were his onely direction.
In Second Marriage, Queene Anne of Bretaigne matched with Lewes the Twelfth,The second Marriage of Queene Anne of Bretaigne to King Lewes the Twelfth. King of France, by the decease of Charles the Eight his Cousin. Which Lewes the ^welfth (called Father of the People) after his Sacring performed at Rheimes, the ^e Seauenteenth day of May, Foure Score and Eighteene; caused himselfe to be sepa^ted from Mademe Ioane or Iane of France, whom he had espoused and perforce, without giuing his will and consent thereto.
This was done by Sentence deliuered from these Cardinalls, as namely Philip, ^earing title of Saint Peter Ad Vincula, named of Sauonna; Marcellinus, Cardinall of Luxembourg, and Bishop of Mans; Lewes, Cardinall D'Amboise, and Bishop of Al^y, and Ferdinand, Bishop of Scepta, all of them Iudges delegated by Pope Alexan^er the Sixt.
Both the parties being in single condition, as they were before Marriage; King Lewes tooke to wife the said Queene Anne of Bretaigne (whom hee had dearely af^ected from the time before remembred) in the Moneth of Ianuary, Anno, One Thou^and, Foure Hundred, Foure Score and Eighteene.
Of this Marriage issued, two Sonnes, deceasing young, and as many daughters: to wit,
Madame Claudia of France, married to King Frances, First of the Name:The Issue of King Charles the twelfth. And,
Renea of France, Wife to Hercules d'Este, Duke of Ferrara; of whom King Lewes the Twelfth vndertooke the protection, against the violences of Pope Iulius the Second.
This Queene Anne dyed at Chasteau de Blois, the Nineteenth Day of Ianuary,The death of Queene Anne of Bretaigne. the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, and Thirteene, Her body lieth buried at Saint Denis in France, in the Sepulcher of King Lewes the Twelfth her ^ast husband, without the Quire on the left hand.
When this Queene was widdow to King Charles the Eight, shee engirt her Armies with a Band or Cordeliere of Siluer, which she had inuented, like to an Order of Knight-hood: to the end that the Armes of Queenes, Princesses and Ladies of high degree (being Widdowes) might bee in the like manner beautified.The gift of Queene Anne to widdowed Ladies. Shee wore, as a Girdle, a Cordeliere of white threed, and gaue the like to alll the Widdowed Ladyes of her Court, to weare vpon their mourning garments in her imitation.
And when shee made or built any Shippes in Bretaigne, Shee called them by the name of Cordelieres; especially the principall Ship of them, which wee tearme Royall.
Madame Claudia of France, her Eldest Sister, Wife to King Frances the First, gaue to the King her Husband the Duchy of Bretaigne, with other Lands beside, which shee held in succession both from Father and Mother, as heere you may behold the Contract of the Donation.





A Copie of the Queenes Letters Patents, for the Duc^ of Bretaigne, and other Lands.
CLaudia, by the Grace of God, Queene of France and Duchesses of Bretaigne, etc. To (...) such as shall see or read these our present Letters, Greeting. We make publikely known^ that as on the Two and Twentieth day of Aprill last past, in the City of Paris, wee gaue (...) granted to our most deare and louing Lord the King our Husband, the Duchie of Bretaigne, Counties of Nantes, Blois, Montfort l' Amaury, and the Siegneury of Coucy, for causes (...) full related in those Letters Patents, made and past before Iohn du Pre, and Iohn Dam, Notaries to our Prouost of Paris, by vsing the Priuiledge of Right, wherein Queenes are (...) subiected to Constitutions and Customes, whereby those Donations made by Wines to that Husbands during their Marriage, may be said to be inualidate and of no worth, but for the enioying during her life time only. Since when, considering, that the said Donation (...) granted for life onely, wherein we haue not satisfied our owne will and true meaning, which was, and is, to giue them to him to all perpetuity, if in case hee shall suruiue vs, with^^^ Children descending of our Marriage, or to our Children. Hauing regard to the Cla^^^ contained in the said Donation, and likewise to the charges, costs and expences, which but must needs bee at, for conquering of our Duchie of Millaine, the paines and trauailes which hee taketh continually to recouer it; yea, the great and (well neere) infinite Summes of money, which hee hath beene at for many yeares, as well in the life time of our most louing Lord and Father, King Lewes (whom God absolue) as since then, sent from the Realme of France, as well for conquering it sundry times, as to conserue and keepe it still ours.
And considering withall, that many Princes of our Blood, and other great Lords, Subiects, and Seruants to our Kingdome, haue exposed their goods and persons in the Conquest, recouery and keeping thereof: And that being issued and extracted of the House of France, whereof (with all our heart) wee desire the prosperity and augmentation.
And, that if our said Duchy of Bretaigne and County of Nantes, should happen to the hands of some strange Prince or Lord (which God forbid) it would proue the cause of many warres, diuisions and debates, to the great preiudice of the said Kingdome and Duchie of Bretaigne, as heretofore wee haue knowne by our deare experience: And for the intimate Loue wee beare to the good and loyall Subiects of our said Duchie of Bretaigne, and Countie of Nantes, the rest quiet and tranquility whereof wee heartily wish, and make no doubt but it may attaine vnto (by Gods assistance) so long as the Duchy and County shall appertaine to the Crowne of France.
For these causes and considerations, with others which haue much moued vs, and are (...) large set downe in the Letters of donation made at Paris, vsing the Priuiledge of Queenes, as before is mentioned; with our certaine knowledge, good counsell, and aduice, pure, fran^ and free goodwill, so much as in vs lyeth, or reason can require: Wee haue giuen, grantly and transferred, doe giue, grant and transferre by donation irreuocable, to our said Lord and husband, at this present accepted and couenanted, our said Duchie of Bretaigne, C^ties of Nantes, Blois, Montfort l' Amaury, and Siegneury of Coucy, without reseruing any part or parcell of them, but going so farre forth as they can and doe extend in the Duchie, Counties and Seigneuries, giuen and granted to our said Lord and Husband perpetually, of hee shall suruiue vs without Heyres descending by our Marriage, or after the death of such descendants, if hee doe suruiue them after our decease, euen as his owne proper and peculiar inheritance.
And wee promise on the sound faith and word of a Queene, to keepe and obserue all things before remembred, and neuer to gainsay or contradict any thing, for any cause, reason o^ meanes whatsoeuer, either directly or indirectly.
And wee promise, to warrant and defend (towards all, and against all) and to pay all Interests and damages, that may happen to my Lord the King, if the said Donation should not take entire and full effect; and that vnder the engagement and Obligation of all and euery part of our goods, and namely the said Duchy, Counties and Seigneurie.
And we renounce all exceptions, as well of Right as of Fact, and will that any such cases ^appening: hee shall take possession at all times, and as often as himselfe shall thinke good. (...) testimony whereof, etc. Beneath the Originall of the said Contract of Donati^n, is written in this manner.

Die Vigesima Octaua Mensis Iunij, Anno Domini Millesimo Quingentesimo Decimo Quinto, Donatio supradicta facta est praesente Domino nostro Rege acceptante; Domino Cancellario, Magistris Florimondo Robertet, Roberto Guydoyen, and nobis Notarijs subsignatis. T. Pastille. I. de Monthennault.





And thus the Duchie of Bretaigne, sundred for euer from the Crowne of France,The full reuniting of Bretaigne to the Crowne of France. ^as inseperably reunited thereunto, by the said Queene Claudia, and King Henry ^e Second her Sonne; as well by the fore-recited Donation, as at the request, ^nd by the aduise of the States of Bretaigne, the Fourth day of August, in the yeare, ^ne Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Thirty and Two.
We haue heretofore spoken somwhat, concerning the custome of Bretaigne,The diuision of Bretaigne before this Law. cal^ed Assise, made for Feodale Succession, adiudged by aduice of the States to Eldest ^rothers and Sisters, and what kinde grace remained to the youngest. Before this ^aw, the Duchy of Bretaigne was diuided betweene the Children of the Duke or ^ount deceased: which was corrected by Geoffery of England, Count of Richmond, ^irst Husband to Constance, Duchesse of Bretaigne his wife, and here you may read ^he nouell Assise.




The new Law or Assise for Bretaigne.
CVm in Britannia super terris inter fratres diuidendis detrimentum plurimum temere soleat euenire, Ego Gofridus Henrici Regis filius, Dux Britaniae, and Comes Riche^ntis, vtilitati nostrae praeuidere desiderans petitioni Episcoporum, and Baronum omnium ^ritanniae satis faciens, communi assensu Assisiam feci, and concessi quod in Baronijs, and ^eodis Militum, vlterius non fierent diuisiones; Sed Maior natu integrum obtineret Do^inatum, and minoribus suis prouiderent, and iuuarent iuxta possessionem. Ea Vero quae ^unc Iuniores possidebant in Terris, siue Denariis, tenerent quandiu viuerent. Haeredes ^uidem terras tenentium possidebunt illas in perpetuum: Denarios autem habentium Haeredes post Patres non haberent. Item si terra Minorum deuenerit in Balliuiam, Fra^r maior post eum Bailliam habebit; quod si fratrem non habue^^t, ille Amitis Bailliam ^unc cui decedens cum assensu Domini sui eam commendabit. In Filiabus vero qui Ma^em habebit, terram habeat, and Minores maritabit de terra ipsa ad Consilium Domini, and Propinquorum: generis. Si etiam in terra Maioris Maritagium aliquod accidere con^igerit quod Iuniori placeat, illud habebit, nec alii Maior conferre potest, dum minor velit ^bere: quod si habere noluerit, and alibi inuenerit, Maior frater ei de rebus, and caballis ^is dando perquirat pro posse suo, cum consilio Propinquorum, amicorumque. Item si Ma^ minoriterram dederit, de qua eum recipiat in hominem, and sine haerede obierit, alicui de propinquis suis cui voluerit eam dabit, ita quod ad principalem Dominum non redibit. ^i autem eum non receperit in hominem, ad Maiorem fratrem haereditas reuertet. Hanc Assisiam ego Gofridus Dux Britanniae, and Constantia vxor mea, and omnes Britanniae Barones iurauimus, and tenere decernimus vt necessarium, and vt Maiores natu, and Minores (...) are valeant, nec amplius in Terris, vel in Denariis partem habituri sint. Hanc Assi^am, siue institutionem nominatim Alano de Rohan, and eius haeredibus per totam terram ^am concessimus per mansuram. Vt igitur hoc ratum, and stabile maneat, appositione Sigillimei, and Constantiae vxoris meae voluimus raborari, testibus adhibitis. N. Redonensi. Petro Maclouiensi, Guichar. Dollensi Episcopis; Mauritaniae, Nannouodii, Red. and aliis plu^ibus Baronibus, Anno Domini, Millesimo, Centesimo, Octuagesimo.




Now, after these homages were thus performed to the Kings of France by the Dukes and Counts of Bretaigne; it was permitted to the French, being actuall Inhabitants, to cause the Bretons to be called to the Royall Seats of France, on simple assignations and defaults, vntil the time of Philip le Bel, King of France and Nauarre, but he
(...)

And some few words after. Quia vero magna qui^ sit Metropolitanus (...) contentio est, nulliusquam teneat memoria, vos in vestra regione, nullum (...) Ecclesiam, tamen si libet, postquam Deus omnipotens pacem intarite; and (...) nostrum KAROLVM Regem gloriosum (This was Charlemaigne; ^y (...) the Kings of Bretaigne Armorica) constituerit facil^ hoc poter^ adm^, Qu^ adeo contensiosius agere creditis, ad Apostolatum destinare contendite, quate^ nostro (...) bramine, quae sit apud vos antiquitus Archiepiscopalis Ecclesia, luce clarius innotesent, (...) deinceps omni ambiguitate recisa, quam sequi Episcopi vestri deb^ant, inc^nct^tur (...) noscant.
Notwithstanding this Rescript, the petty Kings and Counts of Bretaigne did no^ cease, to exempt themselues from acknowledging the right and Iurisdiction of th^ Archbishop of Tours, and maintained the Bishop of Doll to bee their Metropolitan because their Subiects and Seruants should not go forth of Bretaigne, for caus^ c^ncerning Iustice and Ecclesiastiall Discipline. Vntill it happened in the time (...) King Philip Augustus, a great and most magnanimous Prince, called the Good (...) (by iust right) The Conquerour; that Pope Lucius, Third of the Name, (...) with the Pallium of Archbishop and Metropolitane, the Bishop of Doll who (...) then.
Which tidings comming to the eares of Augustus, hee then wrote backe aga^ to the same Pope, concerning this ouer-rash enterprise of his; shewing him that, he ought not to haue done it, without his permission.




The Answere returned by Augustus to the Pope.
NVmquid obliuisci poterit Mater Filiorum vteri sui? Et ECCLESIA ROM^NA REGNI FRANCORVM? cum vterque de Natura sit impossibile, (...) iure difficile, and de facto enorme. Quid enim vltra facere debuimus MATRIN^ STRAE ECCLESIAE ROMANAE, and non fecimus ei vsque in hodiernos (...) es cum Patribus nostris? Cum ipsa gaudente gauisi sumus, and cum flente fleuimus vtra^ que Calicem passionis, and laetitiae, sine dissimulationis dolo, conbibentes. Persecutiones a^us, quae frequentes acciderunt, Patres nostri REGES FRANCORVM, and rab^^^ portabant humeris, and extentis brachijs defendebant. Exempla promere, est beneficia ^tractare, quorum debetis in quem collata sunt, non qui contulit, meminisse. Hacue s^ benefic^a meritorum REGNI FRANCORVM? Hae retributiones, and gratie^^ actione^s Deuotionis, and Fidei quam ECCLESIAE ROMANAE Patres nos^ semper exhibuerunt, in omni persecutione vestra, pro Ecclesia Domini, and suis, fideliter (...) perare, and resistere viriliter alienis?




To race out this fault and errour, Pope Innocent the Third, in the yeare of Gra^ before mentioned, and the Second of his Pontificiality; determined this cause to the benefit of the Church of Tours. And as hee was a very learned man; (...) was hee likewise bold and couragious, in the expressing of his owne inte^sions.
So pronouncing the definitiue Sentence, which hee caused to bee executed vnd^ paine of Excommunication; in taking away the Pallium from the Bishop of Doll (...) beginneth with these words.
Innocentius, Seruus Seruorum Dei. Doleat Dolensis and gaudeat Turonensis Eccl^sia, etc.




Of other Knights, stiled by diuers Names; as Knights of Battaile; Knights of the Siedge; Knights of Mines vnder the Ground; And Knights of the Accolade or Embrace.
CHAP. XVIII.
OVer and beside these Orders of France, which doe beare their perticular Titles; Kings, Lieutenants Generals of Armies,A power peculier to Martialists. and Captaines of maine Battalions, were wont to giue the name of Knight, to such as had carried themselues valiantly in Battailes, rough Encounters, Mines vnder ground, Assaults, and Siedges laid to Cities, Townes and well fortefied places. Moreouer, in times of Peace, Kings vsed to make Knights,Knights of sauour made onely by Kings by colling or embracing them, who were vulgarly called Knights of Grace and Fauour, which are the meanest of all ^he rest; and yet notwithstanding, this Grace cannot be giuen but by the King onely, euen no more then the degree of Nobilitie. As for the other Titles, I meane Knights of Battaile, Knights of the Mine vnder ground, and Knights of the Siedge ^aid to Cities; Lieutenants Generals haue that power from the King, granted in the vertue of their charge.
Before, or after the Battaile, such Knights are made, and in such forme and man^er, as we haue obserued to you in our second Booke.
Bertrand du Guesclin, Constable of France, after the Encounter made at Coche^d, famous by the surprizall of Sir Iohn Chandois, chiefe of the English Armie,The making Knights of Battaile. ^holly disrouted; made Knights of Battaile, to wit, Messire Iacques le Mercier, Lord and Patron of Saint Quentin des Isles, a Village neere to Bernay, in Normandie; and the Sonne in Law of the said Mercier, named Bertauld de Castell, Lord and Patron of the Village called Vitray le Gastel, neere to L' Aigle in Normandie. Moreouer, at Paris there are three Bretheren, descendants from the Familie of the same Bertauld, bearing the same Sir-name and Armes of Gastel, which are D'Argent a Deux Cheurons de Sable: the eldest of which three Brethren, is Maister Frances Gastel, Councellour to the King, and Generall in his Court of Aydes.
Concerning Knights of Mines vnder ground, before,Knights of Mines vnder ground. in the Order of Bour^, Page 492. We haue there declared, that Renaud of Montferrand was made Knight in the Mine of the Castell of Vertueil in Poicton, by the good Duke of Bourbon. Whereto we may adde and annexe, that which is said in the Chronicle of the Vrsins, vnder the yeare One thousand foure hundred and twentie, discoursing on the Siedge of Melun, maintained by the Lord of Barbazan for the French, against the English and Bourgongnons. The English hauing found by proofe, that he gaue them hot worke in their assaulting; made their recouse to vndermining; which was perceiued by the besiedged, who counter-mined also against them.
Et pour-ce qu'on disoit qu'en Mines se faisoient de vaillantes Armes, on sit seauoir que s'il^y auoit personne qui voulust faire Armes, qu'il vint. Dont LOVIS IVVERAL DES VRSINS requit audit Reigneur de Barbasan, qu'il luy donnast con^ge d' en faire. Ce qui luy fut octroye, mais qu'il trouuast Partie, laquelle il trouua assez aysement. Et estoit vn bien Gentil-homme Anglois d' Angleterre. Heure fut assignee, a la^uelle ils comparurent, and y^ auoit Torches, and Lumiere. Et combattirent l'vn contre l'^^tre vne grosse demie-heure, and n'y eut celuy qui ne perdist de son sang, and de ceux qui

auoyent les Gardes furent retraicts. Et n'y auoit guere Heure au Iour, (...) la Mine des faicts d'Armes. Entre les autres, Raymond de Lore, qui estoit vn vaillant ^cuyer entrepri^ Armes Deux contre Deux, and prit pour Deuxiesme ^dict^ Et combattirent contre Deux Angl^is, bien, and vaillament, and en euren^ (...) ne pouuoit-on-prondre l'vn l'autre, car il y auoit vn gros Cheuron* (...) ^rs de (...) Mine, haut iusques a la Poictrine, and estoit defendu que nul ne passast p^r Dessus, (...) Dessous.

Le Roy d'Angleterre, and le Duc de Bourgongne firent^ plusieurs Che^ (...) gran^ Seigneurs, lesquels vaillamment s'estoient portez au faict des Armes, qui ano^ent (...) faicts en la Mine. Et sonnoient Trompettes, and Menestriers en leurs Seiges, and fais^ieut (...) grand Ioye.

Le Seigneur de Barbasan dict aussi qu'il en vouloit faire, and enuoya querir led^ Louis des Vrsins, and Gilles d'Escheuiller (Bailly de Chartres) and les fit Cheualiers* (...) aussi sonner ce qu'il y auoit de Trompettes, and sonner les Cloches de la Ville.
And because it is said, that in Mines vnder-ground valiant actions of ^es are pe^formed; it was made knowne, that if there were any man, that would so (...) himself^ Armes; he should come to doe it. Whereupon, Lewes Iuuenall des Vrsins, requ^ of the said Lord of Barbazan, that he would giue him leaue to make proofe of his V^* Which was granted to him; but hee must finde a partie to coape withall; And it was (...) a very worthy Gentleman of England. The houre was appointed, and Torches and Light^ there readily prepared. And they fought each against the other a large halfe-hour (...) space, and neither of them escaped, without expence of his blood, till by them which wer^ the Guards, they were retreated. And there was not any houre in the day, but stout deede^ of Armes were acted in the Mine. Among the rest, Raymond de Lore, who was a valiant Esquire, vndertooke to fight two against two, and accepted (as his Second) the sai^ Lewes des Vrsins. And they fought against two Englishmen, brauely and valiantly, and had the honor, and yet could not one take another: because there was a great Spar or Beame ouerthwart the Mine, reaching so high as to the Breast; and it was prohibited, that they should not passe either aboue, or beneath it.

The King of England and the Duke of Bourgongne made many Knights and great Lords, that carried themselues valiantly in actions of Armes, and they had bin Knighted in the Mine. And Trompets were sounded, and other Musicks in their Siedges, making great delight and ioy.

The Lord of Barbazan said likewise, that he would make some Knights, and sent for the said Lewes des Vrsines, and Giles d'Escheuiller (Bayliffe of Chartres) and hee made them Knights, causing it to be done with the sounding of Trompets, and ringing the Bels of the Citie.
Knights of Besiedgings of Townes or Cities.Now as concerning the besiedging of Townes and Citties, Iohn Bourdigne, in his History of Aniou, vnder the yeare One thousand foure hundred fiftie and two, i^ the Moneth of Iune, speaking of the Siedge of Fronsac (called in Latine Fran^ic^ Castrum, the Founder whereof is made to be our King Charlemaigne. The Chronicle of Bouchard, Monke of Lauresheim, an Abbey of the Order of Saint Benedict, in th^ Messine Countrey, vnder the yeare Seauen hundred threescore and nine: Re^ (...) Legati, quos miserat, reuerterentur, Castrum iuxta Dornoniam (that is Dordogne) fl^i^ nomine, Francicum aedificet) hath written, that at the same Siedge were made Knight^ Peter des Barres, and Iohn de la Haye, with many other valiant Squires, that had the^ performed faire deedes of Armes. All our French Histories are full of Examples, concerning these Knights of Battailes, Mines vnder-ground, and hot Siedges.
Knights of the Embrace or Accollade.The last are those of the Embrace and Accollade, which the King vouchsafeth and giueth to ennoble them. Such as are of best aduise among them, doe take their Letters of Nobilitie, and of their Knighthood coniointly together, for otherwise they are put to double expences; whereof we say at Paris, as a common Prouerbe and by way of mockerie. Il en ha belles Lettres sans les Seaux: He hath goodly Letters, but without their Seales. And here you may behold the forme of them.





The Coppy of the Kings Letters Pa^ents.
^OVIS par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France, and de Nauarre* A^ pr^^ent^ (...) aduenir, Salut. Scauoir faisons, que desirants (...) l'E^emple, and (...) des Roys (...) ^redecesseurs, recognoistre par les tiltres, and les grades d'Honneur c^^x de nos Subiect^ qui ^ritent par leur fidele Seruice, que cy-deuant ^ous duans recogn^ par les Lettres Pa^es des Roys nos Deuanciers sur l'Ennoblissement de N. en datto d^. Mil* Six Cents ^ix-Sept, and pour l^s causes y contenues, par lesquelles il luy seroit permi^ a luy, and a sa ^sterite naiz, and a naistre en loyal Mariage, de porter telles Armes, and quand bon luy s^^^leroit, requerir and demander l'Ordre de Cheualerie. Pour ces causes, and autres a ce nous ^uants, and pour inciter de plus en plus nostredict Ame, and Feal N. Seigneur de N. and par^iculierement pour tels and tels segnalez seruices, tant par luy, que tels and tels ses (...) Pere, and Oncles, rendus en tels, and tels lieux, and en telles Annees. Auons faict and cree, faisons and ^reons Cheualier en l'Accolant ainsi qu'en cas somblable il est accoustume. Et en consequence dequoy nous luy auons donne, and confirme, donnons, and confirmons le tiltre, and de^gre de Cheualerie, Droicts, Honneurs. Priuileges, Prerogatiues, and Preeminences lesquelles ^en dependent, iouir, and vser pra ledict N. tant en Guerre, Cour, and Assemblee publique de la Noblesse, qu'en Iugement, and ailleurs par tout ou il sera be soin, en la forme, and ainsi qu'ont ^ccoustume de faire, vser, and louir les autres Cheualiers d'Accolee, creez de nostre Main, and ^des Roys nos Predecesseurs. Si donno^s on Mandement a nos Amez and Feaux Conseillers ^les Gents de nos Comptes, Generaux des Aydes, Gouerneurs de nos Prouinces, Bailliages, and Seneschaucees, Iuges, ou leurs Lieutenants and a ^nos autres Iusticiers, and Officiers qu'il ^ppartiendra, que ledict N. ils facent souffrent, and la^ssent chacun endroict soy, iouir, and vser plainement and paisiblement desdicts droicts de Cheualerie, Honneurs, Priuileges, Pre^gatiues, and Preeminences, lesquels y appartiennent. Cartel est nostre plaisir. Et a fin que ^ce soit chose serme and stable a toufiours no^^ auons faic^ ^^ttre nostre Seel a c^sdi^^s presen^es. Sauf en toutes autres choses nos^^e droict, and l'antr^^. Donne a Paris au Mois d' Auril ^l Au de Grace, Mil Six Cents Dixl^uie^, and de nostre Regne le Hui^ties^^e.

Signe De Lom^nie. Et sur le Reply. Par le Roy. Visa. l Du Va^^ and Seelle sur Lacs de Soye de Cire Verde.





The same in English.




LEwes by the Grace of God, King of France and of Nauarre. To all present and to come, Greeting. We make knowne, that ^^^^ng by the Example, and in the Imitation of the Kings our Predecessours, to acknowledge by titles and degrees of Honour, such of our ^ubiects as deserue for their faithfull Seruices, which heretofore haue bin made knowne to ^es, by Letters Patents of the Kings our fore-goers, for the ennobling of N. bearing date (...) the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and seauenteene, and for the causes therein contained, whereby is permitted to him, and (...), posteritie, begotten and borne in loyall Marriage, to beare such Armes, and when it shall seeme good to him, to require and demand the Order of Knighthood. For these causes, and others thereto mouing vs, and to incite more and more our said Beloued and Loyall N. Lord of N. and perticularly for such and such worthy Seruices, as well by him, as such and such his Grandfathers, Father and Vn^les, performed in such and such places, and in such yeares. Wee haue made and Created, doe make and Create him a Knight in Colling and Embracing him, as in the like cases hath bin accustommed. And in consequence whereof, we haue giuen and confirmed, doe giue and confirme the title and degree of Knight, by these presents signed with our hand. For the said title and degree of Knighthood, the Rights, Honours, Priuiledges and Preheminences, which are to be enioyed (...) the said N. as well in Warre, Court and publique Assembly of our Nobilitie, as in iudgement and otherwise euery where, he shall thinke fit, in the forme, and as hath bin vsed to make vse and enioy the same by as other Knights of the Embracing or Colling, created by our hand, and the Kings our Predecessours

Euen so doe we giue in command to our beloued and faithfull (...) Officers of our Accounts, Generals of Aydes, (...) Stewardships, Iudges, or their Lieutenants, and to all our other Iustices (...) whom it may appertaine: that the said N. they doe suffer and leaue (...) enioy and vse plainely and peaceably the said Rights of Knighthood* (...) Prerogatiues, and Preheminences which are thereto belonging. For such (...) And to the end that this may be a matter firme and stable for euer* we haue to (...) set our Seale. Reseruing in all other things our right, and what else* Giues (...) Moneth of Aprill, and yeare of Grace One thousand sixe hundred and eight^^^^ (...) Reigne the eight.
Signed De Lomeni^. And on the Folde. By the King. Visa. Du Vair: And Sealed with Greene Waxe on Strings of Silke.




And heere wee

thinke fit (with this conclusion) to place the Piece of the Hermine, being the Order of Bretaigne.


The End of the Third BOOKE and first TOME.



THE ORDERS OF FLANDERS, AND Of the Low-Countries: Otherwise CALLED THE NETHERLANDS. The II. Tome. The Order of the Golden Fleece: Jnstituted in the City of Bret^ges. Anno One thousand, foure hundred, twenty nine. The Fourth Booke.

CHAP. I.
THE Bourg^ignons, or Bourgongnons,L'Ordre de la Tuson D'Or. People of Almaigne or Germany, seated beyond the Rhine, passed that great Floods vnder the Consulship of Lucianus, and of Heraclianus, the Yeare of Grace, Foure Hundred and Thirteene, where they possessed themselues of one part belonging to the Gaules, and where (at this instant) are the Cantons of our Allied Confederares,The Cantons of the (...). Berne, Fribourg and Soleurre, with limitrophing Countries, sometime called by the name of the lesser Bourgongne. In following time, they pressed on further into the Countrey, possessing part of Sauoy, Daulphine, Lyon. (...), and the Dutchie and County of Bourgongne.
(...) the yeare Foure Hundred and Fourteene, Gondencus succeeded after King Gen^e his Vncle, vnder whose Reigne the Bourgongnons passed the Rhine. After (...) Gondiocus or Gondencus, succeeded next in order Gi^b^, Gothe^^rus, Gisl^h^rus,Kings of the Bourgongne no allied to the Vuisig^th^. ^carus and Gombauld. These Kings of the Bourgongnons were allied, and Kins^ to them of the Vuisigothe, who likewise had seized on, and possessed another (...) belonging to the Gaules, as we haue already declared in the second Booke.
^ombauld (Authour of the Law Gombette, whereby the Bourgongnons were ruled (...) policied) had three other Brethren, named G^ndegifilus,Bourgongne diuided into foure partitions. Chilpericke and Gothe^us, in fauour of whom, the Realme of the Bourgongnons (being then of great ex^e) became diuided into foure portions, the principall whereof was that, which

they properly called the Dutchy of Bourgongne, adiudged to th^ (...) Soissons.Or Ch^otilda.
These men, after the death of King Cloui^ their Father, were incited (...) ^ther Clotilda, to pass into Bourgongne, to reuenge the death of (...) Father,Sigismond and Godomarus Sonnes to Gombauld. on the descendants to the King of Bourgongne Gombauld: (...) and Godomarus ^is Sonnes, vanquished by the three B^thr^ Kings (...) (in some space of time after reconquered Bourgongne which (...) in the Voyage which was made by Childebert and Clothaire, the year^ of (...) Fiue Hundred Thirty Two. Where finished the first Kings o^ Bourgongne (...) death of Godomarus, fled into Affrica.
As for Sigismond, his Wife and Children were throwne into a Well ((...) ^mire King of Orleans) neere to the City of Orleans, in a piece of ground called (...) corrupt Language S. Sigismond (Founder of the Church of Saint Ma^ (...) whereupon he was Cannonized, and his memory celebrated in the Church the (...) day of May.
The Martyrologe of the famous Cardinal Caesar Baronius, on the first day of M^ Seduni in Gallia passio sancti Sigismundi Regis Burgundionum, qui in puter^ de^ers^ (...) cubuit ac postea miraculis claruit.The first King of all France.
Clothaire, First of the name, King of all France, (Founder of the Abbey of Mard of Soissons, where he is enterred) by his Second Wife, named (...) fiue Sonnes, the last whereof was Sigebert King of Austrasia, who by (...) his wife, second Daughter to Athanagilde, King of the Wi^igoths of Spayne, (...) Sonne called Childebert, who (in his Fathers right) succeeding in the (...) ^strasia; inherited the kingdom of Bourgo^gne, by the decease of his Vncl^ (...)
Brunechilde or Brunechaul^ a wicked Quene.This King of Austrasia was Cannonized, and his Feast celebrated in the ^an Churches of France and Germany. Brunechilde, otherwise named Brunch^ wife, for her wicked and abhominable life, was dragd at the tailes of vn^amed (...) by decree of a generall Parliament of France, held vnder King Clothaire the (...) in April 1623. to the Crosse du Trayor at Paris, and buried in the Church o^ (...) d'Autun wherof she was supposed to be the Foundresse: and so much the (...) cause (in her time) was leuied the great taxation (for womens wearing (...) which was called Brunchaulte, according to her name.
Childebert, King of Bourgongne and Austrasia (Realm^ whereof the (...) ^ties were Orleans and Metz) by Fail^uba his wife, left (...)
The Son was named Theodobert, Second of the name (...) without Issue; and by his death
Sigibert, Corbo Childebert and Meroueus, naturall Sonnes to Thierry.Theodoricke, or Thierry, Second of the name his naturall Brother, was (...) ^gongne and Austrasia. Hee (by his Concubines) left foure naturall (...) Corbo, Childebert, and Meroueus, whom Clothaire the Great (...) of Chilpericke and Fredegond) both held and named at the (...) Meroueus had a Sonne named Garnier, or Warnier, a Val^ (...) carriage, which he made publikely knowne both in Austrasia and (...) meanes whereof, Clothaire, Second of the name, was a pe^ble (...) said two Prouinces, and Kingdomes. In acknowledgement o^ his (...) faithfull Seruices, Clothaire made the said Garnier Maior of the (...) ^strasia; and Senatour, as much to say as Gouernour and Maior of the (...) ^gongne. Granting for Armes to him and his Descendants^* The Banner o^ (...) colour of France,L^ Banni^re dos Metal and colour de France. Mis en Bandes de Six pieces, that is to say, Bande (...) Which Armes and Banner haue of long time beene seene depi^ted, (...) of S. Arnoul de Metz, on the Tombe of the said Garnier or Warnier^ (...) wife a Lady of Austrasia, named Gestina.
By her he had two Sonnes, the eldest whereof named Godi^, (...) to all kindes of vices, who was beaten downe and slaine by the (...)

(...) brother Gondouall, fearing to bee taxed with his ^rothers bruti^nesse^* shielded ^selfe from the peoples fury, in the towne of (...) whereof he was ^oun^e. This (...) had to wife Yltr^da, daughter to (...),Ebraine Maire of the Pallace. who was (...) of the Pallace of (...). He had as sonne and successour in the said County of Aut^, Dro^i^, who (...) the heire of Rous^illion (I meane not the ^ssillo^ of Spaine) named Al^r^^ida, of whom descended their sonne Gerard, first stiled of Roussillion, in regard of (...) mother; and afterward hee became Counte of Au^, as being his owne land in ^prietie. This is the man, whom the fubulous ^ncers tearme Gerard of Rous^on, and make him a ^oniured enemy to Great King Charle^gne,The old History of Sir Gerard of Rouss^on. to whom (as ^ey say) hee gaue many Battailes. This Gerard, liuing to be full of yeares, died, and (...) buried at Vezelay, which he had builded and richely endowed.
He maried Frenanda, Daughter to the Duke of Aquitane Gaulfier, or Walfaire, ^om King Pepin ouercame: And by her he had three sonnes, Sampson whom Char^maigne affected, mak^ng him Duke of Bourgongne, Counte of Autun and Roussillion, ^d (if we may credite the Romane^rs, against the trueth of Historie) hee died at Ron^lx, and his body was caried into the Great Church of Aries, and enterred in the ^oyster, among the auncient Kinge of Bourgongne.
The second sonne was Ranulphe, whom the said Charlemaigne made Duke and Go^ernour of Aquitaine, a Prouince which till then,Ranulph^ Duke of Aquitaine. had beene commaunded by her (...) Kings, and was soone after (vntill such time as Eubles, Counte of Poictu, had the (...) Aquitaine) in title of a Duchie proprietarie, and patrimoniall.
The third Brother to Sampson, and Sonne of the said Gerard, was Albane, to whom ^rlemaigne gaue the Counte of Poictu, in title of fauour and benefit, but not in pro^ty: for in his time, such benefits were not giuen but for certaine yeares, and (at the (...)) for life, according to the qualitie of the seruices receiued.
And at such time as Charlemaigne caused to bee buried, the bodies of them slaine at ^i^naulx, in the Abbey of Sordre, neere to the Towne of Arqs in Gascoigne,The beginning of the Counts of Po^ctu. and at (...) foote of the Pyrenean mountaines: in the Letters for foundation of the said Abbey, ^de by Charlemaigne, the forenamed Ranulphe and Albane Bretheren, were presented, ^d Charlemaigne called them brothers of his good kinseman Sampson. Of the last of ^se two brethren, are issued and descended the Countes of Poicton.
Sampson, by the fauour of King Pepin, tooke to wife a Lady of great birth in Anio^; ^ich is not noated, and by her he had two sonnes.
The eldest, who was named Thierry, simply entitled himselfe Count of Autun: ^wbeit, Sampson stiled him Duke of Bourgongne, Counte of Roussillion and Autun.
The other was William, tearmed the Deuout, who was first Counte Officer of Au^gne, and by the death of his vnckle Ranulph,The first Counte Officer of Auuergne. or Raoull (dying without children) ^e of Aquitaine, inuested by the fauour and benefit of King Charlemaigne. This (...) gaue great gifts to the Abbey of Clony, where he lieth buried. In the Chapter-^se of the said Abbey, was (not long since) his Image and representation, hauing (...) Banners. The one D'Azure a Trois Bandes D'Or a la Bordure de Gueules,The Banner belonging to Aquitane. Escar^e Lozanges de Gueules et d'Or. Whereby we vnderstand, that the Lozange was (...) Banner belonging to the countrey of Aquitaine, whereof he had the charge. And (...) ^ame Banner was borne by the first Countes of Angoleusme, Sirnamed Taille-Fer. (...) other Banner which the sayd William the deuoute carried, was that of his owne (...), Stocke and Linage: differing (neuerthelesse) from them of the Auncient house ^^strasia, and of Bourgongne. Because that of Austrasia was De Bandes d'Or et (...) de six pieces, beginning by the mettall.The Banner of Austrasia. That of Bourgongne was likewise De ^es Dorees, et Azurees de six Pieces. But it had moreouer La Bordure de Guenles. (...) that of William the deuout, beganne by the Couller because hee bare D' Azur A (...) Bandes d'Or, which made L'Escu de Sept Bandes, ou Sept pieces a la Bordure De ^les.
As for the Banner of Albane, and of his Successours the Countes of Poicto^: It was (...) A Trois Bandes d'Azur, A la Bordure De Gueules.
And concerning the first Kings of Bourgongne, vanquished by the sonnes of Clouis,The first King of Bourgongne. (...) bare La Banniere D' Argent A La Giure Tortillee De Synople, A la Gueule Beante De ^les. That is to say, a Serpent writhed or wrung together, with any open mouth.

So it is the easier knowne,Or Chrotilda: that the Armes of Clotilda, Wife to King Clouis, are b^^lye emblazoned on the first Portall of Saint Ceneuiefe du Mon vt a Paris, which are D'Or and d'Azur: whereas they rather should be D'Argent a la Giure de Synople. Th^ first Kings of Bourgongne,The higher and lower Bourgongne. hauing conquered that part from the Gaules, which (to (...) very day) retaineth the name of Bourgongne, the higher and lower, and seeing th^ the Banner of the Gaules, was D'Azur au Lyon remptant d'Or: they added to their Armes a spoyle or prey, that is to say the skin of a Lyon, which supplyed the blan^ place of their Armes. And such bare Vernaire Maior of the Pallace of Austrasia, and Senatour of Bourgongne, both the one and other in deuise, but not in Armes.


CHAP. II. Of the first Dukes of Bourgongne.
Robert the strong, Marquesse and Count of Aniou.VNder the Reigne of Lotharius the Emperour, eldest Sonne to Lewes the Debonnaire, was made Duke and Gouernour of Bourgongne Thierry, (...) Cousin Germaine, Sonne to Robert the Strong, Marquesse and Cou^^ of Aniou, as wee haue formerly said elsewhere.
Within a while after, Charles the Bauld, King of France, and Emperour, made King of Bourgongne Bozon, Count of Ardenne, a Kingdome which th^ Descendants of the said Bozon enioyed sometime, euen vntill one named Raoull, became the vtter spoyle thereof. For the higher Bourgongne was vsurped by the E^pire.Berard of Saxony. Berard of Saxony possessed himselfe of Sauoy: Gignes the Fat, of Daulphine, and one Hugues made his seizure on Prouence; the Descendants of Thierry retaining sh^ the Dutchy of Bourgongne.
The said Thierry had espoused the Daughter of Theodoricke (eldest Son of Sampson, the first Duke of Bourgongne.) And of this marriage were borne Richard and Gilbert, who tooke the Sirname and the Armes of Bourgongne, Bande D'Or and d'Azur de Six pieces A la Bordure de Gueules.
Of Richard the Iusticer.Richard, called the Iusticer, or the Iust Duke of Bourgongne, married Othi^s, Daughter to a King of England, of whom was borne Raoull or Rodolph, Duke of Bourgongne, and King of France, after Eudes and Robert his Paternall Cousins.
Gileberta, Sister to the Emperour Otho.Gilbert of Bourgongne, Brother to Richard, in like manner held the said Dutchy. Hee had to Wife Gileberta, Sister to the Emperour Otho, first of that name, and (...) Gerberga, Wife to Lewes beyond the Seas, King of France. And of this Marriage there issued but one Daughter named Berthaire, Dutchesse of Bourgongne, marrie^ to Otho, Brother to the King Hugh Capet.
Otho and Berthaire seeing themselues to be without Issue; adopted for their Son Henry, Brother to the said Otho, and to Hugh Capet.
Gerberg^, Countesse of Dijon.The same Henry tooke to Wife Gerberga, Countesse of Dijon, Widdow to the Count of Mascon (descended of the Linage of Theodoricke, Sonne to Sampson o^ Bourgongne) named Richard, by whom he had a Sonne named Otho-Guillaume, adopted likewise by the said Henry and Gerberga, who had no Children at all. So th^ he was Duke of Bourgongne, and lyeth buried in the Abbey of Saint Benigne, (...) Diion.
By the death of this Otho-Guillaume, deceasing without issue: Robert the deu^ King of France, gaue the Dutchy of Bourgongne to the second of his Sonnes, Monsieur Henry of France. Who being crowned King of France, after the death o^ his Father Robert: gaue (in way of Appennage) the Dutchie of Bourgongne to (...) Brother Monsieur Robert of France.Monsieur Robert of France.
Hee, to shew himselfe conformable to the Lords of the Countrey, tooke th^ Banner and Armes of Sampson the first Duke of Bourgongne. Now you shall see th^ Family and Descent of the said Monsieur Robert of France.



CHAP. III. Of such as were second Dukes of Bourgongne; but of the House of France.
MOnsieur Robert of France, Duke of Bourgongne, tearmed the Aged, because he had li^ed a long and goodly time, had to wife
Amegarda; and in this marriage were ^orne two Sonnes.
Henry, And
Hugh of Bourgongne.
Henry dyed in the life time of his Fa^her, leauing two Sonnes,
Hugh, And
Eudes of Bourgongne.
^. Hugh, Eldest Son of Henry, succee^ed in the Dutchy of Bourgongne, after ^e death of Monsieur Robert of France, ^s Grandfather, dying in the yeare, ^75. buried at Semur in l'Auxois. The ^id Hugh dyed without Issue by his ^ife Yolanda, in the yeare, 1097. And ^as buried at Clugny, where he became Monke, after the decease of his Wife ^d made profession thereof in his latest (...) knesse. And by his death
3. Eudes (first of the name) his Brother, herited the Dutchy of Bourgongne, ^he ^unded the Abbey of the Cisteaux Fri^s, in the yeare 1098. and dyed in the ^yage of Ierusalem, the yeare of Grace, ^02. He left behind him two Sonnes
Hugh, And
Henry of Bourgongne.
4. Hugh, Second of that name, recei^ed the Duchy of Bourgongne, of Duke ^^des his Father, at his going in the Voy^^e to the Holy-land, and held it till his ^cease (happening in the yeare of ^race 1133.) of the Duchesse Mahauld ^s Wife. He likewise left two Sonnes
Eudes, And
Alexander of Bourgongne.
5. Eudes, Second of the name, Duke ^f Bourgongne, deceased in the yeare of ^race, 1164. leauing by Mary his Wife ^e only Sonne
6. Hugh, Third of the name, Duke of ^ourgongne, who had two Wiues. The ^rst whereof was Alix of Lorraine, and ^y her he had two Sonnes.
Eudes, And
Alexander of Bourgongne.
The other Wife was Beatrix, Daugh^er to the Daulphine of Viennoi^, Count (...) Her^y, by whom he had no Issue. Hee ^ade two Voyages to Ierusalem, the first in the yeare 1165. and at his then returning, hee founded the holy Chappell at Dijon. And in the yeare 79. hee gaue the County of Langres to the Bishop of the said place Gaultier, being his Vncle; with the consent of Henry Count de Bar, who pretended some Title thereto. At his second Voyage ouer the Seas, when King Philip Augustus tooke the strong City of Acres from the Sultane Saladine, the said Hugh the Third dyed in the yeare 1192. the eight day of August. His body was brought thence, and buried at the Cisteaux. And by his death succeeded in the Duchy of Bourgongne his Eldest Sonne
7. Eudes, Third of the name, who had 2. wiues. The first was daughter to Thibault, the great Count or Blois, and in this marriage was born one Son, named Iohn (who died in his Fathers life time, without Children) and 3. Daughters.
Mary, wife to the Count de la Marc^^.
Mahauld, Wife to Raoull King of Germany; and these 2. daughters left no Issue.
The Third was Alix, married to the Lord of Chalon, Seigneur Iohn Brichemell, and in this mariage were born many children, among whom was Iohn de Chalon; Bishop of Langres, and Hugh de Chalon, Father to Iohn de Chalon, Lord of Arlay.
The other wife of Duke Eudes the third was Alix de Vergy. He died in the yeare 1218. and was enterd at the Cisteaux. By his second wife he had one only Son.
8. Hugh, Fourth of the name, Duke of Bourgongne. He acquitted the County of Chalon by exchange, to Iohn Count of Bourgongne, and of Chalon his Kinsman, the Son of Stephen, Count of Bourgo^gne, Lord of Salins. His Mother and he founded the Iacobines at Dijon, in the yeare 1230.
The said Hugh had two wiues. The first was Yoland of Dreux, and of her hee begot three Sonnes and two Daughters.

Hugh,

Iohn, And
Robert of Bourgongne.
The Daughters were
Alix, wife to Henry Duke of Brabant, and
Mary, wife to Guy, Viscount of Li^ges:
The second wife of the said Hugh the fourth, was Beatrix; by whom he had one Son and foure Daughters.
Hugh of Bourgongne, Lord of Aualon, Chauagnes, Montreal, Montbar, and o^her Seigneuries in Bourgongne, which his Father left him.
The Daughters were.
Beatrix, wife to Hugh le Brun, Counte de la Marche, and of Angoulesme.
Isabell, wife to Peter of Brabant.
Margaret, wife to Iohn de Chalon Counte of Burgongne, Lord of Salius. And
Ioane, who became a Nunne.
The said Hugh the Fourth died in the yeare 1273. and was buried at the Cisteaux. His two eldest Sonnes of the first Bed, Hugh and Iohn, deceased before himselfe, both of them leauing no issue but Daughters. For.
Hugh by his Wife Mahauld, eldest Daughter to Archambauld of Bourbon the yonger, Countesse of Neuers, d'Auxerre, and of Tonnerre, had foure daughters.
Yoland, Countesse of Neuers, who was maried twise, First to Monsieur Tristand de France, Sonne to the King S. Lewes, dying at Thunis (without issue) with the King his Father. In second mariage she had Robert of Flanders, Eldest Sonne to Guye, Counte of Flanders.
Margaret, Countesse of Tonnerre, Lady of Montmirall in Perche; Second wife to Monsieur Charles de France (Brother of S. Lewes) King of Scicilie.
Alix, Countesse of Auxerre, Lady of Saint Aignan in Berry; Wife to Iohn de Chalon, Lord of Roche-fort in Bourgongne: And the fourth daughter was.
Ioane or Iane of Bourgongne, deceassing very young.
Iohn of Bourgongne, Second Sonne to Hugh the Fourth, had to wife Agnes, Second Daughter to Archambauld of Bourbon the yonger. Shee had as her partage or diuident, the Seigneurie of Bourbon; and of this mariage was borne a daughter onely, Beatrix of Bourgongne, Lady of Bourbon, sole heire to her Father and Mother; and maried to Monsieur Robert of France; Counte of Clermount in Beauoisis, Sonne of the King S. Lewes. And of this marriage is issued the Royall house of Bourbon, which hath succeeded to the Crowne of France, the most Illustrous of all Christendome.
Hugh the Fourth, by his Testament left the Duchie of Burgongne, to his third Sonne 9. Robert, Second of the name, which Duchie was confirmed to him by the King S. Lewes, against all the pre^ces of the Counte of Flanders, Second Husband of Yoland of Bourgongne, Eldest daughter to Hugh of Bourgongne the Eldest sonne of Hugh the Fourth. Of which second mariage proceeded diuers children, which were excluded from the said Duchie, because being borne and descended of Daughters, they are (by the Law of the Kingdome) excluded from inheritances.
The said Robert Duke of Bourgongne tooke to wife Madame Agnes of France, daughter to the King S. Lewes: A^ of this Mariage issued many Children namely fiue Sonnes, and foure Daughters. The Sonnes were

Hugh,


Eudes,

Robert, Count of Tonnerre, dying without any issue.
Iohn, And
Lewes of Burgongne, deceasing a^ without Children. The daughters we^
Margaret of Bourgongne, first wife (...) Lewes Hutin, Tenth of the name, King (...) France, and of Nauarre first of the name
Ioane, wife to Phillip de Valois, Six^ and last of this name, King of France.
Blanche, Wife of Edward, Eldest So^ to the Counte of Sauoy: and an other
Blanche, wife to N. Counte de Bar.
The said Robert the Second deceased i^ the yeare of Grace, 1309. After who^ succceded in the Duchie of Bourgong^ his Eldest Sonne 10. Hugh, fift of (...) name, who dying without Children, (...) the yeare 1315 (and buried at the C^aux) left for Successour in the Duch^e (...) Bourgongne, his Brother
II. Eudes, Fourth of the name. He (...) to wife Madame Ioane or Iane of Fran^ Eldest daughter to Phillip l^ Long, (...) of the name, King of France and Na^ by right whereof, the said E^des (...) Fourth, was ^ounte-Pal^li^e of Bourgongne and of Artois.
Of this Mariage was borne two So^
Philip, And
Iohn of Bourgongne.
The said Eudes was Founder of th^ Conuent of the Chartre^ Monkes in th^ Towne of Beaune, the yeare of Gra^^ 1332. and died in the yeare 134^. (...) two Sonnes died in his life time, (...)

^ Phillip in the yeare 1346. he had es^used Madam Ioane of Bologne, after^ard Queene of France in regard of ^ng Iohn her Husband. Of this marri^ge, the said Phillip of Bourgongne left one ^onne and a Daughter: The Sonne ^as
12. Phillip of Bourgongne, after the ^eath of his Grandfather Eudes, the ^ourth, and his Grandmother. So that ^e was both Duke and Count of Bour^ngne, and of Artois. He had to wife Margaret of Flanders, onely Daughter (...) Lewes, Count of Flanders. He decea^ed without issue, the fiue and twentieth day of Nouember 1362.
Iohn of Bourgongne, dyed before his Brother, in such manner and fashion, ^s by the death of the last Duke Phillip, ^he Duchie of Bourgongne came to
Iohn King of France, second of the ^ame, by meanes whereof, the said Du^hie of Bourgongne returned to the Crowne of France by right of reuersion, through the defect of a masle childe. And in the person of the said Phillip, ended the first ligne of Princes of the Bloud of France, Dukes of Bourgongne.


CHAP. IIII. The second and last Ligne of Dukes of Bourgongne, issued of the House of France.
THE last House of Bourgongne (the Subiect of this discourse) tooke beginning in the person of Monsieur Phillip of France, the last Son of King Iohn, eldest Sonne to King Phillip of Valo^, sixt and last of that name.
This King Iohn (in the life time of his Father) tooke to wife Madam Bonna, Daughter to Charles of Luxembourg, Emperour, and King of Bohemia, fourth of the name. And of her he begat foure Sonnes, and as many Daughters, which were Mesdames.
Mary of France, wife to Robert, eldest Sonne of Henry, Duke de Bar.
Ioane, wife to Charles King of Nauarre, second of the name, and Sirnamed the Bad. Of this mariage are descended the Kings of Nauarre, euen to this instant day.
Isabell, wife to Iohn Galeas, Vicount of Millaine: And
Margaret, a Nunne at Poissy. The Sons were
Charles, fift of the name, King of France called the Wise.
Lewes of France, Duke of Aniou, Count of Maine, and afterward King of Naples and of Sicilie.
Iohn, Duke of Berry and d'Auuergne.
Phillip of France, sirnamed the Hardy for his valiancie.
King Charles the fift,Iane of Bourbon a wise and beautifull Princesse. was married by his Father, his Grandfather Iohn and Phillip of Valois, to Iane of Bourbon, a beautifull wife Princesse, Daughter to Peter, first of that name, second Duke of Bourbon, in the yeare 1349. Wherein hath appeared the arguing ignorance of Hailian, who (very vnaduisedly) hath written in his History of France, that the said King Charles the fift, preferred the beautie of Iane of Bourbon, before his own perticuler pleasures, or the greatest goods of France, and the Estate, which he encreased and augmented greatly,Madam Margaret of Flanders, called the Rich Heire. by accession of the Counties of Flanders, Artois, and the Low Countries, and the sourse of so many warres, as France was then mollested withall, and which it might haue auoided: if the said King Charles the fift, had married the rich Heire of all those Countries Madam Margaret of Flanders, instead of espousing her to his yonger Brother, Phillip the Hardie as he did the twelfth day of Aprill, An. 1369.
The very date of these Mariages are sufficient to confute Haillian,Phillip the last Duke of Bourgongne. and to shew him, that at such time as King Charles the fift was married; the said Margaret, daughter to Lewes de Malines, Count of Flanders, was not as yet borne. And she was no more but eleauen yeares old, when she remained Widdow to Phillip the last Duke of Bourgongne, he deceasing at rhe age of foureteene yeares, at Ro^uray neere Dijon, the moneth and yeare before obserued. Also, the said Margaret continued a Widdow eight yeares, and vntill the yeare 1369. the twelfth day of Aprill, when King Charles the fift caused her marriage to his Brother Monsieur Phillip of France, Duke of Bourgongne. And the King, Charles the fift, had espoused Iane of Bourbon, in the yeare 1349.
Charles the second King of Nauarre.Now after the death of the said Phillip the last Duke of Bourgongne, the King (...) Nauarre, Charles, second of the name, prepared himselfe by way of opposition, ^gainst Iohn King of France, who reunited to his Crowne ^he said Duchie of Bourgongne: because he pretended, that by the death of the last Duke Phillip, he o^^^^ to inherite the said Duchie of Bourgongne, in regard of his Grandmother Marg^^^^ of Bourgongne, wife to King Lewes Hutin, Father of Madam Ioane of France, onely Daughter to the said Margaret of Bourgongne, eldest Daughter to Robert, third of the name, Duke of Bourgongne.
The Duchie of Bourgongne a great Fiefe of France.But the said King of Nauarre was disappointed in his ends and conclusions, by Order of Parlement at Paris; because the Duchie of Bourgongne is an Appennage and great Fiefe of the Crowne of France, whereunto it returneth, through defect of m^^^ children, issued and borne in loyall Marriage.
Duke Charles the Warriour.The same Reuersion was practised after the death of Charles the Warriour, last Duke of Bourgongne, of this last Ligne, deceasing without Heire Masle, hauing left but one Daughter, Mary of Bourgongne, from whom (after the death of her Father) King Lewes the eleauenth, tooke into his power the Duchie of Bourgongne, which hee reunited inseparably to the Crowne of France, conformably to the tearmes of donation of the said Duchie, made to Monsieur Phillip of France, called the Hardie, by King Iohn his Father. Behold here the Teneure of the said Donation.




A Copie of the Kings Letters Patents.
IOannes Dei Gratia Rex Francorum. etc. Notum, etc. Quod nos ad humilem supplicationem Subditorum nostrorum dicti Ducatus Burgundiae, praedictum Duca^um Burgundiae, in Pariatu, and quidquid Iurium, possessiones, and proprietatis habemus, and h^bere possumus, and debemus in eodem; nec non and in Comitatu Burgundiae, dicto Filio nostro Philippo donauimus, and concedimus tenore praesentium, de nostris speciali grati^, cert^, Scientia, auctoritate Regia, and nostrae Regiae potestatis plenitudine, prae missa in eum tr^^ ferimus tenenda, and possidenda, Per Eum, and Haeredes suos Masculos, In Matrimonio, ex proprio Corpore Procreandos, perpetuo haereditario iure pacifice, and quiete ponentes; ipsum que Filium nostrum Ducem, Primum Que Franciae Parem facimus, and crea^^^. Quod si praedictus Filius noster, vel sua Posteritas, vt praedicitur procreanda decesserint, quod absit, absque Prole Mascule, ex proprio corpore succedente, in dictis Ducatu, and Comitatu praemissa vniuersa, and singula sic donata, pleno iure integraliter reuertentur ad N^^, and Successores nostros Reges qui pro tempore fuerint, nostrae Coronae, and Domanio applica^da. Datum Nongenti supra Maternam Die Sexta Septembris, Anno Domini Mille (...) Trecentesimo Sexagesimo Tertio.
Per Regem, Tuo. Sealed with Greene Waxe, on Strings of Silke.


The Ratification of King Charles the fift, whereby, ouer and beside what aboue is said, he gaue to the said Phillip Duke of Bourgongne his Brother; the auncient Seate of the Dukes of Bourgongne, it is of the yeare 1364. the Moneth of Iune. Beside many other,A further ratification of the Kings grant. it beareth these words. Domum Burgundiae Sitam in monte Sanctae Gen^^^esa, quae a longis temporibus citra Ducum Burgundiae fuit, eidem Fratri nostro pro se, and haeredibus suis Masculus in line a directa ex proprio corpore, ex legitimo matrimonia procreandis donauimus, perpetuoque donamus. Datum in Castro nostro Luparae iuxta Parisius, A^ Domini Millefimo Tricentesimo Sexagesimo Quarto, Die secunda I^uij.
Sic signatum supra plicam.
Per Regem, Tuo. And Sealed with Greene Waxe, vpon Labels of Silke.




Of the Marriage betweene the said ^^illip first Duke of Bourgongne, and ^argaret of Flanders, were borne three ^onnes and foure Daughters.
Mary of Bourgongne, wife to Amadis, ^uke of Sauoye.
Katharine, Wife to Leopolde of Austria.
Margaret, Married foure times. And
Bonna, dying young. The Sons were,

Iohn,

Anthony, Duke of Brabant and of Lem^urg: And
Phillip Counte of Neuers and of Re^eill.
The said Monsieur Phillip of France, ^^ed in the Moneth of Aprill, the yeare (...) Grace one thousand Foure hundred ^^d Foure, he was founder of the Char^^rhouse at Diion, and in the Quire there^f is to be seene; the goodly Sepulchre of ^^e said Phillip the hardy, in blacke Mar^^e. His Figure or effigie lyeth in white ^arble, hauing on his head the Ducall ^onnet of guilded Brasse, holding in his ^ght hand a long Staffe, finishing in the ^^rme of a Scepter, of guilded Brasse like^ise, and the iust length of his Figure, ^hich is there alone by it selfe. On the ^^des by his head, are two Angels of ^hite Marble, bearing the armes of Bour^ongne. About the Tombe is a mour^ing of white Marble, containing the Fi^ures of diuers personages, the very best ^^rued and shaped, of all the Tombes that ^^uer I haue seene. The Duchesse his ^ife was enterred at the Isle in Flanders, ^n the Church of Saint Peter, neere to her Father; for she suruiued her husband a^out the space of a yeare, and died in the Citty of Arras, the chiefest in the Coun^ie of Artois, the Moneth of March, One ^housand foure huundred and fiue, After ^his Phillip succeeded his Eldest Sonne.
2. Iohn, Second Duke of Bourgongne, ^irnamed the Bad. He had to wife Mar^aret of Bauaria, daughter to Albert of ^auaria, and Sister to William of Bauaria, Counte of Henault, and of Holland. And of this marriage issued one Sonne, and sixe Daughters, namely
Margaret of Bourgongne, Wife in first Nuptialles to Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Guienne, and afterward Daulphine, Second sonne to King Charles the sixt. Shee was remaried to the Counte of Richmond, Arthur of Bretaigne, Constable of France. The said Margaret was buried in the Carmes at Paris.
Katherine, Wife to Phillip of Orleans, Counte de Vertus in Champaigne; sonne to Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, whom this Iohn of Bourgongne caused to be murdred at Paris, at the Porte Barbette, as we haue already related.
Mary, Wife to Adolphe, Duke of Cleues.
Isabell, Wife to the Counte of Ponthieure. They of this house, Portent de Bretaigne Escarlela d'Azur a trois Gerbes de Bled liees D'Or.
Anne, Wife to the Duke of Bedford, of whom the Tombe is to bee seene in the Celestines at Paris, neere to the Chappell of Orleans: And
Agnes of Bourgongne, wife to Charles Duke of Bourbon.
And like as this Iohn of Bourgongne, had caused by the blowes of Axes, the Duke of Orleans his Cousine, to be mercilesly massacred, and his braines dispersed on the ground:Bloud reuenged with blood in one and the same manner. his owne were dealte withall in the same manner, and his body cut with Axes, on the Bridge of Montereau, or Fourche-yonne, on Sunday the tenth of September, 1419. at fiue of the clocke in the euening. Long while after, his body was caried to the Charterhouse neere Diion, and laid in a vaulte before his Father; where yet is the Skelleton and head of this Duke to be seene, with the markes and cutts of the Axes. Aboue this vaulte is a Tombe of blacke Marble, like vnto that of his Fathers, on the Table whereof in white Alablaster, lieth the figures of the said Iohn of Bourgongne, and Margaret of Bauaria his wife. At the head of her portraiture, is (answerable to that of her husband) an Angell, bearing an Escutchoen of Armes, parted with Bourgongne on the right side, and Bauaria on the other. Which is Lozange d' Argent et d'Azur en Bandes, Escartele de Haynau, qui est d'Or au Lyon de Sable, contrescartele d'Or au Lyon de Gueules. Their only Sonne, sole Authour of these rich Tombes, was
3. Phillip, Second of the name,The good Duke of Bourgongne Philip so called by his owne. people. Third Duke of Bourgongne, sirnamed the good by his owne people (for hee was the scourge, and the most cruell enemy of France; leauing as heire of his goods, and mallicious rancour, Charles, called the Warriour, last Duke of Bourgongne, capitall enemy thereto.)
This Phillip had three wiues. The first whereof was Madam Michaele of France Daughter to King Charles the Sixt.
The second was Bonna of Artois, widdow to Phillip of Bourgongne, Counte of Neuers and Retheill: But by these two Princesses he had no children.
Dom P^dro the vsurper of Portugall.And therefore in his third Marriage, he espoused Madam Isabell of Portugall Daughter to the King of Portugall Dom Iohn, first of the Name, Bastard of Dom Pedro King of Portugall, and of Madame Thereza Gallega. This is the same Dom Pedro, who vsurped the kingdome of Portugall, against the King of Castille Dom Iohn, first of the name, and Madam Beatrix of Portugall his wife, and lawfull heire to Dom Ferdinand, King of Portugall, Legitimate sonne to Dom Pedro, first of the name.
The Lady Phillip of Lancaster.This Dom Iohn of Portugall, tooke to wife an English Princesse, named Phillip of Lancaster, by whom he had a plenteous issue, and among other, Dom Pedro Duke of Coimbre, who had to wife Madam Isabell of Arragon, of whom he begate sixe Children: the second whereof was Dom Iohn of Portugall, who espoused the last legitimate Queene of Cyprus, according as we haue s^id elsewhere. This Iohn stiled himselfe Prince of Antioche, in the Table of the Knights of Bourgongne.
Isabell of Portugall, Third wife to Phillip Second Duke of Bourgongne, was brought in to Flanders by her Brother Dom Henry of Portugall, Duke of Viseo. At her receiuing into the City of Bruges, there was a famous sound of Trumpets, being an hundred, sixty and foure seuerall Trumpets: a number very difficultly seene,A famous sound of Trumpets the like ^ildome scene. at one time together, in the Courte of any other Prince. The Nuptialles were celebrated with all Magnificence in the said Citty of Bruges, the ninth day of Ianuary, one Thousand foure hundred twentie nine.
Phillip of Bourgongne so dearely affected this third wife, as he made a vow, neuer to haue any other: howbeit, hee was greatly subiect to short stockings (which we vse in our common language, to tearme fittes of Amourous nature) and vsually to couet after change; which caused this Dutchesse to bee very suspitious of keeping his oathe. Yee neuerthelesse, in fauour of her, hee tooke for (...) deuise these few words; I will (...) other so long (...) I liue. A deuice whi^ hee caused to bee carued and painted (...) all his Buildings, Glasse windowes, T^stries, and moueables of household wh^soeuer. For yet is to be seene on the co^ cupborde in the great haul^ at (...) (wholly worme-eaten) the very same deuise; which is more amply to be obserued in many other places, hauing these word^ expressed at large: I will haue none (...) all my life time but Dame Isabell. Which is also to bee seene on the Coapes (...) vestiments of his order, in the Holy chappell, and in the Charterhouse at Dijo^.
Of this last marriage issued three Son^, as namely,
Anthony, borne at Bruxelles, the last day of September, one thousand foure hundred and thirty.
Iosses, borne in the Citty of Gaunte, the foureteenth day of Aprill, one thousand foure hundred thirty two. And these two children died in their young yeare^.
Charles, borne at Dijon, on the morrow after S. Martines day in winter, one thousand foure hundred thirty three. And at his Baptizing was stiled Counte of Charalois.
The said Phillip the second died in the City of Bruges, the sixt day of Iuly, in the yeare of grace, one thousand foure hundred sixty seauen, And his body was caried to the Charter-house at Dijon, wher^ he lieth with his three wiues, in a grea^ Sepulchree of blacke Marble, without any figures thereon, or mourning about, it not being finished. So that on sollemne Feast dayes, the Monkes couer the said tombe with a great hearse-cloth of gold* frindged round about; with the armes of the said Duke. After whom succeeded 4. Charles the fourth and last Duke of Bourgongne, sirnamed the Warriour, who had three wiues. The first whereof was Madam Katherine of France, daughter to King Charles the seauenth, called the victorious; whom hee espoused, being (as yet) but ten yeares olde, in the Towne of Saint Omer, in the yeare one thousand foure hundred thirty nine, And died at Bruxelles (where she was buried) Anno. one thousand foure hundred fourty sixt, without any issue.
The second was Isabell of Bourbon, daughter to Charles (first of the name)

Duke of Bourbon, and of Agnes of Bour^gne. This marriage was sollemnized (...) the Isle in Flanders, on All-Saints day ^e yeare of Grace 1454. And of this ^ariage was borne their onely Daugh^er
Mary of Bourgongne, wife to Maximil^ of Austria, King of the Romans.
The third wife (and by whom he had ^o issue) was Madam Margaret of Eng^and, Sister to the King of England, Edward, fourth of the name.
The said Charles, last Duke of Bourgongne, was slaine at the siedge of Nancy in Lorraine, on Sunday,Madam Margaret of England. being the Euen to the Feast of the Kings 1266. Hee was enterred in the Church of S. George at Nancy; but afterward, at the request of Charles the fift, Emperour; deliuered by the Duke of Lorraine, and transported into the great Church of Luxembourg.
In this manner, this last branch of Bourgongne, had but foure Dukes; Phillip, Iohn,Foure Dukes of the last branch of Bourgongne. Phillip the second, and Charles, whose portraicts (after the life) are to be seene in many places of this Realme, and namely in the great Glasse-Window of S. Iohn at Dijon, and in the great Haule of the Cisteaux Abbey, where the Dukes are garmen^ed and attired, according to the manner of the Presidents, with their Bonnets in ^he Parlements of France, which they tearme ^otanes, with great Hoods and Cloakes of Scarlet, furred with Ermines. Each of these Dukes had his perticuler Motto or Deuise written by him: Phillip the Hardy, Moult me tarde: Iohn the Bad, ^e le tiens: Phillip the Good, L'ay Empris: and Charles the Warriour, Ainsi ie ^rappe.
The body of Charles, being knowne after the day of fight, was carried to the Church, where the Duke of Lorraine Rener, hauing a Beard of Gold,The manner of the auncient Worthies beards. according to ^he manner of the Auncient Worthies; caused Holy Water to be sprinkled on him: To very good purpose, thus speaketh Paradine in his History.
It is a very remarkeable meditation, concerning the death of this great Prince, and ^he Order of the Golden-Fleece, instituted in this House of Bourgongne, how (ordenarily) it commeth to passe: that such things as we couet with most feruour; yea, seeke ^nd pursue with our greatest dilligence; in the conclusion, the enioying of them,Longest expectations conuerted to vexations. and ^he pleasure we take in them, bringeth vs much more damage and losse, then all the contentment we conceiued in them. This famous House of Bourgongne, that might haue walked equall with the very greatest Princes of Christendome: fell in an instant, hauing continued no longer then an hundred and seauen yeares in all. Phillip ^he second was the richest Prince of Christendome; by his inheritable portion, Duke of Bourgongne, by succession, Count of Flanders, Artois and Charolois; Duke of Brabant, and of Luxembourg, by acquisition, Count of Namures; and by treatie with Iacquetta of Bauaria, his Neece, Count of Haynau, Holland, Zeland,Wools and Fleeces fatall to the house of Bourgongne. Lord of Frizeland, and of other great Lands, from whence he deriued yearely vnspeakeable summes of money, ensuing by the trafficke and vent of Wools and Fleeces, which were fatall to this House of Bourgongne, in the person of Charles the Warriour; who being ouerlightly wedded to the quarrell of the Count of Romont, warred on by the Swizzers, from whom he had taken some Waggons, laden with Sheepes-skinnes; to ^ittle or no purpose, he iniuried that Nation, being then obscure, and without any renowne, and from whom he could winne but their extreame pouertie. Yet Charles fighting against them; lost his Riches at Gransson; his men at Morath; and his life (...) Nancy, according to this Disticke, made after the Germaine manner.
In rebus Granssen, grege Murthen, corpore Nanssen.
So the Duchie of Bourgongne returned to the Crowne of France,The Duchie of Bourgongne returning to the Crowne of France. by the death of this Charles the last Duke, deceasing without any Heire Masle; conforme to the words, expresly set downe in the Donation and Inuestiture of him. And this was the reason, why King Lewes the eleauenth, for the ease of his Subiects of Bourgongne, who (in cases Royall) came to pleade in the Parlement of Paris: established in Bourgongne a Soueraigne Parlement at Dijon, by his Letters Patents, whereof here followeth the tenour.





A Copie of the Kings Letters Patents, for holding a Soueraigne Court of Parlement, at Dijon in Bourgongne.
LEwes, by the Grace of God King of France. To all them to whom these present Letters shall come: Greeting. So soone, after the decease of our late Co^ Charles (in his life time, and not long since Duke of Bourgongne) our (...) and well affected Subiects, men of the Church, Nobles, and those of the Common estate (...) our Countrey and Duchie of Bourgongne, Countie of Charolois, Lands de Noyers, (...) other included in them, comming to vs, as being our owne by the said decease, desiring to be* remaine, and liue and dye vnder, and in our obedience; haue thereby most liberally, and (...) extraordinarie good will, rendered and deliuered vp into our hands and obeysance, themselues freely, by acknowledging vs to be their Naturall and Soueraigne Lord; for which cause, we (as in such cases customarily is required) haue deliuered our Oath, to some of our Officers, and especiall Seruants, by vs deputed and sent into those Countries.
Since when, the three Estates, or Principall persons among them, in good and sufficient number, haue come to vs, most humbly entreating vs, that it might stand with our pleasure (for the good, securitie, safe conduct and maintenance of Iustice, by our authoritie and right in the Countrey, Duchie and Countie, and for the support and ease of our Subiects and dwellers in them:) To ordaine and establish in our said Duchie of Bourgongne, Countie of Charolois, Baronnie of Noyers, and Lands included within the said Duchie, A Soueraig^ Court, that may be tearmed and stiled, A Court of Parlement, Founded and furnished with Presidents, twelue Councellers, and other Officers, notable persons, conuenient and necessary for the exercise and maintenance of the said Soueraigne Court, and in such member of Councellers, as hath bin at the Parlement of Beaune, and that they may (...) to them The Great Dayes of the Duchie of Bourgongne. Also, that it may be of such preheminence and authoritie, touching the power of Iudgement and Soueraigne Iurisdiction; as our Court of Parlement sitting at Paris, Wherein the said Great Dayes haue their due course. Moreouer, we are further entreated, that we would maintain the Parlement of Dole, and of Saint Laurence, for the Counties of Bourgongne, Au^onne, and other Lands beyond Saone, where (from all Antiquitie) they haue euer had (...) Soueraigne Court, to exercise therein the same forme and manner, as hath bin accustomed (...) times past.
We make knowne, that we haue hereon considered, especially, the great affection and desire, which the said three Estates haue shewne by effect, to liue and continue alwayes v^der vs, and in our power and seruice, obedient in all things, as good, true and loyall Subiects. Considering also, that the said Duchie and forenamed Lands, are of great exte^dure* and farre off from our good Citie of Paris, whereto they haue (from all Antiquitie) resorted, for all right of Soueraigntie. Whereby, our Subiects, dwelling in the said Duchie and adiacent Countries, shall be ouer-much trauailed and hindered, by repairing ^ither, there to seeke for purchase, send for, and procure the prouisions and remedies in th^ last helpe and power of Soueraigntie.
For these Causes, and other serious considerations vs mouing thereunto: Wee haue (...) our especiall grace, full power and royall authoritie, by these presents created, instituted, ordained and established in the said Duchie and forenamed adiacent Countries, A Court and Iurisdiction Soueraigne, to be there hence-forward held, and alwayes called, ^med or stiled, A Parlement and Soueraigne Court, hauing all right of Power and Soueraigntie in the said place for the said Great dayes. And herewith we haue ordained, that the said Parlements of Dole, and of Saint Laurence, shall henceforth be maintained (...) Soueraigne, according as heretofore they haue bin from all antiquitie, and the said Parl^ments are to be held, according to the manner declared in our other Letters Patents, fo^merly granted to the said Estates. And our will is, that all causes of Appeale, and (...) whereof the Court and Soueraigne Iurisdiction may and ought to take knowledge in the (...) Resort, and otherwise, which haue bin moued and suscitated, betweene our Subiects and Inhabitants in the said Countrey, Duchie, Countie and Lands adiacent: shall be there discided,

determined and brought to due end, according as in other Soueraigne Courts of our ^ingdome: without admitting the Sentences, definitiue decrees, and prolongings, which ^here shall be giuen and pronounced, to be prouoked, appealled and reclaimed into any other Soueraigne Courte of our Kingdome, for any causes whatsoeuer.
To exhibite the action of the said Iustice and Soueraigne Iurisdiction, and for maintay^ing and supporting the Preheminences, Prerogatiues, Authority and Right Royall of Vs ^nd the said Court: Wee haue Ordained, and doe Ordaine, by these presents, that ^enceforward there shall bee in the said Court with our President, two Knights, twelue Councellours in Our accustomed manner, two Aduocates, and one Proctour or Atturney to ^he high Iusticer, and one Pregnotarie or chiefe Register in eche of the said Parlements, and ^e Ordenarie vshers, appointed in chiefe Office, who shall make vp the body as well in e^peciall, as being members of the said Soueraigne Courte, and such and such stipends, as by our ^ther Letters Patents for them are taxed and ordained. To whom also we haue giuen, and ^oe giue power to exercise in the same Courte, and elsewhere throughout the limits of the ^aid Countrey, Duchie and County, all actions, executions and exploites of Soueraigne Iu^isdiction.
And because defect of cleare expression, and ample declaration to the Countrey and li^its, (not vnderstanding their resorte to the said Parlement) may mooue an occasion ^ereafter day by day, of many losses, debates and controuersies among our Subiects, as well of ^ur said Duchie and County, as other Countreyes of our Kingdome, neighbouring and bor^ering on the said Duchie of Bourgongne: Wee haue willed and Ordained, Doe will ^nd Ordaine, as already is declared, that all our said Countreyes, Duchie and Countie of ^ourgongne, Countie of Charolois, Lands of Noyers, and other Countries and Terri^ories, which at the death of our late Cousine Charles of Bourgongne, resorted to the Great Dayes of Beaune and Saint Laurence, and all our other Subiects and Inhabitants ^n them, shall appeare directly by Appeale (or otherwise) in our said Court of Parlement, ^or Bourgongne, and not elsewhere.
We also will and Commaund by these presents, our Louing and faithfull Councel^ours, such as are of our Courte of Parliament at Paris, the Gouernours of our said Coun^ries and Duchie, and all other our Iustices and Officers, or their Lieutenants present, or to ^ome, and euery one of them: that our instant Creation, Institution and Establishment, with ^ll contained in these present Letters, be entertained and kept, cause to be maintained and ^ept from point to point, according to their forme and tenure. Causing also these presents ^o be published, entertained and Registred in our Courts of Audience and other Iurisdictions (if need be) to the end, that no excuse or ignorance may be pretended, for such is our especiall will and pleasure.
In witnesse whereof, we haue affixed our Seale to these presents. Giuen in our Citty of Arras, the Eighteenth day of March, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand Foure hund sixty sixe, And of Our Reigne the Sixteenth. So signed by the King; Monsieur the Cardinall of Bourbon; the Counte of Beauieu; the Counte of Marle, Marshall of Bourgongne, and o^hers present.

L. Tendo.







The Institution of the Order of the Golden-Fleece: The number of the Chapters, and Knights thereof. CHAP. V.
POets haue feigned, that Phrixus and Helle, the Sonne and Daughter to Athamas, King of Thebes, to auoid the daunger of death;He was Son to Eolus, and maried Nepheles. etc. exposed themselues to passe the Sea of Pontus, being mounted on a Ramme. They say also, that the maid Helle, Sister to Phrixus, being fearefull; fell into the waues, and that (of her) the Sea was named the Helle-spont,How the Hellespont came to be so named. now the Straite of Galipolis, or Saint Georges Arme, on the Shoares whereof, are the two Castles

of Sestos and Abydos, renowmed in their Poeticall fictions, by reason of the clandestine loue of Hero and Leander,A famous Poet in the time of Orpheu^. whom the Poet Museus hath named The bright shining Starres of those two auncient Townes (which make the Separation of Europe and Asia) and are at this day, two Bulwarkes of the Turkish Empire, and of Constantinople. Moreouer, Phrixus being preserued from death in this dangerous passage, the Ramme (for his good seruice) was enriched with a Golden Fleece, and transported into the Prouince of Cholcos,Sonne to Aeson by P^lymela. where it was carefully kept, vntill the Voyage of the Argonautes Paladines, conducted thither by their worthy Captaine Iason.


This Fable serued as a Subiect (so say diuers Historians) to Duke Phillip of Bourgongne, to Institute the Order of the Golden Fleece,The reason of chusing the Fl^ece for the Order. in memorie of the great reuenues which hee raised, by trafficque and merchandising of Woolles with the Low-Countries, full of excellent pastures, for the breede and nourishing of Beasts bearing Woll.
Others say, that the said Duke Phillip, keeping (very priuately) a Lady of Bruges, endued with beauty beyond all compare,A Couch such as Ladies lye on. entring one Morning into her Chamber: hee founde vpon her Toilet, a Fleece of the Lowe-Countries, whereby this vnaduised Lady, gaue occasion of laughter, to diuers Gentlemen atte^ding on the said Duke. He, to cloude and couer the mistery, sollemnly vowed: that such as made a mockery of the Wolly Fleece, should neuer haue the Honour, to weare a Collar of an Order of the Fleece, which hee intended to establish, for the loue of that Lady.
A Third and the likeliest reason.Yet there is an other oppinion (of more apparance then both the rest) that this Duke, altogether couetous and desirous of honour: instituted this Order, in memory of valiant Gedeon, who with three hundred men, fought against an infinite Army of the Madianites, and deliuered the people of Israel. Heere you may read the Letters Patents of this institution.
Phillip, by the Grace of God, Duke of Bourgongne, Lothreic, Brabant and Lembourg, Count of Artois, Palatine of Bourgongne and of Namure, Marquesse of the Holy Empire, And Lord of Salines and Malines, maketh knowne to all present and to come. That for the Great and perfect loue, which we beare to the Noble Estate of Knighthood, the honour whereof we intend to aduance and encrease: in regard, that by the order of Knighthood, the true Catholique Faith, the estate of our Mother the Holy Church, the ease and tranquility of the publique good, may be defended and maintained: To the praise of our Lord, and in Honour of our Lord Saint Andrew our Patrone, Apostle and Martyr of Iesus Christ our Sauiour, for promoting the Holy Faith, seruice of the Catholique Church, and exhorting all men to liue well and Vertously. The tenth day of the moneth of Ianuary, And in the yeare of Grace, or of our Lord, One thousand foure hundred twenty nine, Which was the day of sollemne Mariage, betweene vs and our most deare Spouse, Ysabell of Portugall, in our City of Bruges; where we haue ordained, receiued, created; we ordaine, receiue and create, the Order and Brotherhood of Knights in a certaine number, whom wee*

will haue to be called and named Of the Golden Fleece, vnder such forme, condition, Sta^tes and manner as heere followeth.

The Statutes and Charters of the Order.
^N the first place, we will that there shall (...) be Thirty Knights, all Gentlemen of ^ame and Armes, without any touch or ^prehension: of which number our ^ife will be the Chiefe, during our life, ^d our Successors after vs.
The Articles of this Ordenaunce, doe ^mount to Fourescore and fourteene: ^hich we passe ouer in silence, to bee im^rinted and further knowne.
He created foure Officers of the Order, (...) namely the Chaunceller, Treasorer, ^tturney, and King of Armes, tearmed ^^d named Folden Fleece.
The Great Coller of the said Order, is ^omposed of double Fusilles, enterwo^en with Stones and Flints, sparckling ^mes of fire; at the end whereof hane^th (on the brest) a Fleece, wholly of ^old, enammelled according to Arte. ^hese Fusilles are ioyned two and two ^gether, representing, as if they were ^ouble Letters of B. which signifieth ^urgongne, intermingled with Flint ^tones, to noate the Armes of the Aun^ent Kings of Bourgongne, of the Noble ^ood of France. Th^se Flints are engirt ^ith sparkes and flames of fire, which ^s the deuice of the said Duke of Bour^ngne: and the soule or speaker for all, ^as, Ante Ferit, Quam Flamma Micet, so ^ith Paradine in his Heroicall deuises. ^he great Cloakes or Mantles, had the ^ordes of the same embrodery of Gould. (...) the Church of Paris on the day of All ^aints, are to be seene the Ornaments on ^e High Altar, as also the Coapes and ^estiments, giuen by the worthy Cardi^all of Gondy deceassed.
The first Chapter of the said Order, ^as held at the Isle in Flanders, in the ^ea^e, One thousand foure hundred and ^hirty, where were made Knights these ^ollowing.
1. Guillaume de Vienna, Sieur de S. ^rge.
2. Rene Pot, Lord de le Roche.
3. Iohn, Lord of Romboiz.
4. Rowland of Vtreich, Lord of En^ode.
5. Anthony de Vergy, Lord of Cham^ne.
6. Dauid de Brimeu, Lord of Ligny.
7. Hugh de Launoy, Lord of Santes.
8. Iohn, Lord of Comines.
9. Anthony de Tolongeon, Lord of Tranes.
10. Peter of Luxembourg, Count of S. Paule.
11. Iohn de la Trimouille, Lord of Ionuille.
12. Gilbert de Launoy, Lord of Willeruall.
13. Iohn of Luxembourg, Lord of the Isle-Adam.
14 Iohn de Villiers, Count of Ligny.
15. Anthony, Lord of Croy and Renty.
16. Florimond de Brinieu, Lord of Mazincourt.
17. Robert, Lord of Malines.
18. Iames de Brimeu, Lord of Grigni.
19. Baldwine de Launoy, called the Stammerer, Lord of Molembais.
20. Peter de Baufremont, Lord of Charny.
21. Phillip, Lord of Ternant, and de la Mothe.
22. Iohn de Croy, Lord of the Tower on Marne,
23. Iohn, Lord of Crequy. And
24, Iohn of New-Castell Lord of Montagut.
The yeare One Thousand foure Hundred thirty one, Was held the second Chapter at the Isle, where were made Knights.
1. Andrewe de Tolongea^, And
2. Iohn de Melun, Lord of Antoing.
The yeare, One thousand foure hundred thirty two, the Chapter of the Order was held at Bruges, where were made Knights.
1. Frederick Count of Moers, And
2. Simon d' l' Alaine, Lord of Haures.
The yeare, One thousand foure hundred and thirty three* the Chapter of the Order was held at Bruges, where were made Knights.
1. Iames, Lord of Creue-coeur.
2. Iohn de Vergy.
3. Guy de Pontalier, Lord of Talmer.
4. Baldwine de Noyelle, Lord of Chasterelle.
5. Iohn Bastard of Luxembourg, Lord of Haubourdin.
6. Charles of Bourgongne, Counte de Charoloi^. And
7. Robert, Count of Vernebourg. And
8. Thibault, Lord of Newe-Castle.
The yeare, One thousand foure hundred thirty fiue, was held at Bruxelles the Chapter of the Order: wherat there was not any person elected, because there was not any one of the company deceassed.
The yeare, One thousand foure hundred and fourty, was held the Chapter at Saint Omer, where were elected Knights these Princes.
1. Charles, Duke of Orleans and of Millaine.
2. Iohn, Duke of Bretaigne.
3. Iohn, Duke of Alanzon, And
4. Mathew de Foix, Counte of Comenges.
The yeare, One Thousand Foure hundred fourty fiue, the Order was held at Gaunte, and then were made Knights.
1. Alphonsus, King of Arragon.
2. Francion de Borselle, Count of Osternant.
3. Reignold, Lord of Brederode.
4. Rubborsle, Lord de la Vere.
5. Iohn, Lord d' Auchy, And
6. Adrian, Lord de Humieres.
The yeare, One Thousand foure hundred fifty one, the Chapter of the Order was held at Monts in Henault, and then were made Knights.
1. Iohn, Duke of Cleues, And the Lords
2. Iohn de Gueuara, Count of Arienne.
3. Peter de Cardonna, Count of Golisenne.
4. Iohn, Lord of Launoy.
5. Iames de Lallaine, Lord of Montigny, And
6. Iohn of New-Castell, Lord of Montagut.
The yeare, One Thousand foure hundred fifty sixe, the Chapter of the Order was held at the Hage in Holland, where were made Knights these Princes.
1. Iohn of Bourgongne, Count of Neuers.
2. Anthony, Bastard of Bourgongne.
3. Adolphe of Cleues, Lord of Rauastein, And
4. Iohn Lyonnell of Luxembourg, Regent of the Kingdome of Cypres.
The yeare, One Thousand foure Hundred sixtie and one, the Chapter was celebrated at Saint Omer, where were made Knights.
1. Iohn, King of Arragon.
2. Adolph, Duke of Gueldres, And Lords.
3. Thibault, Lord of New-Castell.
4. Phillip Pott, Lord de la Rochenoul^, And
5. Guye, Lord of Roye.
The yeare, One Thousand foure hundred sixty seauen, Phillip the good Duke being deceassed, Charles Duke of Bourgongne his Sonne, Chiefe of the Order; held his first Chapter at Bruges, where were elected Knights,
1. Edward, King of England, And Lords
2. Lewes de Chaalon, Lord of the Castel.
3. Iohn de Damas, Lord of Clessy.
4. Iames of Bourbon, Count de la March^
5. Iames of Luxembourg, Lord of R^sbourg.
6. Phillip de Sauoye, Count of Bla^et.
7. Phillip de Creue-coeur, Lord Desquerdes: And
8. Claudius de Montagut, Lord of Couches.
The yeare, One thousand foure hundred seauenty and three, was renewed the second Chapter at Valenciennes, where were Elected Knights
1. Ferdinand, K. of Arragon and Castile
2. Ferdinand, King of Naples and Sicilie. And Lords,
3. Iohn, Lord of Bieure.
4. Phillip de Croy, Count of Chimay.
5. Iohn of Luxembourg, Count de Mar^
6. Guy de Brimeu, Count of Meghe: And
7. Engilbert, Count of Nassau.
Maximilian, elect King of the Roman^s of the house of Austria, after the death o^ Charles the last Duke of Bourgongne, espoused his onely Daughter, Madam^ Mary of Bourgongne, whereby hee wa^ Count of Flanders, and Lord of th^ Low-Countries, vnder homage and Authority of the Crowne of France. (...) the right of his Wife, hee held the chief^ Soueraignty of the Order of the Golden Fleece. And the yeare, 1478. hee celebrated his first Chapter in the Citty o^ Bruges; where were Elected Knights.
1. William, Lord of Egmont.
2. Vlfard, Lord of Borselle, Counte (...) Grand pre.
3. Iosse de Lallaine, Lord of Montig^^
4. Peter of Luxembourg, Count of S* Paule.
5. Phillip of Bourgongne, Count o^ Buren.
6. Iames of Luxembourg, L. de Fie^
7. Iames de Sauoye, Count of Rom^
8. Bartholmew, Lord of Lithestaine.
9. Iohn, Baron of Ligne.
10. Claudius, Lord of Tolongeon.
11. Peter, Lord of Bossu, And
12. Baldwine, Lord of Molembais.
The yeare One Thousand foure hundred eighty and one, the second Chapter was held by the said Elect Maximillian, ^n the Towne of Bosle Duke, where were made Knights.
1. William de la Baume, Lord of Arlant.
2. Iohn de Berge, Lord of Walacux.
3. Martin, Lord of Polhaine: And
4. Phillip of Austria, Counte de Cha^olis. Prince.
Maximillian of Austria being dead, Phillip of Austria his sonne, husband to Ioane, heire of Leon, Arragon and Castille, held the first Chapter of his Order in the Towne of Malines, Anno, One thousand foure hundred ninety and one, And there were elected Knights.
1. Frederick of Austria, Emperour.
2. Henry of England.
3. Albert, Duke of Saxonie.
And others, to the number of foureteene, whose names wee doe omit; for being the most part of them Germaines or Flemings, and fewe or none of the Frenche.
The Second Chapter of the said Order, was helde by the same Phillip of Austria, and celebrated at Bruxelles, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and one, whereat seauen Knights were made, the last whereof was
Charles of Austria, Duke of Bourgongne, Eldest Sonne to the said Archduke Phillip.
The yeare One Thousand fiue Hundred and fiue, was celebrated the said Order in the Towne of Middleborough in Zeland, and giuen to ten Knights, the first whereof was.
Henry, King of England.
After the death of Phillip Archduke of Austria, his sonne Charles held his first Chapter in the Citty of Bruxelles, Anno, One Thousand fiue Hundred and sixteene, Hee encreased the number of Knights of the Golden Fleece, vp to fifty, with charge and condition, that whatsoeuer places of precedencie should remaine voide, to fill them vp with names and Armes of Soueraigne Princes of his Alliance and kinred, according as occurrences happened. The Knights elected in the first Chapter, were fiue and twenty in number, and the chiefest of them, were
1. The most Christian King of France, Frances, First of the name, followed by
2. Lewes, King of Hungaria.
3. Emmanuell, King of Portugall Princes.
4. Ferdinand, Infant of Spayne, Broto Charles.
5. Frederick, Count Palatine of Rheine, And
6. Iohn, Marquesse of Brandenbourg.
The yeare, One Thousand Fiue hundred and nineteene, the Chapter was held in the Citty of Barcelonna in Arragon; where were elected Fifteene Knights, the chiefest for honor, were
1. Christierne, King of Denmarke and Sweden.
2. Sigismond, King of Poland, and Great Duke of Lituania.
The yeare, One Thousand fiue hundred thirty and one, was held an other Chapter at Tourney, whereat were elected Foure and twentie Knights: among whom were many Soueraigne Princes, as namely
1. Iohn, King of Portugall.
2. Iames, King of Scotland.
3. Phillip, Duke of Bauaria, Electour.
4. George, Duke of Saxonie, Electour.
5. Andrewe ^oria, Prince of Melphe.
6. Phillip Infant of Spayne, Sonne to Charles the Emperour, King of Spayne.
7. Ferdinando de Gonzaga: And
8. Nicholas, Marquesse of Saluces.
The yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fourty sixe, the Chapter was held in the Towne of Vltrect, where were elected two and twenty Knights, the principall of them being
1. Maximillian, King of Bohemia.
2. Cosimo de Madieis, Duke of Florence.
3. Albert, Duke of Bauaria. And
4. Emmanuell Philebert, Duke of Sauoye.
Phillip, Second of the name, King of Spayne, after that Charles the Fifte his Father, had giuen ouer his Estates and Seigneuries to him, that hee might retreate himselfe to liue at rest in Spayne: Hee helde the First Chapter of his Order in the Citty of Antwerpe,

Anno One thousand fiue hundred fiftie foure, where were chosen nineteene Knights, the most apparant of them being these Princes:
1. Henry, Duke of Brunzwicke.
2. Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria.
3. Charles, Infant of Spaine, Sonne to the said King Phillip the second, who held his second Chapter in the Citie of Gaunt, Anno One thousand fiue hundred fiftie nine, where were made many Knights, the principall being these.
1. The most Christian King of France, Frances, second of the name: And
2. Guibard de Medicis, Duke of Vrbine.
After the death of the Emperour Charles the fift his Father, happening in Spaine, at the Monastery of the Hieronymites of S. Iustus de la Vera de Placentia, in the month of September,The returne of Phillip o^ Spaine out of Flanders to Castile. One thousand fiue hundred fiftie eight, the said Phillip of Spaine returned out of Flanders to Castille, where he remained all his life time in peace and quietnesse, euen till his decease, happening in the moneth of September, One thousand fiue hundred ninetie eight. We will let passe vnder silence, the other Chapters of the said Order, and the names and qualities of such as were honored therewith, by the said King Philip the second, and his onely Sonne Phillip the third, now reigning, Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maister thereof, to whom appertaineth onely the giuing of the said Order. Whereof hath amply written, Iames Meiera Elemming Paradine in his History of Bourgongne. S. Iulian, on the same Historie; the Sequa^ Memories of Messire Iohn Golut, imprinted at Bezanson; the old Romant of the Golden Fleece, imprinted in two Volumes, of the old impression, and Messire Oliuer de la Marche, in his History of Flanders.
The three Habits worne by the Knights, and their signification.Phillip, the Institutour of this Order, appointed, that the Knights thereof, at three dayes of the sollemnitie (S. Andrew being Patron thereof) should weare three different habites. The first day Scarlet, to let them thereby vnderstand, that heauen cannot be obtained, but by effusion of Blood and Martyrdome. The second day Black, representing griefe and mourning for the dead. The third and last habite was of white Damaske, in signe of the Soules puritie, as euery Knight ought to be carefull of, in all the actions of his life and behauiour. The Emperour Charles the fift, willed and ordained, that the Knights of the said Order, at solemne Feasts, and when the Chapters were held, should weare their long Cassockes of Cloath of Siluer, vnder the Cloake of Crimosine Veluet, and the Mantellet or Chapperon of Violet Veluet, and ouer them the Great Coller of Gold: For on other dayes, they vsed to weare but a Ribband, and light Crimosine Taffataes, with the honor of the Golden Fleece.
The Oath taken by the Knights.The Knights, at receiuing the said Order, make Oath and solemne promise, before the ueraigne Head and great Maister thereof; to be faithfull to him, towards all, and against all, without any exception, and to maintaine the Statues thereof. And hauing thus sworne, the Soueraigne kisseth them, and putting the Collars about their necks, saith: In the name of the Father, the Sonne and Holy Ghost.
The issue of Phillip and his wife.Of the marriage betweene Phillip of Bourgongne, and Isabel of Portugal, three Sonnes were borne. Anthony, borne at Bruxelles nine months after the marriage, the last day of September, One thousand foure hundred and thirtie. And Iosse, borne at Gaunt, the foureteenth day of Aprill, One thousand foure hundred thirtie two. These two Princes dyed in their infancie: but the third and last, named Charles, was borne at Dijon, on the morrow after Saint Martins day in winter, One thousand foure hundred thirtie three. His Godfather that gaue him his name, was Charles of Bourgongne,(...) Count of Neuers, and with him the Lord of Croy, Minion and Fauourite to Duke Phillip. This yong Prince Charles, had the title of Count of Charolois by his Father, as he himselfe had it, by Duke Iohn his Father.
Paradine writeth in his History of Bourgongne, that the Knights of the Fleece elected this yong Prince from his birth, to be of their Bro^herhood, and of the Order celebrated that yeare in the holy Chappell of Dijon: where (saith he) were seene the Tables, Titles, Armes and Blazons of the said Knights, on the Chaires in the Quire of the Church, as yet to this day they are. But Paradine is mistaken in the latter of these two opinions.
For, concerning the Count of Charolois, at an age so tender, to be rancked mong

^nights, as formerly is said: he neuerthelesse being vncapable, to receiue the Order ^f Knighthood, an act most solemne, that any Gentleman can receiue in his life time,Obiections against the opinion of Paradine ^d for the expences whereof, his Subiects are taxable. It is such an honor, as can^ot be conferred, but on a person capable of iudgement and reason, to receiue his ^reation, and vnderstand the tearmes of the Oath, which he must make to the So^eraigne of the Order, a point most importing the Title of Knighthood, and namely (...) France. For there, at all times, the Nobility kept the Oath of Fidelity made to ^eir Prince, as no perill of life could enforce the infringing. Otherwise, it was ^ch an opprobrious shame and scandall, as all the water in the world would not ^rue to wash off. So are we enstructed by Saint Bernard, in his two hundred and ^ineteenth Epistle. Probro I^citur apud Francigenus iuramentum solucre* Videt^ (saith ^e, writing to foure Bishops of the Court of Rome, for defence of King Lewes the ^onger, seauenth of the name) an excusare aliquatenus eum possit^ ^a, A^tas, Ma^e^as; Maiesty, Anger, Age, no, nor the King himselfe hath any power, to dis^ence with the Vassaile or Subiect, for the Oath which he hath made to his ^ord.
As touching the opinion of Paradine, about the Armes which are in the holy Chappell at Dijon; there is not any likelihood, that they were placed there,Concerning the Armes in the holy Chappell a^ Di^n the ^eare when the Count of Charolois was borne; because it was not the same yeare, ^hen the Dukes of Orleans and Alanson, Princes of the Blood of France, were made ^nights of the same Order, and whose Armes are to be seene in the said Quire. Which was in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and forty, at the Chapter for ^he said Order held at Saint Omer, according as before hath bin obserued. It was ^ot in the Chapter held at Dijon; neuerthelesse, in the body of the said holy Chap^ell, there are the Escutcheons of foure and twenty Knights, who (happily) might be ^ome of those Knights that were at Dijon, at the birth of Charles Count of Charolois. ^hose Shields or Escutcheons are (for the most part) ruined, and pearched so high, (...) nothing can be knowne by them: And all the Chaires of the Quire are filled ^ith Armes, as we haue perticularly noated on their places, and will againe ^ention; after wee haue spoken a word or two, concerning the Church where ^hey are.
The Church of the holy Chappell at Dijon, is properly called,The Chappe^ of Dukes at D^ion. The Chappell of ^ukes, because it ioyneth to the Pallace of the said Dukes of Bourgongne* where (at ^is present) the Gouernours of the Prouince doe lodge. This Hostell is called ^he House of the King, and at one of the corners, is a great square Tower, called the ^ower of Bar: because Rene, Duke of Lorraine and Bar, King of Ierusalem and Si^lie, Count of Prouence, was sometime there prisoner to Duke Phillip the second Authour of the Order now in question) who had giuen succour to the Count of ^audemont, Anthony of Lorraigne, against this Duke de Bar, besiedging Vaudemont, (...) the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirty one. Which siedge was raised by ^houlongeon, Marshall of Bourgongne; who tooke the said Duke prisoner, leading him (...) Dijon There he built a Chappell on the right side of the Quire of that holy Chap^ell; in the Glasse-windowes whereof, are the Armes of the said de Bar En Losange, ^mposees and blazonnees de Six quartiers ou Cantons. The first is of Hungaria, Party de ^erusalem, tierce de Sicilie: these three are sustained by Aniou, Bar and moderne Lor^aine, which is D'Or a la bande de Gueulles chargee de trois Alleryons D'Argent.Trimouill^ one of the most famous house of France On ^he other side of the Quire, to the South, is the Chappell of Trimouille, at this pre^ent, one of the most Illustrious Houses of France. In the Glasse-windowes of this Chappell, are their Armes represented and blazoned D'Or, Au Cheuron de Gueulles, (...) trois Aigles d' Azur, portees d'vne grand Aigle: As we see the Ducates of ^paine, marqued with the Armes of Ferdinand of Arragon, and Isabel of Ca^ile.
As for the Founder of this holy Chappell, which we haue already noated before ^n the second Chapter; the Menologie beareth, that euery yeare, the fift day of May, ^here is a Seruice duely said for him. Hac die celebratur Anniuersarium recolend^ me^niae Domini Hugonis Ducis Burgundiae presentis Ecclesiae fundatoris, in quo seruiunt Do^ni Canonici, prout in festis quadruplicibus, and manualiter distribuuntur sex librae Turonenses

per Grenetarium, and Gubernatorem Cauae Ecclesiae. This distribution is made of money extraordinary, by him who hath the charge to receiue the Wine affected by the Chanons, whom they call the Landlord of the Church.
At Paris, it is a thing knowne to all the world, of the miracle which happened (...) to the holy sacrificing Hoast, in the house of a Iew burned aliue, to be cut and pie^ced through with stabbes of a Knife, in the same place where is builded the Oratory and the Church Domini Bullientis,The Brotherhood of our Ladies Charity. belonging to the Brotherhood De la Chari^ nostre Dame; vulgarly called, Of the Billettes, by a French word corrupted of Latine* Phillip the second gaue the very like Hoast in this Church at Dijon. I did very distinctly obserue the stabbes of the Knife, or where the Knifes point had pierced, a^ red and vermillion coloured, as if that day they had bin giuen. The Hoast is of meane greatnesse, and the figure represented thereon, is the Sauiour of the world, seated on his Throane, and the Raine-bowe of Heauen vnder his feete, but of admirable whitenesse. This is the Sanctuary and Tutelary assurance, for this Capitall Citie of Bourgongne* as is remarkeable by this Verse, being in the Chappell of the said holy Hoste, ioyning to the Quire on the South-side.

Sanguinis hic guttas Christi de carne fluentes,
Diuio, praesidium Patriae reuerenter adorat.

It is enchased in a small Circle of Gold, on both sides couered with Christall, loc^ in a Chest of Siluer guilded, in forme foure square, couered with blew Veluet, and kept in a Tabernacle or Chappell, fast engirt with barres of Brasse. It is shewne to the People on the high Altar, all the first Sundayes of the Moneths, after the Ma^ for the Order of the Fleece: and on Good-Friday after Tenebres, and the Friday (...) for the foure Seasons of the yeare, after Compline or Euensong. It is carried wi^ great Ceremony from it owne Chappell, to the high Altar, the Cleargy singing interchangeably in sweete Musique Vexilla Regis prodeunt, to the versicle O salut^ Hostia, that Officiant Channon exalting it, and shewing it to the people two seuerall times. Afterward is sung De profundis for the dead, and in the end the Collects when the Priest Officiant turneth himselfe to the people, and saith with a loud vo^ce God hath the Soule of the Admirall Chabot, Founder. Amen This is he which founde^ this Salutation,Chabot the famous Admirall of France. hauing held g^eat Reuenues in Bourgongne, possessed (at this day) (...) the Marquesse of Mirebeau, foure miles from Dijon, of his Sirname and Armes. Th^ Admirall is enterred with the Celestines at Paris, in the Chappell of Orleans. The Mases and Cannonicall houres for the said Order, which are daily celebrated in the sai^ holy Chappell, betweene the houres of seauen and eight; were founded by the tw^ last Dukes of Bourgongne, at a thousand and fifty pounds Tournois of rent, assigned o^ the Demeanes of Salines, for the Countie of Bourgongne.
In the same Chappell is a Saint Andrewes head, of Siluer doubly guilded, and i^ it a bone of the said Apostle, which I haue seene and handled. The house of B^gongne tooke him for Patron of this Order, because (as the Bourguignons say) in th^ Church of Saint Victor of Marseilles in Prouence,Saint Victor married at Patras in Achaia. there is to be seene the Crosse of th^ said Apostle, whereon he was crucified at Patras in Achaia. But the Crosse is not o^ such fashion, as ignorant Painters picture it, in forme of a Saultour, like to the Ch^racter X of of the Greekes.
This Apostle, eldest Brother of Saint Peter, went to Preach the holy Gospell (...) the Scythians, Sogdians, and A^thiopians, in the Prouinces of Greece, and namely i^ Cappadocia,Aegias Pro^s^ll for Nero in Pa^^^t. Galatia, Bithynia, Pontus Euxinus, in Macedonia, and in Achaya: where being arriued in the Citie of Patras, he was apprehended by Aegeas the Procon^ there, for the Emperour Nero, because he Preached Iesus Christ crucified. He wa^ crucified himselfe, and tyed fast about an Oliue-tree, where he continued thre^ dayes without dying, Catechising and confirming new-become Christians, in th^ Law of Saluation and Life. S. Petrus Chrysologus, in his hundred thirty and third Se^mon of S. Andrew. Petrus namque Crucem, sed Arborem conscendit Andreas. Hypp^tus the Greeke Martyr, in his small Commentary: Crucifixus est Andreas Patris (...) Achaia ad Arborem Oliuae rectus. Hee suffered Martyrdome the last day of N^uember,

in the yeare of Grace fourescore and thirteene. Returning againe to the ^rosse of Saint Andrew, which Painters fashion according to their owne fan^es: it holdeth no way with the Motto of Bourgongne, neither is proper to this ^biect. It is well enough knowne, that the Inuestiture, and taking possession of ^e auncient Realme of Bourgongne, was done by tradition of the Launce of Saint ^aurice; and kept carefully by the first Kings of Bourgongne, descended of the Van^les.
And yet notwithstanding, common ignorance hath so farre preuailed, as to call a ^ultour, a Bourguignon Crosse, and to represent the Apostle Saint Andrew,Grosse ignorance in some Painters. bea^ng a Crosse before him, blazonned for a Saultour in Scotland and Bourgongne. ^oreouer, it was so authorised for future time, to serue as a noate of obseruati^n, in the Standards and Ensignes of the Spanyards and Flemings, acknowledged in ^rance, vnder the name of Bourgongnons. In the treatie at Arras, made betweene ^ing Charles, seauenth of the name, King of France, called the Victorious, and the ^id Duke Phillip of Bourgongne, Sirnamed the Good, the One and thirtieth day of ^eptember, Anno One thousand foure hundred thirty fiue, it is said;Concerning the Armes belonging to Bourgongne. That the said ^ord of Bourgongne, and all his faithfull Subiects, and others, who haue heretofore carried (...) Armes the Ensigne of the said Lord, that is to say, The Crosse of Saint Andrew: ^all not be compelled to take other Ensignes, vnder any command, or in any Armie, which ^all be in this Realme or without; be it in presence of the Duke, or of his Constables, either (...) his paye, wages, or otherwise, etc.
Wee come now againe to the Armes of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, which (...) this present are to be seene on the Chaires, in the Quire of the Chappell of Dukes (...) Dijon. On the right hand at entring into the said Quire, on the first Chaire, ^ore highly exalted then any other; is the Table of Armes of the Institution of the Order.
1. Vnder the Helmet is written in Letters of Gold, this Deuise; Autre N'aray; (...) will haue none other. In the midst are the Armes of the Duke,The Dukes Armes emblazonned. Desquels le premier ^uartier est de Bourgongne, qui est de France sans nombre a la bordure componnee d'Ar^ent, and de Gueulles, escartele de l'Ancienne Bourgongne, qui est Bande d'Or and d'Azur ^e six pieces a l Orle de Gu^ulles; party de Brabant, qui est de Sable au Lyon rempant ^'Or. The third Quarter, party de l'Ancienne Bourgongne, and d'Argent au Lyon rem^ant de Gueulles, which is of Luxembourg. And the fourth of moderne Bourgongne, ^boue all of Flanders, which is D'Or au Lyon rempant de Sable. And about the ^aid Escutcheon is the Order, vnder which in old Letters of Gold, are written these ^ords: Phillip Duke of Bourgongne and of Brabant: these Armes are on the Frontis^iece of this modell Le Mezail est tarre de front (there is none but this there, all the ^est are simple and beside) and pour Cimier vne double fleur de Lys d'Or sur le Bourrelet, of the Collours of Bourgongne, which are d'Argent and de Gueulles. It hath neither Te^ants nor Supporters: And three Chaires there are empty, but on the fourth, on the ^aid right hand
2. Is the Shield of Arragon. D'Or a quatre Paux de Gueulles; the Mezail turned right; the Bourrelet of the Liueries of Bourgongne (Carnation and White,White and Carnation the Liueries of Bourgongne. Componnees a Bourgongne moderne) euen as to all the other. The Crest a little White Crosse, and thereon Vn Dragon yssant d'Or. Beneath and vnder the Shield, as in ^he other Tables, is written in Letters of Gold after the auncient manner, and like vnto the rest. Alphonso, by the Grace of God, King of Arragon, etc. The Order is round about.
3. The third Table, Porte de France au Lambeau d'Argent. Pour Cimier sur le Tymbre vne double Fleur de Lys d'Or. And for the Legend: Charles Duke of Orleans, of Valois and of Millayne. This was the eldest Sonne to Monsieur Lewes of France,Iohn the Bad Duke of Bourgongne. Duke of Orleans, murdered by Iohn the Bad, Duke of Bourgongne, as we haue obserued in the precedent Booke.
4. The fourth D'Argent a trois Faces de Gueulles, escartele d'Argent a trois Haches de Gueulles. Cimier, vn Vol, that is to say, Deux Aisles d'Argent, chargees d'vne Hache de Gueulles. In the midst vn Leurier de Sable, au Collier de Gueulles, borde and cloue d'Or. The word, Anthony Lord of Croy, and de Renty.
5. Vair d'Or and de Gueules, escartele de Gueules, a trois Quinte-Fueilles d Or* Cimier deux Cornes d'Or: in the middest, Vne Pomme de Gueulles, mirouette d'Or. Peter de B^^feremont Count of Charny.Peter de Baufremont, Count of Char^.
6.Iohn de Croy, Lord of Tours, Armed as the Fourth: aboue all D'Or a Neuf Lozanges de Gueules, escartele de Flandres. Cimier de mesme.
7. Iohn de M^leun, Lord of Antoing, D'Azur a Sept Bezans d'Or, au Chef de mesme: Cimier Vn Boeuf vssant d'Or.
8. Iohn de Vergy, Lord of Fouuens. De Gueules a trois Quinte fueilles d'Or. Cimier, Vn Vol d' Argent. In the midst, Vn Canard de Synople, au Bec D'Or.
9. B^udot de No^elles, Lord of Chatou. De Gueules a trois Iumelles, and Lambeau d' Argent, Cimier Vn Chien d'Argent, au Collier de Gueules borde, and cloue d'Or.
10. Charles de Bourgongne, Count de Charolois, the very same of his Father.
11. Don Pedro de Cardonna, Count of Goblene, D'Or a deux Paux de Gueles, party de France sans nombre: Escartele de Gueules a trois Chardons fueillez d'Or. The Third the same. And the Fourth d'Argent au Lyon rempant de Sable, party de Gueules a vne Espee d'Argent in Pal crois^e d Or, tenue par vne main d' Argent, le bras couuert d^^ demy vol d Or. C^mier: Vne Chesne de Synople.
12. Iohn de Neuf Chastel, Lord of Montesay, and of Rigney: De Gueules a la Bande d' Argent. Cimier Chappeau d'Or au Vol party d'Argent, and de Gueules.
13. Drieu (that is Dreux, in Latine Drogo) Lord of Humieres and of Becquencourt. D' Argent frette de Sable. Cimier Vn Lyon naissant de Gueules, cottoye d'vn Vol d'Argent, frette de Sable.
14. Dom Iohn de Gueuara, Count of Ariana. De Gueules a Cinq Trefles d'O en Sa^tour, Escartele d'Or a Cinq Bandes de Bretaigne. Cimier Vne patte d Ours renuersee d'Or, Armee de Gueules.
The Prince of Antioch and Ierusalem.15. Iohn de Portugall, Prince of Antioch and Ierusalem: Party de Portugal, contre-escartele d' Angleterre. The third Quarter of Cyprus, and the fourth of Armenia; but aboue all of Luzignan. Cimier, Coronne au Dragon yssant d'Or. Faute, il y falloit ^n Mellusine.
16. Hugh de Laun^y, Lord of Santes. D' Argent a trois Lyons rempants de Sable, Coronne d'Or, and lampassez de Gueules, a la Bordure Engreslee de Gueules. Cimier: Coronne a la Lacorne yssant d Argent. Thus you see the right side of the Chappell discouered.
On the left side, the ignorant Painter hath made all the Helmets turned to the left hand, as to behold the high Altar, and especially diuers of the Armes, which is Bastardie. There are fiue Chayres empty, and on the Sixt
17. Guilbert de Launoy, Lord of Willeruall: like vnto the precedent; but onely that he hath vne Lambel de Sable. C. Idem.
18. Iohn, Duke of Alanson, and Count of Perche. De France a la Bordure d'Alanson* Cimier: Vne double Fl^ur de Lys d'Or.
19. Begue de Launoy, Lord of Molembais: Like to the former of his race, but aboue all, D'Argent a quatre faces d'Azur. Cimier, Idem.
20. Iohn, Lord of Crequy. D'Or a vn Crequier de Gueules. Cimier: Deux cols and testes de Cygnes d' Argent, becquez de Gueules, tenants ensemble vn Anneau d'Or. In the the midst Vne Pomme de Gueules.
21. Simon de l' Allain, Lord of Hantes. De Gueules a dix Lozanges d' Argent, Trois deface, and vne en Poincte. La troisi^sme du Chef chargee d'vn Lyon rempant tourne de Sable, Cimier: As of V^rgy.
22. Thibault, Lord of Neuf-Chastell. De Gueules a la Bande d'Argent, mal tourn^e. Cimier Coronne au Vol, tourne de Gueules a la Bande d' Argent.
23. The Bastard of S. Paul, Lord of Haut-Bourdin. De Luxembourg tourne: Cimier, Bassinet antique au Dragon tourne d'Argent.
24. Francon de Borselle, Count of Ostrenan. De Gueules a trois Anilles d' Argent* escartele d' Azur a la faisse d' Argent. Cimier Coronne, vn Boeuf yssant d' Argent acorne d'Or.
25. Regnaud de Brederode, Lord of the said place, and of Vienna, D'Argent au Lyon

^empant tourne de Gueules, la queue passee en Sautour: escartele d'Or au Lyon tourne de Gueules Lampasse, and Arme de Sable. Cimier Coronne a deux Bras, l'vn d'Argent, and d'autre d'Or, chasque main tenant vn Os de Trespasse d'Argent.
26. Henry de Leurselle, Lord de la Vere and of Soudeliers. D' Azur a la faisse d' Argent. Cimier, Vn mortier, as much to say, as Chappeau Royall a l'Antique d'Azur, au Cordon d Or charge d'vne face d'Argent.
27. Iohn, Lord and Baron d'Auxi, Escheque D'Or and de Gueules. Cimier Coronne: Demy M^r^ de Gueules, le Collet d'Or, le Viaire de Sable, Bouche de Gueules, yeux d'Argent, Pru^elle d Or, au Bandeau and Turbant trainant a la Persienne d' Argent.
28. Iohn, Duke of Cleues, and de la Mark. De la Mark, party de Cleues* Cimier; fa^sse de la Mark, a deux Cornes esleuees d'Or.
29. Iohn, Lord of Launoy: As of his race: Sans Brisure, Aisnesse. Cimier Chien de Sable cantonne d'vn vol d' Argent.
30. Anthony, Bastard of Bourgongne, Lord of Beure. Turned wholly from Bour^ongne, because he beginneth with Brabant, etc. Au filet de Gueules en Bastardise bro^hant sur tout. Cimier: Chathuant de Sable.
31. The last is Adolph de Cleues, Lord of Rauestein de la Mark, escartele de Cleues. Sur (...) tout de Bourgongne Ancienne and moderne, surcharge de Flandres tourne. Cimier: Teste d'Ours de Gueules, bouclee d'vn Anneau d Or, les yeux d'Argent, aux Prunelles d'Or. Cerenne d'vn Mortier a l' Antique, Blasonne de la Mark somme de Deux Cornes.
Beside the said Chayres, against one of the Pillers of the Duchesses Chappell, new^y painted with Gold and Azure, is a great Table after the fashion of the rest: Char^^ de Gueules a trois Faisses ondees d'Or, Escartele de Gueules a trois Iumelles d' Argent. Cimier: Vn Leurier yssant d' Argent au Collier de Gueules, borde and cloue d'Or. Aboue (...) written, Anthony de Thoulongeon. And vnderneath the Order: Here lieth the noble (...) puissant Lord Sir Anthony of Thoulongeon, Knight, somtime Lord of Frasne,Marshall Guardian, Gouernour, and Captaine Generall of Bourgongne. and de la ^a^^ie, Marshall, Guardian, Gouernour and Captaine Generall of Bourgongne. Who ^eceased at Dijon on the day of Saint Michael, being the thirtieth of September, in the ^eare 14^2. God hath his Soule.
Enguerran de Monstrelet writeth, in the yeare of Grace, 1406. that Monsieur Lew^s of France, Duke of Orleans (against whom Iohn Duke of Bourgongne quarelled for ^he Gouernment of the Realme, through the indisposition or dishability of King ^harles the Sixt) gaue the first day of the said yeare, as Newyeares gifts to his ^riends and familiars, Small, new and knagged Staues fairely gilded, which he had ^^ken for his Deuice: And the Legend or Motto thereof was, Ie Lenuis, to make ^ublikely knowne, that hee did and would hold the foresaid Superiority, and ^ord.
Iohn of Bourgongne, being an opposite to the Duke of Orleans, tooke a Ioyners ^laine for his Deuice, and the Motto these two words in Dutch, Hic Houd, which ^^gnifie in French, I wil hold and maintaine it. Ie le Tiens. To let the Duke his Nephew know, that his new ^laine should euen and make smooth his knotted Staues, As meaning, that hee ^ould maintaine himselfe in his authority, neere to the person of the King, and ^efly by power. From thence forward, the said Iohn of Bourgongne (Sirnamed ^fter) the Bad obserued for his Deuice, as well on his Coynes as Ensignes and Ban^ers, two new Staues crossed as a Saultour, and in the midst of them a Plaine. His Ducall Cloake, on his Tombe at the Charterhouse neere Dijou, is ordered with the ^^me Deuice; which the Archdukes, Counts of Flanders, to this very day haue re^^ined in their monyes of Gold and Siluer.
The Chronicle of Signieur Iuuenall de Vrsins, speaking of the yeare 1411. saith* ^t shall suffise to kill a notable Burgesse in robbing and rifling him, to say by any ^ne in way of hatred: Behold an Armaignac.A Saultou^ called the Crosse of S. Andrew. And take the Ensigne of (Iohn) the Duke (...) Bourgongne, or his Deuice: Which was a Saultour, by them called the Crosse of Saint Andrew, And one Floure de Luce in the midst. And there they had written, God saue ^e King, and euery one tooke it to bee so, yea, Women and young Children. A ^^tle after And they made knowne to the people, and expresly wrote to good Cities and ^o^nes: that they would create a new King, and depriue his Children of the Crowne. This was the Originall of the Leagues, which afterward were made in France.
Iohn of Bourgongne was the first of all his Predecessors (heads of the same part) that was Inuenter of Ceste Croix Bretechee, and passee en Sautour. Before that time it was vnknowne in France: as we learne by the same Chronicle of Vrsins, in the said yeare 1411. And it is to be aduertised, that all things were done in the name of the King, and of Monsieur the Daulphine. But they left the direct white Crosse, which was the true Ensigne of the King: And tooke the Crosse of Saint Andrew, and the Deuice of the Duke of Bourgongne, the Saultoure; and such as they called Armaignacks, Portoie^^ la Bande. That is to say, wore a white Scarfe, the Liuery of France, as red is of Spayne.
The Order of the Crosse of Bourgongne.Of this Deuice of Iohn of Bourgongne his youngest Sonne, the Emperour Charles, called the Fift, King of Spaine, made a new Order, named The Order of the Crosse of Bourgongne, at the Kingdome of Thunis in Affrica: Charles the Fift hauing expulsed thence that famous Rouer or Pyrate Ariadene,The Pirate Ari^^e^e or Barbarossa. Sirnamed Barbarossa, and placed in possession of his ancient Inheritance, Muley Muleasses. Hee made his entrance at Thunis, on Monday, being S. Mary Magdalens day the two and twentieth of Iuly, An. 1535. At his entrance, the Emperour wore a Coate of Armes of Cloth of Gold, hauing on the breast and backe embroydered on Crimson Silke: The Crosse of Bourgongne, and the Plaine in the midst. To preserue the memory of this entrance, and the victory which hee obtained against the Turke and his Pirate; the said Emperour, in acknowledgement of their valour, who had assisted him in a Conquest so signall: instituted the said Order of the Crosse of Bourgongne, and gaue Collars to the principall persons of his Court, composed of two Staues in Saultour, and directly on the b^est, a Plaine, hauing this word about it: Barbaria.
Now although the Emperours of Germany are descended of Philip, Archduke of Austria,Kings of Spaine only giue the Order of the Golden-Fleece. Count of Flanders, and of the Low Countries: yet notwithstanding, they haue not the power and permission, to conferre the Order of the Golden Fleece. The Kings of Spaine declared themselues to bee chiefe of the said Order; and retained the right solely to themselues, for conferring and granting the same.
The King Do^ Philip the Second, by the Contract of Marriage of the Infanta his Daughter, to the Archduke Albert of Austria; howsoeuer in fauour of this Alliance, hee gaue them the Low-Countries: yet it is absolutely ordered, that the said Arch-Duke cannot take any Title of Chiefe of the said Order, nor can conferre it to any person. That honour is reserued to the Kings of Spaine, and to her succeeding Kings.
Within some few yeares, a Treaty was made betweene the Emperour Rodolph the Second and last deceased, and a Lord of Hungaria; among which Articles, this is one. That the Emperour shall procure to and with the King of Spaine: so that the sai^ Lord may bee made Knight of the Golden Fleece. In acknowledgement whereof, he had embraced the Emperours part against the Turke.



CHAP. VI. Homages done and rendred to the most Christian Kings of France* by the Counts of Flanders, of Henault, etc.
THose Predecessors, which were Counts of Flanders, Henault* Artois, etc. haue euermore beene Liege-men to the Crown^ of France: which was continued by the descendant Heyr^^ to Mary of Bourgongne, as well in quality of the said Lord^ Counts, as the Peeres of France.
In the Registers of the Court of Parliament, the Homag^ is yeelded to King Philip Augustus, called the Conquero^^ Second of the name,Ba^ldwine Count of F^an^^rs and Hena^^* etc. by Bauldwine, Count of Flanders, H^nault, etc. In the City of Compeigne, the Moneth of Iu^^ 1196. In the presence of William de Champaigne, Cardinall and Archbishop o^ Rheimes; Madame Mary of France, Countesse of Champaigne, Sister to the said King

Phillip; and other Princes and Lords, Peeres of France. According as it written by Rigordus, and William the Bretone in the life of the said Phillip Augustus.
Ferrand of Portugall, Successour to the said Baldwine in the Counties before named, by the mean^s of his wife: did Homage as a Liege-man to the same King Phillip Augustus, at Bois de Vincennes, in the moneth of Ianuarie, the yeare of Grace, One Thousand two hundred and eleuen. As heere you may behold the Tenure.
Ego Ferrandus, Comes Flandriae et Hannoniae, Notum facio vniuersis ad quos hae presentes litterae peruenerint; Quod Ego sum Homo Ligius Domini mei Illustrissimi Francorum Regis Philippi contra omnes Homines et Foeminas qui possunt viuere et mori. Et iutaui eidem quod ego faciam ei bonum seruitium, et fidele; neque ab eo deficiam quandiu mihi voluerit facere rectum in Curia Sua. Si autem de bono et fideli seruitio ei deficiam; volo, et concedo, quod omnes Homines mei tam Barones, quam Milites, et omnes Commun^a, et Communitates Villarum, et Burgorum Terrae meae contra me sint eidem Domino meo Reg^ in auxilium, et mihi sint innocumentum ad posse suum, vsque dum sit Domino meo Regi emendatum ad gratum suum. Et volo et praecipio, quod praedicti tam Barones, quam Miletes, et alij hanc Domino meo Regi iurent, et faciant securitatem. Si autem aliquis esset qui nollet hoc iurare, omne malum quod possem faciam ei nec Pacem, nec Treugam cum illo nunquam haberem, nisi per voluntatem, et beneplacitum Domini mei Regis esset. Quod vt non possit obl^uione deleri, et vt Praed^cta perpetuam obtineant firmitatem et securitatem, praesentes litteras, Sigilli nostri munimine, et testimonio corroborari fecemus Actum Vincennis, An. Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Vndecimo, M^nse Ianuarij die Quinta.
In the same Registers of Court, is the sentence of the Throne of Iustice, helde by Lewes Hu^n King of France and Nauarre Tenth and First of this name, against the Count of Flanders Robert; and he, and his Dutchmen Fauourers and adherers, declared guilt^^ ^f high treason, and for their Fellonie condemned to loose their liues, and their goods seized and confiscated to the King. This sentence of Iustice, the King then sitting in his Parlement at Paris, is dated the fourteenth of Iuly, and in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand three hundred and Thirteene.
The most remarkable of all the Homag^s rendered to our Kings, by the said Count of Flanders; is that of Phillip, Archduke of Austria, Sonne to Maximillian, elected King of the Romaines, and M^dame Mary of Bourgongne, Father of Charles the Fift, and of Ferdinand, Emperours, Kings of Spaine, Bohemia and Hungaria, in the said Court of Parlement at Paris, where (in cases Royall) it was Iustifiable, that the said Countes of Flanders, Henault, Artois, and others Lands; were their Vassailes and Subiects. Heere is the Verball Processe of the sayd Homage.

The Processe of Homage.
IOhn Amy, Notarie and Secretarie to our Lord the King. Seeing it hath pleased the noble and puissant Lord Guy de Rochefort, Knight, Lord of Pluuot and of Labergement Lord Chancellor of France, so much of his Grace to preferre me, as to ordaine and command the Letters, for receiuing the Homage made to our Lord the King from his hand: By the most high and mightie Prince Monsieur Philip, Son to the King of the Romaines, Archduke of Austria, Count of Flanders, Artois and Charolois, the fift day of this instant moneth of Iuly, 1499. My said Lord the Chancellour being in the Cittie of Arras, and in the Bishops house; such worthy actions and great Ceremonies, as were there then obserued and done, to the exaltation, honor and benefit of the King, And of his Crowne, deseruing to liue in perpetuall memorie: I am so bold as to set downe in writing, concerning what I both heard and saw, touching the present acte and matter; especially, from the last day of Iune now past, vntill the fift day of Iuly. And for our entrance into the matter, it is most certaine and an vndoubted trueth;
That my Lord the Chancellor, departed the said last day of Iune (after dinner) from the Towne of Dourlents in Picardie, to iourney for the Citty of Arras,The departure of the Lord Chancellor to goe for Arra^. where he arriued the s^me day. Being alwayes accompanied with the Lords of Rauesteine and of Gruture* the Lord Charles de la Vernade, Knight and Lord of the same place, as also Sir Christopher de Cremona, Councellers and Maisters of the Requests in the Kings House^ Messire R^oull de Launoy Bayliffe of Amiens; Messire Frances d'Estain; Hugh de

Meghe; Amaury de Quinquiuille; Nicholas de Foix; Phillip d'Estas; Richard Neph^e^, and Peter de la Vernade, Councellers in Ordinarie, Mace Toustaene, Atturney Generall to the said Lord in his Great Councell, Iohn Burdelot, Atturney Generall in the Court of Parlement at Paris; Anthony le Viste, Speaker in the Chancerie of France, Dreux Bude, Iohn de Ville-Bresme, Raoull Guiot, Phillip Maillart, Notaries and Secretaries to our said Lord the King; and my selfe.
As the Lord Chancellour and all his Companie were riding in god order, within a mile and an halfe of the City of Arras, hauing the Vsher of the Great Councell before him, bearing his Mace openly discouered, Armed with the King Armes, and following after the said Vsher the Chafe-wax,The Chancellor (...) concerning to ^apan^ sided by two Kings of Armes to our Lord the King, clothed in their Coates of Armes: as namely, Mon-Ioye, Principall King of Armes of France, and the King of Armes, Normandie: there arriued and came before the said Lord Chancellour, the Bishop of Cambray, the Lord Thomas de Pleures, Knight Chancellour to the Lord Archduke Monsieur the Count of Nassau, the Lord of Flennes, with other, as well Knights as Squires, yet addmitted of Councell to the said Archduke. The Lord Thomas de Pleures preparing to salute the Lord Chancellour, came vnto him, saying, that the Lords in his company and himselfe, were sent from their Lord and Maister the Archduke,^alut^ deliuered to the Chancellor. to tell him: That the Archduke was very ioyfull for his arriuall, and the others Lords which were with him, affirming them all to be most hartily welcome. With much other faire and gentle language, euery one in the traine did the like (on behalfe of the Archduke) doing great reuerences and honor to the Lord Chancellour, not any of the Lords fayling in the like. For which kindnesses, the Lord Chancellour vsed them very honorably, embracing the Lords, euen as if this fauour had bin done to the Archduke himselfe, personally there present.
Soone after, they ordered them on either side, for their more formall ryding into the Citie, and when the whole Companie was neere entring into the Suburbes: the Lord Chancellour was met by the Lord Archduke, who to receiue and welcome him, had purposely come on horsseback from the Abbey of Saint Vaast in the Cittie of Arras, and ridden quite thorow the Cittie to see him come, and meete him.
Thus the Lord Archduke, accompanied with a great number, as well Knights of his Order,The meet^ng of the Arch-Duke and the Chancell^. as Squires, and other Officers of his House, being rancked on either side, to make way and giue place to the Lord Chancellour: he was no sooner come neere, but both the Archduke and they put off their Bonnets, shewing themselues submissiuely bare, and he put on his Mule, to be close to the Chancellor. Him he embraced very humbly, being alwayes bare-headed before him, bidding him most heartely welcome; speaking further to him in this manner. How fareth my Lord the King? Whereto the Lord Chancellour answered; That he was well and in good health, with more ample speeches in honor of his Maiesty. The Archduke gaue gracious welcome to the Lords of Rauestein and Gruture, saluting also honourably the Maisters of the Requests, and other Councellers to the King. After many gracious passages in speeches, and amiable countenances of the Archduke, to the Chancellour and Rauestein: he all this while hold his hart in his hand, and would neuer be couered, but when the Lord Chancellour did the like.
The Archduke and the Chancellour rode on together, to make their entrance into the Cittie,The (...) ^^to the Cit^ie of Arras the Chancellour alwayes keeping the right hand; and before them rode the Vsher of the Great Councell, bearing his Mace alofte and open. The Chafe-waxe carying the Kings Seale on his backe, As it is the custome there, when the Lord Chancellour rideth thorow the Kingdome; and the two Kings of Armes in their Order, neuer any other comming betweene the Archduke and the Chancellour. A thing which was well noated and obserued, as heedfully by the Archdukes people and Officers, as by the common people: whereof there was a mighty assembly, both without the Cittie and within, comming purposely to see this Entrance.
Still all along (in conference) did the Archduke guide and conduct the Lord Chancellour, being alwayes vncouered to him; except when the Chancellour put on, then did he so likewise:(...) euen to the entrance of the Cloyster of the Great Church, the Archduke still striuing to bring the Chancellour to the Bishops Place (where he alwayes vsed to be lodged) but that he was hindred therin, by the earnest intreates and

importunities of the Chancellour, who shewed himselfe sufficiently satisfied with that which he had then done in honour of the King. Wherupon, in kind language he departed from the Lord Chancelour, returning into the Cittie of Arras, to his owne lodging at Saint Vaast, the Chancellour remayning in the Bishops House, accompanied with the Counte of Nassau, and other great persons belonging to the said Lord Archduke. Afterward, the Lords and Gentlemen on either side, repaired to such lodgings, were in due order appointed for them.
After diuers entercourses of courtesie, performed by the said Lords, Thomas de Pleures, the Counte of Nassau, the Lord of Molembais, and other Officers attending on the Archduke, during Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thurday following, being the first, second, third and fourth of this instant moneth Iuly; many treaties passed before the Lord Chancellour in his Lodging, for concluding on matters, points and articles propounded by the Kings Atturney Generall, in his Parlement at Paris.
And those matters being ended, vpon Thursday, requests was made by the Arch-Dukes Officers to the Lord Chancellour; that he would dispose himselfe,Request made for Receiuing the Homage for receiuing the Homage, which the said Archduke was to performe to the King, in regard of his Peerdome and Counties of Flanders, and likewise for the Counties of Artois, Charolous, with other Lands helde by him, belonging to our Lord the King and his Crowne. For the doing whereof, day and houre was to be assigned to the Archduke, to the end he might come and Doe his Duety.
Whereto the Lord Chancellour made answere, that the morrow, being Friday,Appointment for the doing (...). and fifte of the said Moneth; betweene the houres of nine and ten in the morning, he would be ready to receiue it, which day and time was accepted by the Officers to the Archduke.
For this purpose, the Lord Chancellour appointed, that the place should be the second Haule of his Lodging, which was hanged with rich T^p^strie, and a State exalted two or three degrees, and thereon placed A sumptuous Chaire, couered all ouer with Floures de Luces, wherein himselfe was to sit during the reception, and such words as should be deliuered, concerning the Homage that was done.
Friday b^ing come, about ten a clocke in the morning, the Lord Chancellour benig in his Chamber, accompanied with Lords, Maisters of the Requests, and other of the Councell before named, as also the Bayliffe of Amions:The Chancellors answere to ^ed Thomas de Pleures. worde was brought him by Thomas de Pleures, and other Officers, that the Archduke was departed from his Lodging: and co^ing towards him, to performe the Homage, if he would dispose himselfe to receiue it. Wherto the Chancellour made answere, that So soone as his Lord should be come into the place appointed for Homage; he would be readie there in person.
Officers came two other seuerall times, as well Gentlemen of the Chamber, as also the Secretaries to the Archduke, signifying to the Lord Chancellour; that the Archduke was entred the first Haule, which ioyned to the second: And yet the Chancellour would not stirre.
At the third time, because the Officers affirmed, that the Archduke was entred the second Haule (as indeed it was true) and likewise that the Lord de la Gruture, Robert Framezelles, Chamberlaine to the King, and the Lord of Rauesteine (who had accompanied the Archduke from his Lodging, into the second Haule) came also to tell the de Chancellour, that the Archduke was in the second Haule, and in the very place appointed for the Homage.
Then the Lord Chancellour, attired in a rich Roabe of Crimosine veluet, and his Ha^ on his head; came from his Chamber, which ioyned to the said Haule, in manner following.
Before him went the Vsher of the Great Councell, bearing his Mace open and alofte, who with aloude voyce cried and said,The manner of the Chancellors comming to receiue the Homage. so soone as he was come forth of the Chamber, and entring into the second Haule (because there were assembled a great multitude of people, as well Gentlemen and Officers to the Archduke, as others, so that hardly a man could turne himselfe) these words three or foure times: On before there, make way and, giue roome. After the said Vsher followed the two Kings of Armes; then came the Lord Chancellour, and after him the Lords of the Requests,

being of the Great Councell, and the Kings Notaries and Secretaries, with whom I my selfe went. And because the Lord Chancellour had appointed me (before his departing from his Chamber) to take such a conuenient place, where I might be present at the Homage, to heare both his owne wordes, the answeres of the Archduke, and what else should be past betweene them, according as his Letters formerly had directed me; I endeauoured my selfe not to faile therein.
Heere is to be obserued, that as the Lord Chancellour approched neare the Chaire, wherein he was to sit, the Lord Archduke, who all this while had attended there his comming: immediately tooke off his Hat, and spake to the Chancellour these words;The A^^h^ wordes to the Lord Chancellour. My Lord, God giue you a good day, in speaking which words, he humbled his head very low. But the Lord Chancellour, without vsing any action of courtesie, or vttering one word, only lifted his hand to his Hatt on his head, touching it, but not otherwise stirring it; sat down in the Chaire. When presently one of the Kings of Armes, according as formerly the Chancellour had directed him, cried there times with a loud voyce; Keepe Silence.
Which being done, the Archduke presented himselfe bare headed before the Lord Chancellour to doe his Homage, saying. My Lord, I am come hither before you, to performe the Homage which I owe to the King, concerning my Peerdome, and Counties of Flanders,(...) the Homage and (...) to performe it. Artois and Charolois, which I holde of My Lord the King, and of his Crowne
Then the Lord Chancellour, sitting so in his Chaire, and couered both with his Hat and hoode, demanded: If he had either Girdle, Dagger, or any other Weapon about him?The passage^ which (...) them. Whereto the Archduke (Lifting vp his Garment, which was without a Girdle) Answered No. Heerevpon the Lord Chancellour Tooke his two hands betweene his owne, and holding them so ioyned, the Lord Archduke began to bow, shewing apparance of falling on his knee. But the Lord Chancellour would not suffer it, but raising him vp with his hands as he held him, he vsed these words to him: your good will is sufficient, and wee are pleased. Then the Lord Chancellour proceeded in this manner, holding still the Archdukes hands betweene his owne,The (...) Chancel^ (...) the Arch Duke. and he bare headed, off^ring alwayes his knee to the ground. You shall continue a man to your Soueraigne Lord, bearing him Faith and Liege Hommage, in regard of the Peeredome and Counties of Flanders, as also the Counties of Artois, Charolois, and all others Lands which you hold of the King and his Crowne. You shall promise to serue him till death inclusiuely, to and against all that can liue and dye, without reseruing any: To procure his good, and preuent his harme, and to acquit and c^y your selfe towards him, as to your Soueraigne Lord and King.
Whereunto the Archduke answered: By my Faith so I promise, and so I will die. When he had so spoken, the Chancellour vsed these words. And I receiue you, (the Kings right reserued in other things,The Arch-Dukes (...) of the Homage. and of others in all concerning them.) Then holding forth his checke the Lord Chancellour kissed it. Afterward, the Archduke demanded of the Chancellour, Letters for receiuing the said Homage: which he commanded me to make, for his more speedy dispatch.
Now arose the Chancellour out of the Chaire, and putting off his Hat and Hood, made low reuerence to the Archduke, and vttered these words. My Lord, I performed yet-while the Office of a King, by representation of his person. But now I am Guy de Rochefort,The Chancellours court^sie to the Arch-Duke. your most humble seruant, alwayes ready to doe you any seruice, to the King my Soueraigne Lord and Maister, in whatsoeuer it shall please you to command me. For which the Lord Archduke thanked him, returning these speeches. I thanke you my Lord Chancellour, and desire you in all my affaires to my Lord the King, that I may haue your helpe and furtherance.
Witnesse my Seale manuell set heereunto, the first day of August, An. 1499.
This Liedge Homage was made to King Lewes the Twelfth, to whom was giuen that excellent Elogium and Title of honor; Father of his People. After whom succeeded King Frances the first:King L^wes the ^welfth, Father of his People. who was graced with the stile of The Father of good Letters. At his comming to the Crowne of France, Charles of Spayne, Sonne to the Archduke Phillip of Austria, whose Homage we haue so lately reported, sent as Ambassadour to his Sacred Maiesty, the Counte of Nassau, who (in the name of his Maister) gaue Faith and Liedge Homage, for the Counties of Flanders, Henault, Artois, Charolou^, and other Lands held of the Crowne of France, in the yeare One Thousand Fiue Hundred and Fifteene.




CHAP. VII. Concerning the Prouinces and Seigneuries of the Lowe Countries.
MEyer, and (next to him) Marchant, both Chroniclers, in their Historie of Flanders, composed in the time of Charles the fift, Emperour, to foment and cherish the warres, betweene the two famous Crownes of France and Spayne;Historians opinions concerning the Nether-Lands would seeme to begin the Low Countries fro^ the Riuer of Somme, comprehending therein the Counties of Bolongne and Saint Paule, and make them Homageable to the Count of Flanders. And for their better attayning therto, they noate downe, that vnder the yeare Nine Hundred thirtie and one (when our Kings of the Second Ligne leaned towards their declination) that Arnoull, the Great Counte of Flanders, possessed himselfe by force of Armes, of the Cittie of Arras, and the Abbeis of Artois, and afterwarde of the Townes of Bolongne on the Sea, Aire, Doway, Teronane, and other places beside. And that the Counties of Boulogne and Saint Paule, were then belonging to the Counte of Flanders. Vterque Comitatus, erat in clientel^ Comitum Flandriae.
But these good Historians should haue turned ouer the Leafe, where is apparantly discerned, that Lothaire King of France, after the death of Arnoull,A contradiction of those Historians. recouered those vsurped Lands, and inuested therein the eldest of the Sonnes to William Counte of Ponthieu, of the Countie of Boulogne; and the youngest in the Countie of Saint Paule, in Arriere Fle^e to that of Boulogne, and not the Counties of Flanders, nor Artois.
And for manifestation to the Dutche, that (at all times) the Counties of Boulongne. Saint Paule, and other limitrophing Seigneuries, haue bin vnder Homage to the Crowne of France: we will heere insert a sollemne Arrest or decree,A sufficient proofe for auouching the contrarie. giuen in the Generall Parlement, held a Ville-Neufue le Roy, neere to Sens, the yeare of Grace, One Thousand Two Hundred and Nine. in the moneth of Maye, vnder the raigne of Phillip Augustus.
A decree seruing as a generall Rule, for the Homages of the Duchie of Burgongne, Counties of Neuers, Boulogne, Saint Paule, the Seigneurie of Dompierre, and other greate Fiefs, nakedly arising from the Crowne of France, for their A^^ieer Fiefs, and dependances of them.




The Parlement Decree according to the Courte Roule.
PHilipus Dei gratia Francorum Rex, Nouerint omnes Praesentes, pariter et Futuri; Quod Odo, Dux Burgundiae, Herueus, Comes Nuternensis; Rodulphus, Comes Boloniae; Guido, Comes Sancti Pauli; Guido, de Domna Petra, and plures alij Magnates de Regno Franciae vnanimiter conuenerunt, and assensu publico firmauerunt, vt Primo Die Maij in Posterum, ita sit de Feodalibus tenementes. Quidquid tenetur de Domino Ligio, vel alio modo, si contigerit per Successionem Haeredum, vel quoquo alio modo diuisionem inde fieri, quoquomodo fiat, omnes qui de illo Feudo tenebunt, de Domino Feodi, principaliter, and nullo medio, tenebunt, sicut vnus antea tenebat, priusquam diuisio facta esset: Et quandocumque contigerit, pro illo totali Feodo seruitium Domino fieri, quis libet corum, secundum quod de Feodo tenebit, seruitium tenebit exhibere, and illi Domino deseruire, and reddere racaptum, and omnem Iustitiam. Quidquid antem autea factum est, et vsitatum vsque ad Primum diem Maij, maneat sicut est factum, sed de cetero fiat, sicut est supradictum. Quod ne possit obliuione deleri, and in posterum irritari, praesens scriptum Sigillorum nostrorum munimine fecimus roborari. Actum in Parlemento nostro apud Villam nouam Regiam iuxta Senonas congregato, Anno ab Incarnationem Domini, Millesimo D^centesimo nono, Mense Maio.




King Lewes Eight of the name, sirnamed of Montpensier, Sonne to the said Phillip Augustus, and Father of Saint Lewes, proportioned to his Brother Monsieur Phillip of

France,The proportioned allowance of King Lewes the Eight. the Counties of Bologne and Saint Paul, with other Lands, vnder charge of Homage, and they to returne againe to the Crowne, by defect of Heyres Male, borne in loyall Marriage. This Appennage inserted in the Registers of the Court, is dated in the Moneth of Ferbruary, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Twenty Three.
The acknowledgement of Monsieur Philip of France.The said Monsieur Philip of France in the Moneth of December, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Twenty Sixe, acknowledged to the King Saint Lewes his Nephew; that he held of him and the Crowne, the Fortresses of Mortaign and of Lisle-bonne, and the Homage of the County of Saint Paul, he held that of Bologne (these are the very words of the acknowledgement, inserted in the Court of Parliament Registers) with charge of their returning to the Crowne of France, by the defaylance of Heyres Male. These Counties then are not, nor euer haue beene of the Low-Countries.
The diuision of the Low-Countries or Netherlands.Which are at this present diuided into Seauenteene Prouinces, whereof some haue made it an Estate and Common-wealth, a part by it selfe. Others of them haue acknowledged their Dukes, and the rest confesse themselues Heyres to Mary of Bourgongne.
The Duchy of Brabant and her c^^^^dure (...) Townes and Citie.The first is the Duchie of Brabant, which hath two and twenty Leagues or Miles in length, and twenty in breadth, making Foure Score Miles in Circuit. The principall Cities and Townes are Lou^aine, Bruzelles, Antwerpe and Bosle-Duke. And thereon dependeth the Duchie of Arscot, the Marquisate of Berghes, the Counties of Hecstrate and Megue; The Seigneuries of Breda and Rauestein; the Duchie of Lembourg; the Estates of Mastrich and of Valquembourg; the Countie of Dalen, and ninetene Baronies.
Malines.Malines maketh an Estate by it selfe, not subiect to the Duchie of Brabant: although it be iustly seated in the middest of three principall Townes thereof.
Gue^dre^Gueldres or Gelres, a Duchy sometime inhabited by the Auncient Francs, named S^cambrians, and by the Menapians. Th^s Duchy containeth vnder it, the County of Zutphen: And the principall Townes are Nimegen, Ruremonde, Zutphen and Arnam.
Ouure-Issell.Depending or belonging thereto is the Estate of Ouure-Issell, Trans-Iselana, seated both beyond, and on this side the Riuer or Flood of Issell. It is diuided into three other Estates; Island, Drend, and Tuend. Her best Townes are Deuenter, Zuell, Campen, and Voll^nhoue: but Deuenter is the chiefest of all.
Fr^^zeland.The Freize or Friezeland hath heretofore carried the title of a Kingdome. This Prouince is diuided into the East part, and the principall Towne is called Linguen seated on the Riuer of V^surgis, and is subiect to the King of Denmarke. The Westerne part is watred with the Riuer of Einis, in Latine Amasis, and Amasius.
Holl^nd.H^ll^nd, tearmed Batauta, and the Inhabitants Bataui, is but a Peninsula or halfe Iland, watered by the Rhine and the Meuze, threescore miles in Circuit, and but three houses of ground walke onely in breadth. Her best Cities and Townes are Dordrech, Harlam, Delpht, Leyden (Lugdunum Batauorum, a famous Vniuersity) Gende, Amsterdam, the best, richest, and most peopled of all: And the Hage, a County in Latine Haga Comitis, which yet is not engirt with Walles.
Vtrecht.Vtrecht is an Estate apart by it selfe (Vltraiectum) the principall Towne whereof b^areth the same name; and it is seperated from that of Holland.
(...)Z^land is likewise an Estate apart, sometime (heretofore) bearing the Title of a County, according as Holland did. Her chiefest Townes are Meidelbourg, and next to it Z^erriczee; howbeit more Ancient then the other.
(...)Flanders a County, hath thirty Leagues in length (which are but three dayes iourney of way) and twenty in breadth. Her principall Cities and Townes are at this present, Gaunt, Bruges, Ypre, The Isle, Douay, and Tournay. It hath two Principalities, Gaure, and that of Esbing: Foure good Portes of the Sea, Newport, the Escluse, Denque^^que,(...) or Denkerke and Ostend, made famous in our time, for enduring a besieging of three yeares and an halfe. In this County the Inhabitants speake partly Dutch, and partly French, which they doe tearme Flandre Gallicante.
(...)Artets, as wee haue already said, hath for her good Cities and Townes, Arras, Saint Omer, Bethune, Atre and Bapaulme: Therouane and Hesdin, were spoyled in the

time of King Henry the Second, and Charles the Fift Emperour. By the Treaty made at Chasteau Cambresis, betweene King Henry the Second, and Dom Philip the Second, King of Spaine, An. One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Fifty Eight, it was agreed by the said two Kings, that the Bishops Sea of Therouane (then ruined) should be transferred to Bologne on the Sea for the King; and to Saint Omer for the King of Spayne, which was done by consent of the Archbishop of Rheimes, Metropolitane. And equall diuision to be made of the Rents, on the Table, as well those Episcopall as Capitulary, and of all goods in generall appertaining to the Bishopricke, Church and Chapter of Therouane, with the Rights of Collation and other. Then to Attribute the one moity to the Bishopricke of Bolongne, the Country of the most Christian King: and the other moity to the Bishopricke of S. Omer, for the King Catholique. The people and Inhabitants of Artois, speake the French Language.
Henault,Henault. a County inhabited by the Neruians, touching or bordering on the County of Namure, and the Bishopricke of Liege. Her chiefest Townes are Monts, Val^^ciennes, Quesno^, Landrecy, Marienbourg and Maubeuge.
Betweene Artois and Henault, is the Countrey of Ostreuant,Osteruan where is the Monastery builded heretofore, by King Charles of France, Sir-named the Bauld.The Monastery builded by King Charles the Bauld and his bounty thereto. Of this Monastery speaketh Meyer in his Chronicle of Flanders, saying. That Charles the Bauld, by his Letters Patents giuen at the Pallace of Crecy, the fift of the Ides of I^ly, Indiction Eleauen, after the Romane account, and the yeare of Grace, Eight Hundred, Three Score and Eighteene, the Eight and Thirtieth yeare of his Reigne, and Second of his Empire: Gaue to the Conuent of the deuout Sisters (where was Abbesse Hermintrude his Daughter, Sister to Iudith, Wife of Bauldwine Bras de Fer) many Lands and Possessions.

Carlus Rex Cocnobio H^snoniensi sito super Fluuium Scarbum in Comitatu Attrebatensi, pago Osirebanto, vbi Hermentrudis filia eius, Vxoris ferrei Comitis Soror, Sacris praefuit Vnginibus, multa contulit, eorumque bona ac Priuilegia confirmauit. Adiecit eidem d^niumsup^r Scaldum, in Ostrobanto Vauerocinium: in Comitatu Tarauanensi Auciacum super ^luurum Vuellulam.

In place of the Sisters or Nunnes,Monkes placed in sted of the Sisters or Nunnes. afterward there were appointed to bee blacke Monkes, and an Abbot. One of them vnder the Reigne of Philip le Bell, King of France and Nauarre, hauing receiued some wrongs from Iohn, Count of Henault, who was very molestuous, in outraging the Monkes of this Abbey of Henault, and more particularly in abusing the Sergeants, which had informed against him constrainedly vnder the Kings owne hand. He made his complaint to the Parliament,Count Iohn of Henault his Censure in the Parliament. whereby a Decree (inserted at large in the Registers of the Court) The said Iohn Count of Henault, was condemned to make an honourable amends naked, in his Shi^t, with a halter about his necke, to desire pardon of God, and mercy of the King and Iustice, beside other greater amends and reparations. But vpon the earnest prayers and supplications of the said Count, the Halter was changed into Ribands of Silke: but the rest of the Decree remained in full force and vertue; onely the place for this honourable amends excepted, which was performed at Saint Quintins.
Here you may read what is set downe in the Ancient Chronicle of Flanders.Out of the Chronicle of Flanders. The Albet of Henault pleaded a long time in Parliament against the Count Iohn of Henault, and at the length, by the large Priuiledges which were giuen him by the Kings of France, who had founded and supported the said Monastery: the Abbot obtained iudgement for his cause, by remaining in the especiall guardance of the Kings; for long time before they had beene Guardians to the place. To the said Monastery and diuers Sergeants of the Kings, the Count of Henault and his people, had offered many outrages and acts of disobedience. Proceeding so farre therein, that King Philip sent Monsieur de Valois his Brother, and a great power of Men to constraine Count Iohn of Henault, to beare himselfe more obediently. And at last it was ordered at Saint Quintins, whither the Count came and made amends according to the Kings will. A note of most worthy obseruation for great Lords that dare rebell against Iustice, and the Officers thereof.
Luxembourg,Luxembourg. a Duchy (heretofore wonne by Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, and whereof (by power against him) Iohn Duke of Bourgongne possessed

himselfe, where began the effects of the Before spoken of in his Armes and Deuice. Ioyners Plaine, and the mortall hatred which these two Princes bare to each other (as Enguerran de Monstrelet affirmeth to vs) hath three score and ten miles in circuit and compasse, being planted in the Ardenes. The Townes thereof are Luxembourg, Arlon, Audemarc, Thionuille (the ordinary abiding of our Kings and Monarches of the Second Ligne, for the Royall sport of hunting, it being called in our Annales Theodonis-Villa, ruined by King Henry the Second) Vireton, Montmedy, Yuoy, Neuf-Chastell, and Danuilliers.
In this Duchy of Luxembourg (where a very goodly Pyramides is to bee seene) there are Seauen Counties, and the small Towne of Saint Hubert, called the Towne of Contention, in regard it is seated on the Confines and limits of Luxembourg, and likewise of Liege, which hath many times beene the occasion of quarrels and debates, betweene the Inhabitants of these two Prouinces.
Namure.Betweene the forenamed Liege, Brabant and Henault, is planted the County of Namure, washed with the Riuers of Moselle, and of the Sambre, the first seate of our ancient French. It containeth foure Townes, as namely these, Namure, Bovvines, Charlemont, and Valencour. In all these Parts the French Language is spoken.
Within the space of thirty or forty yeares, or thereabout, they of Holland, Zeland, and the round neighbouring people, professing the Religion of Luther, Caluine, and others beside (called by some, Disturbers of the Romish Church, and her quietnesse) haue made a Common-wealth a part by themselues, vnder the name of Estates of the vnited Prouinces. Who (by force of Armes) haue freed themselues from subiection and homage to the Kings of Spaine, the Heyres to Mary of Bourgongne, and acknowledge themselues to bee a free people, by the Truce made betweene the King of Spayne Dom Philip the Third, and them: in the City of Antwerpe, the ninth day of Aprill in An. One Thousand, Sixe Hundred and Eight.

The End of the Fourth Booke.



THE ORDER OF ENGLAND, CALLED Of the Blew Garter: Instituted in the yeare One thousand three hundred fortie seauen. The Fift Booke.

CHAP. I.
HONNY SOIT IL QVI MAL Y PENSEENgland, sometime called

Albion, and Great Bretaigne, which title it ^eareth at this present, vnder the famous King Iames, first of ^he name of England, and of Scotland the sixt: is an auncient Kingdome, wherein by the Lawes and Customes thereof, ^oe succeede the Females, as well as Masles; as is obserued by the Noble Roman Historian Tacitus, in the life of Iulius A^ricola, who wholly made that great Island subiect to the Roman Empire, as were the Gaules Germanie and Spaine.
Peopled by Brute and his followers.This Isle of Albion was peopled (according to common report) by Brute and his followers, they being acknowledged by the name of Bretons, in the yeare of the World two thousand eight hundred and fiftie: And a thousand sixe hundred yeares before the Birth of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ.
To this Brute, first Prince thereof, and from whom it receiued the Sirname of Bretaign, was giuen for his Armes: D'Or (...) Lyon rampant de Gueulles, es^rtele d Azur, a trois Coronnes

d'Or mises en Pal. Armes which haue bin oftentimes changed, as we shall perceiue in the pursuite of this Discourse.
For the Authors of the English Histories doe write, that Gurguintus their two and twentieth King,The permission of Constantine the Great to the Kings of England. carried for Armes in his Banner D'Azur a trois Coronnes d'Or en P^* without other quartering. And the same Historians write, that Constantine the Great Emperour gaue permission to the Kings of England, to beare the Crowne Royall, close and firme aboue, after the Imperiall mannet, by a perticuler priuiledge of honor; whereas other Kings of those times, had no other then a simple B^nnet or Chappeau. But the question is to know, whether the Isle of England had bin wholly conquered in the time of Constantine, and that very long time before, the Romaines did leaue Kings there; rather then in Germany, in Spaine and among the Gaules;The (...) of the Roman^ in their Conquest. considering, that whensoeuer they subdued any Prouince vnder their obedience, they vsed to take away the noate of any other power, then their own, sending such Gouernors thither, as were of their owne naturall Romaine language.
We will forbeare to meddle with the reports of those English Romancers, who before the conquest of their Isle made by the Romaines, vnder the Emperor Seuerus, set downe threescore and three Kings, succeeding after Brute (who was their first King) to the time of Lucius, after whose death, they write, that the Emperour Seuerus passed into Great Bretaigne,The Roman Emperour Seuerus dyed in Y^* with mighty Romaine troupes, possessing himselfe thereof, and ended his dayes in the Citie of Yorke, the yeare of Grace two hundred and eleauen.
They make these threescore and three Kings to succeede man by man, without any woman. And yet neuerthelesse, it is a case constant, that the right of this Isle, Ius gentium ^ritann^rum, the Custome of the Kingdome admitteth, and receiueth women in their succession. We haue the fundamentall Law reported in the life of Iulius Agric^la, by Tacitus, deciphering the Customes of the auncient Bretons, and the scituation of their Island. Britanni his atque talibus in stincti Voadica generis Regij foemina (Nequ^ enim Sexum in Imperijs discernunt) sumpsere vniuersi bellum. This Voadica or V^adicia, in those times was Queene of Great Bretaigne, in which Kingdome (euen to this instan^ both Masles and Females doe succeede; Lancea ad fusum transit.
S^gibert, continuer of the Chronologie of Eusebius, and of S. Hierome, doe e^struct vs, that the inhabitants of this Island, for the space of almost fourescore yeares, were wholly exposed to the spoyles and rauages of the Scots and Picts. In such sort, that being forsaken of the R^mans succour, by counsell of the Bishop of London; they went into Bretaigne Armerica from whence their Auncestours deriued their first originall and birth,(...) as we are taught by venerable Bede) whereof was then King, one named Al^n, who gaue them his Brother, called Constantine, elected King of Great Bret^gne, in the yeare foure hundred and thirteene. He left three Children, the last whereof was Vterpendragon, who, as Son and Successour had Arthur, King of Great Br^taigne, si^named The Great.
The same Sigibert, in the yeare of Grace foure hundred forty fiue, will haue this this Arthur to reigne in Great Bretaigne, and would haue vs to beleeue, that he was a braue and valiant Prince.(...) the Conquests o^ gr^at ^i^g Arthur. But where should he (in those times) conquer thirteene Kingdomes, and performe such admirable actions of Armes, as those fabulous ^mancers doe make him the Author of? Th^y make him King of Bretaigne Armori^s, which then was gouerned by her owne Princes.
In these times as Sigibert telleth vs) the King of Albion Vortigerne, by aduise of the wisest Barons of his Kingdome; assembled the most excellent Architects throughout the land,(...) to build a Castell of Royall structure, to serue as his retreate of assurance and safety. But as the workeman (being many) laboured for seating the foundation therof, the earth being vncertaine and quagging; all their paines proued in vaine. Then aduise was giuen him, to seeke for a man borne without a Father, and to ciment the (...)* of the Castell (which he would haue to be made) with his blood, by which m^anes the foundation thereof would be firme and stable. A yong man was found, named Merl^n,(...) who was brought with his Mother before the King, and there Mer^^ns Mother confessed, that she conceiued him by an Incubus, vnder the phantasticke forme of a man. Merlin reuealed many hidden things to the King, and which should happen afterward in the successe of diuers yeares. He discouered also to the King,

^hat vnder the foundation of the Castell which he intended to build, there was a Lake, and vnder it a Grotte or Denne, whereto two horrible Dragons resorted, the one Red, which designed the Bretons his Subiects, whose Haire and Beards were Red; and the other White, which figured the Anglo-Saxons,Merlins inter-Pretation of the two Dragons fight. dwelling in a Prouince of Saxonie in Germany. By a fight of these two Beasts, which he caused to be performed in presence of the King, the White Dragon had the victory ouer the other; to shew thereby, that the White skinned Saxons, should one day ouercome this Isle of Bretaigne, and make themselues Lords thereof.
He foretold, that Aurelius Ambrosius should vanquish Hengistus in a field of battaile; that V^rtigerne (to whom he spake) should be taken and burned by the Picts; that after his death, this Ambrosius should be King, and haue to his successour Vterpendrag^n his Brother, and both the one and other should be poisoned.Arthur foretold to be a supporter of the Church. After them should reigne the Beare of Cornewall, Arthur the Great, who should be the support and Protectour of the Church. That he should conquer the Westerne Islands in the Ocean Sea; possesse the Prouinces of the Gaules; and make himselfe dreadfull to the Roman power, but he should haue a sad and disastrous end.
He Prophesied mo^eouer, that the Metropolitane See of London, the Capitall Citie of the Kingdome, should be transferred to that of Canterbury, sometimes called D^r^bernia: And that the Archbishop of Yorke Saint Sampson, with seauen other Bishops, should passe from Great Bretaigne, into the lesser, called Armorica. That the Anglo-Saxons being become Masters of Great Bretaigne,Angle-land, so called by the Anglo-Saxons. should change the name ^hereof, and call it Angle-land. Also, that the English should be conquered and subdued by the Normans, and many other things he prophesied beside, yet all the assurance thereof he receiued from the spirit of lying. These are extracts of fabulous Romancers, who neuer speake a word of truth.
These Romancers of England, doe make this Arthur, Author of the Knights of the Round Table. A Table erected in a place of Fayerie-land,Knights of the Round Table founded by King Arthur. by the admirable cunning of the Prophet Merlin. In my yonger dayes I read those Romances of Merlin, and of the said Round Table: Since when, I haue also seene a manuscript Booke, beautified with many figures, wherein likewise was represented the Prophet Merlin, and his Round Table, with these Verses in French.


I.
MERLIN, iadis de son art and pratique,
Moult bien vsant selon l'ancien aage,
Edifia pur chef d'oeuure authentique,
La TABLE RONDE en triomphant ouurage,
Et se monstrast expert, and si sage
En son scauoir, que son oeuure hautaine,
Sans vice aucun estoit perfaicte, and pleine
D'honneur exquis, and Royale ornature.
Car de beaute estoit resplendissante,
Et des ouuriers dicte en iudicature,
LA TABLE RONDE en honneur triomphante.


II.
La Table estoit d'vn ouurage mystique,
Bien prattique d'excellent aduentage,
Par Cheualiers en estat magnifique
La sit garder, and preseruer d'outrage,
Qui tous esto^ent remplis de grand courage,
Bien reclamez en ceste basse plaine,
En la gardant souffrirent maintes peines,
Pour l'approuuer par raison, and droicture,
Sur tout ouurage estre la plus plaisante
Et demourer sans quelque forfaicture
La TABLE RONDE en honneur triomphante.


III.
Vn Seige estoit en ceste TABLE antique,
Bien ordonne d'oeuure de haut parage,
Que Mesdisans ent iuge fantastique,
Plus dangereux que tempeste ou orage:
Mais tels Menteurs pleins de mauuais langage,
Furent confus, car la place tant saine,
Promise estoit par la Cour Souueraine,
A Galaad sur toute creature, etc.


The Verses thus Englished:
I.MErlin long since by his great Art and skill,Well fitted to that graue and auncient Age,Erected an authentique Maister-piece:Collected out of an ancient French Manuscript Chronicle.The Table Round, excelling all workes else.He shewed himselfe so expert and so wiseIn depth of knowledge, that his worthy workeWas perfect without errour, and truely fullOf Honor exquisite, and royall beautie,Because therein it was resplendishing.And tearm'd by workemen of greatest iudgementThe Table Round, in Honor triumphant.II.The Table was of Misticke workmanship,Wel^ practised for excellent aduantage,By Knights of most magnificent degree;Who kept it Nobly from scandale and outrage,For all of them were of highest courage,Well gouernde in their meanest actions.To keepe it famous, they endurde great paines,Approuing alwayes by reason and iustice,Their deedes to be aboue all common reach,And so continued without any impeach;The Table Round in Honor triumphant.III.One seate there was at this auncient Table,Appointed for deedes of highest eminence,Which detractours iudged to be fantasticke,More dangerous then rudest stormes and tempest,But such Lyers full of all ill languageWere confuted: for that Seate safe and sound,Was promised by the Court SoueraigneTo Galaad, from any other creature, etc.
Concerning the Incubi and Succubi according to A^thoug^ of Iudgeme^t.It is a matter vndoubtable and certaine, euen by the interrogatories of Witches and Sorcerers themselues, that in their Sabbats, deuilles are distinguished by Incubi and Succubi. Saint Augustine, the light of the Church, in the three and twentieth Booke, Chapter fourescore and eight of his Cittie of God, and S. Thomas, in his first Tome the threescore and first Question, the third Article, and other more beside, doe hold this commixing of deuils with men and women, for a matter no way to be doubted. The Doctor of Doctors, Saint Hierome, on the sixt Chapter of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Ephesians, and after him Saint Iustine the Martyr, haue left vs in one word, that which may moue doubt of the mingling of Sathan and his minnions, with any of the indifferent sexes. Daemones seruiunt prauis amoribus: and ex s^minibus aliunde sumptis, conuert into Incubes on the behalfe of Sorcerers. But whether of this damnable coition, a reasonable soule may be engendered, or no, the discourse would be too wearisome and tedious. The women of the ancient Gothes, as

some Historians haue obserued, and the Daughters in Turkie haue made proofe.The Women of the olde Gothes, and Maides of Turkie. Wherto, without repetition of infinite examples, we may adde the vulgar oppinion, that of a Iewishe Maide, woed by an Incubus, Antechriste should be borne. Thus much hath bin said, varying somewhat from our former purpose.
But returning againe to Merlin, he was in those times (as was verily credited) the Prince of Magitians, renowned to all ages after him, for a notable Iugler,Merlin a man made very famous. Enchaunter and Magitian, and whose fame remained, and liueth yet in request, especially in the Countrey of our Bretaigne, vnder our two Kings Charles the Fifte and Charles the sixt, Father and Sonne. For the Chronicle of the good Duke of Bourbon, Lewes, second of that name (Authour of the Order of the Thistle, obserued before) informeth vs in the threescore and ninthe Chapter, that the Constable of France, Messire Oliuer de Clisson,In the Chronicle of the Duke of Bourbon Lewes the Second. in name of King Charles the Sixt his maister, defending the County of Pointhieure, ^gainst the Duke of Bretaigne; tooke the Towne of Saint Brieu, and the Bishops Castell, belonging to the said place. A House, which was very neere to the Crosse of Mal^hast, where Merlin wrought his wonders.
The olde Romancers called such men Fayries, as were Magitians and Sorcerers, re^owned and famous in their times, and who perfourmed such actions, as exceeded the Order of Nature, and was indeed altogether impossible. As those men, of whom Saxo Grammaticus speaketh in his History of Denmarke, the Archbishops of Vpsala, Primats of Gothia, Ioannes and Olaus Magnus, Vnckle and Nephew, in their Histories of the North: And the Spanish Monke Torre-Quemada, in the last Booke of his Hexa^eron. What this Merlin was, all the Historians of England do speake wonders of him,English Historians speaking of Merlin. ^nd either begin or finish (alwayes) their Narrations and serious discourses, with some ^ne or other of his pretended Prophecies.
Iannes Leslaeus, Bishop of Rosse, in his Scottishe History, Page an Hundred forty one, saith Caeterum Vortigernus suorum scelerum Poenas acerrimas postea luebat: S^quidem A^relius Ambrosius Constantini Regis filius, eum vxorum Ahnicam Hengisti filiam, and ^beros in turrim compulsos Igni subiecto miserrime consumpsit: id quod Merlinus Vates ^x Nobili Foemina (vt dicitur) Ab Incubo susceptus illi praedixerat. The Romancers ^ti^e, that this pretended Prophet was charmed by his Loouer or faire Friende, and ^ransported into Fayrie-land, the Kingdome of King Oberon, and Vrganda the Vn^nowne, where being placed in a Garden of pleasure, he there sleepes,Merlin his falling i^ to loue with the Lady of the Lake. and so still shall kepe vntill the day of Iudgement. But returne we now to King Arthur.
Sigebert, speaking of him, according to the History of England, in his time traduced ^ut of Brittish into Latine, writeth, that he was successour to his Father Vterpendragon, ^he yeare of Grace foure hundred and seauenty. Mortuo Vterpendragon Rege, sibli^tu^ est in Regno filius eius Arturus, cuius mirabiles actus etiam linguae personant Popu^rum, licet plura esse fabulosa videantur. It is said, that he fought with the Sesnes or ^axons, and subdued them, the Scots and Picts: he conquered Ireland, and made the ^ings of the Orcades and of Gothland his vassailes and tributaries. And on further ^uccesse, made himselfe Master of Denmarke and Norway, whence he went and skirted ^n the Gaules,Arthur held his Royall Throne at Paris for the space of nine yeares. vanquishing in Combate the Gouernours of them for the Romaine Em^erours. In such sorte, that by their saying (meere Fables) at Paris he helde his Seate ^nd Throne Royall Nine whole yeares, at the end whereof, he returned againe into ^reat Bretaigne, and after he had long time reigned there, he died in a Battaile, which ^e had against his Nephewe Monredon, in the yeare fiue hundred Forty two,Or Mordred. (the fable ^f his long age.) That in all his Conquests, hee had the seruice of one Sworde or Cou^tle-Axe, called Calibourne; a Launce named Ron;The Knightly furniture of King Arthur. a Head-piece and Creast of fine ^olde, made in shape of a Dragons throate, and a Shielde, whereon was figured an I^age of the Sacred Virgin, so Sigebert telleth vs. And now beholde what Leslaus saith (...) his Scottish History, Page an hundred fourty fiue, vnder the Reigne of the King of ^cotland Eugenius the third.
Scribunt Arthurum Regem per haec tempora Scotiam, Hiberniam, Islandiam, Finmar^am, Orcades insulas, Daniam, Suetiam, Liuoniam, Lituaniam, Prusiam, Pomeraniam, ^hiam, Hollandiam, Zelandiam, Brabantiam, Flandriam, Morinum, Armoricam Bri^niam, totam denique Galliam vi expugnasse; Incolas, Gentiumque Duces Vectigales ^cisse. Inde (vt Graecorum, Persarum, Medorum, altorumque Reges ab eo victos praeteream)

Lucium Romanorum Imperatorem sub iugum misisse. Multa me in eam sententiam inducunt, vt putem Haec potius in Anilibus, Quam Analibus numeranda. Verum (vt vt res sit) fuit Rex Arthurus animo inuicto, summaque virtute, and verum gestarum gloriae insignis.
Concerning the Kni^hts of the Rounde Table.And see also what the same Authour reporteth, Of the Knights of the round Table, whom he saith to haue seene in his time. Hunc Arthurum Scribunt Quatuor supra Viginti Athletas Equestris Ordinis (quod rei bellicae gloria praestabant) Insignibus Nobilitasse, ac rei militaris scientia, gloriaeque magnitudine pares, pari omnes amore complexum fuisse. Cum omnes simul accumberent, nequis forte se primo in loco constitutum gloriose praedicaret, aut ad infimum locum deturbatum inuide cogitaret, Mensam Rotundam ad Coronae formam effingendam durauit. Locum in quo omnes accumbere solebant Rotundam Arthuri Tabulam, and Nostrates, and Britanni appellant. Eandem ego mensa^ (Si Accolae falsa quadam Maiorum superstitione conflictati, non errent) in Winthoniensi Castro, ad aeternam rei memoriam solemniter conseruatam, Militumque Equestrium nominibus vndique nota tam, non ita pridem aspexi.
His words of the death of Arthur, and his Queene Guenora.The same Authour, speaking of the death of the said Arthur, King of Great Bretaigne, writeth, that he was slaine by the Scottes and Picts, on the Riuer of Humber, in the Battaile which was giuen against him by Eugenius, third King of that name of the Scottes. And that his wife, named Guenora, was fast shut vp in a Tower, in a place called Anguse; where she remained all the rest of her life time, and that there her Sepulture was seene.
This was deuised by the rare witt and inuention, of the Romancers of this Round Table,How Arthur and his Knights were seated at the Table. to make it equal in sitting for foure and twenty Knights, because when the King banquetted with them (as they say) the Precedency of the Knights was knowne to be in them, which were neerest seated to the person of the King. And concerning the rounde forme of this Table, euery one knoweth, that the Romaines had theirs made halfe rounde, and the rest wholly right as others for seruice, and because those Tables were tearmed by the Greeke Letter Sigma Martiall saith.
Septem Sigma capit, Sex sumus, adde Lupum.
The Tables of the Gaules.But as for them of the Gaules, they were Rounde, and with diuers corners; as many such like are yet to be seene in Paris, and elsewhere, especially in the Chamber of Accountes at Paris. This is thus obserued by Atheneus, in the Fourth Booke of his Dynosophists, in the Title De Coena Celtarum.
The Armes of King Arthur.Diuers Armes are giuen to this Arthur. I haue seene an olde Booke of Blazon^ limned, which giueth him D'Azur a Treize Coronnes d'Or. Others of Synople, in the first and fourth Quarter Vne Croix d'Argent, la premier Canton charge d'vn Soleil d'Or ayant l'image de la Vierge Marie au Mitan: le Deux and Troisiesme quartiers de Gueules trois Coronnes d'Or mises in Pal.
Matthew Faris writeth, that in the yeare A thousand one hundred ninety and one the bones of the said Arthur were found at Glasco, enclosed within an olde Coffin^ neere vnto which were raised two auncient Pyramides, engraued with inscription^ but the Letters were so olde and ill formed,The olde Coffin of King Arthur found. as nothing could bee knowen by the^* This Tombe was found, as a ditche or trenche was made, for the enterment of a Re^^gious man; for the earth being raised, they espied an olde Chest, whereon was (...) Crosse of Lead, with this Epitaphe. Hic iacet inclytus Britonum Rex Arthur (...) in Insula Aualonis Sepultus. The place was sometime wholly enclosed with a M^rishe ground, and was named the Isle of Aualon, as much to say, as the Isle of Alpes*
After Arthur succeeded Constantius, Aurelius, Caretticus, Ethelbert, who made h^^ abyding at Canterbury. In his time Pope Gregorie sent Orthodox Preachers, (...) purdge Great Bretaigne of grosse heresies. After Ethelbert reigned successiuel^ Cadwan,The Kingdom of Canterbury won by the Saxons. Athelstane, Echenwald, Sygobert, Ecbert, Lotharius, Ceolri^, Vared, vnde^ whom the Saxons ouercame the Kingdome of Canterbury, and held it in possessi^^ sometime.
Sigibert, with diuers other Historians and Chroniclers doe tell vs, that they (...) Great Bretaigne were subdued by the Saxons, in the yeare of Grace Foure hundre^ fourescore and twelue. Others affirme it to bee in the yeare foure hundred fourt^ foure. And others in the yeare Sixe hundred fourescore and sixe. And that th^

English and Saxons deuided the Isle of Great Bretaigne into Seauen Principalities and Toparchies,Great Bretaigne deuided into seauen iurisdictions. each of which were distinguished and knowne by different Armes.
The Principall Kingdome was that of the Saxons, otherwise tearmed of the Nordanimbres, or Northumbers,The principall Kingdome of the Saxons. to the King whereof the auncient Romancers doe attribute for Armes, D'Azur a la Croix Feurencee d'Or, cantonnee de quatre Merlettes, et vne en pointe de mesme. It is said, that to King Ardulf the same Armes were giuen by King Charlemaigne, reseating him in his Kingdome, according as the Chronicle of Lauresheim sheweth, in the yeare Eight hundred and eight. Interea Rex Nordumbrorum de Britannia insula nomine Ardulf, Regno, et Patria pulsus, ad Imperatorem dum adhuc Nouiomagi moraretur (that is to Noyon in the Isle of France, or in Picardie, whereas the said Emperour Charlemaigne was exalted King of France) venit et patefacto aduentus sui negotio, Romam proficiscitur, Romayne radiens, per Legatos Romani Pontificis, et Domini Imperatoris in Regnum suum reducitur. Praeerat ea tempestate Ecclesie Romanae Leo Tertius, cuius Legatus ad Britanniam directus est Adolphus Diaconus de ipsa Britannia Saxo. etc.
The same Chronicler, in the yeare Eight hundred and nine.Armes giuen by Charlemaigne to King Ardulphe Postquam Ardulphus Rex Nordumbrorum reductus est in Regnum suum, et Legati Imperatoris atque Pontificis reuersi sunt, etc. The Armes giuen by Charlemaigne to the said Ardulphe, were (as is affirmed) conserued by the Kings of England his Successours, euen vntill the Reigne of William the Conquerour, who abolished them, to make his owne Royall Stemme there.
The English and Saxons issuing out of Germanie, dwelt in the Countreyes of Scandinauia, and part of Saxonie, and of Thuringe, who being possessed of Great Bretaigne,The Saxons, possession of Great Bretaigne. made themselues famous, vnder diuers names according to the Climate, and scituation of the lands by them conquered, where they made their partitions East, West, North and South. And according to the testimony of Mathew Paris, a Monke of the Abbey of Saint Albane in England, the first King of the West-Saxons was named Cerdicius, of whom the descent and Ligne (sometimes allied to the most Illustrious Crowne of France) continued fiue hundred, threescore and eleuen yeares, without interruption (some Kings of Denmarke reserued,When the Danes were in England. who held England) and euen till the death of Edward (Sonne to King Etheldred) happening in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, threescore and sixe on the Eeue of the three Kings.
For the Succession of whom, because hee deceassed without issue, there happened contention, the Barons of England fauouring Harold, a Prince of their Nation. Yet so it followed neuerthelesse, that William Duke of Normandie, by the assistance of the King of France, Phillip first of that name, made himselfe Lord and Master of England.
This Harold being cast vpon the Sea coaste of Ponthieu, by a stormie tempest of Winde, as he sayled on the English Seas, was brought to William then Duke of Normandie, and to free himselfe out of his power,The promise of Harold to Duke Willam of Normandie. hee promised to keepe and perserue for him, the right which he pretended to haue to the Crowne of England, by the deceasse of Edward without issue. And moreouer, was affianced to one of the said Dukes daughters, named Alizon. But seeing himselfe aduanced to the Royaltie,Honors alter manners. by fauour of the English Barons; he falsified the Oathes made by him, and kept not any one of them.
Now this William was auouched to be a Bastard, by Robert Duke of Normandie, begotten by him in his amourous pursuites, on one named Hellen, daughter to a Groome of the Chamber (of the said Robert) named Foubert, who was the sonne of a Skinner.
By two meanes hee had right to the Crowne of England. The first,The rights of Duke William to the Crowne of England. because his Great Grandfather Richard, Second Duke of Normandie, had giuen his Sister Emma or Emina in mariage to the King of England Ethelred, and of that mariage was issued the said King Edward. Who seeing himselfe without children, and acknowledging the good kindnesses, which hee had receiued in Normandie of the said William, during the time of his banishment from England: He instituted (as his Heire and Successour in the Kingdome) the said Duke William; this we deliuer from the Auncient English Historians.
William receiued from Pope Alexander, an hallowed Banner of the said Dukes

Armes, who caried De Gueules a Trois Lepards d'Or, L'un sur L'autre; And hauing with him a great number of Frenche Noblemen, dwelling in England, as deriued from the greatest houses thereof, euen to this very day: tooke Shipping from the Porte of Saint Valery,The landing of Duke Willia^ (...) England, and his (...) with Haro^^. and landed in England at that of Hastingues, in the Moneth of August, Anno One Thousand Sixty and seauen. Neere to which Towne of Hastingues was the battaile fought, wherein William the Bastard had the victory, famous by the death of his contrary Harold, slaine by the shot of an arrow, fighting valiantly in the midest of his people. In this manner the Kingdome of England came to the Dukes of Normandie, by the winning of the Battaile, fought on the day of Saint Calixtus Pope, before the Ides of October. And of the Conquest of the said Kingdome, William the Bastard was sirnamed the Conquerour. This change was presaged by a great Comet, in memorie whereof this Distick was made, as it is reported by Mathew Paris in his History of England.

Anno Milleno Sexageno quoque Seno,
Anglorum metae flammas sensere Cometae.

WIlliam the Conquerour had to wife Mahauld or Mathilde, daughter to the Count of Flanders, Baudouin de L'Isle, by whom he had fiue daughters, and foure sonnes.
The Issue of King William the Conquerour.As namely Cecilie, his eldest daughter, Abbesse of Caen in Normandie.
Constance wife to Alain Fergand, Duke of Bretaigne.
Alison, affianced to King Harold, who neuer would espouse her, but died vnmaried.
Alix, who had to her husband the Count of Blois Stephen, after whose death, she entred into Religion at Marsigny among the Nunnes.
The youngest died in her infancie.
His Sonnes were Robert the eldest.
Richard; these two were borne in Normandie.
William, sirnamed the Red.
And Henry.
This Genealogie is thus set downe in the Registers the Courte, but it is otherwise in Mathew Paris,The Genealogie (...) by Mathew Paris. who vnder the yeare One thousand, Sixty eight, nameth the birth of Henry in England, saying that his Elder Sonne William the Red, and Robert the s^c^nd, were born^ in Normandie. And that in the said yeare, Robert his second Sonn^, whom he had made Earle of Northumberland, was slaine by the people of the said Countrey. And yet notwithstanding, hee contradicteth him selfe soone after, ded^cing the Genealogie in these tearmes. Ex Regina Mathilla Liberos multos pr^creauit, Robertam s^elciet, Ricardum, Willelmum and Henricum: quorum Primogenitus Robertus, ad huc pa^re viueente, Normanniam negari molleste ferens, in Italiam abijt ira succensus; vt si^ia Bonisacij Marchionis in Vxorem ducta, patri, affinibus adiutus, bellum moueret. Sed hac petitione frustratus, Philippum Francorum Regem, contrapatrem suum excitauit. Quare benedictione et haereditate paterna orbatus, in Angliae Regnum post mortem patris sui non successit, Ducatum Norm anniae autem vix retinuit. And the same Author, speaking of the death of the said King of England William the Conquerour,The death of William the Conquerour. happening at Rouen One Thousand, Fourescore and eight, the eight of the Ides of September, saith that Normanniam filio suo Roberto Angliam, possessiones maternas, cum thesauris Willelmo Ruffo legauit. By his testament he leagued Normandie to Robert his eldest Sonne; but in fauour of William the Red, all his Treasures, goods and possessions, as also the riches of his Mother Queene Mahauld, and the Kingdome of England he left to him.
William Ruf^s his con^^ to the Crowne.In this manner William the Red, second of that name, came to the Crowne of England. Robert his Brother, going in the voyage to the Holy land (in imitation of the Frenche Paladines) the yeare of Grace One thousand fourescore and sixteene. Hee p^wned the D^chie of Normandie, for the summe of Ten thousand poundes of Money. The Red hauing reigned Thirteene yeares, was slaine with an Arrowe, (shot at a Hart swiftly pursued) by one of the ordenary attendants on the said King,The death of K^ng William (...). named Walter Tyrell, of the Kings Chamber, vnwittinly, and not on any pretended purpose, on the

next day after Saint Peter ad Vincula, the second of August, in the secular yeare One thousand, an hundred. His death is notably described by the Monke Mathew Paris.
By his vnbemoaned death, Henry his Brother, first of that name, and last of the Sonnes to William the Bastard, came to enioy the Crowne of England, on the day of our Lady in August, and the same yeere. By his first wife Mathilde or Mahauld,Henry Beauclar^ first King of the name. daughter to Milcolme King of Scottes, and of Saint Margaret his Queene, hee had a Sonne and a daughter.
The Sonne was William, Duke of Normandie.
The daughter was Mahauld, married in the yeare, One Thousand, one hundred and nine, to the Emperour Henry, Fift of that name. And Mahauld the Queene of Scottes dying in the yeare One Thousand one Hundred and Eighteene, the said King Henry, making haste to a second mariage; in the yeare one thousand, one hundred, twenty one, tooke to wife Adela, Daughter to Geoffrey, Counte of Louuaine, who left him no children.
The yeare before, William, the eldest Sonne to King Henry, was drowned in the Sea,The drowning of King Henries children. passing from Normandie towardes England, with his Brothers and Sisters Bastardes, and a great number of chiefe Officers of England: so that there remained to the said King Henry, but his only daughter Mahauld for heire, and the Emperour Henry her husband being dead, in the yeare, One thousand, one hundred, twentie sixe, shee returned into England, where she was acknowledged as Queene, after the deceasse of her Father. And the yeare following, Foulques Counte of Anion, hauing beene at the voyage of Ierusalem, espoused there the Eldest Daughter of King Baldwine the second, with promise to succeede him in the Kingdome of Ierusalem, as he did. So that the Countie of Anion, being lefte remayning to Godfrey, sirnamed Planta-Genest;Mahauld the Empresse maried Godfrey Planta^enes, and their issue. because he tooke delight in that branch or stalke (as is auouched by S. Lewes) the said Widdow Mahauld maried with him: And by this mariage three Sonnes were borne.
Henry, borne in the yeare One thousand, one hundred, thirty two.
Geffory, in the yeare One thousand, one hundred, thirty foure, hee dying without issue.
And William, who was Earle of Mortaing by his owne stock, and by that of his Wife Comes Varennarum, the only daughter to William the third Earle Warren, who dyed in the voyage beyond the Seas, where he followed King Lewes the younger. We gather all the Genealogies of the famous houses of France, out of the Registers of the Court of Parliament at Paris, where they are inserted altogether equally.
Now, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, thirty fiue, the first day of December, died in Normandie the King of England Henry, first of that name,The death of King Henry the first in France. who in his life time had receiued the Empresse Mahauld his heire and onely daughter, Queene of England, and duchesse of Normandie.
Yet it chaunced neuerthelesse, that Stephen Counte of Bologne, Sonne to Stephen Counte of Bologne (Brother to Thibauld Counte of Blois) and of Adela, fourth daughter of William the Bastard, first King of that name of England (by consequent Nephewe on the mothers side) to deceassed Henry the first, notwithstanding their Oath;Stephen crowned King of England. was receiued by the States of the Kingdome, and crowned King of England at London, two and twenty dayes after the decease of his vnckle. Mahauld being payed with this Coyne. Fore nimis turpe si tot Nobiles foeminae subderentur, so saith Mathew Paris.
The Count of Anion was as speedily in Normandie, as his wife in England, where, in a foughten Battaile, she vanquished King Stephen her Cousine, tooke and led him prisoner on Candlemas day, in the yeare One thousand, one hundred and forty.King Stephen ouercome by Maude the Empresse. But deliuered againe the same yeare, in exchange of Counte Robert, Brother to Mahauld the Empresse. Ten yeares after, Henry was receiued Duke of Normandie, for which he did Liege Homage to King Lewes, Seauenth of that name.
In the yeare, One thousand, one hundred and fifty,The death of Geoffrey Plantagene^ Count of Anion. died the said Counte of Anion Geoffrey Plantagenest, in the Castell of Loir, the seauenth of the Ides of December. The King of France, Seuenth of the name, being returned from his voyage beyond the Seas, was separated from Aelianor of Aquitaine his wife, for her impudicity. Obserue here what is said by Mathew Paris. Eodem anno celebratum est Diuortium inter.

Ludouicum Regem Francorum, and Alienor Reginam vxorem suam, propterea quod diff^mata esset de adulterio, Etiam cum Infideli, and qui de genere fuit Diaboli. Let vs deliuer his wo^des more clearely.
Guy, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictou, had by Adelaida of Nauarre (of others named Ermesinda) Daughter to Don Garcia, Sixt of that name, King of Nauarre, two Children, to wit, William and Mary who was Lady of Melle, and of L^signan in Poictou, of which Seigneuries shee was called Mellusina, and married with Raymond de Croisic, Count de Forest in Bretaigne, which is in the Ile de Ruis (sometime called The firme Iland) where is an Abbey which beareth the same name, whereof Peter Abaylard Breton (Founder of that of Paraclet,Peter Abaylard Founder of the Abbey called Paracletum. betweene Noyant on Seyne, and Troyes in Champaigne) was Abbot sometime, and managed it in such sort, as himselfe describeth in his owne life.
William Duke of Aquitaine the Fourth, and Third Count of Poictou of that name, by his Wife Gisle, Daughter to William Duke of Normandy, had a Sonne (bearing the same name as his Father and Grandfather did) Fift of the name, Duke of Aquitaine, and Fourth Count of Poictou. Who by Ioane, Daughter to a King of Scotland, had two Daughters: A^lianor, Wife to King Lewes the Seauenth, called the Deuout, and Peronella, married to the Count of Vermandois Raoull the younger, Sonne to the Elder Sonne of Monsieur Hugues de France, tearmed the Great, Brother to King Philip the First.
This William, at the beginning of his gouerning, was a cruell and vnruly Prince, robbing Churches, and contemning the Ministers of them. But being exhorted by Saint Bernard,Saint Bernard Founder of Cleruaux. Founder of Cleruaux (a Monke of holy life) hee tooke better courses, repenting and making satisfaction for his offences; hee went the Voyages of our Lady of Mont-Serrat, Saint Iames in Spayne, and to Ierusalem.
At his returne from them, after hee had visited the places of deuotion at Rome, hee, and three of his Seruants, withdrew into Toscane, the Territory of Sienna, neere to Chastillon, a place very Desert and solitary (sometime called Stabulam Rhodis, and at this instant Male-Val) where the said William,The G^^l^mines founded by this repentant William. Founder of the Religious Guillemins, after his owne name (called White Cloakes at Paris) happily departed out of this life, about the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred and Forty, but according to some, Fifty Sixe.
King Lewes the Deuout and Pittifull, being Crossed in the Councell of Vezelay, for the Voyage ouer the Seas; tooke his Wife Queene A^lianor in company with him. Shee affecting change, complained among her Houshold People, that shee was married to a Monke: I alledge the words of Mathew Paris* throughout the History of England in his time,Queene Aelianor grew ^namo^^ed of Saladine. and not any other. Shee became enamoured of a Prince of the Sarazens, named Saladine, who was famed to bee a braue and valiant Knight, in the Barriers belonging to the Goddesse of Loue, and Letters hauing flowne from either side (pretending matter of other subiect) an enteruiew was made between the Kings and Christian Princes, with consent of Saladine, at Melande, where hauing seene Queen Aelianor at his pleasure, he became so wounded; that the sore (hauing long time festered) gaue further instruction for recuring, and (in time) succeeded to the rest. Nulla t^m occlusae fores, quin pateat aditus Feli, and Adultero* so say the Greekes as a common Prouerbe.
Saladine b^nt^full in his (...)All such Christian Prisoners, as shee desired to haue of the said Prince Saladine, were speedily sent her well cloathed, and without any ransome. These familiarities were the cause, that the King her Husband, and the Christian Princes (there assembled for the good of Christendome) would haue had her made some assignation and rendeuous to the said Saladine, for the surprizing of him by an Ambuscado: which shee would neuer yeeld to doe, but contrariwise, gaue him aduertisement thereof, resoluing to make her selfe banquerout, both of God, her honor and husband, to follow Saladine.
Which caused the said Deuout King to returne home into France, where hee assembled the Prelates and Lords of his Parliament at Baugency on Loire, by whose Decree, hee separated himselfe from his Wife, alleadging the Orders prohibited by the Church, to Contract Marriage, and laying some blame on himselfe,

only to couer the honour of the said Aelianor, by whom hee had two Daughters married to two Brothers.
Mary to Henry le Large, Count Palatine of Champaigne, and Brie.
Alix, to Thibauld, Fourth of the name, Count of Blois.
But hee was reproued by his Councell, vpon good and iust cause, in regard hee gaue her liberty, to withdraw freely into her owne Lands, which were of very great extendure, and (by the meanes of this Diuorce) were very vnaduisedly disunited from the Crowne of France. Because in such occurrences he ought (imitating the Kings his Predecessors) to haue limited her to some place of assurance, and there haue giuen her leysure (during the remainder of her life time) to acknowledge her offence.
A^lianor was not long without company: For the yeare after her separation,She married againe with Henry the Sonne to Geoffery of Aniou. to wit, the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fifty One, shee espoused Henry (Eldest Sonne to Geoffery of Aniou, and the Empresse Mahauld of England) Duke of Normandy and Count of Aniou, Touraine and Maine, by his owne right, and by the iust Title of the said Aelianor his Wife, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictou; by meanes of which accessions, hee was one of the greatest and most potent Princes in the Kingdome of France. So that in the Yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fifty Two, Henry of Aniou crossed from Normandy into England, with a Fleete of two and thirty Shippes, well furnished with good Soldiours and prouision for Warre, where hee began rough encounters against King Stephen,The death of Eustace, s^nne to King Stephen. who the same yeare, and on the day of Saint Laurence, lost his Sonne Eustace of Bologne, by a sodaine and vnexpected death.
In the yeare Fifty and Three, the Prelates and Barons of England, endeuored to make peace betweene King Stephen and Duke Henry of Aniou, vpon these conditions: That the King should adopt, and accept (as his Sonne and Successour) the said Henry of Aniou in the Realme of England* yet the King himselfe to enioy his Royall right, all the rest of his life time.
Which being thus agreed on, and the States of England hauing sworn obeysance to Henry, and acknowledging him for their Prince, after the Kings decease: it fortuned that hee liued not long after, because he dyed the yeare following, the eight of the Calends of Nouember. So by his death, Henry of Aniou, Second of the name, in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fifty Foure, the Sunday before Christmasse, the fourteenth of the Calends of Ianuary,Henry of Aniou ^irnamed Short-Mantle, crowned King of England. was sollemnly crowned King of England at Westminster, by Thibauld Archbishop of Canterbury. This Henry was called Short-Mantle, because hee delighted to goe cloathed in short Garments.
In the Yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fifty Two, Queene A^lianor was deliuered in Childbed of her first Sonne, whom our Histories call Henry, and Mathew Paris William. Eodem Anno natus est Dux Henrico ex Aelienore vxore sua Filius, and vocatus est Willielmus, quod peoprium nomen est Dux Aquitanorum and Commitibus Andegauensium. But this childe (according to the said Paris) died the yeare an Hundred, Fifty Sixe.
The same Author maketh this Henry, Second Sonne, of whom he appointeth the birth to bee in the yeare an Hundred. Fifty Fiue, and in the City of London the chiefe City of England. Natus est Londonijs pridie Calendas Martij, Henrico nono Anglorum Regi, ex Regina A^lienore Filius legitimus, and vocatus est Henricus.
In the same yeare,The Conquest o^ Ireland intended by the King. the said second King Henry resolued on the Conquest of Ireland, whereof he demanded the title, and permission to conquer it, of Pope Adrian, paying yearely for euery house, one penny of an hundred, into the Treasury of Saint Peter, which was granted vnto him.
The yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fifty and Seauen, was borne Richard, third Sonne of King Henry and Queene Aelianor, in the City of Oxford in England. And the yeare following, the said Aelianor lay in of a fourth Sonne, who was named Geoffrey. And the Chancellour of England Thomas Becket, went on the behalfe of the King his Maister, to demand in Marriage Madame Margaret of France, Daughter to King Lewes the younger, and of Queene Cons^ance, Daughter to AlAlphonso,

seauenth Knig of Castile,A Marriage for the young Prince of England Henry. for the Prince of England Henry, then aged but three or foure yeares onely, which was granted to him.
In the yeare One Thousand, One Hundred, Sixty Two, Queene Aelianor was deliuered of a Daughter at Rouen, who had the name of her Mother Aelianor, and who in the yeare,King Lewes of France Sirnamed the Lyon. One Thousand, One Hundred, Sixty Nine, was Wife to Alphonso, Eight of the name, King of Castile. And of this Marriage was borne, the wise and vertuous Queene Blanche, Wife to King Lewes, Eight of the name (Sirnamed the Lyon, for his inuincible courage, and of Mont-pensier, because that after the taking the City of Auignion from the Albigeois Heretiques, where hee was imprisoned, and returning into France, hee dyed at Montpensier in Auuergne) and of this Marriage was borne the King S. Lewes, and many other children.
Mahauld, or Ma^an other Daughter m^rri^d to the Duke of Saxony.Formerly, this Aelianor, Wife to Alphonso King of Castile, had another Daughter named Mahauld (as wee vnderstand by the said Mathew Paris) who was married to the Duke of Saxony Henry, Father to the Emperour Otho, fourth of the name, (of whom we haue spoken in our Second Booke) who, in the right of his Mother contended (but to no purpose or benefit) for the Kingdome of England, after the death of his Vncles, and the marders committed on the persons of Arthur and A^lianor of Bretaigne (children to the Prince Geoffrey of Bretaigne) by the meanes and in the right of Constance his Wife, and of Richmond his chiefe claime, by King Iohn Without-Land, their Paternall Vncle.
Of this Alliance of Mahauld of England, and Henry Duke of Saxony, Mathew Paris, saith. Anno Domini, M.C LXV. Reginaldus Coloniensis Archiepiscopus venit ad West-m^nasterium ad Regem Henricum, accepturus in coniugem Matildem Filiam Regis Pr^mogenitam Henrico Saxoniae Duci.
Raymond, Co^n^ of Tolos^ (...) ^itted C^r^stian buriall.In the same yeare Queene Aelianor had another Daughter, who was called Ioane, Wife in first Marriage to William King of Sicilie. In her second Marriage, shee espoused Raymond de Saint Gilles, Count of Tolosa, fourth of the name, Protectour of the Albig^ois Heretiques. For this reason in my Manuscript Chron^cle, concerning the life of this Count of Tholosa, and of Simon de Mont-fort his aduersary, I tearme it P^ssime Herese, according to the language of the time. And for this cause, Raymond the younger his Sonne, and last Count of Tholosa, could neuer obtaine power and permission of the Church, to bury the body of the said old Count Raymond ^is Father, in any hallowed ground, or to take it out of the prophane place, where yet his Graue is to be seene in the Garden of the Commandery of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, neere to the Dealeade.
The birth of King Iohn Sirnamed Without Land.In the yeare, an Hundred, Sixty Sixe, the said Queene A^lianor was deliuered of a Sonne, who had to name Iohn, and was Sirnamed (by his Father) Without Land.
Now the Count of Bretaigne Conan being dead, in the Yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Sixty Eight, Constance, Daughter and Sister to the Kings of Scotland; left by his Wife but one Daughter (bearing the name of her Mother) as his onely Heyre, whom the King of England caused to be espoused to his third Son Geoffrey, whom the King of England caused to be espoused to his third Sonne Geoffry, who was Count of Bretaigne, in the right of his Wife Constance, as we haue already said in the Tract of the Ermine.
King Henry cau^^d his Son to be (...) King (...)In the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, and Seauenty, the fourth of the Calends of Iuly, King Henry the Second caused his Eldest Sonne Henry to be crowned King of England (then aged about fifteene yeares) by Roger, Archbishop of yorke, and the Bishops Suffragans to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
The de^th of Bec^et Archbi^ho^ of Canterbury.In the yeare after the said Coronation, Thomas Becket (whose Genealogie wee haue set downe in our History of Nauarre) Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of England, was slaine in his Church, on a Tuesday morning in the feast of Christmas* One Thousand, One Hundred, Seauenty One. Hee was the yeare following Canonized, and rancked among the Saints Martyrs, his Graue reported to bee night and day full of Miracles: The foure Murderers which had slaine him, and the King of England Henry (reputed to bee Author of the Murder) were excommunicated by the Pope. And during that yeare, the Primatiall Church, being without diuine Seruice in it, had the Altars vnpaued, and the whole Church likewise, as

^eft naked, and the Belles vn-hung, in signe of sorrow and sadnesse, vntill the Day of Saint Thomas the Apostle, when by authority from the Pope, the Church was pu^ified, and diuine Seruice againe restored, by Bartholmew the Bishop of Oxford, who, ^here celebrated Masse, and made a Sermon beginning with these words: Secun^um multitudinem dolorum meorum in corde meo, consolationes tuae laetificant animam ^eam.
And the yeare following,King Henry a^solued by the Pope, and tyed to st^ict conditions both Father and Sonne. King Henry the Father had his Absolution from the Pope, with many conditions and satisfactions, as well to the Church of Canterbury ^s to the Kindred and friends of the reputed Martyr Saint Thomas of Canterbury, de spoyled of their goods, and banished out of England; with charge also to send (as his owne cost) Two Hundred men of Armes for one whole yeare, ouer the Seas, to fight with the Sarrazins in the Holy Land.
This was done in Normandy, and the Kings, both Father and Sonne, promised and sware to fulfill the Conditions in euery poynt, according as they were prescribed by Albert and Theodore, Cardinalls and Legates to Pope Alexander, Third of that name.
This being done, the young King returned into England, leading with him his newly espoused Wife, Madame Margaret of France, crowned Queene by Retrou,The yong King com^ing into England with his n^wly espoused Q^n. Archbishop of Rouen, assisted with the Suffragans, belonging to the Primacy of Canterbury, the Second of the Calends of September, in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Seauenty Two.
The next yeare ensuing, the young King Henry tooke Armes against his Father,The young King (...) against hi^ Fa^h^. in such sort, as all England was (in an instant) filled with partialities, taking and retaking Townes and places, with robberies, slaughters and murders; as was prophesied before by the Martyre Saint Thomas, and before his death. The young King withdrawing himselfe out of England, went into France, to King Lewes the younger, his Fa^h^r in Law, with him were ioyned his Brethren, Richard Duke of Aquitaine, and Geoffrey, Count of Bretaigne, by the aduice and councell of A^lianor their Mother. So the Kings Father was punished for Beckets death,Queen^ ^lianor ^e^th the Sonn^* against their Father. by the fruit of his owne loynes, who still pursued him (saith Mathew Paris) euen to death. But by mediation of King Lewes the Seauenth, peace was made betweene the Father and his Sonnes, who (according to their duty) desired pardon of him, because they had risen and rebelled in Armes against him.
It fortuned in the yeare One Thousand, One Hundred, Foure Score and Three that the King Father would compell his Sonnes, Richard Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of P^ictou, by his Mother, and Geoffrey the Count of Bretaign^, in right of his Wife Constance, to doe homage for their Lands to their Elder Brother King Henry the younger. Against which they opposed themselues, saying* That they were men, and faithfull Subiects to the King of France, their Soueraigne Lord, and so were they not to him of England.
This refusall was the cause that the Father leuied an Army,The de^th of King Henry the younger in France. which hee committed to the Conduct of his Sonne King Henry, to make them obey him. But while the busines went forward, Henry the young King dyed in the Flower of his age (being aged eight and twenty yeares) on Saint Barnabies day, in the same yeare, Foure Score and Three, and was buried before the High Altar in the chiefe Church of Rouen.
Queene Margaret, his Widdow, was afterward remarried to Bela King of Hungary; after whose death, shee spent the rest of her life in the Holy-Land, and was buried in the City of Acres.His Queene bur^ed in the City of Acres. The forenamed King Henry the younger deceased without issue, in the Castell of Martell, in the Vicounty of Turen, thus writeth Mathew Paris. In s^ore ^uuentutis ^uae cum annum aetatis Vigesimum Octauum compleuisset, intra Gasconiam, in illotractu terra, quae Torroina dicitur, apud Castellum Martel, in fes^o Sancti Barnabae Apostoli, Rex iunior e medio substractus est.
This death was followed with that of his Third Brother,The death of Geoffry Count of Bretaigne. Geoffrey Count of Bretaigne, hee deceasing at Paris, as we haue obserued in the Third Booke, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred, Foure Score and Sixe. Eodem anno Gaufridus Comes Britanniae, and Regis Angliae Pilius diem clausit supremum, Decimo Quarto

Kalendas Septembris, and sepultus est Parisijs, in Ecclesia beatae Mariae in choro Cam^rum. Reliquit autem duas filias, quas genuerat ex Constantia vxore eius filia, videlicet Ca^ani Comitis Britanniae, quae etiam tempore quo vir eius obijt grauida fuit, quae postea pariens Arturum illum vocauit.
Two yeares after, the King of France Phillip Augustus, by force of Armes constrained the said King Henry the second,The death of King Henry the second at Chiron in France. to make peace with his Sonne Richard, and as well to resigne to him the Kingdome of England, as also whatsoeuer he possessed in France by his Fathers inheritance. Which being done at Tours, he came to Chinon, where (in griefe) he tooke his bed, and three dayes after this agreement, he dyed at the said place of Chinon, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and eight, the Octaues of Saint Peter in Iune. As they carried his body to be interred in the Monastery of Font-Eurauld, Royally cloathed, the Crowne of Gold on his head, rich Gloues on his hands, Buskins of cloath of gold on his legges, guilt Spurres on his heeles, his great Seale on his finger, the Scepter in his hand, and Sword by his side; hauing his face bare and vncouered: Richard his Sonne, came running to the conuoye,The dead Kings body bled at the presence of his Son Richard. and presenting himselfe before the corps, suddenly blood started forth at the nose of the dead King, and ran out extreamely boyling. Consestim erupit sanguis ex naribus Regis mortui, ac si indignaretur spiritus in aduentu eius, qui eiusdem mortis causa esse credebatur, vt videretur sanguis clamare ad Deum: So saith Mathew Paris. Such sights are ordinarily seene, at the approachings and confrontings of murderers of the murdered. And this accident was followed by the death of Mahaula, wife to the Duke of Saxon, Daughter to the said King Henry the second, shee being come into England, and grieuing for the decease of her Father.
In his estate and dignities succeeded Richard, first of the name, and for the first act of his reigne, he set at libertie Queene Aelianor his Mother, whom the King her husband had kept in strict imprisonment. Fifteene yeares he had continued in England, in the Ides of August, and after he was absolued by the Archbishops of Canterburie, of Rouen and of Treues, because he had borne Armes, and made warre so many times against his Father: he proceeded to his Sacring and Coronation, which is perticularly described by Mathew Paris,The Sacring and Crowning of King Richard the first. because the Crowne of England, being falne into the house of the Counts of Aniou; many ceremonies were therein vsed, belonging to that of the most Christian Kings of France, to whom they were allied.
The meeting appointed to be at Westminster, and not at London, the chiefe Citie of the Kingdome,The manner of the Royall pompe in performance. the Clergie in order went foremost with the Crosse, holy Water and perfuming Censors, cloathed in their goodliest Coapes, followed by Archbishops, Bishops and Abbots in their Pontificall habits. So went they on to the doore of Duke Richards Chamber, whence they conducted him into the Church and royall Chappell of Westminster, and before the high Altar thereof, in a solemne Procession. In the midst of the Bishops and Cleargie, went foure Barons, each bearing a rich Candlesticke, with waxe tapers lighted in them, being followed by two Earles, the first whereof carried the Scepter Royall, on the top whereof was a signe or ma^ke of Gold (Mathew Paris doth not expresse it, Sceptrum Regale; in cuius su^mitate signum erat aureum) and the other a royall Rod, hauing a Doue on the end thereof. After them went two other Earles, and one in the midst of them, who carried three Swords in faire guilded Scabards. Next followed sixe Earles and Barons, bearing an Exchecker (portantes Scacarium vnum) whereon were the Royall ornaments, after which followed the Earle of Excester alone, bearing aloft the Crowne Royall, enriched with infinite precious Stones, and then went the King betweene two Bishops, ouer whose head foure Barons carried a goodly Canopie or Heauen of State, on foure golden Lances.
Being come to the Altar, before the people and Cleargie, the King sware vpon the Euangelists, and many Reliques of Saints, to giue (all his life time) due honour and reuerence to God, to his holy Church, and to the Pastours thereof; he swore and promised also, to render good Iustice to the people, whom God had committed to his charge; to abolish all euill Lawes and bad customes, and to ordaine such

as are good. Which words being spoken, the Bishops and Chamberlaines attending on him, tooke off his ordenary garments, except his Breeches and Shirt, which was made open and vnsowne vpon his shoulders. And then Baldwine, Archbishop of Canterburie, consecrated and annointed him with holy Oyle in Foure parts,The Kings body annointed in^o^er seuerall places. on his Head, his Shoulders, and his right Arme: All which while, the Quire sung the vsuall Prayers, which commonly are exercised in such Ceremonies, couering his head with a hallowed Cappe of fine Linnen, and putting also a Bonnet thereon. Posito deinde super caput eius panno lineo sacrato, pileum desuper posuit. And after they had put on his Sandales, ^issued and wrought with Gold, then they brought him his Royall Ornaments, namely the Tunick and Dalmaticke, and then the Archbishop gaue the Sword into his hand, for the punishment of such as should doe euill to the Church.
This being done, two Earles did put on his Spurres, and cloathed him with the royall Cloak (of crimosine Veluet, thick powdred with golden Leopards) the Archbishop gaue him expresse charge, in the high name of God Almighty, to publish openly and aloud, whether he was resolued to obserue and keepe intirely, all those things whereto he was sworne, or no. Whereto the King answered, that (by the helpe of God) he would faithfully keepe whatsoeuer hee had promised, without fraud or false meaning. And then the King went to take the Crowne on the Altar, which he deliuered into the hands of the Archbishop, who hauing crowned the King therewith, put the Scepter Royall into his right hand, and the Rod of Iustice into the left, and with these adornements he was conducted to his Throane, by the Bishops and Barons, the Crosse, Candlesticks and three Swords being borne before him in such manner as formerly hath bin related.
The same was done at the Offering, at the Agnus Dei, at kissing the Paxe, and at the Procession after high Masse. Returning into the Quire againe, the King was deuested of his Royall Ornaments, for putting on other more light, and going all in order to the Royall Dinner, the Archbishop of Canterbury, being seated in the most eminent place of the Table, on the right hand of the King, the other Archbishops, Bishops, Earles and Barons, according to their rancke and dignitie, were seated in order, and then followed the people and Cleargie. This Coronation was performed on Sunday, the third of the Nones of September, in the said yeare, one thousand one hundred fourescore and eight, and on the morrow, he receiued the Homages of the Lords of the Kingdome.
This Richard, sirnamed Coeur de Lyon, for his valiancie,King Richard Sirnamed Coeur de Lyon for his valiancie, and his voyage to the Holy-Land. went in the voyage beyond the Seas, with King Phillip Augustus, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and tenne. Which voyage is amply described by Mathew Paris, but maketh no matter to our discourse, wherefore we will let passe in silence, the particularities remarked by the said Mathew Paris. Both the Kings tooke Shipping at Marseilles, where they deuided themselues, King Phillip shaping his course for Geneway, and the King of England sayling to Messina in Sicilie.
Richard (at his returne) endured ten thousand afflictions, whereof briefely behold the subiect. In the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and twelue,The briefe History of his returning home and many miseries by the Duke of Austria. Leopold Duke of Austria came into the holy Land, to beare Armes there, as other Christian Princes did. At his Arriuall, the Marshall of his Campe hauing marked out a Lodging for the Duke his Maister, planted downe his Tent and his Ensigne on it. A Norman, being a follower to King Richard, maintained, that the lodging place belonged to him. From words they fell to blowes, and Richard, without vnderstanding the reasons of the parties, caused the Duke of Austriaes Tent and Ensigne to be pul'd downe, and hurl'd (vpon a heape) into a ditch of mire. The Duke made complaint to Richard, to haue reparation of this offence, but he payed him with derision: whereupon, the Duke seeing he was despised, desired God to doe reason for him, and then he would remit the iniurie.
Richard, after he had done wonderfull deedes in the Holy-Land, was aduertised, that his Brother Iohn without Land,The first occasion of the quarrell. sought to possesse himselfe of the Kingdome of England, which made him resolue of returning home. And being on the Sea, with the Queene Berengaria of Nauarre his wife, and Ioan of Sicilie her Sister, he so continued

seauen weekes together, suffering infinite miseries, and lastly was cast on the coast of Barbarie, from whence (within the space of three dayes) he might haue bin at Marseilleis. But fearing the Count of S. Gilles and of Prouince, with whom he had dealte but hollowlie in the Holy-land:King Richard returne thorow Germanie he determined to shape his course thorow Germanie, and from thence passe for England, without aduenturing into France, where Phillip Augustus kept a choaking Peare in store for him, to quench his thirst.
Heerupon he put to Sea againe, accompanied with three men only, to wit Baldwi^e of Bethon, Maister Phillip his Clearke, and Anselme his Chaplaine, and some Brethren Templers, who for their owne preseruation, went to the Land on coasts of Scl^nia, from the Port of Gazara, whether Richard sent one of his people, to the neerest Castle, for a Pasport from the Lord thereof, that he might trauaile thorow his Lands in safetie. The Lord of this Prouince was Nephew to the Marquesse of Mont-fera^, slaine by an Assassine some while before, by intelligence of the said Richard, as some reported. Richard being in his iourney, had bought of a Ieweller of Pisa three Rubies, valuing the sum of nine hundred Bezans, and had caused them to be beautified with curious workemanship.Three costly Iewelles bought by King Richard. One of them he sent to the Lord of the Prouince, who desired to know of the messenger, what he was, that should send him such a p^^sent. Answere was made, that they were Voyagers, returning from the Holy-Land, the chiefe wherof was named Baldwine of Bethon, with his associate, and a Merchant, named Hugo, who sent him that Iewell. The Lord looking aduisedly on it, said to the messenger: That Merchant is King Richard, I know it by this King. And although I haue sworne a sollemne oath, to stay all Pilgrimes returning from the Holy-land, without taking any thing of,The honourable minde of the Lord. or from them: yet notwithstanding, for the beautie of this present, and dignitie of him that sent it; I return him backe his Ring, and licence to passe freely through my countries.
The messenger reported to King Richard what had hapned, and being much affraid of stay in his enemies countries, Richard and his followers, being furnished with hired horsses, departed secretly from the Porte. They were (neuerthelesse) pursued on the Lords behalfe, by Spies, that had giuen intelligence to his Brother (who was an other Lord of the same Prouince) in hope of taking Richard, if he passed thorow his lands* Richard arriuing (vnluckilie) in the Cittie where the same Lord dwelt, vpon aduertisment of his Brother,Great wait and s^a^ch laid for King Richard. he commanded a man, whom he held to be most faithfull of all his followers, (named Roger, a Norman by nation, and borne in Argentane, who had continued twentie yeares in his seruice, and enioyed his Niece in marrige) to visite and search exactly all the Innes in the Cittie, wherof he would giue him the halfe in propritie, if he could discouer the King of England.
Roger discouered him, making himselfe knowne to be a Norman, giuing him aduer^i^ment,The honest dealing of Roger the Norma^ with King Richard. what search was made for him, and aduising him withall (for his good) to dislodge thence so soone as he could, sending him a very good Horsse. Now, while Richard was prouiding for his escape, Roger fed his Lord with nothing but lies and fables: that it was a man named Baldwine of Bethon (and not King Richard) and companions of his returning home from the Holy-land. But the Lord not satisfied with this answere, made stay of all of them in the Innes.
Richard saued himselfe by a more prosperous wind, with one named Guillannie de l' Estang, and a Boy, that vnderstood the Germaine tongue, trauayling three dayes and nights, without receiuing any sustenance, or tarying in any place. But hunger pressing them extreamely, they came to lodge in a Towne, being neere to the Kiuer of Danubie, named Gynatia in Austria, as saith Mathew Paris, but according to the Histories of Germanie (which I haue read) it is called Erdbourg, where then remained Leopold, Duke of Austria, to welcome Richard thither, like him falne out of a Feauer, into a farre worse disease.Leopold Duke of Austria narrowly watch^ng for King Richard. Being come to his Inne, he sent his Boy to make prouision for him in the Market, where the Boy shewing his pursse to be full of Bezans, and buying very exquisite victuals: he was stayed by the inhabitants of the Towne, to vnderstand further of his condition. Hauing certefied them, that he belonged to a wealthie Merchant, who would arriue there within three dayes; they pe^mitted him to depart. Richard being heerof aduertised, and much distasted in his health, by so many hard sufferances on the Seas, and perillous passages on the wayes: concluded, to repose there

some few dayes in the Towne. During which time the Boy alwayes made their prouision of food. But by ill accident, on the day of Saint Thomas the Apostle, the Boy being in the Market, chaunced (through neglect) to haue King Richards Gloues tuckt vnder his Girdle. The Magistrate of the Towne o^seruing it, tooke the Boy, and gaue him torment, to make him confesse whose Gloues they were. The power of punishment, and threates, to haue his tongue cut out of his head, compelled him to tell the trueth. So in short while after, the Duke of Austria hearing the tydings,King Richard taken by the Duke of Austria, and his hard vsage to him. engirt the Inne where Richard was (with a band of armed men, and Richard) with his Sword in his hand yielded himselfe to the Duke, which kept him strongly enuironed with well armed Souldiours, who watched him night and day, with their Swords readie drawne. This is the affirmation of Mathew Paris, concerning the surprizall of King Richard.
But I haue read an ancient Manuscript of old Poesies, written about those very ^imes, which reporteth this Historie otherwise. Saying,The History related another way. that Richard being in his ^nne, disguised himselfe like a seruant Cooke, larding his meate, broching it, and then turning it at the fire himselfe. In which time, one of the Duke of Austrieas fol^owers, being then in the Inne, came (accidentally) into the Kitchin, who tooke know^edge of this Royall Co^ke, not by his face, which he had purposely disfigured with ^he soyling of the Kitchin; but by a Ring of Gold, which (very vnaduisedly) he wore on his finger. This man, ran immediatly and aduertised the Duke his Maister, that the King of England was within the compasse of his power, and vpon this aduertisement Richard was arrested.
In the yeare following, namely, One thousand one hundted fourescore and thirteen ^he Duke sold King Richard to the Emperor Henry,The Duke of Austria sold King Richard to the Emperor for the sum of threescore thou^and pounds of Siluer, the pounds answering the weight and order obserued at Cologne. With which sum Leopold towred the wals of the Citie of Vienna in Austria, and bought ^he Duchie of Styria, Neopurg, and the Counties of Lins and Wels, of the Bishops of ^assau and of Wirtspourg. So speaketh the Latin Chronicle of Otho of Austria, Bishop ^f Frisinghen, for these perticularities were forgotten by Mathew Paris, who further ^aith: That in the same yeere of fourescore and thirteene, the third holy day after Palme-Sunday, Leopold led Richard prisoner to the Emperor, who sent him vnder sure ^uard to the Tribales. Retrudi eum praecepit in Triballis, a quo carcere nullus ante dies ^tos exiuit, qui ibidem intrauit: de quo Aristoteles Libro Quinto. Bonum est mactare Pa^em in Triballis; and alibi,
Sunt loca, sunt gentes, quibus est mactare parentes.
The Englishmen were more then a whole yeare,A pretty History concerning the finding of King Richard by a Minstrell. without hearing any tydings of ^heir King, or in what place he was kept prisoner. He had trained vp in his Court a Ri^er or Minstrill, called Blondell de Nesle, who (so saith the Manuscript of old Poesies, ^nd an auncient Manuscript French Chronicle) being so long without the sight of his ^ord, his life seemed wearisome to him, and he became much confounded with me^ncholly. Knowne it was, that he came backe from the Holy Land, but none could ^ell in what Countrey he arriued. Whereupon this Blondel, resoluing to make search ^or him in many Countries, but he would heare some newes of him; after expence ^f diuers dayes in trauaile, he came to a Towne (by good hap) neere to the Castell ^here his Maister King Richard was kept. Of his Host he demanded, to whom the Castell appertained, and the Host told him, that it belonged to the Duke of Austria. Then he enquired, whether any prisoners were therein detained, or no; for alwayes ^e made such secret questionings, wheresoeuer he came; and the Hoste gaue answer, ^t there was one onely Prisoner, but he knew not what he was, and yet he had bin ^etained there more then the space of a yeare. When Blondel heard this, he wrought ^ch meanes, that he became acquainted with them of the Castell, as Minstrels doe ^sily win acquaintance any where; but see the King he could not, neither vndersta^d ^at it was h^. One day he sat directly before a window of the Castell,Blondel singeth a French Song, made by his Lord and himselfe. where King ^chard was kept prisoner, and began to sing a Song in French, which King Richard ^d Blondel had sometime composed together. When King Richard heard the Song, (...) knew it was Blondel that sung it, and when Blondel paused at halfe of the Song, the ^ng entreated him to sing the rest. Thus Blondel won knowledge of the King his

Maister, and returning home into England, made the Barons of the Countrie acquainted where the King was.
Otho Frisinghensis reporteth, that Pope Leo then ruling the Church, excomm^nicated the said Leopold,The Pope offended at the hand vsage of Pilgrim^, and detaining of King Richard. because by the like imprisoning, the Pilgrimes returning from the Holy-Land, were greatly wronged, the voyage intermitted and impeached, to the great preiudice and hinderance of the Latines of the East. And that the Emperour Henry preuailed by money, to get into his power the King of England (as he did) and kept him vnder sure guard, strongly giued and fettered in the Citie of Wormes, where the Emperor then remained, who made co^position for the said Princes ransome, raising therby a great sum of monie. Mathew Paris speaketh nothing of this fulmination.
Onely he saith, by the pursuite and dilligence of Hugh, Abbot of Cluny, and Wi^am, Chancellour of England, the Emperour held a Diet in Germanie, whereat were assembled the Bishops, Dukes and Counts of the Empire, whether he brought King Richard,Imputations laid ^pon King Richard by the Emperour at the Die^. and charged him with many infamous actions.
1. First of all, that by his counsel and meanes, he had lost the Kingdome of Apug^ and that of Sicilie, which belonged to him by hereditary right, after the death of King William, and for the recouery whereof, he had spent vnspeakable sums of monie, an^ brought a puissant Armie thither to none effect, wherein King Richard promised h^ assistance faithfully, and to mediate with Tancred, to restore the said Kingdomes to him.
2. Concerning the Kingdome of Cyprus, that in pride and brauery, he had pre^^med thereon, which appertained to his kinsman and allie, whom he had vniustly, and without any grounded reason despoiled, and put in prison rigorously, inuading h^^ Treasures and Realme and selling it to a stranger Prince.
3. With the death of the valiant Marquesse of Montferrat, heire to the said Emperor, whom he had traiterously pursued, and so wrought with the Arsacides, that inhumanely they murdered him.
4. That on the like occasion, he had sent the Arsacides, to massacre the King o^ France his Soueraigne Lo^d Phillip Augustus, by an insigne trechery, against the oath and homage which he had sworne vnto him.
5. And that by an act of ouer-weening pride and rashnesse, to wrong the Prince^ which went to the Holy-land in his time, he had pul'd downe the Standard of his Cou^ne the Duke of Austria, and threw it into a Ditch at the Port of Iaph, vsing word^ of arrogancie and ini^rie, against the Germaine Natton.
King Richard defended himselfe worthily, washing his hands by the best meane he could d^uise;King Richard compounded with the Emperor for his ransome. and yet neuerthelesse, to get out of the Emperors fingers, he was constrained to compound and pay to the said Emperor, an hundred and fortie thousan^ Markes of money (according to the poize of Cologne) for his ransome, whereof h^ paied part ready downe, and gaue sufficient Hostages for the rest.
Prince Iohn his proceedings against his Brother.During the imprisonment of King Richard, Earle Iohn without Land his Brother beleeuing he should neuer come home againe; laboured to possesse himselfe of th^ Kingdome of England, and of the Seigneuries belonging to the Crowne of France.
In this designe he was fauoured by the King Phillip Augustus, in hatred of th^ which King Richard had said vnto him, being in Sicilie, that Alix his Sister, whom h^ had long time fianced, should neuer haue any thing of him. So saith Rigordus for (...) especiall obseruation, and that this was the true sourse, whence sprung the mallice betweene these two great Princes, in their voyage to the Holy-land. Which neuerthelesse, Mathew Paris hath not spared to touch, to impose the blame on Phillip August^^ whom he taxeth at euery word, to discharge his owne King Richard, who (by his returne) disappointed his so forward Brother.
In the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and fifteene, King Richard se^ his Ambassadors to the Holy See,^^ng Richard (...). and to the Pope, to complain and craue iustice, for th^ outrages he receiued by Leopold Duke of Austria, who had staied him as a prisone^ returning from his perillous voyage of the Holy-land, and vsed him otherwise, the^ a Prince of his qualitie ought to be; that he had sold him to the Emperor, as if he ha^ bin an Oxe or an Asse (these are the very words of Mathew Paris) and that both o^ them together, intended to ruinate his Kingdome, by the excessiue value of his ra^some. That both these Princes (although they were Christians) had worse dea^

with him, then Saladine could haue done, a vowed enemy to the Christians, if by hazard of the Warre, he should haue fallen into his hands, against which Saladine the said Richard was come to fight, from one of the corners of the World, to the other, abandoning his Kingdome wherein he was but newly seated, his deare Countrey, Kindred and friends. That therefore the Pope should command the said Leopold and others, to send him the Hostages, which he and they kept for the rest of his ransome, restoring that againe vnto him, which they had vniustly extorted from him, with all his expences, damages, and interests, as well to him as his people, whom they had abused.
Pope Celestine the Third,The Duke of Austria excommunicated by Pope Celestine and his Lands interdicted. after hee had three seuerall times summoned the Duke of Austria Leopold; by the aduise of his Cardinals, he excommunicated particularly and namely the said Leopold, and generally all them that had ill entreated King Richard and his followers. Hee sent an interdiction on all the Lands of the said Duke, giuing charge and command to the Bishop of Veronna, to publish the Excommunication three seuerall Sundayes in all the Seigneuries belonging to the said Duke: who should still stand excommunicated, if hee did not restore to King Richard his Hostages, and the monies which he had exacted of him, with the expences, damages, and interests, for his so long time of detention.
The Duke lending a deafe eare to all this,Heauen reuenged the wr^gs of King Richard. Austria became afflicted with an vniuersall Pestilence and famine, the great Riuer of Danubie, mounting out of her bed and ordinary current, drowned and deuasted a great part thereof, and tenne thousand persons. The Duke managing his Horse vpon Saint Stephens day, brake one of his legges, whereinto the Gangrena falling, hee was glad to haue it quite cut off: but the disease extending vp into his thigh, the fire thereof so embraced the body of this miserable Duke; that acknowledging his fault, hee promised to satisfie the Popes Command. Whereupon, the Bishops of the Countrey, gaue him absolution of the Excommun^cation, which he had incurred,The death of the Duke of Austria. and ministred vnto him the Communion of the faithfull, and so hee dyed cruelly. His body remained a long time without burial, full of wormes crawling in it, because his Sons made no account of satisfying King Richard; to whom at length they sent his Hostages, so saith Mathew Paris.
But Otho of Austria, Bishop of Frisinghen, affirmeth, that the Pope excommunicated Leopold, and relateth his death in another manner. That falling (on a day) from his Horse, he brake his leg, and the affliction thereof causing him to detest the vanities of the world: hee became a Hermite of S. Augustines Order, leauing his Seigneuries to his Sonnes Leopold and Fredericke, And that hee died in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Foure Score and Foureteene.
The said King Richard in the last yeare of his Reigne, which was 1199. made war against the Poicteuins, who were become rebels vnto him, putting all to fire and sword.King Richard his Warre against the Poictouirs, and vnfortunate death. Finally, he came into Limosine, laid Siege before the Castle of Chaluz, where he was wounded with an arrow, and empoysoned Quarrell, shot from the said Castle by one named Peter Bazile; the seauenth of the Calends of Aprill. He liued twelue daies after, in which time the Castle was yeelded. The poyson reaching to the heart, King Richard dyed on Tuesday the eighteenth of the Ides of Aprill. Hee commanded his Entrailes and Bowels to be carried to Poictiers, his Heart to Rouen, and his Body to Font-Eurauld (for reasons alleadged by Mathew Paris) to be buried at the feet of his Father. Mathew relateth not the subiect of this besieging the Castle of Chaluz, and of Cabrit, because he would not taxe his Prince of Couetousn^sse.
But the Monke of S. Denis in France Rigordus, who liued at the same time,The reasons of King Richards war alleadged by Rogoraus the Monke of Saint Denis. enstructeth vs that there was a rich Treasury, for the pictures of the Emperor Charlemaigne, or of Lewes the debonnaire, his wiues and Children, Sons and Daughters, were seated at a Table made all of fine Gold. Thus you heare what he saith, and as it followeth.
Anno Domini M.C.XCIX. Sexta Idus Aprilis, Ricardus Rex, Angliae iuxta Lemouicam Ciuitatem grauiter vulneratus occubuit. Obsederat enim Castrum quoddam quod Calidum lucium (de Capreolo Lemouicenses vocant) hebdomada Passionis Dominicae occasi^ne cuiusdam the sauri, a quoddam Milite ibidem inuenti, quod ex nima ambitione a Vicecomite Lemouicensi instantissime sibi reddi petebat: Miles enim qui thesaurum inuenerat, ad

ipsum Vicecomitem confugerat. Dum vero Rex in obsidione Castri moram faceret, and per singulos dies ipsum Castrum viriliter impugnaret, Balistarius quidam ex improuiso, quarello transmisso, Regi Angliae lethale vulnus intulit, and paucis reuolutis diebus, viam vniuersae carnis ingressus est. Sepultus vero quiescit apud Fontem Ebrardi, in quadam Abbatia Monialium, iuxta Patrem suum. Thesaurus autem praedictus, vt ferebatur, fuerat Imperator quidam de Auro purissimo cum vxore and Filijs, and Filiabus ad mensam auream residentibus, qui Posteris, quo tempore fuerant, certam dabant memoriam. To the said King Richard the First, dying without Issue, and who (as we haue noted before) instituted for his Heyre and Successor his Nephew Arthur, Count of Bretaigne; succeeded (by force of Armes) his last Brother
King Iohn succeeded after his Brother Richard, and was crown^d at Rouen first.Iohn Without-Land, Earle of Mortaigne, who caused himselfe to bee crowned at Rouen, with the Ducall Circle of Normandy. Comes Iohannes Rotomagum veniens, in octauis Paschae, Gladio Ducatus Normanniae accintus est, in matrice Ecclesia, per ministerium Walteri Rotomagensis Archiepiscopi, vbi Archiepiscopus memoratus, ante maius Altare, in capite eius posuit Circulum Aureum, Habentem in summitate per Gyrum Rosulas Aureas artificialiter fabricatas. Behold how wee represent the Ducall Wreath or Garland,His Coronation at Westm^nster. which Mathew Paris calleth Circulum, the Circle, which is properly meant for Earles or Counts. His Sacring and Coronation performed at Westminster and at London, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Paul, on the Assension day, the Sixt of the Calends of Iune, in the said yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Foure Score and Nineteene, and the Oration of the Archbishop of Canterbury Hubert, reported by Mathew Paris; were presages of the misfortunes happening in England in his time, the Kingdome not appertaining to him, but to Arthur, the Count of Bretaigne. For so soone as hee heard of his Brothers death, hee made great diligence (by meanes of the old Queene his Mother Aelianor, and her partakers) to entrap the Children of Geoffrey of Bretaigne, his Brother, in such sort; that Constance, Mother to Arthur, the lawfull Heyre to deceased King Richard, speedily came to Paris, as into a place of assurance.
But within a while after, one Guillaume des Roches, to whom King Philip Augustus had giuen the gouernment of Mans, found meanes to perswade the said young Count A^thur, to make agreement with his Vncle Iohn Without-Land, promising him Mountaines and Vallyes, which were but words, only to bee possessed of him, which caused him to returne the sooner to Paris.
King Iohn (in the life time of King Richard his Brother) had espoused Her name was not Hau^sa but Isabell, and shee was third ^aughter, and one of the He^res of William ^aile of Glocester, Sonne of Robert Earle of Glocester, naturall Sonne of King Henry the ^^rst. Hauis^, Daughter to the Count of Glocester Robert, Bastard to the King of England Henry, First of that name, a rich Heyre, yet Iohn diuorced her, in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred. The reason of this Diuorce was thus grounded, because they were Kinne in the third Degree; in stead of whom hee tooke Isabell, only Daughter to the Count of Angoulesme, whom the Earle of March, Hugh of Lusignan, Sirnamed the Browne, had formerly espoused; so saith Mathew Paris. Duxit idem Rex Isabellam filiam Comitis Engoulesmi, quam prius susceperat in suam Hugo cognomento Brunus, Comes Marchiae, and Dominica prima ante festum Sancti Dionisij apud Westmonasterium consecratur in Reginam, quae copula postmodum Regi, and Regno Angliae magno detrimento fuit. Du Tillet saith, that this Queene Isabell, being Widdow to the said King Iohn, did marry againe with Hugh le Brun, by whom shee had many Children.
The opinion of the Monke ^i^ordus in this ^ase.To agree these two opinions, it is expedient to take that of Rigordus, Histriographer to King Philip Augustus, who (in his life) telleth vs, that this King conueyed away the Wife of the said Earle of March, because the said Hugh le Brun, the Viscount of Thouars, and Geoffrey of Lusignan (who were Vassailes to the King of England) withdrew themselues from his obeysance, (to his no little griefe and discontentment) and gaue themselues in seruice to King Philip Augustus. Sed quia Iohannes vxorem suam Hugoni Bruno in dolo abstulerat, filiam scilicet Comitis Engoulismensis, a fidelitate eius recesserunt, and Regi Francorum, datis obsidibus, confoederati sunt. But after the death of King Iohn, shee came againe to liue with her Husband.
In the same yeare, the Kings of France and England came to an enteruiew

at Vernon, where Count Arthur did Homage to his Vncle King Iohn,An enteruiew betweene the Kings of England and France. for the Countie of Bretaigne, which (as wee haue elsewhere said) was the Mesne-Fief of the Duchie of Normandy. But the said Arthur, fearing treason in his Vncle, continued in the Guard of the King of France, and what King Iohn could not compasse at two seuerall enteruiewes; he executed two yeares after, to wit, in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred and Two, being in the Castell of Falaize. By faire promises and flatteries, he won the said Arthur thither,King Iohn murdered Prince Arthur with his owne hands. whom hee sent soone after to New-Castle at Rouen, whither he followed him, and murdered him with his owne hands, and caused his body to bee cast into the Sea, so that it was neuer seene afterward. Hee compassed the meanes also, to get into his power the Sister of Arthur, whom he sent Prisoner into England, where she dyed.
The death of Count Arthur, lawfull Heyre to the Crowne of England,An Armie prepared for Normandie. being discouered, King Philip Augustus set on foote a potent Army, to possesse himselfe of Normandie and other Seigneuries, which the said Iohn Without-Land held in the Realme of France, declaring him also to bee guilty of high Treason, a Traytor disloyall, and a fellon to his owne blood, by Decree of the Court of Parliament, furnished with the Peeres, the King sitting in his Throane of Iustice, in the Hall of the Bishop of Paris, in mid-Lent, One Thousand, Two Hundred and Three, as it is reported by Mathew Paris. Prima praepositio fuit in praesentia Domini Papae (at Rome before Pope Innocent the Third) quod Arthurum Nepotem suum proprijs manibus per proditionem interfecit pessime Mortis genere, quod Angli Murder vocant. Pro facto idem Rex condemnatus fuit ad mortem in Curia Regis Francorum per Iudicium Parium suorum. Consuetudo enim est in Regno Francorum, Quod Rex habet omnimodo iurisdictionem in Homines ligios suos, and Rex Angliae erat suus homo ligius tanquam Comes, and Dux. Ergo licet alios Rex iniunctus, tamen tanquam Comes and Dux, erat de Iurisdictione Domini Regis Francorum. Sed si Comes and Dux in Regno Francorum delinqueret, posset, and deberet iudicari ad mortem per Pares suos. Imo, si non esset Dux vel Comes, vel Homo ligius Regis Franciae, and deliquisset in Regno Franciae, ratione delicti in Regno Franciae perpetrati, potuerunt cum Barones iudicare ad mortem. Alioquin, si Rex Angliae quia Rex erat iniunctus, non posset iuditari ad mortem, impune posset intrare Regnum Franciae, and interficere Barones Franciae, sicut interfecerat Arthurum. Such courses haue likewise past in diuers other Kingdomes, which (notwithstanding are not to bee produced as a warrantable ground or example for any other State to imitate.
At the same time, as this sentence was giuen against King Iohn,King Iohn much distasted by his ^ubiects. the Barons and great Lords of England, that were with him at Caen in Normandie; left him, forsooke his Seruice, and withdrew themselues into England; whither the King followed them, extorting of all his Noblemen, and of the Conuentuall and Parish Churches, the seauenth part of all their mouables, which begot him farre more ill will then before. As much he did in the yeare Two Hundred and Fiue, which hee continued the whole time of his Reigne.
In the yeare, Two Hundred and Seauen, on the day of Saint Remigius, Queene Isabell of England was deliuered of her Eldest Sonne Henry, by the name of the King his Grandfather.
King Iohn, for his robberies vsed against Churches, his Nobles,His colourable dealing with the Pope. and them of the third Estate of England, was long time excommunicated by Pope Innocent the Third, who sent his Legate Pandolph, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other Bishops expelled out of England, to him, to set him in the way of saluation, whereof hee made an outward appearance, and by faire promises, rendred to the Popes Legate the Crowne of England, which he receiued soone after at his hands, as if he held it of the holy Sea of Rome, whereto hee acknowledged himselfe Feudatory and Tributary, of a Thousand markes of money yearely. But his deuotion and repentance was of no long continuance, because, when hee saw himselfe absolued of the Censures thundered against him (which hee should haue feared, in regard of the place whence they came) hee grew worse and worse, and laboured to surcharge his Subiects with imposts and Subsidies.Heauie oppression of the People. Which made them to alienate themselues from their obedience, and from the affection which they had sworne to
(...)
Then beholding Thomas and Raoul with dreadfull lookes, and passing before them, he said: That they should come no more into his presence, and that their eyes should no more see his face; because the renowne, or rather infamy of their Apostate Master (meerely mad) did infect his sences with a stincking fauour.
A description of Robert of London.The Ambassadours preparing to depart with their short shame, the Ammirant began to obserue Robert of London, Priest to King Iohn, who was a little man and of blackish hayrie skinne, hauing one of his armes longer then the other, his fingers wrong placed, hauing two thumbes together on one hand, and his face like to a Iew or Tawnie More. He considered with him selfe, what misshapen men the King of England had made his choyce of, to be Ambassadours to him, vncapable to manage a matter of such importance, and especially his Sir Priest Robert, so ill formed as he was. Neuerthelesse he remem^red, that in a deformed body, there might be enclosed an apprehensiue spirit, and he prooue to be a crafty companion: for, beholding the crowne of his head to be shauen, he thought him thereby to be a Priest. He caused him to be called alone by himselfe, for the two other hauing onely spoken before him, the Priest kept the sile^t Clocke all the while.
Hauing thus made stay of him, and sent the two other thence in some disgrace, the Ammirant began to takle and conferre with him priuately, enquiring earnestly of him; if King Iohn his Master had any vertue in him,The Ammirants priuate conferr^ng with Robert of London. whereby to make himselfe commendable; if he had any generous children, of fayre expectation and hope; and whether he were pow^rfull in the acte of generation, or no: adding withall, that if Robert gaue him tales in stead of currant payment, hee would neuer after credit a Christian Priest. Robert hauing made oathe, by the faith of a Christian, and of a Priest; promised the Ammirant to tell him the trueth, in whatsoeuer he demaunded of him.
Robert his answree to the Ammirant, concerning King Iohn.First of all he assured him, that King Iohn was rather a Tyrant, then a King, rather a subuerter of his State, then a Gouernour; oppressing and treading downe his Subiect^, to loue, cherish and aduance Strangers. To his people he was terrible, and as rigorous as a Lyon; but to Strangers and Rebells a meere Sheepe. By his sloth and negligence, he had lost many Lands and Seigneuries, and had no other thirst or desire, but to lose and destroy the Kingdome of England. That he was insatiably couetous, dreaming on nothing night and day but to pill and poule his Subiects, to feather his owne neast, and p^ss^sse himselfe of others goods and possessions. As for the children begotten by him, hee had but few, and none that yeelded hope of worth in any thing, but euen like to their father. That he had maried a wife which hated him to the death, and he her in the same manner. A woman incestuous, a whore and adulteresse and Sorceresse (read the life of Saint Lewes, written by Sire de Ionuille, there you shall see the effects) conuinced many times of these vices, and that King Iohn had often strangled his strumpets, on the very bed of his said wife. This King (for his owne part) made it a triumphall sport, to violate wiues, and the Daughters of his Nobl^men: And as for his Religion, there was none other in him, but he a meere Atheist in his actions and discourse.
The Ammirant further demaundes.The Ammirant hauing heard Robert, detested the naturall disposition of his Prince, and demaunded, why the English would so long endure him: for either they were truely women, or else of very seruile soules. Whereto Robert answered, that the Engl^sh were naturally suffering, vntill they should bee prickt to the blood: but then they imitated and resembled the Elephant and Lyon, who feeling themselues wounded, mount vp in choller, and shake off the yoke of seruitude. Whereto the Ammirant r^plied, that the English were ouer-long patient and fearefull. Many times, Robert conferred familiarly with the Ammirant, who gaue him great gifts of precious Stones, Gold, Siluer, Pearles and Silkes, granting his licence of departure; but the other two Ambassadors, he would neuer more see them.
King Iohn vnderstanding by the Ambassadors, how contemptibly and dishonourably the Ammirant of Marocco estemed of him; grew very chollericke against him. Robert presented him with part of the gifts which had bin giuen him;Robert made keeper of the Abb^y o^ (...) Albanes. in recompence whereof the King his Master gaue him the keeping of the rich Abbey of Saint Albane, the first Martyr of England; albeit it was without vacancie; for Iohn Albot de le Celle was yet liuing.
Now in the yeare One thousand, two hundred and fifteene, towards the Feast of Easter, the Noblemen of England assembled in Armes at Stamforde, summoning the King, to maintaine the liberties of the Kingdom, graunted by the Kings Saint Edward, and Henry first of the name, according as he had promised two Moneths before. Vpon his refusall, the Citty of London, chiefe of England,London Receiued in the Barons. which began the daunce of Rebellion; opened her gates to the Nobles, who became Maisters thereof, and of diuers Castelles: so that the King, fearing a generall reuolt, was constrained to confirme the liberties and customes of the Realme, by his Letters Patents, dated the fifteenth day of Iune, in the said yeare Two hundred and fifteene. But he well declared within the yeare, that what he had done, was but to make a separation of his enemies, who were farre aboue him in strength.
Then he made his recourse to Pope Innocent the third,his recourse to the Pope. as holding the Kingdome of England of him, because hee would bee assisted both with spirituall and temporall Armes.
The Nobles seeing their part to be the weakest, implored the succour of Phillip Augustus, King of France, a most Magnanimous and generous Prince,The Daulphine of France elected by the Barons to be King. and being assembled in Councell at the Citty of London, with an vniuersall consent of them all: They elected for their King of England, the eldest Sonne of the said Phillip Augustus, named Monsieur Lewes of France, sirnamed the Lyon. Because hee was the neerest to succeed to the Crowne of England, by reason and right of his wife Madam Blanche of Castille, Daughter to Alphonso the eight of the name, King of Castille, and of Madame A^lia^r of England, daughter to King Henry the Second, and sister to the Kings Richard and Iohn Without-Land.
The Nobles hauing made this election, sent into France as their Ambassadours,The Ambassadors sent into France. Simon Earle of Winchester, and Robert, Sonne to William High Marshall of England, who brought to King Phillip Augustus and Lewes his Sonne, the signed Letters of his Election, sealed also by the Nobles of England, instantly entreating them to accept their seruice, with the Crowne. The King made answere to the Ambassadours, that he would not suffer his Son so to passe into England, without good Hostages, for securitie of his person.
Hee demaunded foure and twenty Hostages, of the Principall Lords of England; whereof the Ambassadours hauing immediatly giuen intelligence in England;Foure and twenty Hostages. the Barons sent into France with all diligence, the said foure and twenty Hostages to Phillip Augustus, who sent them vnder good and sure guard to the Citty of Compeigne (in Latine Compendium, and by the name of King Charles the Bauld Emperour, who rebuilded it, Karnopolis.
While the Kings were preparing a powerfull Fleete, they sent before to succour the Barrons of England, the Castillian of S^int Omer, the Castilian of Arras, Hugues Chacun, Eustache Neuuille, Baudouin de Bretaile, Guillaume de Guines, Gilles de Melun, Guillaume de Beaumont, Gilles de Hersey and Bizet de Fargis, all braue and valiant French Knights, with a great number of other Commanders and Sergeants, who mounting vpon the Thames, arriued at London, where they were welcommed with all ioy and gladnesse, the third of the Calends of March.
Lewes hauing taken his leaue,The Daulphines parting from his Father. and receiued the blessing of his Father King Phillip Augustus, who then was at Melun; departed thence on Saint Markes day, and comming to Callice, found there his Fleete readily prouided, consisting of Sixe hundred Shippes, and Fourescore great Galions and Caracks, which he had prepared, armed and well furnished with Armour and prouision for warre: his Admirall being Eustace the Monke, an English Pyrate.
With King Lewes were the very greatest and most valiant Lords of France, to wit,What Lords of France were with King Lewes. Henry Count of Neuers, with an hundred Knights: Enguerran de Bailleu, Lord of Coucy, Marle and Crecy in Laonois second of that name, with fifty Knights. This Lord of Coucy Portoit de Coucy, qui est Vaire de Gueules et d'Argent, Escarlele de France. Because that his mother was youngest daughter to King Lewes le Gros and Alix de Dreux. Robert de Dreux had thirty Knights. Iohn de Mont Mirell had twenty Knights. The Counte de Roussy had tenne Knights: The Counte of Holland had thirty Knights: Aruoul Counte of Guines, had fifteene Knights. The Counte of P^rche; the Counte

of Mont-fort; the Counte of Mont-Belliard, with an infinite number of braue men, the floure of Chiualrie, who being arriued at Callice, put their Sayles to the winde, and safely coasted on England, landing in the Isle of Tenet, at a place called Stanchore, the twelfth of the Calends of Iune. King Iohn was then in the Porte of Douer with his Army of Strangers, but being not strong enough to Fight with Lewes; he fled thence toward Winchester, so that Lewes (at his owne ease) landed his Army at Sandwich, and at his first arriuing, possessed himselfe of all places on the Coasts of England, except Douer,His comming to London. and so came straight to London, where he was magnificently receiued by the Barons of the Land, of whom, (together with the Citizens of London) he receiued their Homages, and liedge oathe of fidelity: As on his part, he sware vpon the Holy Euangelists, that he would make good Lawes to them all, and recouer their lost inheritances, vsurped in the name of King Iohn Without Land.
King Iohns Dutch Soldiours sent out of the land.Immediatly he laboured to cleanse the Countrey, of wandring Dutch Soldiours, which depended on King Iohn, and tooke the homages of the King of Scots Alexander, for that which he possessed from the Crowne of England, and of the Earles, William de Warren, William Earle of Arundell, William Earle of Salisbury, William Marshal the younger, and an infinite number of others, who abandoned and forsooke King Iohns part, to Honour the rising Sunne; who receiued for his Lord Chauncellour, Simon de Langton, an Englishman.
While matters thus proceeded, King Iohn chaunced to dye in the Castell of Newarke,The death of King Iohn in the Castell of Newarke. on Saint Lukes day in October, the said yeare, One thousand, Two hundred and sixteene.
After his death, they of the Clergie and Nobilitie, (who had maintained his cause) met together at Glocester, where they crowned King of England, His eld^st Sonne Henry, called the Third of that name, being then but ten yeares olde: And the voyage which Monsieur King Lewes made backe into France, gaue way to the Barons of England, to do their seruice now to the rising Sun, But the s^id Monsieur Lewes of France, in his Crowning King of England, tooke for Armes, De France Escartele d'Angleterre, which he held all his life time, with the title of King of France and England, etc. And the memorie thereof is conserued to this day in the Rituall of Ceremonies, obserued at the Sacring and Crowning the most Christians Kings.
The comming of King Henry the Third to the Crowne, and his marriage.Henry, third of the name, eldest Sonne to Iohn Without-Land, and Isabell of Angoulesme, tooke to wife Aelianor of Prouence, Sister to Margaret the Queene of France, wife to the King S. Lewes, daughter to Raimond, Counte of Prouence, and by this mariage were borne fiue Sonnes, and three Daughters, the Sonnes were
Edward, after King of England by the name of King Edward the Fift.
Edmund, Earle of Lancaster.
William died young, and was buried at the new Temple London.
Iohn died young, and Richard who died also young. The daughters were
Margaret, Wife to Alexander King of Scots.
Beatrix, maried to Iohn Duke of Bretaigne, and
Catharine, who died young.
The two marriages of Edward the first, and Issue.Edward, First of that name, eldest Son of King Henry the Third, was married twise. First he espoused Madam Elianor, daughter to Ferdinand, third of that name, King of Castille, and of Queene Iane, daughter to the Count of Ponthieu, Of this mariage were borne foure sonnes and fiue daughters.

Iohn.


Henry.

Alphonsus, all dying without issue in the life time of their Father: And the last was
Edward, Second of that name, King of England after his Father: The daughters were.
Elianor, wife to Henry Duke of Bar.
Iane, commonly called Ioane of Acres, maried to Gilbert, Earle of Glocester, and after to Raphe Monthermer, Earle of Gloucester.
Margaret, Wife to Iohn Duke of Brabant.
Isabell or Elizabeth, giuen in second mariage to Humfry de Bohun Earle of Hereford and Essex. And
Mary entred Religion as a Nunne at Ambresbury.
In second mariage, Edward tooke to wife Madame Margaret of France, Sister to King Phillip le Bel, and of her hee begate two Sonnes and one daughter, named

Elianor. The Sonnes were
Thomas, surnamed of Brotherton Earle, of Norfolke* and Edmond called Edmond of Woodstock, Earle of Kent, who died leauing one onely Daughter, named Ioane, surnamed the Faire Maide of Kent, maried thrise. First, to William Montacute Earle of Salisbury, from whom being diuorced she was after maried to Sir Thomas Holland Earle of Kent, by whom she had two Sonnes, Thomas Earle of Kent, Iohn de Holland Earle of Huntington. Her third Husband was Edward Prince of Walles, eldest Sonne to King Edward, third of that name, King of England.
Edward, Second of that name, King of England, fourth Sonne to King Edward the first, had to wife Madame Isabell of France, daughter to Phillip le Bel, King of France and of Nauarre. (This Isabell was the leuen of the last warres, betweene the Crowne of France, and that of England) And of this marriage came two Sonnes, and as many daughters, namely
Elianor, dying in her infancy, And
Ioane, Wife to Dauid, King of Scots: His Sonnes were
Edward, King in his Fathers life time, And
Iohn, Earle of Cornewall, dying young.
Edward, third of that name, had to wife Phillip, Daughter to William, Counte of Henault, And of this mariage issued seauen Sonnes, and three Daughters.
1. Mary, Wife to Iohn de Montfort Duke of Bretaigne, fift of that name.
2. Isabell, maried to the Earle of Bedford, And
3. Margaret, wife to the Earle of Penbroke: His Sonnes were
1. Edward Prince of Wales, deceassing in his Fathers life time.
2. William, dying in his infancy.
3. Lyonnell, Duke of Clarence.
4. Iohn (tearmed of Gaunte, because he was borne there) Duke of Lancaster.
5. Edmund, Earle of Cambridge, and afterward Duke of Yorke.
6. Thomas, Earle of Buckingham, afterward Duke of Glocester; And
7. William of England, dying an infant.
Edward Prince of Wales, dying in the life time of his Father, Edward third of the name, had to wife Ioane or Iane, daughter to Edmond Earle of Kent, And of this mariage were borne two Sonnes.
Edward dying in his infancy, And
Richard, who was King of England, after the death of his Grandfather King Edward the third.
Lyonnell of England, Duke of Clarence, third Sonne to King Edward the third, was maried two seuerall times. First to the heire of Clarence Elizabeth, the daughter of William de Burgh, Earle of Vlster, and in this mariage they had one onely daughter.
Phillip of Clarence, Wife to Edmond de Mortimer Earle of Marche, of whom came a Sonne and a Daughter.
Elizabeth de Mortimer, Wife to Henry de Percy, eldest sonne of the Earle of Northumberland. The Sonne was
Roger de Mortimer, Father of

Anne.


Edmond.

Roger and of
Elianor: These three last children deceased without any issue.
Anne was married to Richard, Earle of Cambridge, youngest Sonne of Edmond of England, Earle of Cambridge, and Duke of Yorke, to whom he was heire, Edward his elder Brother being dead without issue.
Of this Richard Earle of Cambridge, and of Anne de Mortimer, was borne Richard, sirnamed Planta Genest, who by Cecilie his wife had
Edward King of England,The birth of Edward the fourth fourth of that name.
The second wife to Lyonell of England, was
Yoland, Sister to Iohn Galeas, Duke of Millaine.
Iohn of Gaunte was likewise twise married. First to Blanche, the onely daughter to Henry Duke of Lancaster, and of her he begat one Sonne, and two daughters, namely
Phillip of Lancaster, the wife to Iohn King of Portugall. The other was
Iane, Countesse of Westmerland, Grandmother to Edward, Fourth of that name, King of England. The Sonne was
Iohn, Earle of Sommerset, Father of Iohn Duke of Sommerset, Father of Margaret of Sommerset, wife to Edmond, Earle of Richemond.
The second Wife of Lord Iohn of Gaunte, was Madame Constance of Castille, Second Daughter to the King of Castille Dom Peter. And of this second mariage was borne one Daughter only.
Katharine, Wife to Henry of Portugall, the Sonne to Iohn of Portugall.
Edmond of England, Earle of Cambridge, and afterward Duke of Yorke, had to wise Madame Isabell of Castille, daughter to Peter, King of Castille.
Thomas of England, Earle of Buckingham, and afterward Duke of Glocester, was slaine by the commaunde of King Richard the second, his Vnckle.
And this was that Edward, third of the name, who (to small purpose) in the right of Madame Isabell of France, contested for the Crowne of France, against Phillip de Velois, the Sixt and last of that name, moued thereto by Iaquemart d'Arteuelle of Gaunte, and Robert of Artois, Counte of Beaumont, refuged in England (by reason of the Arrest or Decree d'Asniers giuen, concerning the County of Artois. This Edward tooke the Armes and Title of King of France and of England, as before him did Monsieur Lewes of France,He quartered the Armes of France with England. Eight of the name, called and Crowned King of England, as wee haue formerly declared.
Of this Title, and the Armes of France, the pertakers of King Edward of England, made these verses in those times.

Rex sum Regnorum bina ratione Duorum,
Anglorum Regno Rex sum ego iure Paterno:
Matris iure quidem Francorum nuncuper idem.
Hinc est Armorum Variatio facta meorum

Whereto the Frenche answered scornefully in verses of the same temper, but somewhat touching Edward with ill grounded vanity, pretending right to the Crowne of France,A ridiculous answere returned by the Frenche. by Queene Isabell his mother: before whom (if Daughters should succeed in the Sacred Lillies of France) her eldest Sister must march, Madam Margaret of France, wife to Ferdinand, fourth of the name, King of Castille.

Praedo Regnorum qui diceris esse Duorum,
Francorum Regno priuaberis, atque Paterno.
Matris vbique nullum Ius Proles non habet Vllum,
Iure Mariti carens alia Mulier est prior illa.
Succedunt Mares huic Regno, non Mulieres.
Hinc est Armorum Variatio stulta tuorum.

The same Edward the third, in the Fiftieth yeare of his age, which happened in the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred, sixty and one, for the Ceremony of his Iubilie, which the Church celebrated from Fifty to Fiftie yeares, aunciently from Age to Age, that is to say, from an Hundred yeares to an Hundred yeares, and now at euery fiue and twenty yeares) gaue repeale of Cursse to all his subiects, and banished persons for time or perpetuity:The Royall Iubilie of King Edward the I^lud. hee deliuered out of prisons, such as were detained for debts, and all kinde of crimes. He was Authour of the Franchises and Priueledges, which the English tearmed The Great Charters. Ordayning and appointing alwayes after, that his Successours the Kings of England, should practise and doe the like, in the Fiftieth yeare of their age. And the same yeare he ordayned, that all Expeditions of Iustice, Decrees, Sentences, Iudgements and Contracts, should thenceforforward be made in the English-Saxon tongue. For vntill this yeare, since the Conquest of England made by William the Bastard, Duke of Normandy, Liegeman to the sacred Kings of France: all those Expeditions were concealed in the French language.
The comming of King Richard the ^econd to the Crowne.Richard, Second of that name, Sonne to Edward Prince of Wales, deceasing while his Father liued: came to the Crowne of England, after the death of his Grand-father Edward the third, in the Moneth of Iuly, One thousand, three hundred, seauenty seauen. Hee was twise maried.
First to Madame Anne, Sister to the Emperour Wenceslaus; but by her hee had no issue.
His second wife was Madame Isabell of France, daughter to King Charles the Sixt, being eight yeares of age when shee passed into England. Shee had no issue neither, because King Richard was made a prisoner, and afterward slaine, by commaund of Henry of Lancaster, Earle of Derbie, Sonne to Iohn of Gaunte, Duke of Lancaster, whom the said Richard had banished from England. So that Henry hauing safety in France, obtayning succour,

came againe into England, where he was made King. The faction of the White Rose against the Red (such as wee haue formerly touched) began againe at this time, because by the death of Richard, Lyonnell of England, Duke of Clarence of ^he White Rose, was the elder Sonne of Edward the Third, and ought to precede Iohn of Gaunte; from whose Sonne neuerthel^sse, this Henry Earle of Derby, (taking part with the Red Rose) caried the Crowne by might, and contrary to rea^on. Richard reigned twenty two yeares, ^nd died without any issue; his Successour in the Kingdome, was
Henry of Lancaster, fourth of the name, Crowned the last day of September, in the yeare One thousand, three hundred, fourescore and nineteene; hee was maried twise, first to Mary, daughter and one of the heires to Humfrey de Bohun, Earle of Hereforde, Essex and Northampton, and by her he had foure Sons, and two daughters.
Henry, who was King, fift of that name.
Thomas, Duke of Clarence.
Iohn, Duke of Bedforde; And
Humphrey, Duke of Glocester. His Daughters were
Blanche, wife to Lodowick, Sonne to the Duke of Bauaria: And
Phillip, married to Iohn King of Dennaoke.
Thomas Duke of Clarence, was slaine in ^n encounter of the French, and left no issue
Iohn Duke of Bedforde was three times maried. His first wife was Anne, daughter ^o Phillip the good Duke of Bourgongne: ^er graue is to bee seene in the Celestines at Paris.
The second wife was Katherine of
And by whom hee had Henry, Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinall of England. The last was
Iacquetta, daughter to Peter of Luxembourg, Earle of Saint Paule.
Humphrey Duke of Glocester, tooke away perforce Iacquetta of Bauaria, wife to Iohn Duke of Brabant; to whom she came ^gaine, after the death of Humphrey, de^eassing without issue.
The second wife of Henry the fourth, was Iane, Widdow to Iohn de Mont-fort, Duke of Bretaigne, and by her he had no ^hilde. Hauing reigned almost foureteene yeares, hee died the twentieth day of March, in the yeare One thousand, foure hundred and twelue, leauing for Successor to the Crowne of England, his eldest Son
Henry; fift of that name, who through the bad faction of Phillip of Bourgongne, (whom his owne wel-willers tearmed the good Duke) espoused Madam Katherine of France, daughter to King Charles the Sixt. The mariage was celebrated in the Citty of Troyes in Champagne, whereby issued their only Sonne
Henry, sixt of that name, who was King of England by the death of his Father, happening the last day of August, in the yeare one thousand, foure hundred, twenty and two, hauing reigned nine yeares. He had to wife Margaret of Cicilie, daughter to good King Rene of Cicilie, Duke of Anion, and of this mariage came their only Sonne Edward.
The faction of the White Rose preuailed against the Red, because Richard duke of Yorke, chiefe of the White Rose, gaue two Battailes to the said King Henry the Sixt, detained prisoner. In both of them, Margaret of Sicilie, a most couragious Princesse, went into France for succour, and (by meanes thereof) passed againe into England, and wunne the bataile, wherin was slaine the Duke of Yorke, head of that part, as also the Earle of Rutland, and set her husband at liberty.
After his deliuerance, Edward, sonne to Richard Duke of Yorke, gaue him two battailes, which the said King Henry lost, so that he was constrained to flye into Scotland, from whence he returned in the habite of a Greye Frier: but being discouered, he was commited to prison, wherein he remained ten yeares. At the end wherof, he was deliuered by Richard Duke of Warwick, and the Duke of Clarence.
Edward of Yorke, Earle of Marche, was enforced to escape out of England, and to secure himself in Flanders, with his Father in Law Charles Duke of Bourgongne, of whom hauing succour, he came againe into England, tooke, and caused King Henry the Sixt to be slaine, and his Son Edward, detayning Queene Margaret prisoner, and appointing her ransome at fifty thousand Crownes, which King Lewes the eleuenth payed for her deliuerance. The said King Henry reigned almost thirty nine yeares, and by his death, his enemy
Edward, called fourth of the name, Son to Richard Duke of Yorke, and Cicelie his Wife, Daughter to Ioane Countesse of Westmerland, daughter to Iohn of Gaunte,
(...)

daughter of Iames the fift, King of Scots, Husband to Mary of Lorraine, daughter to Claudius, Duke of Guise. The said Iames the fift, was Sonne to Iames the fourth, king of Scotts, Husband to Madame Margaret of England, daughter to king Henry the Seauenth, and eldest Sister to king Henry the Eight.
The said Iames, king of England and Scotland, intituled him King of Great Britaine, for reuniting the two kingdomes in his owne person. By his wife and Queene, Anne of Denmarke, daughter to Frederick, second of that name, and king of Denmarke, hee had two Sonnes and three daughters.
Henry, Prince of Walles, died aged about nineteene yeares, in the Moneth of Nouember Sixe hundred and twelue
Charles, Duke of Yorke, and now Prince of Wales, borne in the Moneth of Nouember, One thousand, Sixe hundred.
His daughters, were named
Elizabeth, borne in the Moneth of August, One thousand, fiue hundred, fourescore and sixteene: Married in the yeare Sixe hundred and twelue, to the Counte Palatine of the Rhine Frederick, Prince Elector of the Empire.
Mary, borne in December One thousand, fiue hundred fourscore and eighteene.
And Sophia, dying young.

THE INSTITVTION OF THE ORDERS OF ENGLAND. CHAP. II.MAthew Paris (one of the most Auncient Historians of England, next to Venerable Bede and Gyldas) describing the liues of the first Kings of England, Suc^essours to William the Conquerour,Fashion of Royall Ornaments (...) into England. writeth, that the said Kings brought into England, the fashion of Royall Garments and ornaments, the Ceremonies obserued and vsed, as well at the Sacring of the most Christian Kings of France; as also the forme of creating of Knights vsually in France. He speaketh it to this purpose, because king Henry, third of that name, made knights of his Brethren by the mothers side, the Sonnes of Hugh le Brun, Earle of Marche, and of Queene Isabell of Angoulesme,Knights made by King Henry the Third. Mother to the said king Henry, who made those knights, Se undum Regum Francorum consuetudinem, after Fasting, Watching and Bathing. Wee haue set downe the auncient formes vsed at those Creations, in the Tracte of the Order of the Star, to speake any more thereof, serueth but to say th^ same againe.We may onely say, that in England, there hath not bin any Ordes, bearing a perticuler name; before that of the Blewe Garter, instituted by king Edward, Third of the name.At all times, as some affirme there haue beene knights of the Bath, so named, because, before they were honoured with guilded Spurres, (which is the marke or noate of knighthood) they washed and bathed themselues,(...) watched in the Church, made Confession of their sinnes, to be more cleane and pure both in Soule and Body, to receiue the degree and Honour of knighthood, the acte most importing their whole life.Sir Iohn Froissard writeth, that the king of England Henry, Second of that name, hauing conquered the Realme of Ireland, and brought vnder his obedience the foure petty kings thereof: the said Richard made them all foure knights, on Thursday, being the feast of our Lady in March, in the Cathedrall Church of Saint Peter in London, wherein they had watched on Wednesday all the whole night.Before the Coronation of the King of England, Henry of Lancaster,It is held that there were no Knights of the Bath, before this Kings time Fourth of that name, he made Sixe and Forty Esquires Knights of the Bath, who had their Chambers each man seuerall to himselfe in the Tower or Castell of London, watching and bathing themselues on Saturday night, and on Sunday at High Masse, the King himselfe made them Knights, giuing them long Grey Cassocks or Coates, with strait Manches or sleeues, furred with Minniuer, each hauing on his left shoulder, a double Cordon of White Silke, with Tassells and Fringes hanging at the ^ame.At the Coronation of Mary, Queene of England, Daughter to King Henry the Eight, the like number of Knights of the Bath were made.And this hath anciently beene obserued in England,An ancient custome obserued in England, of Knighting before crowning that Kings (before their crowning) made a certaine number of Esquires, Knights of the Bath, to be serued by them at their Sacring and Coronation, as Mathew Paris noteth in many places of his History. And we learne of him, as also of Ingulphus, Iohannes Salisburiensis, of Mathaeus Florilegus, of William Camden, and other Historians of England, the Ceremonies which the Kings exercised in the Creation of Knights of the Bath,Knights of the Bath called Knights of the Crownes, and the reason why. others wise called Knights of the Crownes, because, to distinguish them from Esquires, they wore vpon their left shoulders an Escutchion of Azure Silke, with three Crownes of Gold embroydered thereon.The Esquires that were chosen to be made Knights;Their Habite before Knighting, and Ceremonies obserued. in the Euening before the Ceremony, were cloathed with Ash-coloured Gray-Cloth, after the manner of Hermites, with the Hood or Capuch, a small woollen Cappe on the head, and Gamashes of the same Cloth on the legges. And in this manner they went two and two together in the Euening, to shew by this Ceremony, that they consecrated their liues to Iesus Christ, and in defence of his faith to spend their dayes in warre, euen to the last drop of their blood.At returne from the Church, these Batchelors went and supt all together, each Bachellor hauing two Esquires to serue and attend on him. After supper euery man ^eturned to his Chamber, where his Bed was fairely Curtaind with Red Silke, before which was fixed the Shield of Armes, and Blazons of the Bachelor, and neere to the Bed stood a Bathing-Tubbe, with necessary Linnens thereto belonging. Prayers being ended, they bathed themselues, curlled their locks of hayre, and their Squires afterward did the like.On the next Morrow, about the break of day, they were awaked with the sound of Instruments, summoned and called to arise, by the noise of Drums and Trumpets. Cloathed againe in their Hermites Habites, as they were the day before; the Constable and Marshall of England called these Bachelors by order, causing them to sweare and promise: To loue God aboue all things; to defend the Church;The Oath giuen to the young Bachellors. to honour the King; and maintaine his royall Rights; to protect and succour Widdowes, Maides and Orphants to their vtmost power. Which the Bachelors hauing promised, and sworn vpon the holy Euangelists to doe, they were then conducted (two and two together) to Matins and Masse, being preceded or Vsherd by the Instruments of Musique, Trumpets, Fifes and Drummes, the Heraulds and Kings of Armes. And after Matins, they were (in the same manner) guided backe to their Chambers,The Knights in their rich Habites and furnishment. there despoyled of their Hermites Habites, and cloathed with rich Garments of Carnation Silke, the Cassocke and Surcote, and the great Mantle or Cloake of fine Scarlet in Graine, as they tearme it in England. A white Hat or Bonnet, and a Linnen Nightcap on the head, white Gloues on the hands, fastened to the Cloake, tuckt vp on the left shoulder, with long tasselled Cordons of white Silke.This being thus done, euery Bachelor mounteth on his Horse or Courser,According to ancient custome. being a choyse Horse for Seruice, well saddled and ^arnised with White and Blacke, and on the Chanfrane or Front-stal, the Signe of the Crosse in Embroydery; each man hauing his Page before him on horsebacke, who beareth the Bachelors Sword by the point of the Scabbard, the hilt fairely gilded aloft, whereto are fastened the gilded Spurres, and on either side of this Page on horseback, the two Esquires belonging to the Bachellor.In this equipage the Bachelors goe to the Court, or Castell of the King, guided
(...)

delle si qu'il ne s'en scauoir conseiller, and n'y faisoit que penser tousiours, co^bien que le Counte de Salebery fust le plus priue de tout son Conseil, and l'vn de ceux d' Angleterre qui plus l^yaument l'auoit serui. Si aduint que pour l'Amour de ladite Dame, and pour le grand defer qu il auoit de la voir, il auoit faict crier vne grand Feste de Ioustes a la My-Aoust, a estre en la bonne Cite de Londres. Et commanda expressement au Comte de Salebery qu'il ne laissast nullement que Madamoiselle sa femme n'y feust, and qui elle amenast toutes ses Dames and Damoiselles qu'elle pouuoit auoir entour elle. Aelix la Comtesse y vint le plus simplement Atournee qu'elle peust, etc.In another Chapter he writeth, that the same King did so ardently loue the faire and Noble Lady Madame Alix Countesse of Salisbury, as he could not abstaine. For Loue admonished him night and day, representing her beauty so fresh and gracious, as he could doe nothing but dayly thinke on her. Howbeit the Earle of Salisbury was one of the most priuate of his Councell, and one of them of England that had most loyally done him seruice. So as it came to passe, that for loue of the said Lady, and for the longing desire hee had to see her; hee caused to bee proclaimed a sollemne Feast of Iousting, in mid-August, to bee held in the good City of London. Expressly he commanded the Earle of Salisbury, that he should be no hinderance to his Lady and Wifes being there, and that she should bring with her all the Ladies and Gentlewomen, as shee could haue about her. Alix the Countesse of Salisbury came thither, the very simplest attired that could be, etc.We haue written in the Eight Booke of the History of Nauarre, Page 469. that the Order of the Kingdome of England,Concerning the Orders first Institution, and vpon what occasion tearmed of the Blew Garter, was established (according to the the testimony of Polidore Virgill, in his History of England) by King Edward, Third of the name, Sonne to Edward the Second, and Madame Isabell of France (the flaming Firebrand of France) in the yeare One Thousand, Three Hundred, Forty and Seauen. That this Order had S. George for the Gouernour or Patron; Loue for the Subiect, and the Deuice French. Forasmuch as King Edward being wounded with loue of faire Alix, the Countesse of Solisbury, one day as hee was deuising with her, the left Garter (of Blew Silke) of this Lady, hung loosely down vpon her shooe. King Edward, ready at the Ladies Seruice, and to take vp the Garter; by little and little lifted her cloathes so high, that the Courtiers had some sight of her white Smock, and could not refraine from smiling. The Lady reprehended the King for this publike fault before his own people (who carried good lookes, but bad thoughts, and pleased their owne opinion so much, that they made an Idoll of their vaine conceits:) King Edward therefore, to couer his owne honour, stopt all their mouthes with these few French words;The French words embroydered on the Garter. Honny Soit Qui Maly Pense: (Honny signifieth in the old French Language To reproach, to Speake ill, and to Dishonour) and made instantly a like or the same vow, as that was of the Duke of Bourgongne Philip the Second, noted heretofore: That such was the mockery of this Garter, as it should be held a great Honor to weare the like.The number of Knights to bee of the Order, and manner of their Habits.That effects might follow wordes, heereon arose the Knights of the Order of the Blew Garter, which hee composed of Fiue and Twenty Knights, and no more.Euery one of them, according to the first Institution, must be cloathed with a long Cassocke of Carnation Sattin or Damaske: the large Cloake or Mantle of Violet Veluet, lined with White Damaske, and the Chapperon had a faire large round hood of Crimosine Veluet, worne on the right shoulder, tyed before with two great Cordons of White Silke, trayling downe to the ground, with two great Tassels of Silke. Nor are these Cloakes turned vp on the left shoulder, because thereon is Embroydered, Vn Escu d'Argent, charge d'vne Croix droitte de Gueules Liure d'Angleterre, and a l'entour, dudit Escu la Deuise de L'ordre, Honny Soit Qui Maly Pense. The Buskins or Gamashes worne by the said Knights, are likewise of Carnation Veluet, and beneath the knee on the left legge, a Garter or small Girdle, Blew, Embroydered with Gold and Precious Stones, fastened with a Buckle and Tongue of pure gold about the Legge.(...) the Great Collar of the Order.The Great Collar of the Order (whereof some make Author King Henry Fift of that Name, as wee vnderstand by William Camden King of Armes in England, by the name of Clarenceaux, in his History of England) was of Gold, composed of White Roses, and Red Roses, enterlaced and knit in manner of True-loue Knots.

At this present, in stead of those knots, are combined the Thistles of Scotlands Order, since King Iames came to the Crowne of England; to the end, that the two Orders might be ioyned together, according as the Kingdomes are. At the point of the said Caller (directly on the Brest) hangeth the figure of Saint George on Horseback,Vnion of the two Orders of England and Scotland. hauing a Dragon at his feete, which is not made in Ouall forme. The lesser Order which these Knights doe daily weare about their neckes, is a Blew Cordon or Ribband, and a George depending thereat. I haue seene of these Collars at Paris, when the Duke of Lennox was there, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and foure. Here you shall see who were the first Knights, and other of the same Order, from King to King vnto this present.Edward, the third King of England and of France, etc. Supreame or Gouernor of the Order of the Garter, and with him the fiue and twentie first Founders thereof, which number they neuer exceede.Henry Duke of Lancaster.Peter Captaine Bouche.William Mont-acute, Earle of Salisburie.Iohn, Lord of the Iland, otherwise called L'Isle.Iohn Beauchampe, knight.Hugh Courtney, knight.Iohn Grey of Codnor, knight.Miles Stapleton, knight.Hugh Wrotesly, knight.Iohn Chandos, knight Banneret.Otho Holland, knight.S^nchio Dampredicourt knight.Edward Prince of Wales, King Edward his eldest Sonne.Thomas Beauchampe, Earle of Warwicke.Raffe Stafford, Earle of Stafford.Roger Mortimer, Earle of March.Bartholmew of Burgherst, knight.Iohn, Lord Mohun, Baron.Thomas Holland, knight.Richard Fitz-Simon, knight.Thomas Wale, knight.Neele Lorenge, knight.Iames Audeley, knight.Henry Esme, knight.Walter Paueley, knight.Now noate what Froissard saith in his first Volume of this Order, which he calleth The Fellowship or Brotherhood of Saint George.En ce temps vint en propos, and en voulente au Roy Edouard d' Angleterre qu'il feroit faire, and reedifier le grand Chastel de Windesore, que le Roy Artus sit iadis faire, and sonder la ou premierement fut commente, and es^oree la Noble Table Ronde dont tant de lons and vaillants Homines, and Cheualiers estoint, and yssirent and trauaillerent en Armes, and en proyesse par tout le Monde. Et feroit ledit Roy vne Ordonnance de Cheualiers, de Luy, and de ses Enfants, and des plus Freux de sa Terre, and en seroient en somme Quarante: and les nomme^^it en les CHEVALIERS DV BLEV IARTIER, and la feste a durer d' An en An, and de la solemniser a Windesore le Iour Sainct George (qui est le Vingt-Troisiesme d'Auril. Et pour ceste fesse commencer, le Roy assembla de tout son l'ais Comtes, Barons, Cheualiers and leur dict son intention. Et ils luy accorderent ioyousement pource qu'il l^ur semblo. l vne chose moult honorable ou tout Amour se nourriroit. Adonc furent esleuz Quarante Cheualiers (Froissart s'est mespris, car cest Ordre n'estoit compose que de Vingtcinq Cheualiers, and du Roy Chef de l'Ordre non compte au nombre des Vingt-cinq) par aduis, and par renommee les plus Preux de tous les autres, lesquels seell^rent and (...) a poursuir, and tenir la Feste, and les Ordonnances telles qu elles eslorent la (...) fit le Roy fonder, and edifier vne Chappelle de Sainct George au Chastel de Windes^re, and y establit Chaneines pour Dieu seruir, and les renta moult grandement. Puis enuoya le Roy publier la feste par s^s Heraulx en France, en Escosse, en Bourgongne, en Haynau, en Flandres, en Braban, and en l'Empire d'Alemagne. Et si donnoit a tous Cheualiers, and Escuyers qui venir y voudroient, Quinze Iours de Saufconduict apres la Feste. Et deuoit estre ceste reste le l^ur de Sainct George ensuiuant L'an Mil Trois Cents Quarante Quatre au Chastel de Windesore. Et deuoit estre accopagnee la Royne d'Angleterre de Trois Cents Dames, and Damoiselles toutes Nobles and Gentil-Dames, and parces richement de pareme^ts semblables.At this time it came into the purpose and will of King Edward of England,Iohn Froissard in the first Tombe of his Chronicle. that he would reediffie and make the great Castell of Windesore, which King Arthur had formerly (long
(...)
Thomas Baron Camois.Iohn Baron Clifford.Robert Baron Willoughby.William Phillip, Baron Bardolfe.Henry, Baron Fitz-Hugh.Lewes Robsart, Baron Bourchier.Hugh Stafford, Baron Bourchter.Walter, Baron Hungerford.Simon Felbridge, knight.Iohn Graye of Eyton, knight.Iohn Dabridgecourt, knight.Iohn Robsart, knight.Trank van Clux, a German Lord.William Harrington, knight.Iohn Blount, knight.
Henry, sixt of that name, King of England, chose these in his time to be companions of that Order.Albert, Duke of Austria, King of Hungaria and Bohemia, and afterward Emperour.Frederick Duke of Austria, Emperor, and Albertus his Brother.Edward, King of Portugall.Alphonso, King of Arragon.Cazimir, King of Polonia.Edward Prince of Wales, eldest sonne to King Henry the sixt.Peter of Portugall: Duke of Coimbria, Son to Iohn King of Portugall.Henry of Portugall, Duke of Viseo, son to Iohn, King of Portugall.Conrard, Duke of Brunzwicke.Richard, Duke of Yorke, father to the King of England, Edward the fourth of that name.Iohn Beaufort, Earle, and afterward Duke of Somerset.Edmond Beaufort, Earle Moriton, afterward Marquesse, and at last Duke of Somerset.Iasper Earle of Penbroke, and afterward Duke of Bedford.Iohn Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke.Humfrey, Earle of Stafford, and afterward Duke of Buckingham.Gaston de ^oix, Captal de Buk, Earle of Longue-Ville.Iohn de Foix, Earle of Candalia.Aluarez D'almeida Earle of Aurence.Iohn Fitz-Alan, Earle of Arundel.Richard Neuil, Earle of Warwicke.Iohn Lord Talbot, afterward Earle of Shrewsbury.Iohn, Lord Talbot, Earle of Shewsbury his Sonne.Iames Butler, Earle of Wiltshire and Ormond.William Neuil, Lord Fauconbridge, afterward Earle of Kent.Richard Wooduile, Earle of Riuers.Henry, Viscount Bourchier, after Earle of Essex.Iohn Beaumont, Vicount Beaumont.Iohn Sutton, Baron Dudley.Thomas Baron Scales.Iohn Baron Greye of Ruthin.Rafe, Baron Butler of Sudeley.Lionell, Baron Welles,Iohn Bourchier, Baron of Berners.Thomas Baron Stanley.William Baron Bonuile.Iohn Baron Wenlocke.Iohn Beauchampe of Powicke.Thomas Baron Hoo.Iohn Ratcliffe, knight.Iohn Fastolf, knight.Thomas Kiriel, knight.Edward Hall, knight.
Edward fourth of that name, King of England, nominated these Noble Knights in his Reigne.FErdinand, the Bastard Son to Alphonso King of Arragon.Iohn King of Portugall.Edward Prince of Wales.Charles Duke of Bourgongne.Frances Sforza, Duke of Millan.Fredericke, Duke of Vrbine.Hercules d'Este, Duke of Ferrara.Richard, Duke of Yorke, son to the King of England.Richard, Duke of Glocester, who afterward vsurped the Kingdome.Iohn Mowbray, Duke of Norfolke.Iohn Baron Howard, afterward Duke of Norfolke.Iohn de la Poole, Duke of Suffolke.Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.Iohn Neuil, Marquesse Mont-acute.Thomas Grey, Marquesse Dorset.Iames Douglas, Earle Douglas in Scotland.William Fitz-Allan, Earle of Arundell.Thomas, Baron Maltrauers, the sonne to William, and afterward Earle of Arundel.Anthony Wooduile, Lord Scales, afterward Earle Riuers,William Baron Herbert, afterward created Earle of Pembroke.Iohn Stafford, Earle of Wiltshire.Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland.Iohn Tiptoft, Earle of Worcester.Galliard Duras, Lord Duras.Iohn Baron Scroope of Bolton.Walter Deuereux, Baron Ferrers of Chartley.Gualtier Blount, Baron of Montioy.William, Baron Hastings, the Kings Chamberlaine.Iohn Astley, Knight.William Chamberlaine, Knight.VVilliam Parre, Knight.Robert Harecourt.Thomas Mont-gomery.
Edward, fift of that name, King of England, and France, etc. Supreame Gouernour of the Order of the Garter, vnder whom was no election of new Knights of that Order. For as he had all the places filled with Knights by his Father, whilest he yet liued euen so he left them. Excepting onely the seates of the Prince, and of Iohn King of Portugall.
Richard, the third of that name, King of England and France, etc. Chiefe of the Order of the Garter, and the Fellowes chosen into that Order, during the time of his Reigne.THomas Howard, Earle of Surrey, and Duke of Norfolke.Thomas, Baron Stanley, afterward Earle of Derby.Francis, Vicount Louel.Iohn Coniers, knight.Richard Radcliffe, knight.Thomas Burgh, knight.Richard Tunstall, knight.
Henry, the seauenth of that name, King of England and France, etc. in his time elected these.MAximillian, King of the Romans, and afterward Emperour chosen, his Father Frederick Emperor then liuing.Iohn, King of Portingall.Iohn, King of Denmarke.Philip, King of Castile, Arch-Duke of Austria, Son to Maximillian the Emperour. Alphonsus, Duke of Calabria and Naples, King of Sicilie and Ierusalem.Arthur, Prince of Wales, the Kings eldest Sonne.Henry, Duke of Yorke, and Prince of VVales his Brother Arthur being dead, and he the same afterward King of England.Vbald, Earle of Montferrat, and Duke of Vrbin, and of Pesseran.Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.Thomas Grey, Marquesse Dorset.Iohn Vere Earle of Oxford.Henry Percy, Earle of Northumberland.George Talbot, Earle of Shrewsbury.Henry Bourchier, Earle of Essex.Richard Grey, Earle of Kent.Edward Courtney, Earle of Deuonshire.Henry, Baron Stanley, afterward Earle of VViltshire.Edmund de la Poole, Earle of Suffolke.Charles Somerset, Knight Banaret, and afterward created Earle of VVorcester.Gerard Fitz-gerald, Earle of Kildare.Iohn VVels Vicount VVels.George Stanley, Baron Strange.VVilliam Stanley, Chamberlaine to the King.Iohn Baron Dynham.Robert VVilloughby, Baron Brook, Steward of the Kings house.Giles d'Aubeny.Edward Poynings, knight.Edward VVideuil, knight.Gilbert Talbot, knight.Iohn Cheney, knight.Richard Guilford, knight.Thomas Louel, knight.Thomas Brandon, knight.Reynold Bray, knight.Ryce ap Thomas of VVales.Iohn Sauage, knight.Richard Poole, knight.
Henry, eight of the name, King of England, France, etc. in his reigne nominated and elected these into the noble fellowship of the Garter.CHarles of Spaine, Emperor, fift of the name, King of Spaine.Ferdinand, King of Hungaria, and Bohemia, Arch-Duke of Austria, brother to Charles the fift, Emperour.Francis, King of France, Naples, Sicilie and Ierusalem, Duke of Millaine, Lord of Geneway, etc.Emanuel, King of Portugall.Iames, fift of that name, King of Scots.Henry of England, Sonne to King Henry the eight, called Fitz-Roy, which is in English, Son of the King, Earle of Richmond and of Sommerset.Iulian de Medicis, Brother to Pope Leo the tenth.Edward Seymor, Earle of Hertford, and afterward Duke of Sommerset.Thomas Howard; Earle of Surrey, and afterward Duke of Norfolke.Charles Brandon, Maister of the Horse to the King, and afterward Duke of Suffolke.Iohn Sutton, called Dudley, Vicount de L'Isle, afterward Earle of Warwicke, and finally Duke of Northumberland.Anne, Duke of Mont-morency.Henry Courtney, Earle of Deuonshire, and afterward Marquesse of Excester.William Parre of Kendal, Earle of Essex, and afterward Marquesse of Northampton.William Pawlet, Baron Saint Iohn, of Basing, afterward Earle of Wiltshire, and Marquesse of Winchester.Henry, Earle of Surrey, Sonne to Thomas Duke of Norfolke.Thomas Bullen, Treasurer of the Kings Houshold, Viscount Rocheford, and afterward Earle of VViltshire, and Ormond.VVilliam Fitz-Alan Earle of Arundel.Iohn Vere, Earle of Oxenford.Henry Percy was Earle of Northumberland.Rafe Neuil, Earle of Westmerland.Francis Talbot Earle of Shrewsbury.Phillip Chabot, Earle of Burensais, de Charny, de Neublan^, etc. Lord Admirall of France.Henry Fitz-Alan, Son to VVilliam, Earle of Arundell.Thomas Mannors, Baron Roos, who was afterward Earle of Rutland.Robert Radcliffe, Viscount Fitz-VValters, and afterward Earle of Sussex.Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland.VVilliam Fitz-William, Treasurer of the Kings Houshold, afterward Earle of Southampton.Thomas Baron Cromwel, afterward Earle Essex.Iohn, Baron Russel, afterward Earle of Bedford.Thomas, Baron Wriothesly, afterward created Earle of Southampton.Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, B^stard sonne to King Edward the fourth.Walter Deuereux, Baron Ferrers of Chartley, and afterward made Earle of Hertford.Edward Howard, Admirall of England, who died in Bretaigne.George Neuil, Baron Aburgaueny.Thomas West, Baron de la Ware.Thomas, Baron Dacres of Gillesland.Thomas, Baron Darcy of the North.Edward Sutton, Baron Dudley.William Blount, Baron Montioy.Edward Stanley, Baron Monteagle.William Baron Sands.Henry Baron Marney.Thomas Baron Audley of Waldon, Lord Chancellor of England.Iohn Gage, knight, Controller of the kings House.Henry Guilford, Knight, Maister of the Horse, and after Controller of the House.Nicholas Carew, Knight, Maister of the Horse.Thomas Cheney, Knight, Warden of the Cinque-Ports.Richard Wingfield, Knight, Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster.Anthony Wingfield, Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine to the King, Captaine of the Guard, and after Controller of the Kings House.Anthony Saint-Leger, Knight, Vice-Roy of Ireland.Iohn Wallop, Knight, Captaine of G^y^s in France.
Edward the sixt, King of England, France and Ireland, Supreame Lord of the Garter^ by him these men following were admitted into the said Order.HEnry the second, King of France.Henry Grey, Marquesse Dorset, after

Duke of ^^^^olke.Henry Neuile, Earle of Westmerland.Edward Stanley, Earle of Derby.Frances Hastings Earle of Huntingdon.William Herbert, Earle of Pembroke.Thomas Seymour Baron of Sudeley.Thomas West Baron de la Ware.George Brooke, Baron Cobham.Edward Baron Clinton, Lord Admirall of England, and afterward Earle of Lincolne.William Paget, Baron of Beau-Desert.Thomas Darcie, Baron of Chiche.Andrew Sutton (alias Dudley) Knight.
Mary, Queen of England, France and Ireland, and Supreame Lady of the Order of the Garter, these men (for orders sake) the other Knights being dead, were preferred into their places.PIllip, King of Spaine, Husband to the Queene.Emanuel Philebert, Duke of Sauo^y.Henry Radcliff, Sonne of Henry Earle of Sussex.Anthony Browne, Vicount Mount-acute.William Howard, Baron of Effingham.William Gray Baron of Wilton.Edward Hastings, Master of the Horse, after Baron Hastings of L^^ghborow, and Chamberlaine to the Queene.Robert Rochester, Knight, dyed before the enstalement.
Elizabeth of famous memory, Queene of England, France and Ireland, Supreame Lady of the most noble Order of the Garter, chose into that Order, these men following.MAximillian Emperour, King of Bohemia and Hungaria, in the yeare 1568Charles the ninth, King of France. 1564Henry the third, King of France. 1584Fredericke King of Denmarke. 1582Adolph, Duke of Halsatia. 1560Iohn Cassimere, Count-Palatine of Rhine and Duke of Bauaria. 1579Frances Montmorency, Duke of Montmorency. 1572Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolke. 1556Fredericke Duke of Wittenberge 1597. He was not receiued, till vnder the reigne of the King of Great Bretaigne, Iames, first of that name, in the yeare 1604William Parre, Marquesse of Northampton. 1559Thomas Percie Earle of Northumberland. 1563.George Talbot, Earle of Shrewsburie. 1561Henry Stanley, Earle of Derby. 1574William Sommerset, Earle of Worcester. 1570Henry M^nnors, Earle of Rutland. 1559Henry Hastings Earle of Huntington. 1572Ambrose Sutton (alias Dudley) Earle of Warwicke. 1563Francis Russell, Earle of Bedford. 1564Henry Herbert, Earle of Pembroke. 1574Robert Sutton (alias Dudley) Earle of Leicester. 1559Walter Deuereux Earle of Essex. 1572Edward Mannors Earle of Rutland. 1584Henry Radcliffe, Earle of Sussex. 1586Robert Deuereux, Earle of Essex. 1588G^lbert Talbot, Earle of Shrewsbury. 1592George Clifford, Earle of Cumberland. 1592Henry Percie Earle of Northumberland. 1593Edward Sommerset, Earle of Worcester. 1593Robert Radcliffe, Earle of Sussex. 15^9William Stanley, Earle of Darby. 1601Arthur Grey, Baron of Wilton. 1572Charles Howard, Baron of Effingham, and Lord Admirall of England, 1575. after Earle of Nottingham. Edmund Burges, Baron Chandoys. 1572Henry Cary, Baron of Hunsdon. 1561William Cecil, Baron of Burghley. 1572William Brooke Baron of Cobham. 1584Henry Scroope, Baron of Bolton. 1584Thomas Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst, after Earle of Dors^t, and Lord High-Treasurer of England. 1593Thomas, Baron de Burgh. 1593Edmund, Baron Sheffeild. 1593Thomas Howard, Baron Howard of Walden, 1597. after Earle of Suffolke, and Lord Chamberlaine to the Kings Maiesty, also Lord High-Treasurer of England. George Cary, Baron of Hunsdon, and Lord Cha^berlain to Queen Elizabeth. 1597Charles Blount, Baron Monioy, 1597. after Earle of Deuonshire. Henry Brooke, Baron Cobham. 1599Thomas Cecil, Baron of Burghly. 1601Henry Sidney, Knight, President of the Marches of Wales. 1588Christopher Hatton, Knight, Lord Chauncellor of England. 1588Francis Knoles, Knight, Treasurer of the Queenes house. 1593Henry Lea, knight, Keeper of the Armory 1597
These foure last were of the long Roabe and they whom we call Knights of Letters (who may be of Armes) the English, Germaines, Italians, and other Nations, do tearme Cheualiers Dorez, Equites Auratos. Because in regard of their long and faithfull seruice, they haue Letters from their Prince, for the title of Earles and Knights, with power to beare the Circle on their Armes, a Chaine of Gold about their necks, the Sword and guilded Spu^res, as we haue said in the first Booke, and first Chapter.
Iames, the first of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, King, Supreame Lord of the Garter: by him these men following, were admitted into the said Order.Christierne, fourth of the name, King of Denmarke. 1603Henry of England, Prince of VVales, and of Great Bretaign, eldest Sonne to the King. 1603Charles Duke of Yorke, second Son to the King, Prince of Great Bretaigne and VVales. 1611Fredericke, Prince Elector, Palatine of the Rhine. 1613Graue Maurice, after Prince of Orenge. 1613Frederick Duke of VVittemberge, elected in the yeare 1597. but not enstalled till 1604. Lewes Duke of Lenox, Cousine to the King. 1603Henry VVriothesly, Earle of Southampton. 1603Iohn Ereskin, Earle of Marre. 1603VVilliam Herbert, Earle of Penbrok. 1603Hulricke, Duke of Hlsatia. 1605Henry Howard, Earle of Northampto^ 1605Robert Cecil, Earle of Salisbury, after Lord high-Treasurer of England. 1606Thomas Howard, Viscount Bindon. 1606George Hume Earle of Dunbarre. 160^Phillip Herbert, Earle of Mo^tgomery. 1608Thomas Howard, Earle of Arundel. 1611Thomas Ereskin Viscount Fenton. 161^Robert Carre, Vicount Rochester* afterward Earle of Sommerset. 161^VVilliam Baron Knoles of Grayes, Treas^ror of the Kings house, after Viscoun^ VVallingford. 1615Francis, Earle of Rutland. 1616George Villers, after Viscount Villers, Earl and Marquesse of Buckingham. 1616Robert Sidney, Viscount Lysle, after Earle of Leicester. 1616Iames Hamilton, Marquesse Hamilton and Earle of Cambridge, enstalled 1623
For the rest, we haue sufficiently discoursed the Armes, Crests and Supporters of the said Order of the Garter, which a^e to be seene in an infinite number of imprinted Bookes and Manuscrip^^, remaining yet in mine owne hands, with the figure of the vnion of the Roses White and Red, printed and cut in Copper at London, by Iodocus Hondius, An. 1589.
We will finish this Order, by the Blazons and Supporters of the Armes of England, and with the Kings, Heralds and Pursuiuants of Armes of the said Kingdome.
The Armes are De France, Fs^arte^^ D'Angleterre.
The Supporters: On the right side a Leopard, and on the other a Griffon.
There are three Kings of Armes.
Garter, who is first; for honour of the Order, but not for Antiquity, because his Institution was but by King Henry the Fift.
Clarenceux: And
Norroy.
Both of them Instituted by King Edward third of that name; And these two Kings are called Kings of Prouinces.
There are six Heralds; namely,
2. Sommerset.6. Chester.3. VVindsore.5. Richmond.4. Lancaster.
1. Yorke. The Officers of Armes doe giue their attendance according to their antiquity in creation.
Who haue foure Poursuiuants vnder them; to wit, 3. Rougedragon.1. Portcullis. Which we tearme^

Harrow, that the King of England, Henry, eight of the name, tooke for his Deuise.2. Blew-Mantle.4. Rouge-Crosse.
All these Officers are immediately allowed by the owne hand of the Kings of England, or in their absence or impeachment, by the Constable or Earle Marshall of the Kingdome, who giuing them their Crownes and Collars, createth the Pursuiuants and granteth Coates to the Heralds and Pursuiuants. They haue a House or Colledge for their meeting together, perticularly appointed for them in the Citie of London, and their Pensions or Wages are iustly payed them from the Kings Exchecquer.
Gahrer King of Armes, hath charge of all such matters as concerne the Order, to carry mandates and all instruments necessary, as well to the Knights as Bachelers, elected and named for the said Order.
Clarenceaux King of Armes, hath for his deuision all the Prouinces and Countries of England, which are in the East, West and South sides, from the Riuer of Trent.
Norroy is King of Armes, of those parts extendind beyong the said Riuer, into the North.
The charge and exercise of these two Kings of Armes, is to command the Heralds and Pursuiuants, to view and visite in the Prouinces of their diuisions, all Noble Houses; to obserue, make and describe their Pedegrees; distinguish and blazon the Armes of yonger Brothers from the elder; to ouerthrow and deface in publique Market places, those which are vsurped by Yeomen, Villaines, or their Sons; and to cut off the Spurs of those vsurpers, who counterfeit themselues as descended from Nobles, Knights and Esquires. Also to giue Armes to such Yeomen, whom the Kings will haue ennobled: And to order the Blacks, Obsequies and Funerals for Princes, Gouernors, Knights, and Nobles in their partitions.
In England there is perticularly a Chamber of Iustice, to iudge causes concerning the facts of Knights of the Garter, as well for things touching their goods, as those that respect their honor and person. And this Chamber is named The Court for Knights. Therin is deliuered all Commissions, Exploits and Assignations, necessary in matters ciuile and criminall: the signification whereof belongeth to the King of Armes Garter, who imployeth in them (according to the importance and occurrences of the fact) the other Kings of Armes, or Heralds.
The End of the Orders of England.

The Order of Scotland, called of Saint Andrew, or of the Thistle, and the Rew. CHAP. III.L'Ordre d'Ls^^sse, d^^ de Saint An^^e: Ou du Cha^^on and de la Rue.SCotland, a part of Great Bretaigne, is an auncient State or Kingdome alone, and seperated from England by two Riuers; the one comming from the East, and called Tueda, and the o^her from the West, named Solueo, all the rest of the Island is engirt with the Sea,Edenborough the chiefe Citie of Scotland tearmed the Ocean. Edenborough is the Capitall Citie of the Kingdome (where the Kings of Scots, predecessours to Iames the sixt, now reigning, and King of all Great Bretaigne) haue made their ordenarie residing.Setting aside the auncient Originall of the Scots, and the Warres which they haue had against the Picts, the old English and Saxons their neighbours, and which the curious Reader may see in the Histories of Marianus Scotus; of Ioannes Leslaeus, Bishop of Rosse, imprinted at Rome, In aedibus populi Romani, Anno 1568. of George Buchanan, and other Scottish Historians; wee will come to their Kings,Fergus the first King of Scotland. the first of whom (by their saying) was Fergus, who they make to be the Son of Ferquhard, King of Hibernia or Ireland. Fergusius faustis omnium acclamationibus, Fatali Cathedrae insidens, primus Scotorum Rex in Albione dictus est. Three hundred and thirty yeares before the Incarnation of our Sauiour and Redeeemer Iesus Christ.King Hiber that came from Egypt, and brought the Mable Stone.The Scots say, that their King, named Hiber, who came from Aegypt to inhabite on the coasts of Spaine, and from thence into Ireland, so called of his name; brought along with him a Stone of Marble, made in the fashion of a Chaire, wherein hee made it his vse to sit. And this Chaire, which they called Fatale, the Kings of Scots were seated in, at their election to the Kingdome. A custome which was continued by the Kings, descending of Fergus, first of that name, vnto the King Iohn Baliol, ouercome by the King of England Edward, first of that name, who caused the Marble Chayre to be brought from Scone in Scotland, where it was kept; to his Pallace at Westminster neere London,The Marble chaire brought into England. where at this day it is to be seene. Which Edward was incited to doe, because by an ancient credited saying, it was verily beleeued, that the Kingdome of Scotland should change from thence, to follow the fortune of him, who was to become Maister thereof, according as two verses, engrauen on the fatall Marble, doe report.Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocumque locatumInuenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.The Armes of King Fergus.This Fergus, by the magnanimity of his courage, tooke for his Armes and deuise, the creature accounted the Symboll of valiancy and generositie, to witt D'Or, As Lyon rempant de Gueules (which the Kings of Scotland haue retained, without changing, euen to this present) Au Mezail tarre de front, et coronne, et pour Cimier vn Scepire au coste droict, et vne Espee nue a l'autre.Donald^ first Christian King of Scotland.After the said Fergus, the Scots accounte fiue and twenty Kings Idolaters, vnto Donalaus, first of that name, who was their first Christian King, by the meanes of Pope Victor, first of the name, who sent them Priests, by whose preaching and miracles wrought, the said King of Scotland, the Nobility and people, embraced and receiued the Catholique Religion, in the yeare of Iesus Christ, two hundred and three, and from the establishment of the said Kingdome, fiue hundred, thirty and three.After the said Christian King Donalde the first, vntill King Achaius, there are rancked seauen and thirty Kings successiuely.This Achaius, made League and Alliance offensiue and defensiue, towards all and against all Kings and Princes, not excepting any; with King Charlemaigne and the most

Christians Kings of France his Successours to perpetuity, in rhe yeare of Grace, Eight hundred and nine. The Conuentions and agreements of this League spake perticulerly.

That to Perpetuity,The Articles of the League concluded on* Alliance and Confederation, should be betweene the Scotts and Frenche.That in the warres which the English made, the said Scots and French should giue succour mutually and reciprocally, the one to the other.That if it happened the said English, should make warre in France; the Scotts must then giue them succour with men of warre, who should be waged and maintained at the expences of the French.The same should they likewise doe, furnishing the expences with their money, if the said Scotts should be warred on by the English.That for following time, neither the Scotts nor French, should fauour the parte of the English, either with money, councell, Armes or victualles, vnder paine of being declared guilty of High Treason.That the French should make no Peace or Truce with the English; except the King of Scots were comprised and named therein.That the Couenants and Conditions aboue named, should be confirmed from King to King, and at ech^ change of them, and their Pragmaticall Sanctions to bee sealed and confirmed riciprocally on both sides.The Scots ioyfull of this Alliance, accepted it for their aduantage and benefit,The ioy for this confederated alliance. as the very greatest and most famous of Christendome, and deleagued for their Ambassadour, William, Brother to Achaius their king, assisted with the councell of foure persons more, renowned for learning, named Clemens, Iohn, Rabanus and Alcuinus, accompanied with foure thousand men of warre, sent to the succour of king Charlemaigne.Two leaned Doctours aduanced by King Charlemaigne, Ioh^nnes Sco^us C^audius Clemens. Of those foure Doctours and vtterers of knowledge, king Charlemaigne kept two, the one as Regent and Gouernour of the Vniuersitie of Paris, and the other for that of Pauia, which he had founded and erected, to instruct in learning the French, Lombardes, and the nations of Italie, which hee had reduced vnder his obedience. The two worthy Doctours, so stayed by king Charlemaigne at Paris and Pauia, were Iohn, sirnamed Sco^us, a Scottish man both by nation and Sir-name, and Claudius Clemens.To preserue the memory of this Alliance to posterity, the Scotts report, that Charlemaigne gaue permission to the said Achaius, king of Scotland, and to his Successours in the said kingdome,The Armes of Scotland Enlarged. to Honour and enclose Le Lyon de leur Armes D'un double Essonier et Trescheur Fleure', Contrefleure 'De France de Geueules, and deporter la Coronne esleuee, et cleschee a l'Imperiale, le Chappeau decore' de quatre Fleures de Lys esleuee entre parcil nombre de Croix pattees. Which the kings of England

Scotland haue conserued in Armes, And Crowned to this very day.Aeguinard, Secretary to the State, nourished (from his tender youth) in the Court of France, decribing the life of the said King Charlemaigne, maketh a denumeration of strange Princes, who sought for, and embraced the amity of that puissant Monarch.Such as sought the friendship of King Charlemaigne. First of all, the Emperours of Constantinople, Nicephorus, Michaell and Leo: Aaron King of the Persians, Ruler of the greatest part of the East, the Indiaes excepted: Alphonso King of Gallicica and of the Asturies, with the Kings of Scotland, of whom he speaketh thus. Scotorum quoque Reges sic habuit ad suam voluntatem per suam munificentiam inclinatos, Vt eum nunquam aliter quam Dominum, seque subditos ac seruos eius pronuntiarent. Extant Epistolae ab eis ad eum missae, quibus huiusmodi affectus eorum erga illum indicatur.This Alliance of the two Crownes of France and Scotland, hath continued (as the Scots themselues say) for the reignes of one and Forty Kings of France,The continuance of this lincked amity, and the succours giuen by the Scots to France. and sixe and Forty of Kings Scotland, contayning the space of Eight hundred and twenty yeares.In vertue of which Alliance or Confederation, many remarkable succours haue bin giuen by the Scots to France. The forenamed Achaius assisted King Charlemaigne, with foure thousand Scots, conducted by his Brother Guillaum, who did profitable seruice in tho warres, in Italie, Saxonie, Hungaria and Spayne.Malcome, Third of that name, King of Scotland, sent two thousand men of his to Monsieur Hugues de France, called the Great, Counte of Vermandois, Brother to Phillip, first of that name, to ioyne in the Voyage of the Holy Land, for the Conquest of Ierusalem, vnder the Conduct of the valliant Prince, Godfrey of Bullen.Alexander, second of that name, sent Three thousand Scots, to the succour of the Great King Saint Lewes, Conducted by Patach of Dunbar, Earle of Marche, for his voyage into the East.Alexander, third of that name, sent to the same Saint Lewes, for his Voyage into Affrica, other two thousand Scots, Conducted by the Earles of Caerrct, and of Ath^ll.Dauid la Bruce, sent three thousand Scots to King Iohn, Conducted by William Earle of Douglas, who were slaine on the day of Poictiers.Robert Stuart Lord Gouernour of Scotland.Robert de Stuart, Gouernour of Scotland, and vnckle to King Iames, First of that name, sent seauen thousand Scots to Monsieur Charles of France, the Daulphine of Viennois, Conducted and commaunded by his Sonne the Earle of Bouquh^n, and Archembald Douglas, Earle of Wigton, and Brother in Law to the Earle of Boucquhan, who won the Battaile at Baugency.His Sonne Murdaque, also Gouernour of Scotland, sent ten thousand Scots to the same Charles, being King, Fifte of that name, Conducted by his Brother the said Earle of Boucquhane, and A^chembald Douglas, and the one eyed Earle of Douglas, Father to the Earle of Wigton, Godfather to the Earle of Boucquhane; who perished (for the most part) at the Battaile of Vernueill. Anno, 1424.Iohn Stuart Constable of Scotland.Iohn Stuart, Constable of Scotland, in the yeare One thousand, foure hundred twenty fiue, brought foure thousand Scots to King Charles the Seauenth, with many other Companies, commaunded by Dauid le Pitulot.Since those times, the Scots haue alwayes continued, and giuen to France very worthy seruices; vnder the charge of Robert Bernard; an other Robert and Iohn Stuart, Lord of Aubignie; Alexander Duke of Albaine, and Iohn his Sonne, Earle of Boucquhane; during the Reignes of Lewes the Eleuenth, Charles the Eight, Lewes the Twelfth, Frances the First, and Henry the Second.The said Scots, not satisfied to haue assisted with their powers France, whensoeuer it had neede,The French against the Scots. to diuert the auncient enemies thereof from warring thereon; drew them against themselues into Scotland: so that vpon the same subiect, the English (at all times enemies of France and Scotland) entred into their Kingdome, soare wounded, and tooke prisoner Dauid le Bruce, of whom we spake before, and with him ten thousand Scots slaine, at the Battaile of Du^ham.Iames the Fourth, vpon the same subiect, had warre against his Father in Law the King of England Henry, Eight of that name: was slaine in the Battaile of Flodden, with him the most part of the Nobility, and well neere foureteene thousand Scots.Iames the Fift, his Son, had also the same Henry the (Eight being his Vnckle) pressing

vpon him, because hee had made warre in fauour of the King of France,The death of King Iames the Fift. Frances the First, his Father in Law. This Warre succeeded ill to him, he dyed with griefe and discontent, eight dayes after an vnkinde crosse of Fortune, by the ouerthrow of his Army, conducted by Oliuer de Sainct Clere, his Fauourite.Mary Stuart, Queene of Scotland, his Daughter and onely Heyre, was by the three Estates of the Realme, promised in Marriage to Prince Edward of England, Sonne to the said King Henry the Eight, in the Life time of his Father. But he being dead, the said Estates of Scotland finding this Alliance not liking to them, married their Queene, sending her into France, to the French Daulphine, Second Son to King Henry, Second of that name. Edward being angry at this Marriage,King Edward disappointed of his Marriage. sent an Army into Scotland, conducted by his Vncle the Duke of Somerset, who wonne the Battaile of Puique, wherein dyed Fifteene Thousand Scots.Beside these succours and signall Seruices, rendred so many times by the Scots to France, heereto may bee added, that since King Iames, Sixt of that name, King of Scotland, came to the Crown of England, by the death of Queen Elizabeth, Daughter to King Henry the Eight: the States of England made many requests to the Scots, that seeing they were now ioyned together, as being one people, vnder the obedience of one King onely, and their Kingdomes comprised vnder the name of Great Bretaigne; it was very requisite and good reason,Motion made for altering the Alliance. that (thenceforward) there should be no other Alliance, Confederation or other Gouernment, but that of the English, labouring by this meanes, to diuert the Scots from the ancient Alliance of France, whereto the Scots would not listen by any meanes.Because (from time to time) there had beene Alliance and Affinity betweene the French and Scots, from King to King, and Kingdome to Kingdome,Alliance continued from time to time. and their Affinity renewed by diuers Marriages. For Iewes the Eleauenth being Daulphin, had to Wife in his first Nuptialls, Madame Margaret of Scotland, Daughter to King Iames First of that name, at which time, the blood of the two Nations of France and Scotland were conioyned and mingled all together. In regard that there were an Hundred and Forty, as well Scottish Ladies as Gentlewomen, married into France, of which number, were the two Sisters to the Queene Daulphine, the one whereof espoused the Duke of Bretaigne, and the other the Earle of Flanders.Alexander Duke of Albany, Brother to the King of Scots, Third of the name,The Issue by this Marriage. espoused the Countesse of Bologne: And running at Tilt against Monsieur Lewes, Duke of Orleance, was wounded with a splinter of a Launce, of which hurt he died immediately, leauing off this Marriage.Iohn Steuart, Duke of Albany, Count of Bologne, and Gouernour of Scotland, during the Minority of Iames the Fift: who married in his first espousals Madame Magdalen of France, eldest Daughter to King Frances, First of that name. And in second Marriage, the said King Iames tooke to Wife Mary of Lorraine, Dowager of Longue. Ville, Sister to the Duke of Guise; And of this Marriage was borne only one Daughter.Mary Stuart, Queene of Scotland, Wife to the Daulphine Frances, Second of that name, King of Scotland.The Kings of France incited by the fidelity of the Scots, of succours and Seruices so many times receiued from them, and of losses and damages suffered by them, in being alwayes of their part and Alliance: haue recompenced their principall charges, from the great F^e^s and fees of their Crowne.Charles, Seauenth of the name, gaue the Office of Constable of France,Iohn Stuart, Constable of France.. the first of the Kingdome, to Lord Iohn Stuart, Earle of Boucquhane. He was made by the same King, Count d'Eureux, an ancient Appennage belonging to the Princes of the blood of France, Kings of Nauarre, and hee gaue him the Siegneury of Concressault. He deserued for his great and worthy Seruices, to beare for honor in the first Quarter of his Armes, De France a la Bordure de Gueules, a huict fermailets d'Or.The Earle of Douglas was honoured with the Duchie of Touraine, which Charles the Seauenth, and his Brethren, Eldest Sonnes of France, held for their Appennage or Portion.The said Douglas enioyed the said Duchie, hee, his Sonne, and youngest Sonne,
(...)
Priuiledges granted to Scottish Merchant.These Priuiledges of the Scots, were confirmed by King Henry the Great, Fo^^^ of that name, in the yeare One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Foure Score and Nineteene. According as the same was formerly done by King Charles the Ninth, who in Anno One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Three Score and Seauen, confirmed the Priuiledges granted by the Kings his Predecessors to Scottish Merchants, Priuiledges of Exemption from all kinds of Impositions laid vpon their Merchandises. Priuiledges not onely verified in the Court of Parliament at Paris; but also confirmed by Arrests in the Yeares, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Foure Score and One, and, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Foure Score and Foure.
The Captaines of the Scottish Guards, who had the places of Honour wherevnto they were called: As those of the first Men of Armes; of ordenary exempts* the Marshall of the Lodging; the keepers of the keyes, and of the Quire in the Church, were naturall Scots. And vntill the disastrous death of King Henry, Second of that name, slaine by a Lance in the Iousts of Paris, by the Count de Montgommery, naturall Scots. By whose death and absence, those Charges were conferred on the Lords and French Gentlemen, admitted in like manner into the Companies of the Scottish Guards, with the naturall Scots. But returne wee now againe to King Achaius, the subiect of this our digression.
King Athelstane against Hungus King of the Picts.Hungus, King of the Picts, pressed by the powers of Athelstane, King of the East Saxons, made his recourse to the said Achaius, who with his Army of ten thousand Scots, entred on the Marches and Frontiers of Northumberland, where hee gaue hot welcome to Hungus at his returne; yet he was surprized by the Army of Athelstane, with all his forces, as hee resolued (neuerthelesse) to giue the Enemy Battaile. And being in the night time on their knees at prayer, the Scottish men beheld in Heauen the Crosse of Saint Andrew the Apostle,A Vision of the Crosse of Saint Andrew. their Patron, by vertue and encouragement of which sight, by breake of day the next morning, they had the victory ouer the King their enemy, who was there slaine, and the place hath euer since retained his name, being called Athelstanes Foord, abruptly tearmed Ailsta^^ Foord.Athelstanes or Ailstane Ford The Scots write, that about the yeare of Grace, Three Hundred, Three-Score and Nine, Saint Regulus came forth of Greece into Scotland, bringing with him the Reliques of Saint Andrew the Apostle, whom they held for their Tutelary Saint and Patrone. And his Crosse En Saultoir (vnhansomly fashioned) for Colonel in their Penons, Standards and Banners.
After this Achaius, the Scots account twenty Kings in Succession, euen vnto
Saint Margaret Wife to King MalcolmeMalcolme, Third of that name, who began to reigne in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Three Score and One. Of his Wife Saint Margaret, Sister to Edgar, he begat sixe Sonnes, and two Daughters.
Edward, slaine with his Father.Etheldred, dying young.Edgar.Alexander.Dauid: AndEdmond, who became a Monke.
The Daughters were
Mathilde, or Mahauld of Scotland, Wife to the King of England Henry, First of that name, called Beauclarke. And of this Marriage descended the Kings of England, Successors to the said Henry. The other Daughter, was Mary of Scotland, Wife to Eustace Count of Bologne, Brother to Godfrey of Bologne the First King of Ierusalem.
By a Concubine, before his Marriage, hee had a Bastard Sonne named D^ncane,Donald, Brother to King Malcolme. who was King of Scotland, Second of the name after Donald, Brother to Macolme the Third, who, with his eldest Sonne was slaine on the Marches of Scotland, by the King of England William, Sirnamed Rous, or Rufus, Sonne to William the Conqueror, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Foure Score and Seauenteene, the Sixe and Thirtieth yeare of his Reigne, the Queene Saint Margaret deceasing with sorrow foure dayes after him. In his time was made the Conquest of Normandy, by Willam the Bastard. And the Illustrious Family of the Stuarts, which holdeth

the Crownes of Great Bretaigne at this present, tooke stemme and foundation from Walter (Sonne of Fleance) Great Seneshall or Steward of Scotland.Originall of the Royall Family of Stuart After King Malcolme succeeded
Donald, Sixt of the name, his Brother, in regard of the young yeares of his Nephewes; transported them into England, vndet the Guard of King Edgar, their Vncle by the Mothers side. The reigne of this man was of no long continuance, because
Duncane, Bastard of him dead, being assisted by a puissant Armie, which was sent him from William Rufus, vnder whom hee had martially serued: expelled Donald out of Scotland, who reigned no more then eighteene Moneths, but fled into the Ilands Hebrides. Duncane was slaine within a while after, by the cunning traines of Donald; who came againe into Scotland, where he ill-intreated the Nobility, the chiefest whereof resolued to call home
Edgar, the Third Sonne of Malcolme.Edgar conducted into Scotland by an English Army, and the First King there annointed. From England he was conducted into Scotland (by an Army of Englishmen, sent from William Rufus) where he was receiued and installed in the fatall Chayre at Scone, and Donald shut vp in Prison, where hee dyed with griefe, in the fourth yeare of his Reigne.
Edgar was the first of the Kings of Scotland, Annointed and Sacred with Holy Oyle, by the Bishop of Saint Andrewes, named Godric, which hath euer since beene obserued at the Coronation of the Kings of Scotland. Saint Margaret, Mother to the said Edgar obtained this Priuiledge of Pope Vrbane the Second, who at that time presided in the Holy Seate.
This King liued peaceably in his Kingdome about the space of nine yeares, and dyed without Issue, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred and Nine, and after him succeeded his Brother
Alexander, First of that name, called the Strong, who dyed also without Issue, after he had reigned Seauenteene yeares, in Anno, One Thousand, One Hundred, Twenty Sixe, leauing for his Successour his Brother
Dauid, First of that name, who in the life time,English Earldomes comming to the Crowne of Scotland. and with the consent of his Father Alexander, tooke to Wife Mahauld, Daughter and sole Heyre to the Earle of Cumberland, Northumberland and Huntingdon, Earledomes, which by meanes of this Alliance came to the Crowne of Scotland, vnder the homage of that of England. Of this Marriage was borne their onely Sonne
Henry, who dyed in his Fathers life time.
Hee had espoused Adama, Daughter to the Earle of Warren, and by her hee had three Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
Malcolme,William: AndDauid.
The Daughters were
Adama,Margaret: AndMahauld.
Moreouer, hee had by the Widdow of Gualtier, Knight of the Thistle, a Bastard Sonne, named Gualtier, a Monke of holy life, Confessour and Councellour to his Brother Malcolme.
Dauid, First of that name dyed, hauing reigned nine and twenty yeares, in the yeare, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred, Fifty One.
Malcolme, Fourth of that name, teamed the Virgin-Man,Malcolme, Sirnamed The Virgin-Man, eldest Sonne to the Prince of Scotland Henry, scceeded in the Kingdome, after the death of Dauid the First his Grandfather. He liued chastly, and not being married, gouerned by his naturall Brother, formerly named, and dyed after hee had reigned thirteene yeares. An. 1163. he had for his Successour his Second Brother
William, Sirnamed the Lyon, who left by his Wife Hermingard, Daughter to the Earle of Beaumont, youngest Daughter to William the Conquerour, one Sonne, named
Alexander, and three Daughters, all married into England, to wit
(...)
and other Authors who liued at that time, say all with one consent, this of her. Magnam post Abaelardi coniugis mortem ei in assiduis precibus fidem seruasse, Corpusque eius de loco vbi obierat, ad praedictum Paracleti Monasterium transtulisse.
Shee dyed the Sixteenth of the Calends of Iune, An. One Thousand, One Hundred, Threescore and Three. And at her enterring, the Celestiall and Diuine Loue of these faithfull Louers appeared by Miracle. Helouisa, being at the end of her life, ordained and desired to bee carried to the Sepulchre or Tombe of Abaylard her Husband. After her death she was brought thither,An other testimony of true and cordiall affection. and (a miraculouus thing) her Husband, who twenty yeares before had lien in his Graue; lifted vp his arme on high, receiued the body of his Wife, and after hee had embraced it, held it fast to him.
Heloisa in agritudine posita praecepit, vt mortua intra Mariti tumulum poneretur. Et sic eadem defuncta ad tumulum deportata, Maritus eius qui multis diebus ante eam defunctus fuerat, eleuatis in brachijs illam recepit, and ita eam amplexatu, sbrachia sua restrinxit.
To the end, that like as this modest Dame (during her Marriage) had singularly affected and honoured her Hu^band; so after the dissolution thereof, and his life, she loued him more entirely, with loue wholly diuine and Celestiall, and liued all the rest of her life in continuall Chastity, and in obseruance of the Monasticall Rules, which the said Abaylard had prescribed to her, and followed him in the same Graue, to liue with him in eternall glory. These are the words of Peter of Clugny, writing the newes of her Husbands death, to the said Helouifa. Hunc ergo venerabilis, and charissima in Domino Soror, cui post carnalem copulam tanto validi^re quanto melure diuinae charitatis vinculo ad haesisti, cum quo, and sub quo diu Domino deseruisti; hunc inquam, loco tui, vel vt te alteram in gremio suo confouet and in aduentu Domini, in vece Archangeli; and in tuba Dei descendentis de Coelo, tibi per ipsius gratiam restituendum reseruat. Returne wee now againe to the Kings of Scotland.
Alexander the Third (of whom we discoursed before this digression) dyed in A^. One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score, and Three, hauing reigned thirty foure yeares.
The variance happening betweene Iohn Baliell and Robert Bruce.Being dead without Issue, and hauing declared (by his Testament) his Successor in the Kingdome: there grew contention betweene Iohn Balliol, and Robert Bruce, Princes issued of the Scottish Blood, to which of them the Crowne should come, because they were both descended of Dauid, Brother to King William; Robert, of Isabel of Scotland, the youngest Daughter, and Iohn, of Margarete of Scotland, eldest Daughter to the said Dauid. To vnderstand clearely this Genealogie, let vs tell you.
Dauid, First of that name, King of Scotland, Brother to King Alexander the First, had a Sonne.
Henry of Scotland, Father of three Sonnes, namely of Malcolme, Fourth of that name, King of Scotland, deceasing without Issue, as we haue said, of
William, King of Scotland, of whom the Line fayled in the person of King Alexander the Third, the Subiect of this digression. And of
Dauid of Scotland, Earle of Huntingdon, who left but two Daughters; to wit
Margaret: And Isabell of Huntingdon.
Of Margaret, eldest Daughter to Dauid of Huntington, descended one onely Daughter
Deruogilde, Wife to Iohn Balioll, Father and Mother of this Iohn Balliol, who contended for the Crowne.
Isabell, youngest Daughter to Dauid of Huntingdon, wife to Robert Bruce, had a Son Robert Bruce, Father of this Robert Bruce, who pretended his precedency to the Kingdome, before his Cousin Iohn Balioll, who maintained the contrary. To make agreement betweene them, Edward the First, King of England, Sirnamed Long-shankes, was made Arbitratour, who adiudged the Crowne to Iohn Balioll, sitting in the Fatall Chayre, according to the ancient Custome. This Iohn and his Sonne Edward, were taken and ouerthrowne in Battaile, by the said King Edward the First, and then hee transported the Fatall Chayre, as we haue formerly declared.
Robert Bruce came to the Crowne of Scotland, which he defended valiantly against the English, surmounting them in great store of Encounters; so that he purdged Scotland of the English, after a furious and Blody Battaile, wherein he had the victory, the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and foureteene, the feast day of S. Iohn:
This Robert had two wiues. By the first, named Elizabeth, Sister to the Earle of Marre, he had but one daughter, named Margery.
The other wife, was Sister to the Earle of Hullesten, and by her he had one Sonne and two daughters, namely
Dauid.Margaret: AndMahauld.
At the generall Parliament of Scotland, helde in the yeare before remembred, it was ordained, that for following time,An Order agreed on in the Court of Parliament. the Kingdome of Scotland should appertaine to Dauid, the Sonne of Robert. And if he chaunced to dye without heires Males; to Edward, Brother of the said Robert, and to his Male children; who deceasing without heires Masculine: the Crowne of Scotland should then come to Margerie, eldest daughter to King Robert, and to her descendants, as well Males as Females.
There was a Treatie of Peace, betweene the Scots and English, by meanes of the Mariage of Ioane, daughter to Edward, the Third of that name, King of England,Peace treated on betweene the English and Scots* with Dauid of Scotland, Sonne to the said King Robert, who died the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred twenty and nine, and the foure and twentieth of his Reigne. Somewhile before his death, hee had made a vow to crosse ouer the Seas, to make warre vpon the Sarrazins: which hauing not done, hee appointed by his Testament, that his heart should be buried at the Holy Sepulchre of Ierusalem, which was performed by Iames Douglas his faithfull Knight, who (at his returne) came to dwell in Spayne, where he died in the seruice of the King of Arragon, in a Fight giuen against the Moores.
Dauid, Second of the name, succeeded in the Kingdome of Scotland, by the death of King Robert his Father. His repose was so troubled by Edward of England, that this young King was constrained to forsake his Kingdome, and shelter himselfe in France, in the Courte of King Phillip de Valois, the Sixte and last of that name, who gaue the Conduct of a puissant Army to William Douglas, and hee expelled the English out of Scotland, where he reseated his Master King Dauid: who hauing reigned nine and thirty yeares, more in warre then peace, more in afflictions and miseries,The English (...) of Sc^d. then any pleasure or contentment: died in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred seauenty, without hauing any issue by his two wiues, Ioane the Daughter of England, or Margaret, daughter to the Knight Iohn Logy: So that by his death, according to the Decree of Parliament Generall, related before, the Crowne of Scotland came to the Eldest sister.
Margerie, who married Walter Stuart, and of this Mariage descended the Kings of Scotland, that reigne to this day. Behold heere the Sourse of that Illustrious Family.
The Originall of the Illustrious Family of Stuart.BAnquho, Thane of Loquhabir, that is to say, President and Gouernour of such a Prouince in Scotland, with his Sonne Fleance, caried themselues so vertuously in their charges, that they attained to great credit in Scotland. This was the reason, why King Mackbeth (immediate Predecessour of King Malcolme the third) was very enuious of their vertue, practising by wicked stratagems to murther them both. The father was slaine in the place.Fleance escaped, and saued himselfe in England, trauayling to the Gouernour of the Prouince of Wales.The Armes car^ed by Fleance and his Father. This Fleance and his Father caried for their Armes D'or a la Fesse Eschiquettee D'Argent and de Sable de quatre Traicts, Which are the Auncient Armes of the Stuarts. This Fleance espoused the Daughter to the Gouernour of Wales, and of this mariage was borne.Walter, surnamed Banquho (according as his Father was) who returning into Scotland, fought valiantly for his King, against the Ilands Rebells, and the Sauages of Scotland. In recompence of his extraordinary vertue, he was made Great
(...)


or as there is a common Prouerbe at Paris: He is a Foole that so trusts. On the morow after this crowning the Earle of Atholl,There can no truth be ex^ected from the father of lies. he was fastened to the taile of a Horse, being led so thorow all the quarters and streets of the Citty. On the third day he was drawne with foure Horses, his hart and bowells rent forth of his body, which finally was deuided into foure quarters, the head and they being sent through all the Prouinces and Townes of the Kingdome, and affixed to the principall places of them. The Complices in this execrable Parricide,The rest of his complices. were pinched, with burning Pincers, quartered, and cast vpon Wheeles, so to finish the rest of their miserable liues.
Iames, Second of the name, the only Male childe left, succeeded in the Kingdome of Scotland,Prouidence to auoide confusion and good successe ensuing on it. being then but sixe yeares of age: And this young condition of the Prince, gaue subiect to the Malcontents, to remoue all things out of order. To cleanse Scotland of these enormities, the Gouernour and Chauncellour of the Realme, assembled the three Estates in the Royall Citty, where the mutiners appeared, and were there ouer-reached at the end of a Feaste, made in the Kings Castell. The Table clothes being taken away; on the Table where the mutiners sate, was placed a Bulles head which (long before had bin the noate among the Scots, of condemnation to death.) They were instantly manacled and bound with cordes, and by their execution, Scotland reduced to perfect quietnes.
Ad praefinitam diem omnes sese sistunt. Publice coitur, disseritur varie de rebu^ va^ijs; Prandetur simul. Douglacio Comiti, Dauidi eius fratri, ac Malcolmo Flemingo C^naldeo, in Castello Edimburgensi, subito remota mensa, Caput Tauri (quod Scotis tunc temporis signum fuit in reos capitalis sententiae latae) Apponitur. In mensa vinculis constri^guntur: post capite mensam mulctantur: quo facto res Scotica pacata fuit.
The said Iames had to wife Mary, Daughter to the Duke of Gueldres, and of this mariage issued three Sonnes and two Daughters.
Iames, afterward King, Third of the name.Alexander, Duke of Albanie; AndIohn, Earle of Marre. The Daughters wereMary, Wife to Iames Hamilton, Earle of Arane: AndMargaret.
This Iames was slaine by the slice or piece of a Faulckon, breking at the siedge of Roxborough, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred and ninety, hauing reigned foure and twentie yeares, leauing for his Successour his eldest Sonne
Iames, Third of the name, aged then only seauen yeares, who ^spoused Margaret, Daughter to Christierne, First of that name, King of Denmarke, Sueden and Norway, by whom he had three Sonnes, and one Daughter.
Iames, afterward King, Fourth of the name.Alexander, Duke of Rothsaye: AndIohn, Earle of Marre.
The Daughter is not named --
King Iames being (in his olde dayes) addicted to all couetous courses, and gouerned by councell of men of meane qualitie; all the Nobles of Scotland bandi^d themselues against him, elected Prince Iames his eldest Son, aged then but sixteene yeares, for their King, and vnder his conduct, marched in rancked Battaile against the Father, who was there slaine the eleuenth day of Iune, Anno, 1488. bring the eight and twentieth of his Reigne, leauing for Successour in the Kingdome, his eldest Sonne.
Iames, Fourth of the name, who at the beginning of his Reigne, found the Realme full of troubles and seditions, The Earle of Lennox, the Lord of the Isle, and an infinite number of Barons, arose against him, to take the Crowne from him, and to reuenge (as they said) the murder by him committed on the person of his Father King Iames, whose bloody Shirt they caried openly,Such as arise against their lawfull King can neuer-pro^per. through the Townes and Prouinces of Scotland, thereby to procure a generall reuolt. Yet it came to passe (notwithstanding) that the mutiners were vanquised in a fought Battaile, to make it knowne to Subiects that it belongeth not to them, to raise Armes against their Prince, or to Canton themselues in his Townes, vnder whatsouer pretence or appearance.
Notwithstanding this victory, K. Iames, was long time afflicted with disturbances, hauing euermore before his face, the countenance of his father, of whose death he had bin

the occasion. And he was verily perswaded, that at euery step he trode; the shadow of his Father followed him at his heeles.
Omnibus vmbra locis adero; dabis improbe poenas.
He called also to his memory, diuers passages of the sacred Scriptures, That the Sonne which bandieth himselfe against his Father, and speaketh euill of his Mother, shall be accursed in heauen and on earth: And all the people shall say, Amen. The same is said al^o of disobedient children, as passe out of the world into eternall darknesse. Qui maledicit Patri suo, and Matri, extinguetur Lucerna eius in medijs tenebris: So it is said in the twentieth of the Prouerbs* And if the life of the disobedient childe, shall be alwayes fatall and vnfortunate; then must his death be altogether extraordinary, the Rauens of the Torrents, accustomed to Carrion, shall picke out his eyes, and his body shall serue for foode to the yong Rauens; in the last of the Prouerbs. Oculum qui subsannat Patrem, and qui despicit Matrem, effodianteum Corui de Torrentibus, and come^t cum filia Aquilae. Heauen and Earth shall passe, but the Word of God remaineth for euer.
For this reason the said King Iames, obtained an absolution from the Pope, Alexander the sixt then sitting, as the Scottish Histories relate in these words. Alexander Sextus, Pontifex Maximus, cum intellexisset Regem incredibili quodam dolore pene confectum, quod eorum factioni, qui manus Patri inferendas coniurabant, se adiunxerat. Formannum primum suum Amannensem (quem Prothonotarium vocant) abeum mittit, qui illum suo nomine bono esse animo iuberet, etc. This was done in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred ninetie one.
This Iames tooke to wife the eldest Daughter of King Henry of England,King Henry the seauenth his Daughter Margaret maried to King Iames the fourth of Scotland* seauenth of the name, named Margaret, in right of whom, Iames, sixt of the name, King of Scotland, succeeded to the Crowne of England after the death of Queen Elizabeth, as we haue alreadie showne in our precedent discourse. And of this marriage were many children born, which were not long liued: so that there remained but two Sons:
Iames, fift of the name, King of Scotland, borne in the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred and twelue, the fifteenth day of Aprill: And Alexander, Duke of Rothsay, who died an infant, One thousand fiue hundred and sixteene.
Now notwithstanding this Alliance and kinred, King Henry of England the eight, brought his Armie into Scotland, against his Brother in Law, who was ouercome in the Battaile at the foote of the Mountaine by ^lodden, foure houres after midday, the ninth day of September, in the yeare of Grace. One thousand fiue hundred and thirteene, the fiue and twentieth yeare of his Reigne, and nine and thirtieth of his age. After the Battaile, the Body of the King could not be found among the dead, nor remaining with the liuing. The English said, that the morrow after the Battaile, by the breake of day, they found the body of the King of Scotland,Doubt and question about the Kings body. stretched out at length, and wholly dead, and that they caused it to be carried, first to Warwicke, and afterward to Richmond. The Scots on the contrary did maintaine, that the body transported by them into England, was that of the Lord of Bonhard, and not of the King, who the night after the Battaile, was seene safe and well at Kelso^, and that from thence (grieuing for the Battailes losse) he went to finish his dayes at the holy Sepulcher of Ierusalem, and the deuout places of the holy Land, in prayer and teares, as performing penance for the death of his Father. Iudicia Domini abyssus multa.
Iames the fift, came to the Crowne of Scotland, being then but two yeares old. He was hurried among the troubles and seditions of the time, which neuer faile to giue their attendance, especially at such times as Kings are in their minoritie, according as the diuine written Word hath giuen vs assurance: Vae Regno, cuius Rex puer est, in whatsoeuer sence it can be turned.
He ^a^ two Wiues, the first Madam Magdalen of France, Daughter to King Francis the first. This mariage was solemnized (the said Iames being present) in the Church of Paris, the first day of Ianuary, One thousand fiue hundred thirty seauen. She died of a Feuer in Scotland, the sixt of the Ides of Iuly, in the same yeare.
In secon^ N^ptials he espoused (by Ambassadours in France, the Earle of Murray, and Da^id de Betoun Cardinall, Bishop of Mirepoix in Languedocke) Mary of

Lorraine, Daughter to the Duke of Guise, Claudius of Lorraine, Widdow to the Duke of Longueuille. Of this marriage in Anno One thousand fiue hundred and thirtie, was borne
Iames, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred thirtie eight.
Arthur in Anno One thousand fiue hundred and fortie, both of them dyed in one day.
Mary, who was Queene of Scotland, borne in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred fortie and two, the seauenth of the Ides of December.
Iames the fift, dyed soone after, to wit, the nineteenth day of the Calends of Ianuary, One thousand fiue hundred fortie two. Appointing his buriall to be neere to his wife, in the Church of Holy Crosse in Edenborough.
Mary, his onely Daughter, came to the Crowne of Scotland, the seauenth day of her birth, Crowned at Striueling, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred fortie three. And promised the same yeare to the Prince of Wales, Edward of England, Sonne to King Henry the eight, a marriage which was neuer performed. After the death of King Henry the eight, his Sonne Edward the sixt did what he could, to haue this Royall Princesse into England, against which, the Great Lords of Scotland made their opposition. Vpon this refusall, the English entred the Kingdome with a potent Armie, whereby the Scots were vanquished in a pitched Battaile. So that the States of the Realme thought it most conuenient, to send the yong Queene into France, and marrie her there to the French Prince Daulphine Francis, afterward King of France, second of the name. The English endeauoured to surprize her on the Sea, but notwithstanding all their ambushes, she arriued safe and well there, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fortie seauen. And the espousals of the said Queene Mary, and the Prince Daulphine were celebrated in the Church of Paris, the foure and twentieth day of Aprill, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred and fiftie eight, after Easter. Of this mariage came no issue, and by the death of the said King Francis the second, happening in the Citie of Orleance, the the fift day of December, One thousand fiue hundred and sixtie. Queene Mary Dowager of France, returned the yeare following into her Realme of Scotland, and in some time after, she tooke as her second Husband, Henry Stuart, Duke of Albany, and Lord D'Arnley. And of this marriage issued their onely Sonne (called Iames the sixt) King of Scotland; by the vntimely and much to be moaned death of so great a Princesse, happening in England in the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred eighty eight.
We haue spoken formerly, that the Illustrious house of the Stuarts, tooke Originall and descent from Banquho, Thane of Loqhuaber. And now say, concerning the appellation of the word Thane: Stuartorum familia (vt rem a capite arcessam) a Banquhone Regio in Loquhabria Thano; id est (vt Latine loquitur) Praeside. This is all that is spoken by the Bishop Leslaeus, in the seauenth Booke of his History, Page 257* without explicating more vnderstandingly, the source of this strange name, being an auncient Saxon word.Of the words Thaynus and Sub-Thaynus. For in the old Lawes of the English Saxons (commonly called Anglo-Saxons) mention is made of this word Thaynus and Sub-Thaynus, in many places.
Degrees of Nobilitie among the Anglo-Saxons.Among the auncient Anglo-Saxons, their estate of Nobilitie was deuided by certaine degrees of honour and preheminence. In the first place were the Earles, and next, the Barons, who were called Thanes. After them marched the Castillilians, who they vsed to call Sub-Thanes, and the simple Gentlemen of the Field.
If the Fielden or Countrey Gentleman, had so well husbanded his affaires, as in value he were worth fiue Hides in Arpents of Land (Hyda in the Saxon Law and Norman, contained foure Roddes, and each Rod comprehended foure and twentie Acres of ground,Of equall^ng the condition of a Thane. as yet they speake in Normandy and Bretaigne) a Parish Church, an Abbey, Priorie or founded Hospitall, a House with a Tower, in manner of a Clock-house, with Battlements, murdring loop-holes, and a draw-Bridge: if he haue also some charge of office in the Kings House: Then he may goe equall and fellowlike with the Baron called Thane, and may purchase the title also by the Princes

Letters, paying for rights of reliefe but fiue times an hundred shillings, of currant money.
If this Thane of new creation, finde himselfe so aduanced in the Court of his King and Prince, as he becommeth his Table familiar,Bouche a Cout Barberaze P^ed fe^re. feedeth freely in Court with good lookes, no distaste, and gaineth imployment by command in some Embassie; And shall haue likewise with him a Thane, who is also possessed of fiue Hydes of Land, intirely of his owne, and some Office in Court, and hath three times deliuered Messages to the King* on the behalfe of his Maister:Of a Sub-Thane* He may likewise be a Sub-Thane, and represent the person of his Thane, hauing first sworne to him all fidelity, and shall be his Castellaine.
If this Thane doe so aduantageously follow his fortune,Of a Thanes becomming an Earle. as to compasse the reuennues of an Earle, he shall obtaine the rancke and title of an Earle, and shall Marche equall with the new Earles.
As concerning Merchants and Citizens of walled Cities or Townes,Concerning Cittizens and Merchants becomming Thanes. if they haue made three voyages on the Ocean Sea, and won so much by their industrie, as to liue thereon, without medling any more with Traffick: they shall be ennobled, and haue the name and qualitie of Thanes.
If any one be so addicted to Studie,Benefit of Students and Schollers. as he meriteth to haue some Order in Holy Church, for the seruice of Iesus Christ: he shall hold rancke with Noblemen, be exempt and discharged of all taxations and Subsidies, all therewhile as he liueth an Ecclesiasticall person. The knowledge of these auncient Lawes of the Anglo-Saxons, which made themselues Maisters of Great Bretaigne, doth serue exeeedingly well to vnderstand the auncient Historians of England, and namely Mathew Paris, who ^hrough the whole course of his Historie, layeth stumbling-blockes in the way of strange Readers, for vnderstanding the auncient vocables of the Saxon Nation.
Apud Anglo-Saxones legibus ritibusque suis honores impertiebantur, vt quiuis e Populo Prudentia, sagacitate, diuitijsque anteibat.
Comes.
Thaynus.
Sub-Thaynus: At que
Colenus.
Si Colenus ita rem auxisset, vt habuerit quinque Hydas propriae Terrae, Aedem sacram, Coquinam, Campanile, and Portam, locum autem, and peculiare munus in aula Regia; Tunc erat deinceps habitus par dignitate Thayno.
Si Thaynus ita prouectus erat vt Regi seruierit, and Nuncius eius esset, and equitauerit ^um familia: Si tunc etiam Thaynum sibi famulantem habuerit, qui ad Regiam expedi^ionem Quinque Hydas habuerit, eique in Regia aula Domino serui erit, terque eius Nun^ius ad Regem venerit, hic deinceps data fidelitate, Domini personam sustinere poterit, si ^pus fuisset.
Quod si Thaynus ille ita prouectus erat, vt Comes euaserit, pari erat deinceps Comite dignitate.
Si Mercator ita rem fecisset, vt ter, vastum Mare sua peritia traiecerit, pari tunc erat dignitate Thayno.
Quod si Literarum studiosus talem in Literis progressum fecisset, vt Ordines habuerit, and Christo militauerit, erat deinde venerandus, and immunis, nisi ita excidisset, vt suo mu^ere vti non potuiss^t.
We will leaue these Recherches of Antiquities to the learned, and come now to the Militarie Order of Scotland.
The Militarie Order of Scotland.THe Historians of that Nation, doe ordinarily call it, The Order of Saint Andrew.Orders of Knights sent to King Iames the fift.
Leslaeus in his ninth Booke, Pag. 193. writeth, that Iames, Fift of the name, King of Scotland, in Anno One thousand fiue hundred thirtie foure, receiued the Order of the Golden Fleece, from Charles the fift, Emperour: That of Saint Michael, from
(...)
Galindes of the Hillocke, d'Argent, a vne Merlette de Sable.Margoudes, de Gueulles, a trois Iumelles en Bandes d'Or.Kerdius, de Gueulles, a la Faulx d'Or, emmanchee de Sable.Nabon, d'Argent, a trois Fuzees de Gueulles mises en Fal.Chalamor the well wisher, de Synople, a la Merlette d'Argent.Alibel the Forsaken, de Synople, seme de Rustres, and de poincts d'Argent. Party de Ermines.Dalides, d'Argent, a deux Bars adossez de Sable.Haran of the Pine, de Synople, a trois Pommes de Pin d'Or.Arganor the Rich, de Sable a vn Homme arme d'Or, a la Halebarde de Synople, le Manche and le Espee de Gueules, au bout d'Or.Melios, Burele, Contreburele d'Argent, and de Synople de huict pieces.Meliadus the white Knight, de Sable a la Croix pattee d'Or.The auncient Knight of the hollow Deepes, de Gueulles a trois Armets, and Salades de Argent.Malaquin the Grosse, de Gueulles a la Bande d'Argent, chargee de trois Lyons de Gueulles.
At the Seauenth Chapter were made Knights.ARgahast the bold Britaigne, d'Or au Boeuf de Gueulles, accorne and ongle d'Azur.Normains the Pilgrime, de Sable seme de Coquilles d Or.Haruin the vnweldie, d'Or a quatre Iumelles d'Azur.Thoscans the Romaine, d'Or a vne main de Sable, tenant vne Espee de Gueulles en Pal.Ferandon the Poore, d'Or a trois Iumelles de Synople.Randon the light or nimble, Bande, Contrebande d'Or, and d'Azur.The Strong alwayes found, d'Argent, au Sanglier passant de Sable.The Fortunate Knight of the Isles, de Gueulles a vn Elephant d'Or, ongle d' Azure.The lost Blacke Knight, d'Argent au Lyon passant de Sable.Dirant of the Rocke, de Gueulles (...) Chien passant d'Or.The Fayrie for Ladies, de Sable a tr^^^ Billettes d'Argent.The Forester, d'Or a vne Touffe de Bois de Synople, au Huchet, and Trimpe d'Argent, y attachee a vne Chai^e d'Or.The Huntsman, d'Or a six Ermines de Synople.The Man of Ireland, de Gueulles a la Cloche d'Argent.The Brown without Ioye, de Gueulles, party de Synople, seme de Larmes d'Or.Geffrey the Stoute, de Gueulles a la Tour d'Or, Breteschee, and Masonne de S^ble.Randon, otherwise called the Pe^cie, de Sable a vne Chappelle d'Argent.Foyadus the Gallant, d Or a la Poinct de Gueulles.
At the Eight and last Capter, were made Knights.ROusteline of the high Mountaine, d' Or au Sauuage de Sable, tenant vne Masse de Gueulles.Courant of the hard Rocke, de Sable a trois Connils d'Argent.Armont of the Greene Serpent, d'Or au Griffon de Synople, membre d'Argent.Ferrant of the Hill, de Gueulles au P^^rce au d'Or.Corli the Sonne of Ares, d'Azur s^me de Croissants de Or.Busterine the Great, d'Or, au Tess^^ de Sable, a la Bordure componee d'Argent, and de Gueulles de Ving^ and quatre pieces.Lydeux the Strong, d'Argent a la Chimere de diuerses Couleurs.Soline of the Woodde, d'Argent (...) Cerf de Gueulles, Arme de Sable.The Knight of the seauen wayes, de Gueulles a vn Pont d'Or, Masonne de Sable, a vne Arche ou decoule vne Riuiere d'Argent en Poinct.Broadas, de Sable a vne Escreuisse d'Or en Pal.The Knight attired in Scarlet, de Gueules au Nauire d'Or, habille d'Argent.The Huntsman beyond the Marches, de Gueules a vne Teste de Boeuf d'Argent, accornee d'Azur, and Coronnee d' une Coronne Vallaire, en Palissade d'Or.Hescalon the Hardie, d'Argent a trois Fe^es de Gueules.Marandon of the Riuer, de Sable au Moulin a Vent a pied, d'Or.Sacanarbin, de Sable au Sagittaire d'Or, l'Arc et la Flesche d'Azur, a la Corde de Gueules.Dezier the Fierce, d'Argent a vne Hydre a Sept Testes de Gueules, Arme et Langue de Synople.Abilem of the Desert, de Sable a l'Escarboncle percee, Pommetee, et Fleuronnee d'Or de Huict Raiz.Foelix the fortunate Searcher, de Synople au Cerf vollant d'Or, Langue et Ongle de Sable.

The End of the Fift Booke.



(...)
That which at this day is called Pampelona (founded by Pompeye, in the yeare Sixt hundred, fourescore and two of the foundation of Rome, and about Three-score before the birth of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ) is now the Citty that hath the Bishops See, which, vnder our first Kings of Nauarre, acknowledged for Metropolitane the Archbishop of Auch, in the County of Armaign^c in Gascoignie, and which (from Antiquity) had nine Diocesses and Gouernments, which confessed it to be Metropolitane. For this cause the Archbishoprick of Auch, with her large extendure, was called Nouempopulana,Of n^w People contributing thereto. a Nouem Populis sibi contributis. At this day, the Bishop of Pampelona is subiect to the Archbishoprick of Saragossa, as the other Bishops of Nauarre in like manner are.
Concerning the auncient extendure of Nauarre cited euery way.The Auncient extendure of the Kingdome of Nauarre, began towards the East, at the Towne of Atapuerca, neere to Burgos, the Capitall Citty of olde Castille, and the very greatest part of the Mountaine of Idubeda. To the North it possesseth the Prouince of Alaua, the Countrey all about the shoares of Sadorra, the lands of Losa, and the two parts of Biscaye, namely of Alaua and Guipuscoa. On the South side, it containeth the greater part of Arragon, the Pyrenean Mountaines, and those of Moncayo, with the territories of Calahorra, Terrassona and of Agreda. It runneth cutting on all sides, by the bad neighbouring of the Kings of Arragon and Castille,What Meriadadaes are according to the meaning. which haue sliced it into quarters. For vnder the last Kings, it was noated, as reduced only to sixe Meriadadaes, (that is to say Gouernements: for in Nauarre Merin signifieth the Gouernour or Consull of a Citty) as it is at this day.
The boundes of new Nauarre.New Nauarre is bounded with the Pyrenean Mountaines on the East side: On the North, with the Prouince of Biscaye called Guipuscoa, and part of that of Alaua: The West containeth that of La Rio^a, along the riuer of Ebro: And on the South, it hath the Kingdome of Arragon. And yet neuerthelesse, Nauarre is the most Noble, and the very auncientest Kingdome of Spayne, as it is acknowledged by Mariana, in the place before alleaged.The wordes of Mariana, Hanc Prouinciam quamuis angustis regionibus circumscriptam, in Praecipuis Hispaniae partibus poni placuit. And the reading of this Inuentory instructeth vs, that the Kingdomes of Ouiedo, Leon, Arragon, Castille, Galicia, Portugall and other, in number equall to the Prouinces of Spayne; had not any beginning before, but long after this of Nauarre.Most of the Kingdomes erected by Kings of Nauarre. And that which is most worthy, famous and remarkable, is; that the most part of these forenamed kingdoms, haue bin erected by Kings of Nauar.
The first Merindada of which Kingdome, is that of Pampelona, the Capitall Citty, a Citty engirte with good walles, and with an olde strong Castell, the auncient abyding of the Kings of Nauarre. Beyond which, on the other side of the Citty, the Spanyards haue builded a new one,Concerning the seuerall Merindada^^ how they are in themselues. The Prince of Viana. to maintaine their auncient holding against the French.
The second Merindada is the Diocesse D'Estella, within which is included the Principality of Viana, a title belonging to the eldest Sonnes of the Kings of Nauarre: As in France, the eldest beareth the title of Daulphine of Viennois; in England, the Prince of Wales; and (heertofore) in Arragon, the Prince of Gironna; and in Castille, the Prince of the Asturies.
The third is Tudela, sometime called Cantabria, as we haue already said.
The fourth is Sanguessa.
The fifte is Olita, the ordinary dwelling of King Charles the Noble, Third of the name. These fiue Merindadaes are in the higher Nauarre, on the side of Spayne, beyonde the Pyrenean Mountaines. And the Sixt
lower Nauarre Vltra Puertos.Is the lower Nauarre, on the side of France, called by the Spanyards, Vltra Puertos, that is to say, Beyonde the Portes. For they tearme Ports, the straites, whereby a man may very vneasily passe ouer the Pyrenean Mountaines, when we goe from France into Spayne. This lower Nauar is deuided from the higher, by the small Bridge of Arereguy, betweene the Abbey of Ronceuaux, and Saint Iohn pied-de-puerto. The first Towne and strongest place thereof, on the higher side, is that of Saint Palais, (in Latine Sanctus Pelagius) wherein is the Chancery, and the money Minte of Nauarre. The sole Prouince, of the great body of this Kingdome, remained to the heires and descendants of the Kings, Katharine de Nauarre, and Iohn d'Albret her husband: vnworthily despoyled of their paternall inheritance, by Ferdinand of Arragon, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, Three hundred and thirteene, And in the Moneth of Iuly the same yeare.

CHAP. II. The Genealogie of the Kings of Nauarre, and a Summary Chronologie of their Reignes.1. GArcia Ximenes, Count of Bigorre, and of those Lands which (at this present) are called, The lower Nauarre, was, according to the ancient fashion vsed among the French, exalted on a Shield or Escutcheon of Armes, King of Sobrarbre or Nauarre, by Sixe Hundred French Gentlemen, the third day of May, when the Church celebrateth the Inuention of the Holy Crosse, in the yeare of Grace Seauen Hundred Sixteene, and of Here Caesar Augustus, Seauen Hundred Fifty Foure, two yeares after the Affricane Arabes, made themselues Maisters and Lords of Spaine: from whom King Garcia Ximenes conquered the Bourgades or Village: of Aysa, Amescua, Abrarsusa, and the little Towne of Iaca, which hee made the Capitall of his new Conquest. He caused to be newly builded the Hermitage of Saint Iohn Baptist de la Pegna, that is to say, de la Roche d'Orouell, where hee was exalted King, and neere therevnto a Castell, which serued him, and the Kings his Successors a very long time, as a Pallace and ordinary dwelling.Hee dyed full of glory and honour, for hauing beene the first, that fought against the Moores, and so consequently, the first Christian King of Spaine: in the yeare of Grace, Seauen Hundred Fifty Eight, the Three Score and Tenth yeare of his Age, and the Two and Fortieth of his Reigne; hee lieth buried at Saint Iohn de la Pegna. By his Wife Iniga, Daughter to the Count of Commenges, hee had his onely Sonne and Successor2. Garcia Inigo (bearing the names both of his Father and Mother) Second King of Nauarre or Sorbrarbre, and Second of the name. Hee extended the bounds or limits of his Kingdome, so farre as to the City of Alaua, one of the three Merindades of Biscay, which hee conquered from the Moores. Hee reigned Forty and Foure yeares, and dyed the yeare of Grace, Eight Hundred and Two. By Estesiana of Carcassona, his Wife, he had a Sonne and Successour.3. Fortunio Garcia, who reigned thirteene yeares, and dyed in the yeare of Grace, Eight Hundred and Fifteene. By Theoda of Arragon his wife, Daughter to Galindo, Count of Arragon; hee had a Sonne who was his Successour.4. Sanctio Garcia, First of that name. The Spaniards pronounce it in their Language, Sancho Garces: but I conuert these strange words into our more sweet and gentle passage. In the Latine Phrase, this name of Sancho is tearmed Sanctus, and Sanctius, which in Gascoigne (where the name is very common) they call Sainct Sans.The Reigne of him was Seauenteene yeares, and he died the yeare of Grace, Eight Hundred, Thirty Two; hauing by his Wife Estesiana, Daughter to the Count of Narbonna, for his Successour in the Kingdome5. Ximenes Inigo, who reigned but Eight yeares.And heere the Noble and Generous minded Reader, if hee please, may obserue once for altogether, that in Spaine speaking of Kings: they set downe before their proper names, this title of honour for abbreuiation, Dom or Don.The addition of Dom or Don to men, and Dona or Dogna to women in Spaine. And speaking of Queenes and Princesses, Donnes or Dognaes, which commeth of the Latine, Dominus and Domina, and by abbreuiation, Domnus and Domna: Dom Philip the Third, and Donna N. of Austria his Wife. The Knights of Spaine doe likewise carry this Title, according as the very same is in Italy. In Gascoigne the Sonnes neuer speak of their Father, without this Epithite, Seigne Pay, and of their Mother, Done May, which is as they vsually say at Paris, My Lord, my Father, Madame, or my Lady, my Mother.All these manners of speaking were deriued from the Ancient French,The additions in France. who talking of their own Kings and Queens, haue alwayes placed these qualities of honour before; Domnum Childericum, Damnam Fredegundam; as wee haue obserued in the History of Nauarre, by the testimony of Saint Gregory of Tours, the most learned and ancient of all our Historians.
(...)
Iniga, Lady of Biscay, who espoused a Gentleman of the Countrey called Zuria, Sirnamed the Faire, who by the death of his Wife (shee deceasing without Children) held the Seigneurie of Biscay, whereof hee became Lord in the yeare Eight Hundred, Three Score and Ten.
In second Marriage, he espoused Dona Dalda, Daughter to Don Sanceo Esteguis Hortunes, Lord of Tauira de Durango. And of this Marriage are issued, the Lords of Biscay.
The said Zuria was Sonne to a Knight named Lopez, a very rich Lord in Biscay, descended of Bermond Laygnes, Sonne to Layn Caluo, Iudge of Castile.
The Dukes of Aquitaine carried the ancient Armes of the Gothes, D' Argent au Lyon de Sable; from whom they were issued and descended.
Zuria neuerthelesse, forsaking the Armes of his House, tooke them of Sobrarbre, in honour of so great an Alliance: that is to say, D' Argent au Lyon de Synople.
The Spaniards, who are alwayes contrary to the French, doe say, that this Count tooke these Armes to preserue the memory of the Biscaines, who exalted the Armes of their Lord or Prince; aloft on the Tree of Garnica, where they m^de their Assemblies, as well of Councell, as delight.
Howsoeuer it was, this Zuria tooke and carried such Armes, leauing them belonging to his Father, who carried his owne, which spake and answered to his name, as wee say.
Lopez in Spanish signifieth a Wolfe, and thereupon, Il portoit d' Argent au Loup Ceruier de Sable, which is altogether from any apparance, inasmuch as the Spanish Historians say, that the first who carried Wolues in Armes, was Dom Diego Lopez de Haro, on the day, Des Naues de Tolosa: whereof wee will obserue the particularities at the end of this Discourse, purposely for the Armes of Nauarre.
Of the Marriage of Zuria and Dalda of Taiora, was borne their Sonne
Manso Lopez, Second Lord of Biscay: And of Tauira de Durango and him, came
Inigo, Third Lord of Biscay, Sirnamed the Left-handed; because hee had gotten a bad custome, to serue himselfe alwayes with the left hand, and not with the right. He had for his Sonne and Successour
Lopez Diaz, Count, and Fourth Lord of Biscay. This was the man, who before any other of his Predecessors, tooke for his Armes (as corresponding to his name) D' Argent Vn Loup de Sable. Hee left (beside a Bastard, called Inigo the Left-handed) for his Sonne and Successour
Sanceo Lopez, Fift Count of Biscay, who had two Sonnes
Inigo Sanchez: And Garcia Sanchez.
The eldest was slaine by his owne people, in seeking to appease a quarrell, and left his Children very young: so that the Biscaines tooke for their Lord, his Bastard Brother
Inigo the Left-handed, Sixt Lord of Biscay, who imparted to his Cousins some Lands and Seigneuries: from whence came the Lords of Lodio and D' Horosco in Biscay. The Sonne of this left handed Lopez, was
Lopez Dias, Sirnamed the Red, Seauenth Lord and Husband of Dona Teilla, by whom he had
Diego Lopez, called the Faire, Eight Count of Biscay, who had to Wife a French Lady, named Madame Almicina, or Almicia, Daughter to the Lord of Saint Iohn Pied-de Port, in the lower Nauarre. And of this Marriage was borne their Sonne and Successour in the Countie of Biscay, Lopez Dias; whose Father carried for Armes, D'Argent a deux Loups de Sable.
Lopez Dias, Ninth Lord of Biscay, was Sirnamed of Naiera, a Towne of ancient demaine in Nauarre, which the King of Castile, Alphonso Eight of the name, gaue him, to draw him to his part, and soone after, the Towne of Haro, whereof he had the Title and Sirname, which still continued to his Linage. He tooke to Wife (according to Garibay) Menci^, Daughter to the Count Arias, and by her he had three Sonnes; and one Daughter.
Diego Lopez de Haro Lord of Biscay.Lopez Dias de Haro, Bishop of Segobia.Martin Lopez de Haro; AndDogna Vrraca Lopez, Wife to the King of Leon, Ferdinand Second of the name.
Some doe grant him to haue another Daughter, named Gaufreda, Wife to the King of Nauarre, Garcia seauenth of the Name; but it is contrary to truth.
Diego Lopez de Haro, Sirnamed the Good, senth Lord of Biscay, had to wife Maria Diaz de Lara, Daughter to Count Nugno Mamiqu^s de Lara, in his first Marriage. And in the Second, hee had Toda Perez, Daughter to Dom Pedro Roderiguez D' Azagra, and by her he had two Daughters, both of them married to the Counts o^ Lara, Aluarez and Gonsaluez.
Diego Lopez de Haro, Eleauenth Lord of Biscay, tooke for Armes, D' Argent a l'Arbre de Garnica de Synople, a deux Loups di Sable, trauersez au pied de cest Arbre, c'est ad^re l vn deuant, and l'autre derriere l' Arbre, laquelle est entre ces deux Loups a l'Ordre de Gueules, charge de Huict Croix en Saultoir d Or. As a Signall and memory, that hee had assisted at the surprizall of the Towne of Baesa, from the Moores of Andalouzia. For hee was (in his time) renowned, to be as valiant in Armes, as a wise and prudent Councellour: whereby hee obtained the Sir-name o^ Cabeca brana, that is to say, A good Head, furnished with good Iudgement. Hee had to Wife Dogna Vrraqua A^phonsa, Daughter to the King of Leon Dom Alphonso, and of Igna de Mendoce; and by her hee had foure Sonnes.
Diego Lopez de Haro, Twelfth Lord of Biscay.Sanceo Lopez.Lopez the Dwarfe: AndAlphonso Lopez, Father to Iohn Alphonso de Haro, called the Old. We will let passe the rest of this Genealogie in silence; because it is not incident to our Discourse.
King Inigo Ximenes Arista, had by Toda of Biscay, Daughter to Count ^eno, his Sonne and Successour
7. Garcia Inigo, Third of the name, the Reigne of whom was eighteene yeeres; deceasing in the yeare Eight Hundred, Foure Score and seauen, or (according to some, who make him to reigne seauen and twenty yeares) Foure Score and Fifteene. By Dogna Vrraca, Daughter and sole Heire to the Count of Arragon, Dom Fortunio Ximenes, hee had two Sonnes and one Daughter. The Sonnes were
Fortuni^.Sanceo, Sirnamed Abarca: And the DaughterSancia, Third Wife to the King of Leon, Dom Ordogne.
8. Fortunio, Second of the name, King of Nauarre, and Count of Arragon, (in regard of his Mother) reigned no more but Sixe yeares, without being married. Hee gaue ouer the World and his Kingdome, to serue the King of Kings in the Monastery of Saint Sauiour de Leyra, where he professed himselfe a Monke, in the yeare Nine Hundred and One: After whom succeeded in the Kingdome his Brother
9. Sanceo, Second of the name, Sir-named Abarca, because hee affected to weare Gamaches and Buskins of Leather on his Legges, and Galoches of wood and blacke Leather on his feete, which in Spanish they tearme Abarcas. In this regard, such as were descended of his Ligne, retained the Sirname of Abarca* and bare in their Armes, D'Or a deux Galoches de Sable Eschiquettees d'Or.
By Toda his Wife, Daughter to the Count of Pigorre, or of Carcassona, hee had foure Sonnes and fiue Daughters: his Sonnes were.
Garcia Sanceo, his eldest.Ramiro.Gonsaluez: AndFerdinando. The Daughters wereVrraca Ximenia, Wife to the King of Leon, Alphonso, Fourth of the name.Maria, Wife to Sigefroy the Fift, Count of Barcelona.Thereza, married to the King of Leon, Dom Ramiro, Second of the name.Sancia, Second Wife to Ferdinando Gonsales of Castile; AndBlanche Valesca, Wife to the Count of Biscay, Sanceo.
Sanceo reigned nineteene yeares, or (according to Dom Rodericke of Toledo, who sets downe the yeares of the reigne of Dom Fortunio his Brother, with his) fiue and twenty yeares; And dyed in the yeare of Grace, Nine Hundred and Twenty. After him succeeded his Eldest Sonne
10. Garcia Sanceo, Fourth of the name, Tenth King of Nauarre, and Count of Arragon: who by his Wife Therese of Biscay, had two Sonnes, and three Daughters. The Sonnes Were
Sanceo Garcia: AndRamiro.
The Daughters were
Vrraca.Ermesinda: AndXimenia.
His Reigne continued forty and nine yeares, and hee dyed in the yeare of Grace, Nine Hundred, Three Score, and Nine. Hee had for Successours in the Kingdome, his two Sonnes
Sanceo Garcia: And11. Ramir^.
Who raigned together in loue and Concord, contrary to the Maxims of State: That the world cannot endure two Sunnes, nor one Kingdome two Kings.
--Omnisque p^testasImpatiens consortis erit.
Ramiro reigned ten yeares, without being married, and by the death of his elder Brother, remained sole King of Nauarre, and Count of Arrag^n Seauenteene whole yeares. Hee had to Wife Vrraca de B^gorre, and by her hee had three Sonnes;
Garcia.Ramiro. Father of
Sanceo, andRamiro.Gonsales.
Sanceo Garcia reigned Twentie and Seauen yeares alone, and with his Brother: And died in the yeare of Grace, Nine Hundred, Foure Score and Thirteene. After whom succeeded his Eldest Sonne
12. Garcia, Fift of the name, Sirnamed Trembling* or the Trembler, because hee would (...) and shrug (as couetous of ease) at all times when he should mount on Horsebacke, for riding to warre. By Ximena of Barc^l^na his wife, he had one only Sonne, named Sanceo. Hee Reigned but seauen yeares, and dyed the yeare of Grace One Thousand and Three, leauing for Successour
13. Sanceo, Fourth of the name, called The Great, who had to wife Eluira la Nigna, that is to say, The Little, Daughter to the Count of Cast^lle Dom Sanceo, and by her he had three Sonne,
Garcia, King of Nauarre.Ferdinand, First King of Castile: AndGonsales, King of Sobrarbre, and of Ri^a^o^sa.
By the Damosell D'Ayuar, Dogna C^, his Loue-Mistresse, he had a Bastard, named
Ramiro, First King of Arragon.
This King Sanceo was Sirnamed the Great, as well in regard of manifold vertues shining in him; as also, because hee was (in his time) the very greatest Christian Prince of Spayne. Who, as other Kings of Christendome did the like, sought the friendship of King Robert the Deuout, Sonne to Hugh Gapet. Glaber Rodolph, in the tenth Booke of his History of France, and Second Chapter, after hee hath set downe the particularities of the enterview, between the King and the Emperour of Germany Henry, on the Riuer of Meuse, the Frontire of the Kingdome and Empire, saith, that hee wonne the amity of all the Kings his neighbours, and particularly the King of Nauarre, Dom Sanceo the Great. Fuit the pax cum Regibus in ^yro Regni sui positis, Maxime cum supradicto Imperatore Henrico: Ab alijs quoque Regibus gratifice fuit semper habitus ab Alrado scilicet Rege Anglorum, and Rodolpho Rege Austras^^rum, nec non and Sanctio Rege Nauarriae and Hispaniarum, mittebantque ei munera, and ab eo potebant auxilia. This King Sanct^ was called the Great, because hee possessed Nauarre, Arragon, Castile, Sobrarebre and Ribagorsa, This was hee that made Kingdomes of Arragon and Castile, as we shall speake more at large elsewhere. He dyed the eighteenth day of October, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Thirty Fiue, and the eight and thirtie of his Reigne; leauing the Kingdome of Nauarre to his eldest Sonne
14. Garcia, Sixt of the name, and Sir-named of Naiera, because (from his tender youth) he had been nourished in the City, where King Sanceo the Great his Father, made his Royall abiding. In imitation of the King of France, Robert the Deuout, who instituted the Order of the Starre, in honor of the Virgin Mary; the said Garcia, before all other the Kings of Spayne, erected in honour of the same Virgin, an Order of Knighthood, which hee called: Of our Lady of the Lilly.



The Order of the Lilly, Or of Nauarre.
THE Subiect of Instituting this Order of the Lilly, was, that this Prince hauing beene very sicke; in the extremity thereof, sent to Saint Sauiour de Leyra, and other places of deuotion, that Prayers and intercessions might bee made for his recouery and health. In the same time of his sicknesse, was discouered in the City of Nagera (where ordinarily hee kept his Court) an Image of the Virgin Mary, issuing forth of a Lilly, and holding her Sonne betweene her armes.
Vpon the Inuention or


finding of this Image, the King very sodainly recouered his health, beside infinite other Miracles performed there, on all kindes of diseased persons, by the admirable Vertues, supposed of the Virgin Mother, whom the Scripture tearmeth, The Lilly of the Vallies, Lillium conuallium. In honour of whom, in the same place where this Image was found, King Garcia caused to bee builded a Church and Monastery of Royall structure, wherein he placed the Monks of Clugny, and the Church was called Sancta Maria Reale de Nagera, in memory of the occasion and place.
Moreouer, to perpetuate his deuotion to the Virgin Mary, said to bee Queene of Heauen, and Lady of the Angels; hee instituted in his Kingdome, the said Order of Knights of Saint Mary, of the Lilly, whereof he would bee Founder and Soueraigne Great Maister, and after him, the Kings of Nauarr his Successours. He composed this Order of Eight and Thirty Knights, the chiefest Gentlemen of Ancient Families in Nauarre, Biscay, and old Castile, who at receiuing the said Order, must vow and sollemnly sweare in presence of the King, to expose their goods and persons, for conseruation of the Crowne of Nauarre, and expulsion of the Moores. Each of these Knights weareth on his Brest a Lilly, embroydered in Siluer, and on sollemne Feast daies, a double chaine of gold enterlaced with Letters M. after the manner of the Ancient Gothish ph. At the end of this Chaine, hangeth in a wattled Ouall, Vn Lys d'Or Esmaille de Blanc Sortant d'vne Terrace, portant ph vne d' Or Coronnee; as it is figured in the Frontispice of this Discourse.
These Knights were strictly charged and obliged, to say ouer fiue times their Beads, composed of fiue round Lincks, with other Seruice and Prayers, which were ordained and prescribed to them by the Monks of Saint Mary la Reale de Nagera,

with the Rule of the said Order, touching the dayes when they should goe to Confession and the Communion. The Institution of this Order was in the yeare 1048. since when it was long time conserued in honor by the Kings of Nauarre, Successors to Garcia, whose Effigies are yet to be seene with this Order about their necks, as well in the said Church of S. Mary at Nagera, S. Sauiour de Leyra, S. Mary la Reale of Pampelona: as also in the Church at Ronceuaux, and at S. Iohn de la Pegna.
Garcia in the life time of his Father, married Esleuanetta, or Stephanetta, Daughter to Roger Count of Carcassonna, and of Beziers: And of this Marriage issued foure Sonnes, and as many Daughters: The Sonnes were
Sanceo Garcia, his Successour in the Kingdome.Ramiro, Lord of Calahorra, Calaguris in Latine (a strong City and potent, conquered from the Moores by the said Garcia de Nagera) of Toresillas, de los Cameros, de Ribafresca, de Lea, Billoria de Trebeiano, and other places.Ferdinando, Lord of Iubera, Lagunilla, etc.Raymond, who had for his partage the Lands of Murillo, Agoncillo and others.
The Daughters were
Erm^sinda, Lady of Villa Mediana, and of Martos.Ximenia, Lady of Carcueros, Hornos and other places.Maiora, Lady D'Yangas: AndVrraca, Lady of Aluerita, Lardero, and Mucrones, Wife to a Count, named Dom Garcia. But our Garcia of whom we now speake, was slaine in the Battaile of Atapuerea, about foure miles from Burgos, won by King Ferdinand of Castile his Brother, the yeare of Grace 1054. hauing reigned twenty yeares. His body was laid by his Wiues (deceasing before him at Sancta Maria la Reale, de Nauarre. His Eldest Sonne succeeded him
15. Sanceo Garcia, Fift of the name: By Pleasancea his Wife, hee left three Male Children,
Ramiro Sanceo.Garcia, First: AndGarcia, Second.
These two were after the death of King Sanceo their Father, nourished in the Court of Alphonso, King of Castile, First of the name, who for their maintenance gaue them diuers Lands; for they neuer had any issue in Nauarre.
King Sanceo was slaine by his last Brother Raymond, Lord of Murillo, in a certaine Ambuscado, which hee had purposely prepared for him, the yeare of Grace, 1066. hauing reigned two and twenty yeares, or thereabout.
Ramiro Sanceo, Infant of Nauarre, and naturall Heyre to the Kingdome, by the death of his Father; tooke to Wife Dogna Eluira, Second Daughter to Cid R^^^ Dias de Biuaro, and by her hee left two Sonnes, and one Daughter.

Garcia Ramiro, who was King of Nauarre.
Sanceo Ramiro: And the Daughter Eluira.

Now, because this Cid Ruis Dias de Biuaro, was the most renowned Captain and Knight of Spaine, and of whom diuers Romancers haue sung and written wonders; in regard also that by the Marriage of the Prince of Nauarre, and Eluira his Daughter, the Kings of Nauarre are descended to this instant, euen to the Sacred Maiesty of Lewes the Second of the name, King of Nauarre now reigning: I will summarily set downe heere in this place, the Originall and descent of this Great Captaine.
Nugno Belides or Belcides, a Gentleman of Germany, and a Natiue of Cologne being desirous to fight against the Moores; went in the Voyage for Spaine, where becomming well knowne by his valiancie, he espoused Dogna Sola, Daughter to Don Diego Porcello, a rich and mighty Lord, who dwelt at Burgos in Castile: Of this Marriage was borne their Sonne
Nugno Nugnez Rasura, who was Iudge of Castile, and had by his Wife a Sonne and a Daughter.

Gonsalez Nugnez: And
Teresa, who was Wife to Layn Calus, likewise Iudge of Castile

Gonsalez Nugnez, had to Wife Madona Ximena Fernandez, Daughter to Count Dom Nugno Fernandez, Sonne to the King Dom Bermond, First of the name, and Father to Fernand Gonsalez.
Teresa tooke to Hushand Layn Calus, Iudge of Castile, who had by her foure Sonnes
Fernan Laynez.Bermudo Laynez.Layn Laynez; AndDiego Laynez.
Fernan Laynez, the eldest Sonne, was Father of
Layn Fernandez, Father of
Nugno Laynez, who by his Wife Ella, or Egnona had a Sonne
Layn Nugnez, Father of Diego Laynez. And of Ferdinand Laynez.
Who married with Dogna Ximena Nugnez, Daughter to the Count Dom Nugno Aluarez d'Amaya. And by her he had the Count Dom Aluaro Fagnez Minayo.
Diego Laynez eldest Sonne of Layn Laynez, espoused the Daughter of Dom Roderigo Aluarez, Count and Gouernor of the Asturies: And of this marriage was borne
The Cid, Ruis Dias de Biuaro.
The same Diego Laynez, had by a Countrey Damosel a Bastard, or naturall Sonne, called Fernando Diaz Laynez: And hee tooke to wife the Daughter of Anthony Antolinez, a very worthy Knight of Burgos. Of this marriage were borne
Martin Antolinez.Pero Bermudez.Melendo Fernandez.Fernan Alphonso: AndOrdogno, Knights highly renowned by the Romancers of Spaine, for performing actions of wonder, with the Cid their Vnckle.
Ruy Diaz, called the Cid, by the Moores of Spaine (which in the Affricane and Morisco tongue, signifieth a King and Lord) tooke to wife Ximena Gomez, Daughter to the Count Dom Gomez, Lord of Gormaz, neere Kinsman to the King of Leon. By this marriage he had a Son and two Daughters
Diego Rodriguez, who dyed in the Battaile of Consu^gra, fought against the Moores, and left no issue. The Daughters were
Sola, wife to the Infant Dom Pedro, Sonne and heire to Dom Pedro, King of Arrag^^; but by him she had no childe. The other Daughter wasEluira, who married with the Infant of Nauarre, Ramiro Sanceo, eldest Sonne to King Sanceo Garcia; but the ^gne of this mariage we haue already related.
The Cid bare in Armes, De Gueulles a la Bande de Synople bordee d'Or: retained by them of Mendoza, and the Antolinez. These last Portent du Cid, A l Orle and Bordure de Gueulles a huict Saultours d'Or.
Martin Antolinez, and Pero Bermudez, Bretheren, with Nugno Gustios de Lincuella, were (during their life time) three famous Knights, renowned for their valour beyond all other. In the presence of the King Dom Alphonso, who soiourned there in the Towne of Carion; they Combatted against the Lords of Carion, Fernand and Diego, Sonnes to Count Gonzalo Gonzalez, Lord of Carion, and Suero Gonzales their Vnckle, for an offence done to the Daughters of Cid Ruy Diaz. And in this Combate (fought to the vtmost extremity) the Counts of Carion were foiled and vanquished
Martin Antolinez fought against Fernand, and in this Combate hee had one of the Swords belonging to the Cid, so famously spoken of by the Romancers, for excellency of the temper. They called this Sword Colada, on the Blade whereof, and on the one side, were engrauen these two words (deriued from the Gospell. Sermo vester sit, Sic, Sic, Non Non) Si, Si. And on the other side, No, No. The Cid wonne this Sword from the Count of Barcelona, in the Battaile which he gaue to the King Dom Pedro of Arragon.
Pero Bermudez had likewise in this Combate, another Sword of the Cids, called T^sona (wonne by the Cid, on the day when he fought against Albucar the Moore, King of Thunis) and wherewith he slew his enemy Diego. These two Swords of the Cids, are to be seene in the Haule Royall of Armes at Madril.
To continue the memorie of this Combate, fought in presence of the King, and the Lists engirt with Chains, wherein the Knights acted their Chiualrie: Pero Bermudez, and his descent, carried in their Escutcheon of Armes, Eschicquete d'Or and de Sable de Quinze pieces de Cinq traicts, a l'Orle d Or chargee d'vne Chaine d'Azur. And of this Linage of the Antolinez, there are to be found in Portugal (euen to this present) knowne by these Armes.
The Cid and the Antolinez are interred
(...)

Church of the said chiefe Citie of Nauarre. Leauing for Successour his eldest Sonne
23. Thibault, second of the name, King of Nauarre, who reigned eighteene yeares. By his Wife Madam Isabel of France, Daughter to the King S. Lewes, hee had no childe. By a Concubine, which long time hee secretly maintained, called Marquisia Lopa de Rada, Daughter to Giles de Rada, a Knight of Nauarre, hee had a naturall Daughter, bearing the same name of her Mother
Marquisa, who was married to Dom Pedro Fernandez d'Ixar, Lord of Aicibea, naturall Sonne to the King of Arragon, Iames, first of the name, and of the Lady of his affection, Donna Thereza de Vidaure.
The said Thibauld the second dyed at Trappes in Sicilie, in his returne from the voyage of Thunis (made with the King Saint Lewes) the fift day of December, Anno One thousand two hundred three score and tenne. The Hearts of the said King and Queene, are at the Iacobines of Peruence, before the high Altar, in a Coffin (purposely made) of Brasse, doubly guilded, and round in forme: Their Bodies lye at S. Stephens of Troyes in Champaigne. Thibault left his Kingdome and goods to his Brother
24. Henry, King of Nauarre, first of that name, called the Grosse, exalted and Sacred at Pampelona, on Monday the foure and twentieth day of May, One thousand two hundred seauentie one. He had to wife Blanch of Artois, daughter to Monsi^ur Robert of France, Count of Artois: By her he had
Thibault, who dyed at a yeare old, it being the same of Sacring his Father: AndIoane, or Iane, who was Queene of Nauarre, and wife to the King of France Phillip le Bel.
Before his marriage, he had amorously embraced a beautifull yong Gentlewoman, of the house of Lacarra, by whom hee had a naturall Sonne, named
Henry, who was Lord of Ablitas, and high Steward of Nauarre, chiefe of the Noble Familie, sirnamed the Henries in Nauarre.
King Henry died with fatnesse, which stifled him, in the Bishops Prince of Pampelona, the one and twentieth day of Iuly, Anno One thousand two hundred seauentie foure. And lyeth in the great Church of Sancta Maria la Reale of Pampelona. After him succeeded his onely daughter Ioane of Nauarre, wife to
25. Phillip, sirnamed Le Bel, King of Nauarre, first of that name, and of ^ine fourth of the name of his owne descent, yongest Sonne to the King Saint Lewes. And of this marriage were borne foure Sons, and three Daughters
Lewes, called Hutin.Phillip, sirnamed the Long.Charles, tearmed Le Bel. AndRobert, who died at eleauen yeares old.
The Daughters were
Margaret, wife to Ferdinand fourth of the name, King of Castile, Sonne of Sanceo le Braue, fourth of the name, yongest Song Sonne to Alphonso the Tenth, all Kings of Castile.Isabel, wife to the King of England, Edward, second of the name: AndBlanche, who died yong.
Phillip le Bel deceased in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and foureteene, on the Eeuen of Saint Andrew, in the Deserts of Fontaine Bla^dy where he was borne. And Queene Ioane, of Nauarre died ten yeares before him, to wit, in the yeare, One thousand three hundred and foure, the second day of Aprill, at Bois de Vincennes. Her Tombe might haue bin seene in the Gray Fryers, before the burning of the Church of this great Monastery, which was vnfortunately set on fire at ten of the Clock in the night, on Saturday the nineteenth of Nouember, One thousand fiue hundred and fourescore. The said Queene Ioane reigned neere one and thirtie years, and the portraits of Phillip le Bel, and Ioane of Nauarre (drawne to the life) may be seene on the North gate of the Church in Paris, and on the fore-front of the Royall Colledge of Champaigne, called at this present of Nauarre, founded by the King and Queene at Mont de Paris, beneath the Butcherie of Saincte Geneuiefue.
Lewes, Sirnamed Hutin, that is to say Mutenous, or Tempestuous, their eldest Sonne, was King of Nauarre, first of that name; in regard of his Mother, and of France (by the Fathers side) tenth of

^he name, who caused the Parliament of France to be alwayes sedentary at Paris. He was Sacred and Crowned of Nauarre ^t Pampelona, the first day of October, in ^he yeare, One thousand, three hundred ^nd seauen, and reigned tenne yeares (or ^here about) in Nauarre, hee had two wiues; the first whereof was Margaret, ^aughter to Robert the Second, Duke of Bourgongne: And in this Marriage was ^orne their only Daughter.
Madam Ioane or Iane of France, Queene of Nauarre, by death of the Kings of Na^arre and France, Phillip le Long, and Charles ^e Bel, who both deceased without issue.
The second wife of Lewes Hutin, was ^he Que^ne Clemencia of Hungaria, ^aughter of Charles Martell, and Sister to ^arobert (that is to say Charles Robert) ^ings of Hungaria; of whom was borne ^heir only Sonne a Posthumus, after his fa^hers death
27. Iohn, King of France and Nauarre, ^irst of the name; whose life and reigne, ^ontinued but eight dayes. By the death ^f him, and his Father also Lewis Hutin, ^appening in this manner, his Father dy^ng the fifte day of Iune, and the Sonne in ^he moneth of Nouember following, An. One Thousand Three hundred and Six^eene.
28. Phillip Sirnamed the Long, or Great, was King of Nauarre Second, and ^f France Fift of the name. By Ioane, Countesse of Bourgongne and Artois, his Wife, Daughter to Otho, Count of Bourgongne, and Mahauld Countesse of Ar^is, he had one Sonne, and foure daugh^ers.
Monsieur Lewes of France and of Nauarre, who died very young: The daughters were
Madame Ioane of France and of Nauarre, Wife to the Duke of Bourgongne, ^ourth of the name. She had in mariage ^he Counties of Artois and Bourgongne, Counties, that by the deceasse (without ^ssue) of Phillip the last Duke of Bourgongne, who was of the ligne of Hugh Capet; ^ell to Madame Margaret of France, wife ^o Lewes Counte of Flanders, Father and Mother of Margaret; Heire of Flanders, Wife to Monsieur Phillip of France, called ^he Hardy, D^ke of Bourgongne, First of ^he name of the last ligne.Madame Margaret of France and Nauarre, Wife to Lewes Count of Flanders aboue named: to whom she brought in Marriage the said Counties of Artois and Bourgongne.Madame Isabell of France and Nauarre, Wife to Guyon, Counte d'Albon, Sonne of Iohn, Daulphine of Viennois. AndBlanch, a Religious Nunne, professed at Long-Champ, neere to Paris, where her Tombe is to be seene, at the Yron Grate.
Phillip le Long died at Bois de Vincennes, vpon Thursday, being the fift of Iune, One thousand three hundred and twenty, hauing reigned fiue yeares in Nauarre and France. His Brother
29. Charles le Bel succeeded him in the Kingdomes of Nauarre and France, being First of the name in Nauarre, and Fourth in France. Hee had three Wiues. The first was Blanch of Bourgongne, youngest Daughter to Otho, Counte of Bourgongne, and Mahauld, Countesse of Artois; but by her hee had no Child. By the second, named Madame Mary of Luxembourg, Daughter to Lewes of Luxembourg, Emperour, and Sister to Iohn of Luxembourg, King of Bohemia; he had a Sonne, borne before his time, and of this Child-bed died the said Queene Mary, being buried with the Iacobines at Montargis.
His third Wife was Iane d'Eureux, Daughter to Monsieur Lewes of France: Counte d'Eureux: and by her he had three Daughters.

N. Deceased very young.
Mary died likewise in her infancie: And
Madame Blanche of France, a Posthumus, Wife to Monsieur Phillip of France, first Duke of Orleance, who left no issue.

Charles le Bel reigned but from seauen, to the eight yeare, and died at Bois de Vincennes, the first day of the moneth of February, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred twenty seauen. These three last Kings of France and of Nauarre, being deceased without heires Male, and Phillip de Valois, Sixte and last of the name, comming to the Crowne of France, who could not pretend any title to the Crowne of Nauarre; held vp his hand to
Iane of France, Queene of Nauarre by her birth Wife to
30 Phillip, Third of the name, called the Good Counte d'Eureux, Eldest Sonne to Monsieur Lewes of France, Sonne to King Phillip the hardy, Third of the name,

Sonne of Saint Lewes. The said Lewes, Counte d'Eureux Porte de France sans nombre, au Baston componne d'Argent, et de Gueules: Armes which the King of Nauarre Phillip d'Eureux, Third of the name, King of Nauarre caused to bee quartered; which yet the Kings of Nauarre haue retained in their Armes, and to this present in their money, which is stamped in the lower Nauarre and Bearne.
Of this Mariage ensued a plenteous lignage, to witt, three Sonnes and foure Daughters.
Charles, who was King of Nauarre.
Phillip, Counte of Longue-Ville, slaine in Normandie by Bertrand du Glesquin, in the yeare, One thousand three hundred sixty foure, he lieth buried at Eureux, and died without leauing any issue.
Lewes of Nauarre, Count de Beaumont le Roger in Normandie, who espoused the eldest Daughter to the Duke of Duraz, and Mary, Daughter to the K. of Cicilie issued of the house of Anion: in regard whereof, he stiled himselfe Duke of Duraz, a Citty in Greece, heeretofore called Dyrrachium. And of this mariage was borne
Charles de Beaumont, Married in Nauarre to the Daughter of the Viscounte of Mauleon. The said Beaumont was made Alfier Maior of Nauarre, by King Charles the second his Vnckle, and of him are descended those of the house of Beaumont, Countes of Lerin, Constables and Marshalles in the Kingdome of Nauarre, Agents and instruments of the losse and vsurpation thereof, against their lawfull Kings. The Daughters were
Ioane of Nauarre, wife to the Viscounte of Rohan in Bretaigne, and of this mariage issued many children, who (to this day) beare the Armes of Nauarre and d'Eureux quartered, with their Mascles, according as we haue formerly obserued, in the Catalogue of the Knights of the Holy Ghost, vnder the name there set downe of Montbazon.
Mary, Wife to the King of Arragon Peter, Fourth of the name.
Blanche, Wife in second Marriage to King Phillip de Valois And
Agnes, Wife to Gaston, Sirnamed Phoebus, for his goodly cuilled locks of haire Counte of Foix, and Lord of Bearne.
King Phillip d'Eureux was slaine at the siedge of Algazire in Granado (possessed by the Moores) the sixteenth day of September, Anno, One thousand three hundred forty and three, his body was enterred at Sancta Maria le Reale in Pampelona, but his heart was caried to Queene Ioane of Nauarre his Wife, who kept it (during her life) in her Oratory. Shee suruiued her Husband sixe yeares, or there about, and died at Chasteau de Conflans beneath Charanton, where the Riuer of Marne loseth her name in Seine, on Tuesday the seth of October, Anno One thousand three hundred forty and nine, her body lieth buried at Saint Denis in France, at the feete of King Lewes Hutin her Father: But her heart is buried with her Husbands, before the high Altar of the Iacobins at Paris, where yet their Monument is to bee seene. The said Queene liued one and twenty yeares, next whom succeeded her eldest Sonne
31. Charles, Second of the name, commonly called The Bad, for his depraued life, whose Reigne continued seauen and thirty yeares, but died miserably: Such Life, Such Death. The scourdge of France, although he was the prime Prince of the blood thereof. Hee had to Wife Madame Iane or Ioane of France, Second Daughter to King Iohn: Of which Mariage came three Sonnes, and as many Daughters, as namely
Charles, King of Nauarre by his fathers death.
Phillip, who was both borne, and died at Pampelona, very young And
Peter of Nauarre, Count of Mortaigne in Normandie, who tooke to Wife Katharine d'Alanson, Daughter to Peter, Count of Alanson, Sonne to Charles, Count of Alanson, Brother to King Phillip de Valois. The said Peter of Nauarre (whom the French then called Monsiegn Pierres, as the Gascoignes vse to speake) and his wife lye buried at the Charterhouse of Paris, on the right side of the high Altar, where you may see their Tombe and Pictures in white and blacke Marble, without any inscription. Hee was a Prince (in his life time) perticulerly affected to the said Monastery of the Charterhouse, where hee founded foure Celles of Monkes, which at this day are to bee seene quoated with these foure Letters C. D. F. G. The Religious men thereof, are called The Monkes of the Prince of Nauarre. The Foundation heereof was in the yeare,

One thousand three hundred ninety one, allowing then foure thousand Crownes of Gold (then called Francks, there were Francks on Hos^backe, and on foote) with which summe of Money, the Char^erhouse of Paris bought the land and Seigneu^ie of V^lie-Neufue le Roy, foure miles from Paris. Moreouer, the Prince gaue them many Ornaments and Dec^king for their Altars; especially for Easter day, and other solemne Feast dayes in the ye^r^, when the Coap^s and Vestiments are publikely to bee seene on the Priests, at the said Charterhouse Monasterie in Paris, very costly imbrodered with Gold, charged with the Armes of Nauarre and d Eureux. In acknowledgement of so many great and gracious sauours, the said Charterhouse Monkes stood bound to say for him (during his life) two Conuertu^ll Masses, the one De ^eata, and the other for the dead, and on the day of his death, Monachatum vnum: that is to say, by the whole Monastery of the Charterhouse, in what place soeuer of the Land they wer^, eche Priest ought to say Sixe Masses. The prof^ssed (no^ Priest^) two Psalters, and the Laye brethren, a certaine number of their Beades o^ Chappelets, for the soule of the deceassed. After his death, the said two Masses were chaunged into an Aniuersarie, which should bee euery yeare said, on the Feaste of the Ascention. He died of a Fluxe in his belly, at the Seidge of Bourges, with Giles, Brother to the Duke of Bretaigne, in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred and Twelue, according to the Chronicle of the Vrsins. The Tombe of the said P^ter of Nauarre, and his wife, is made of white and blacke Marble: On their heades are the Crownes belonging to Countes, of double guilded Brasse, and their Collars of the same, answerable to the Honor^^le Order obserued in those dayes.
Peter is Armed with Nauarre, Quartered (to no purpose) with B^urbon, in sted of d'Eureux, hauing the Baston Compone, as before, which the Kings of Nauarre haue alwayes caried, since King Phillip d'Eureux, euen to this present. Of this Peter of Nauarre* cam^ Dom Peter, Lord of Peralta, Constable of Nauarre, of whom are desc^nded th^ Marquesses de Falces, Lords of Peral^a. This famous family is f^lne to the Female ligne, in the person of the Lady Marquesse de Falces, who I saw at Peralta, in my last voyage into Spayne, in the yeare fourescore and eleuen. The daughters were these Ladies.
Madame Mary of Nauarre, wife to Alphonso of Arragon, Counte of Denia (in Latine Dianium) at this day a Marquis^te.
Blanche, who died at Olita, being then aged about thirteene yeares And
Ioane of Nauarre, maried twise. First to Iohn de Montfort, Duke of Bretaigne: in second mariage she had Henry of Lancaster, King of England.
Hee had moreouer a naturall Sonne* named Lionell of Nauarre, the stemme of the Marquesses de Cortez, Marshalles of Nauarre.
Queene Ioane died at Eureux, where she made her abiding, in the end of the Moneth of Nouember, Anno, One thousand three hundred seauenty three, Her heart was buried in the Church of Pampelona, but her body enterred at Eureux. Charles the Bad her husband, out liued h^r thirteene yeares, and died at Pampelona, on Tuesday the first of Ianuary, Anno, One thousand three hundred fourescore and Sixe, the seauen and thirtieth of his Reigne, and of his age the Fiue and fiftieth. His heart was carried to Sancta Maria d'Vxo^, his ^owells to ^o^ceuaux; but his body buried in the great Church of Pampelona, by the heart of his wife; he finished his life in a very strange manner.(...) In regard of his age, being benummed with much colde, aduise was giuen, that he should be wrapte in a cloth well wet and steeped in Aqua Vitae, and so sowne vp therein, till the Cloth being growne drie, it should then be wet againe with Aqua Vitae. He which sowed him vp in the cloth, had a waxe Candle lighted standing before him, and to breake off the thred, he tooke the waxe candle to burne it in sunder: but it so chaunced, that the enflamed threed ran on to the cloth, setting it both on fire and flame, without any remedy to redresse it. So he liued three dayes, crying and scrieking most lamentably, with the extreame agonies which he endured, and in that maner ended his life: which was reputed (by many) a iust and diuine punishment inflicted on him, in regard of his wicked and lewde life. Thus you heare what the Chronicle of the Vrsins speaketh of him, in the yeare, One



thousand three hundred fourescore and sixe, Hee had for Successour in the Kingdome, his Eldest Sonne
32. Charles, Third of the name, called The Noble, who reigned nine and thirty yeares. He espoused in the life time of his Father, Madame Eleanor of Castille, Daughter to Henry, King of Castille, and Iane of Castille his Wife, Daughter to Emanuell King of Castille: And of this marriage were borne two Sonnes, and fiue Daughters.
Charles andLewes
dying young.
Ioane* Maried to Iohn, Eldest Sonne to Archo^nbauld, Fourth of th^ name, Count of ^oix, by whom no issue r^m^ined.
Mary, she died young at Pampelona.
Blaunch, who while her F^ther liued, maried with Martin, King of Cicilie, Eld^st Sonne to Martin, King of Arragon, but by her hee had no child. In second mariage Shee had th^ Duke of Bauaria, Lewes, Brother to Queene Isabell Wife to Charles the Sixt. She was married also the third time, to Iohn Infant of Arragon, Duke of Pegnafiell in the Kingome of Castille.
Beatrix, Married to Iames of Bourbon, Count de la Marche, called King Iames of Naples: And
Isabell, d^ceasing at nine yeares olde. During the ^bsence of his wife in Castille, he had by his Looue-Mistrisse a Sonne and a D^ughter: The Sonne was
Godfrey of Nauarre, Marquesse de Cortez, Marshall of the Kingdome: The Daughter was
Io^ne of Nauarre, Maried to Dom Inigo d'Ortis d'^s^i^uga, Sonne to Dom Diego Lopez d Estenuga, a rich and powerfull Lord in Na^arre. Charles the Noble died a sudden death at Olita, on Saturday in September, being the Natiuity of our Lady, the yeare of Grace, One thousand Foure hundred eighty and fiue, Hee lieth in the Great Church of Pampelona, which he c^used to be newly rebuilded, as at this d^y is to be s^ene. By his death, his Eldest Daughter
Blanche, And
33. Iohn of Arragon her husband, were King and Queene of Nauarre; and of this Ma^ge were borne
Charles, Prince of Nauarre, poysonned by his Stepmother, at the age of one and forty yeares, without being Married.
Blanche, Married to the King of Castille, Dom Henry, sirnamed the Weake or Impotent: And
Leonora, Wife to Gaston, Counte of Foix, and afterward Queene of Nauarr^.
Queene Blanche died at Nieuas in Castille, the first day of Aprill, about the ending of the yeare, One Thousand Foure hundred forty and one, His Body lieth at the Gray Fryers of Tudele in Nauarre. By his deceasse, the Kingdom of Nauarre appertained to the Prince Dom Charles, from whom King Iohn of Arragon his Father kept it, vntill the yeare, One thousand foure hundred threescore and two, when
34. Eleanor, the last Daughter, was enstalled Gouernesse in the Kingdome of Nauarre, for the said King Iohn her Father, the Estates of the Realme declaring her Princesse of Viana, and Regent of Nauarre, with the Count Gaston her Husband. Vnder this King Iohn of Arragon, began the factions in Nauarre, of them of Beaumont, partakers with Prince Charles; and them of Gramont, who tooke p^rt with King Iohn. By these factions ensued the Kingdomes loss, from the legitimate and naturall Lords thereof. In this mariage of the said Eleanor, and Gaston, Fourth of the name her husband, were borne foure Sonnes, and fiue daughters.
Gaston, Prince of Viana, the Eldest Son, who tooke to wife Madame Magdalen of France, Sister to King Lewes the Eleuenth. And of this mariage ensued a Sonne and a Daughter.
Frances, sirnamed Phebus, King of Nauarre: And
Katharine, Queene of Nauarre, by the death of her Brother.
The said Gaston was slaine by the splinter of a Launce, in a Tourney held at Liuorne neere to Bourdeaux, on Friday the two and twentieth of Nouember, One Thousand foure hundred Threescore and nine, the sixe and twentieth yeare of his age: His Body lieth at Saint Andrew of Bourdeaux. The second Sonne was
Iohn, Viscounte of Narbona, who had to Wife Mary of Orleans: the Father and Mother of that Thunderbolte of Warre, Gaston de Foix, Duke of Nemoux, slaine in the Battaile of Rauenna.
Peter, Cardinall, and Bishop of Ayre in Guienne: And
Iames, who died at the age of thirtie ^res, without being Married. The ^^ughters were
Mary Wife to William, Marquesse of ^tferrat.
Ioane, Married to the Counte of Ar^g^ac.
Margaret, Wife to Frances, the last ^ke of Bretaigne: And of this marriage ^s borne Madame Anne, twise Queene (...) France.
Katharine, Maried to the Count de ^dalles, Captaine de Buch. Of which ^rriage issued two Sonnes, the one, ^unte of Candalles and Captaine de ^h, the other Archbishop of Bourde^: And a Daughter, Anne de Foix, ^ife to Ladislaus, King of Bohemia ^d Hungaria, Sonne to Cazimir, King (...) Poland. And of this Marriage came ^wes, King of Bohemia and Hungaria, ^o espoused Mary of Castille, Sister to (...) Emperour Charles the Fifte; and ^ane of Hungaria, who Married with ^rdinand of Austria, Brother to the ^d Charles the Fift, after whom, he was ^o Emperour: And of this Marriage ^s borne the Emperour Maximillian, ^d other children.
The last daughter was Leonora de Foix, ^ho died in her infancy.
By the death of Iohn of Arragon, hap^ning on Tuesday the nineteenth of Ia^ary, One thousand foure hundred sea^nty eight, at Barcelona:
Eleanor was crowned Queene of Na^re in the great Church of Tudela. ^he reigned but three weekes after her ^oronation, and died at Tudela, in the ^d of the Moneth of Aprill, and begin^ng of the yeare, One thousand foure ^undred seauenty nine, the ninth of her ^iddowhood. Her body was enterred (...) the Monastery of the Graye Friers, in ^e Suburbs of the Towne of Taffala in Nauarre, according to her owne appoint^ent. By her death her youngest Sonne
35. Frances, sirnamed Phoebus, came to ^he Crowne of Nauarre, and to the Seig^euries and Counties of Bearn, of Foix ^nd Bigorre. His Reigne was of small continuance, because hee died (fifteene ^oneths after his Cronation in Nauarre) the nine and twentieth day of Ianuary, the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred fourescore and three, the sixeteenth of his age, without being maried. He died at Pa^ in Bearn, and his Body was caried to Saint Maries, the Cathedrall of Lescar. After him
36. Katharine, And
Iohn d'Albret her Husband, Second of the name, were King and Queene of Nauarre, Sacred and Crowned at Pampelona, on Sunday the tenth of Ianuary, One thousand foure hundred ninety foure,
Of this Marriage ensued many children, whereof fiue died very young. The Sonnes were
Andrewe Phoebus, who died at Pampelona.
Iohn died before his elder Brother.
Henry, who was borne in the Citty of Sanguessa in Nauarre (three dayes after the death of his Elder Brother) the eighteenth day of Aprill, One thousand fiue hundred and three, And
Charles Frances, who dyed in the voyage made to the Kingdome of Naples, with the Lord of Lauirec, The daughters were

Katharine.

Anne, who died affianced to the Count of Lustrac, Sonne to the Count of Candalles.

Quiteria.

Magdalen, And
Isabell, Wife to the Count of Rohan in Bretaigne: And of this Marriage were borne
Henry, Viscounte de Rohan, And Iohn de Rohan, Lord of Fontenay, Both dying without Issue.
N. Deceased younge.
Rene, who was heire of all by the Fathers side.
Peter died younge.
Lewes, Lord of Gien, died younge: And
Frances, Duchesse of Leon, of the Ganache, and of Beauuoir on the Sea. Of the M^sle children of this auncient house of Rohan
Rene had to Wife the Heire of Par^nay, of the Royall house of Luzignan, Daughter to Iohn of Luzignan, called the Archbishop, Lord of Soubize. Of this mariage were borne.
Henry, Viscounte de Rohan.
N. Who died young.
Beniamin, Lord of Soubize.

Henriet.

Katharine: And

Anne.

This Genealogie sheweth aparantly, in what neerenesse of Alliance the house of Rohan is to the most Christian Kings of France and Nauarre: And for this consideration, King Henry the Great, of eternall memory, gaue the title of Duchie and Peer-dome to the Eldest Sonne of Rohan.
Against King Iohn d'Albret, and Katharine his Wife, the Kingdome of Nauarre was vsurped by Ferdinand of Arragon, as we haue both heere, and elsewhere formerly declared. Iohn d' Albret died in the Castell of Moning in Bearn, the seauenteenth day of Iune, One thousand fiue hundred and sixteene, His Body lieth in the Cathedrall Church at Lescar. Queene Katharine suruiued her Husband a yeare, or thereabout, because she died at Mont de Morsan on Tuesday the twelfth of February, One thousand fiue hundred and seauenteene, the seauen and fortieth of her age, and nine and twentieth of her Reigne. Her Body was likekewise caried into the Church of Lescar, and laid by her Husband.
37. Henry their Eldest Sonne, was King of Nauarre, Second of the name, who by Margaret d'Engoulesme, Sister to King Frances the First (Widdowe of Charles the last Duke of Alanson) his Wife, had
Ioane, Queene of Nauarre after (...) Father.Iohn, who died being two Mone^^ olde.
And two other Daughters, who bei^^ borne before their time, neuer saw the light of this world.
King Henry died at a place called H^getman in Bearn, the fiue and twentie^^ day of May, aged three and fifty yeare^ His Body was caried to the Church (...) Lescar: And then succeeded him
38. Ioane, and her Husband, Anthony of Bourbon, D^ of Vendosme, First Prince of the Bloo^ of the Sacred and Holy Lillies of Fran^ Wee haue in the Tract of the Order (...) Bourbon, formerly discoursed and obse^ued, the death and Linage of the said King and Queene, to whom next succeeded
39. Henry, King of Nauarre, Third and of France Fourth of the name, called The Great, Father of
40. Lewes, King of Nauarre, Second, and of France Thirteenth of the name* To whom God giue (of his Grace) a wise and vnderstanding Councell, with an intelligible spirit to effect the best long life, victory ouer his enemies, and to gouerne his people with mildnesse an^ Iustice.
Wee haue heeretofore remembred, that the Kings of Nauarre haue caried varied Armes, and chaunged diuers times.
Armes by paternall inheheritance.Those of Garcia Ximenes, who was First King of Nauarre, and Count of Big^r^ by his paternall inheritance, caried but L'Esu de Gueules, without any other ornamen^* Armes retained by the auncient Lords of Labrit, since then called Albret, to whom King Charles Sixt of the name, gaue permission to beare Seme de France au Quart^^ d'Honneur, and the other to retaine those of the auncient Kings of Nauarre, and Countes Bigorre, the St^mme of the house of Albret.
The sam^ Garcia Ximenes, being come into the Hermitage of Saint Iohn de (...) Pegna, neere to Iaca, in the territorie of Nauarre, to giue his furtherance in the Funeralles of Iohn l'Archimandrite or Abbot of the same place, who was departed out of this wretched and transitory life, into glory eternall and without ending, the yeare of Grace seauen hundred and sixteene, two yeares after the inuading of all the Prouinces of Spayne by the Moores of Affrica;The Prouinces of Spayne inuaded by the Moores of Affrica. thus it happened to him. After the said Funeralls, being at Prayer in the night season, he and all his People saw a Shield in Heauen shining like Gold, wherein appeared a great Oake, greene and fairely flourishing with leaues, hauing on the top thereof a Crosse Red as blood, Which serued them as a good pr^sage, of happy encountring with the Moores in fight. Ximenes being chosen chiefe of this holy enterprise; he left the auncient Armes of his house, and tooke D'Or au Chesne de Synople, au Chef d'Or a la Croix pommetee de Gueules. Of this vision, and the newe-made Conquest of the said Garcia Ximenes,This vision or miracle may be credited so farre as men please. both he and his desendants were honoured with the title of The Kingdome of Sobrarbre, Regnum Subarboris, and Subrarbris by abbreuiation, and the Lords of this large extended Countrey, called Kings of Sobrarbra, and Sobrarbre by the Spanyards. Who enuying the glory

^nd renowne, of the First Kings of this first Christian Kingdome, haue reiected this miracle: writing, that the extendure of the Kingdome of Sobrarbre, was so named for the proximitie or neerenesse thereof, to the Serres and Mountaine of Arbe, which seperateth and deuideth Sobrarbre, from the plaine and Champayne-ground, which extendeth it selfe from the Flood of Cinga, so farre as to the Riuer of Euro.
These Armes were chaunged the second time, by the Sixte King of Nauarre Inigo Ximenes, sirnamed Arista, who beside his deuise formerly related, tooke for Armes of the Kingdome, L'Escu d'Azur a la Croix Pommettee ou patte d'Argent,An other vision the cause of an other alteration. long ^ime retained by the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon. The subiect of this second Armes, ensued thus. The said Ximenes Arista, being one night in prayer at Saint Sauiour de Leyra, there appeared an Angell to him, who gaue him courage to warre ^gainst the Moores of Spayne, with Vne Estendard de Soye Bleue, charge d'Vne Croix ^lanche pommottee. So that Arista, wholly animated with valour and newe receiued strength, by bearing this C^lestiall Banner; descended downe the Mountaines, where the Kings his Predecessours had made their abyding, and conquered on the ^laine, the Citties of Pampelona and of Alaua from the Moores.
The Third Armes of the Kings of Nauarre, which haue remained with them ^ill this instant; were taken by King Sancio the Strong, Eight of the name. As a ^ignale memorie of the Battaile Des Naues de Tolosa, wun against the Moores by his good conduct. We will therefore set downe the particularities of that memorable ouerthrow.


A True, but bri^fe Discourse of the famous Battaile called Des Naues de Tolosa, fought betweene the Christians and Moores, In Anno, One Thousand two Hundred and Eleuen. CHAP. IIII.
AFter the Battaile of Alarcos,Losse of the Battaile at Alarcos. lost by the rashnesse of the King of Leon Dom Alphonso, Ninth of the name (hauing despised the succours of the Kings of Nauarre and Arragon, because the onely honour of victory might be arrogated to himselfe) on Wednesday the seuen and twentieth of Iuly, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred fourescore and fifteene, the Moores thirstily pursuing their victory; razed Alarcos, forraging on (euen as themselues pleased) so farre as to the Portes D'Yebenes, about sixe miles from Toledo, wherein was shut vp Dom Alphonso, grieuously wounded on the day at Alarcos, which he besieged tenne dayes together, without the least preuayling or doing any thing, and then was compelled to discampe, by the braue resistance of the besiedged and defendants. The Moores returned to encampe there the second time, so that he was forced in flight to Leonois, to finde Ioseph Muhamet, the Miramomelin of Affrica, either for Peace, or (at the least) for a Truce of Nine yeares continuance.
During which time, Aben-Iosep Muhamet died at Marocco,The death of Aben Ioseph Muhamet as Marocco, leauing for Successour his Sonne (or Brother) Aben Mahamet, Sirnamed The Greene, because ordinarily he were his Roabe and Tolibant Greene, to shewe, that he was descended of the Stocke of the false Prophet Mahomet, as indeed he was, comming of Aben-Alauecy, of great renowne among the Affricanes and Arabes, to haue his originall deriued of the Quenne Fatima, Daughter to Mahomet, Wife to the King and Caliphe Hosman.
The Truce being vpon the point of expyring, Aben-Mahamet, hoping and purposing the conquest of all Spayne; departed from Marocco into Spayne, with a very great number of Affricanes, who being ioyned with his other forces in Spayne, made a dreadfull Army, consisting of aboue three Hundred Thousand Men.
The huge Army of Aben-Mahamet against the Christians.This horrible deluge, made an assembly of all the Christian Kings and Princes of Spayne, who armed themselues on all sides in this common cause. Ferdinand, Sonne to the King of Leon Alphonso, Ninth of the name, conducted the troupes of his Father Dom Alphonso, and made a Caualcado or out-ranging vpon the Moores of Baesa d' Anduyar and of Iaen, where he tooke some Castles, burnt and spoyled all, and (laden with the spoyles) returned to Tolledo. This he did in Andalousia, in the yeare, One thousand two hundred and eleuen, where likewise (on the other side) the King of Arragon aduentured on the Moores of Valencia, out of whose feruility he deliuered Adamusso, and some other strong places: while (in the meane time) Aben. Mahamet,(...) taken and all put to the ^word. by three moneths siedge, tooke the strong Towne of Saluatierra, where he put all the inhabitants to the edge of the Sword. This surprizall happpened in the Moneth of December, One thousand two hundred and eleuen.
Alphonso, King of Leon, being then at Talauera, heard the sad tydings of this strong Townes surprising, and despayring (by present power) to resist against so potent an Army, as that of the Moores was: obtayned of the Pope, sitting then in his holy Chaire, a Croisade, or expedition of Christians out of diuers Countries, by his Ambassador Roderick Ximenes,Roderick Ximenes Archbi^ho^ of Toledo. Archbishop of Toledo, causing it to be published among the States of the Christian Princes, to whom he sent his Ambassadours, to signifie the great multitudes of the Moores, which passed out of Affrica into Spayne dayly, to make themselues Lords and Maisters thereof. Among them were thirty Kings, and the Army consisted of an hundred and threescore thousand horse, and an innumerable multitude of foote S^ldiour^.
The Armie of the Christians.Vpon the publication of this Holy Croisade, an vnspeakeable number of Frenche, Germaines, English, Dutch, and other went into Spayne, and there ioyning with the natiues of the Country; made their Armies body to consist of an hundred thousand Foote, and threescore thousand Horse. To traine the baggadge of the Christian Army, there were threescore thousand Chariots. Eche Horsseman hauing dayly paide him a Maruedis of Golde; euery Footeman the fourth parte thereof, and eche Soldiours B^y^ the fourth part of a Footeman: which wadges was furnished by all the Princes of Spayne; excepting him of Portugall, who would not yield any contribution.
This Army was assembl^d on the plaines of Toledo, in the Moneth of Iune, One thousand two hundred and Twelue, from whence they departed to meete with the Moores. Alphonso of Leon was the conducter of the Arriere-garde; he of Arragon, the maine Battaile; and the Counte Diego Lopez de Haro, Lord of B^scaye (who was one of the first that fl^d on the day at Alarcos) led the vangard. The Christian Army thus Marshalled into three diuisions, went and besiedged Malago, foureteene miles from Toledo, a very good place, and which they wonne by force, the three and twentieth day of the said Moneth of Iune, where the Christians (as an acceptable Sacrifice to God) put all the inhabitants to the sword,(...) for the bloody (...) Salua^^^^^. as their enemies formerly had dealt with the Christi^ns at Saluatierra* and the sacke or spoyle of this so strong a place, was giuen to the Straungers, who had very valiantly fought for it. From hence the Christian Army went to Guadiana, one of the greatest riuers in Spayne, and to Calatrana, winning it from the Moores that were therein, by way of composition, (Liues and Iew^lles saued,(...). and conducted to a place of security, by the Counte of Haro) against th^ oppinion of all the forraine succour, who coueted nothing more, then the vtter ext^rmination of that wicked race. The place was rendered to the Knights (bearing name thereof, Knights of Calatraua) who possessed it before; but the pillage was giuen to the Strangers.
Aben-Mahamet had wonne againe Iaen from the Christians, where hee continued ^^posedly, expecting the route and rupture of the Christian Army, weakened in the greater parte of the Starungers, being constarined (through want of victualles) to re^^^ne among them. Which highly exalted the courage of the Moores, and gaue them vndoubted hope, to furnish their affaires in better order, which was greatly disioynted by so many enemies,(...) with whom they were yet to meddle withall.
From Calatraua the Christan Army came againe to Alarcos, died red yet with the large effusion of blood, but blanched and made white soone after with the Moores bones.

where the Christians soiourned certaine dayes. This was the place where the King of Nauarre Sancio the Strong, Eight and last of the name, brauely shewed himselfe, with a choice troupe of his best Horse and Foote, Soldiours of good and sound approbation. At his arriuall the Christian Army recouered a new face of ioy and ^lacrity, expressed by the honourable welcomming of this Great Commander, whom they entertained in a ranged Battaile.
With the King of Nauarre were many great Lords and Gentlemen of France, Champaigne, and other places. Gonsalo Gomez Garcia d' Agonciello, carried the Royall Standard of Nauarre, which was of Blew Silke, A la Croix Blanche Pommettee, as we haue already said.
About this Colonel were the Lords of Nauarre, as namely, Garcia Almorauid;The great Lords of Nauarre present i^ the Army. Pero Martinez de Leet; Pero Garces d'Aronis; Sanceo Fernandez de Montagut, Brother to Dom Pedro de Montagut, Great Maister of the Templers, to whom the King of Arragon had giuen the City of Tortosa: Pero Martin de Subica; Martin de Milagro, Garcia Ximenez d Oielletta; Ximenez d' Ayuar, Pero Velez de Gueu^ra; Mauleen de Cascante; Raymond de Peralta; Ximenez de Bastan; Iuan Garcia de Bidaurra; Pero Gonsales de Marrano; Arnauld de Leet; Inigo de Oteyca, Fortunio Ximenez; Nugno Sanchez, Brother to the Archbishop of Toledo Dom Roderigo Ximenez; Inigo de Rada; Miguell de Rada; Ximenez Iniguez; Inigo Destunica; Diego Iniguez his Sonne; Fremin d' Aguigniga, Monsen Iuan de Areillano; Ochoa Fortunez; Lope Fortunez; Roderigo de Arazuri, and many other, with the Inhabitants of the Borough of Sainct Sernin of Pampelona, who made their comming well knowne to the Enemy, by the surprizall of many places, which serued as a leuelling for the approaches to and from Saluatierra, possessed by Aben-Mahamet.
This Towne is seated at the foote of the intangling Mountaines,Montes Mar^anos new call^d La Sierra Morena. which the Romaines called Montes Marianos, at this present La Sierra Morena, the most detestable Countrey to bee seene in all Europe, and a retreate for no honest people.
The King of Nauarre being thus ioyned with the Kings of Arragon and Leon, the Christian Army departed from Alarcos, to encampe neerer on the Skirts of Saluatierra.
On the Sunday following, the Army being in Battaile array, the Generall Muster was made; and on the next day, they came to lodge at ^^exinaida, and three dayes after, neere to the foote of the Mountaine Muradall, by the Riuer called Guadalhaiara.
Mahamet (in the meane while) had planted his troupes all along the Mountaines about Iaen, where hee attended the Christians comming resolutely, to giue them a Charge vpon their Retreate.
But hauing vnderstood by some Traytors in the Christian Army,False v^lai^es in the Christian Army. what great necessity of Victuals was among them, in regard whereof the Strangers were all withdrawne: hee changed his former resolution to another, and in stead of attending for them, discamped, to get before them to Baesa, from whence hee sent part of his troupes to Naues de Tolosa, to hinder the passage of our men, and seize them first on the high Mountaines. Wherein hee was foreseene by Count Diego Lopez de Haro, who sent his Sonne Dom Diego and two of his Nephewes, Sanceo Ferdinand, and Martin Nugnez, to get first possession of them. There was the Fight sharpe and cruell, because they found the Arabes on the toppe of the pointed Rockes, neere to the Castell of Ferrall, from whence they were to driue them by force of Armes (as they did) and planted downe there their Tents and Pauilions.
On the Thursday, about the ninth houre, all the Army came and lodged at the foote of the Mountaines, where part of them ascended,The Castle of Ferrall taken from the Moores. and the rest encamped on the bankes of Guadalhaiara. On the morrow, the three Kings of Nauarre, Arragon and Leon, ascended the Mountaines, and lodged themselues betweene those two that were beneath the Castell of Ferrall, which (the same day) they tooke from the Moores.
To come to the place where the enemies Army was encamped, there was but one passage so strait and vneasie, as one man alone could defend it against a whole
(...)

bridle, to saue himselfe in the Towne of Baesa, or that of Iaen, followed with no more but foure Horse onely.
By his example his chiefest Commanders, shifte for themselues through the wide fields: God knoweth how the rest (pitifully affrighted) serued for a Butte or ayme to the Christians,The wonderfull s^aughter of the Moores and pauerty of the Christians. who made no meane Massacre of the Moores, although they were twenty men to one Christian. So that vpon the account made, there remained slaine in the field Thirty Fiue Thousand Horsemen, and an Hundred and Threescore Thousand Foot-Soldiers, as it is written by Dom Rodericke of Toledo.
Of the Christians were slaine but an Hundred and Fifteene men; among whom was not any of note, but three only, Dom Dalmau de Crexell, whom the Kings caused to bee buried in the Church of Toledo; Dom Alphonso Fernandez de Valladares, Commander of the Barre of the Order of Saint Iames; And F. Pedro Gomez D' Aluezeda, Commander Dez Cazez de Toledo, Cornet of the Order of Calatraua. The Christians pursued the Moores so farre as to Vilches, hewing and cutting them still in pieces.
Considerations on this rate Victory.This Victory was miraculous by all the circumstances. First, by the small number of Christians slaine in the Battaile, in regard and comparison of the Moores. Secondly, by the strange passage which the Heardsman shewed them. Thirdly, by a Crosse, which appeared in Heauen ouer the Christian Army (which Crosse was Red, finishing with foure Flower de luces, after the manner of the Order of Calatrana.) Fourthly, by the seuerall goings and returnings of the Chanon and Cabiscoll of Toledo, Dominicke Paschall, who bearing (according to the ancient custome of Prima^es) the Crosse of the Archbishop of Toledo, Roderigo Ximenes, a natiue of Nauarre (and such as obserued the particularities of this Battaile, wherein hee was with many Spanish and French Bishops) passed diuers times thwart the Sarazine Army, without receiuing any stroake or wound, albeit the staffe of the Crosse was shot full of Arrowes.
I haue seene in my time at Toledo, in the Chappell of Saint Lucie of the great Church, the Pictures drawne to the life of that Chanon Paschall, and of the Heardsmen,(...) and arrow^ (...) the C^^istian^. that shewed the passage to the Christians. The number of Lances and Arrowes da^ted at the Christians, was so great, that in two dayes of the Christian Armies reposing there; they had no other wood for Kitchin-seruice; beside, making great heapes and bundles of the remainder, in memory of a Battaile so worthy and famous.
During the two dayes, while the Army tarried in the Field of Battaile, Dom Diego Lopez de Haro, by consent of the three Kings, deuided the spoyles of the enemies Army.
Diuision made of the enemies spo^les among the best deseruers.To King Sanchio of Nauarre was giuen (without enuy) the honour of the Battaile, and to his Partakers the Chaines of the Palisado, by them so brauely forced, which hee caused to bee brought to Pampelona, where one part of them is to bee seene in the Cathedrall Church, and at Sancta Maria de Ronceuaux. With these Chaines hee had the Tent and Pauilion of the Miramomelin.
The Riches of Gold and Siluer, as also the precious Stones, goodly Horses, rich Clothes of Silke and Gold; were diuided betweene the two Kings, and to all their Companies.
The Colonell of this Christian Army, was a Banner of Crimosine Silke, Charges d^v^e Croix potencee de Ierusalem, which Gonfanon or Pennon was blessed by the Pope, and deliuered to the Archbishop of Toledo, who carried it on the day of Battaile: After which fight, this Banner was fastened aloft in the Cathedrall Church, stretching from one side to the other.
The Miramom^lins great Banner.The great Banner of Miramomelin, was of Greene Silke, A vne demy Lune ou Creissant, renuersee d' Argent, entoure de Cinque Esloiles d'Or. And in the Orle or Border was this Deuice in Arabian Letters of Gold: Allahil Alla Mehemet Ress^lac, which is a Prayer of the Turkes: God is God, and Mahomet his Great Prophet.
The Men of the Borough of Saint Sernin de Pampelona, to note their valiant

behauiour, carried for Armes of their Citie, Vne Escu de Synople au Croissant verse d Argent a cinq Estoiles d'Or. And the most auncient houses of Pampelona, haue retained them still to this day: to shew, that they deriued their descent from them, who won that Banner from the Moores.
Sanchio the Strong, forsooke his auncient Banner,The words of the Count of Lans^rote. Et por auer rompido in esta Battailla el Rey de Nauarra el Palenque de las Cadenas, tomo por Armas l^s Cadenas de oro at^ouesad is ^n campo de Sangre. And to preserue to posteritie, the memorie of the Battaile of Tolosa, wherein he brake the enchained Palissado of the Miramomelin. Hee tooke vn Troillis compose de Croix, Saultoire, Pauz, Fesses and Orle de Chaines d'Or en Champ de Gueulles.
King Sanchio gaue part of his Cha^nes, to his Nauarre Knights, and other Spanish Knights of his Battalion, who since that time, gaue ouer their auncient Armes, o^ else quartered them with Chaines: As yet to this day may be seene in the best houses of Nauarre, and the Prouinces in the Kingdomes of Spaine, all enriched with these Chaines, which serue for Enquirie.
We will obserue some few, deriued from an infinite number of other,Armes giuen and ordered according to this honorable victory, and carried afterward in tremory thereof. according as they are set downe by the Count of Lansarote. A imitation del Rey Dom Sancho de Nauarre, muchos de los Caualleros que se halleran in la Batalla de Tolosa, vsaron por Armas la Deuisa de las Cadenas. De las quales se precian muchos linaies. That in imitation, and by example of the King of Nauarre Dom Sanchio, many of the Knights, who were present at the Battaile de Naues de Tolosa, tooke for Armes and Deuise, those Chaines; Armes, which many most Noble Linages and Families in Spaine, doc hold as great Honour to them, and beare them to this present day. Here follow a few, collected from an infinite number of other.
Dom Garcia Romeu of Arragon, who before this Battaile, Portoit d' Argent a vn Aigle de Sable: tooke De Gueulles a trois Pieux en Paux eslenez de dessus trois motes en poincte, and enchainez d'vne Chaine d'Or in Fesse. The Spanyards call those St^kes or Piles of the Palissado Estacas.
Inigo de Mendoza Porta tranche de Gueulles a la Bande de Synople bordee d'Or, flanque de Gueulles a Vingt Panelles d' Argent, and sur le tout en Saultoir and en Orle de Chaines d^Or. Armes retained by the Mendozaes and the Hurtados of Mendoza.
The Mendozaes of Ba^sa Portent de Gueulles a la mesme Bande que dessus a l'Orle and Chaines d^Or.
Inigo de Stuniga, and those of his descent, Portent a la Bande de Sable, a l'Orle chargee d'vne Chane compone^ de huict Chainons d' Or.
They of Mugnos at Baesa, Portent d'Or a la Croix de Calatraua de Gueulles, Escartele d'Or a trois Fesses de Gueulles, a l'Orle de Gueulles chargee d vne Chaine d'Or.

Raymond de Peralta: De Gueulles au Griffon d'Or, d l'Orle de Gueulles a vne Chaine d^Or.

Alphonso Telles de Menesez, who before this Battaile bare but Vne Escu d'Or: afterward, Le chargea d'vne Chaine en Bande d'Azur.
Pe^ro Masa, descended of Fortunio Masa, a Gascoigne by originall, and who in the Battaile of Alcoraz, giuen against the Moores, in Anno One thousand fourescore and sixteene, brought to the King of Arragon three hundred Gascoignes, armed with Battaile-Axes, to succour him, and whence that Noble Familie dwelling in Arragon tooke Sirname: Pour Armes de Gueulles a vne Masse d' Armes mise en Pal, Y adiousta deux Chefnes d'Or en Pal, and la Masse au mitan.
Those of the Linage of Abarca in Arragon and Nauarre; Portent d Or a l'Orle. and la Banac de Chesnes d Azur, a deux Galoches Eschiquettees d'Or and de Sable, l vne in Chef au dernier Canton, and l'autre au Canton de la Poincte.
They of Villa seca, Portent de Synople a vne Muraille d' Argent, Brotessee de Sable en p^^ncte, au Bras arme d' Argent, tenant vne Banderole d'Or a l^Orle d'Or chargee de Tronce^s de Ch^mons rompus and attachez de deux en deux d' Azur.
Those of the Ligne of Otaco, Portent d'Or a vne Chaine de Sable mise en Bande.
Those of Arricauall, or Irracauall, Portent d'Azur a vne Chaine d'Or mise en Bande, a deux Coquilles de mesme; l'vne en Chef, and l'autre en poincte. And
They of Vr^^na, issued of the house of Dom Diego Lopez de Haro, Count of Biscaye;

Portent de Haro, which is, as we haue formerly said, D' Argent a vn Arbre de Sable, a Deux Loups trauersez de Sable agueulez de deux Moutons de Gueulles, a la Bordure de Gueulles, chargee d'vne Chaine de huict Chainons d'Or.
The Banner of the Miramomelin borne in many Coates of Armes.In memory of the same Battaile, you may see in Spaine and Nauarre, an infinitie of Noble houses, which beare in their Armes the Banner of the great Miramomelin, A la Lune renuersee d' Argent, and aux Estoiles d'Or; and others full of Crosses of diuers colours, and the most part of them finishing in Floures de Luces, by reason of that which appeared in Heauen, ouer the Christian Armie the day of Battaile. And there are many Families, especially in Nauarre and other places of Spaine, which beare in their Armes of diuers Mettals and Colours, Floures de Luces in Crosse, in Saultoir and in Orles.
In Nauarre, they of Naruaez, issued from S. Iohn Pied de Port: D' Argent Cinq Fleures de Lys d Or en Saultoire.
They of Arze, Lords of Villarias, d'Or a cinq Fleures de Lys d'Azur en Saultoir, a l Orle de deux Traicts Eschiquetee d Or and de Gueulles.
They of Maldonados, de Gueulles a Cinque Fleurs de Lys d'Or.
They of Flores, d' Azur a Cinq Fleurs de Lys d'Or.
Those of Chirino, the same; and other of the same Family in diuers places, De Gueulles a Cinq Fleurs de Lys d'Or.
For the Spaniards doe acknowledge, that the most famous houses of Christendome, are honored by the Armes of the House of France, namely the Floures de Luces, Armes the most Authentique, that are renowned in Histories. La Deuisa de la-Flordelis tan famosa, y esclarecida en la Christiendad, es vna de lamas antiquas Deuises, de que tenemos noticia por Historia por auer vsado della Casa Real de Francia, desde los primeros Reys Christianos que en ella vno.
The fauours and recompence giuen to the p^^re Heardsman Martin AlhayaWe will finish this Discourse of Nauarre, with the recompence giuen to the Heardsman, that enstructed the assured way to surprize the Moores. He was named Martin Alhaya, who hauing giuen the vndoubted assurance, and direction for passing without any perill or danger, to the Lords Diego Lopez de Haro, and Garcia Romeu, deputies for the Christian Armie; found the Carkasse and head of a Cowe, deuoured but lately before by Woolues. The passage was therefore called The Cowes Head,The Cowes Head Cabeza de Va^a. in memorie whereof, King Alphonso of Leon the ninth, Sirnamed the Noble, gaue the title of Nobilitie to this Heardsman Martin, whom he also sirnamed Cabeza de Vaca, The Cowes Head. For Armes Eschicquette de Gueulles and d'Or de sept pieces a la Bordure d'Azur, chargee de Six Testes de Vaches d'Argent. Store of Lands were likewise giuen him, about Baesa and Iaen. Of him are descended the Knights renowned for valiancie in the Histories of Spaine, and namely Dom Fernand Ruyz Cabeza de Vaca, a Knight of high courage and aduentures, and who performed actions of admiration, in the succour which he gaue to the King of Castile Dom Ferdinand, called the Sainct, for the surprizall and Conquest of Cordoua, wonne from the Moores of Spaine, in the yeare One thousand two hundred thirtie sixe, foure and twenty yeares after the Battaile of Tolosa.



The Order of Saint Iames, tearmed of the Sword.
CHAP. V. A Briefe Historie of Prince Pelagius, with the Race and Genealogie of him and his descending.
PElagius, neere kinsman to the last King of the Gothes Dom Roderigo, drowned in the Guadaleta, after the Battaile wonne by the Moores at Xeres de Medina Sidonia, on Saint Martins day in Nouember, the yeare of Grace seauen hundred and foureteene, and of Here de Caesar Augustus seauen hundred fiftie two: Saued himselfe by better fortune, at the Mountaines of the Astures, where lying close and secretly for sometime; he auoided the first furie of the Ammirant Musa, as also of Captaine Tariffa, who were Conquerors of Spaine.
Those which remained of the naturall inhabitants of the Astures, were compelled (by the law of Warre) to obey the victorious Arabes, and to liue vnder their controle,Pelagius a wise and worthy Prince seeketh fauour with Mugnusa. vpon such conditions as they would prescribe to the vanquished. Pelagius being an ingenious Prince, sought to winne the amitie of Mugnusa, naturally a Spanyard, but was made a Renegado, and so became Gouernour of Gigion in the Astures, for the Captaine Tariffa. This Mugnusa well liking the seruices of Pelagius; made imployment of him in the charges belonging to the Prouince, during the space of fiue whole yeares: at the end whereof, he was sent to Tariffa, who remained then at Cardona or Corduba.
During the absence of Pelagius, Mugnuso became enamoured of the Sister to Pelagius, whom he tooke from her abiding, and conueighed to Gigion,Pelagius offended at his Sisters wro^g vsing her there as his Loues Mistr^sse. At his returne from Corduba, Pelagius impatiently offended for the rape of his Sister; began to quicken his memory, with the practises and courses of Count Iulian, to reuenge himselfe by the like affront. Wherein hee tooke himselfe to be much better grounded, then Count Iulian was: considering the contrariety of Religion, and vsurpation of the Lands in Spaine by Infidell Moores.
On the other side, although he had no subiect for vengeance, saue this onely vice (not proper to any, but a seruile deiected soule, vtter enemy to any vertuous act of courage:) yet the Conquests of Prince Garcia Ximenes, King of Nauarre,Former good examples are especial encoura^ement^. serued him as a modell and cleare Looking glasse, for exciting him to some generous act of valour, whereby his Countrey be deliuered. Beside, the right of Hospitality being duely considered, we stand obliged to keepe it ciuilly, especially on their behalfe, which entertaine vs humainely in our aduersities, were they Turkes, Pagans or Canibals, being vanquished by the right of Religion, and the Charity which naturally we owe to our Country. All these considerations together, made Prince Pelagius resolue, to declare himselfe an enemy to the Arabes.
So that hauing collected from the Towne of Cangas, and other round neighbouring parts of the Astures, a troupe of a thousand fighting men:The Conquests and fortunes of Prince P^lagius. he was chosen to be their Captaine and Leader, in the yeare of Grace Seauen hundred and nineteene. First he ouercame Alchaman, the Affricane Captaine, and twenty thousand Moores (so say the Chroniclers of Spaine.) And not long after, to wit, in the yeare Seauen hundred twenty two: he conquered the Citie of Leon, called by the Romans Legio (...), builded by the Emperor Traiane.
This Conquest of Leon, by Spanish Historians of good noate, is not attributed to Pelagius; who carried no other title, but Prince d'Ouiedo, called in Latine Ouetum,

and by a word of further time, The Citie of Bishops: because after the ouerthrow of King Rodericke,Pelagius called P^ince D'Ouiedo. the Bishops of Spaine (with their goods and Shrines) repaired to this Citie, being of difficult accesse in the Mountaines of the Astures. The Successours of Pelagius continued the same title of Princes D'Ouiedo, vntill the time of Ordogne, second of the name, who hauing wonne the Citie of Leon from the Moores, transferred thither his Seate, stiling himselfe King of Leon, where he caused to be builded the great Church of Sancta Maria Maiore. Le Lyon rempant de Gueulles, ou de Sable, en Champ d' Argent, which is giuen to the Kings of Leon for Armes; belonged not to Pelagius, who is not knowne to haue any: as we are informed by Ambrosius Morales, and other good Spanish Authors. Wherein the Bishop of Burgos confesseth his fault, who writeth, Que el Rey Dom Pelago gagno a Leon, y vso destas Armas: Pues qu'el Rey Dom Pelago, nunca fue Rey de Leon, sino de Gixon, ni se sabe de Armas que aye vsado en sus Escudos.The Arm^^ of Pelagius not certainely knowne* That the King Dom Pelagius wonne the Citie of Leon, whereof he tooke the Armes, is to small purpose, so saith Morales. Because the King Dom Pelagius was neuer King of Leon, but onely of Gigion, and it is not knowne what Armes this King Pelagius bare in his Escutcheon: This Molina telleth vs, in the life of Dom Henry the third. And that they of Gigion, Portoient en Armes d'Argent a Cinq Lions rempants de Gueulles en Saultoir, a l Orle de Gueulles chargee de huict Saultoirs (which the Spaniards call Aspas) d'Or. Very true it is, that the Kings and Princes of Gothia, carried in Armes the Lyon rampant, as I haue seene a thousand times in the Workes of Olaus Magnus, Vnckle and Nephew, both of them Bishops of Vpsala, and Primates of Gothia Butherus writeth likewise, that the first Kings of the Gothes, which passed into Spaine; Portoient d Argent au Lyon rempant de Sable: And that one of the same is yet to be seene, on the Tombe of Astolpho, which is at Barcelona. There is great obscurity in all these monuments, so that we neede the thred of Theseus, to be diuided in seuerall Clewes, to guide vs out of these mazing Labyrinths. For, if we will credit Ambrose Morales,Richly wroght hauing a Rubie in the midst, as great as a C^esnut. he plainely tels vs, that the first Armes of the Kings of Leon, was vne Croix Ancree d'Or, richement elabouree, ayant au mitan vn Ruby gros comme vne Chastaigne. And that this Crosse was brought by the Angels of Heauen, to the King of Leon Dom Alphonso the Chaste, in the yeare of Grace Eight hundred twentie sixe. And the said Alphonso gaue that Crosse to the Church of Ouiedo, where it is yet to this day. Also, that he tooke it for Armes, as, long time after him, did his Successours in the Kingdome of Leon, who bare D'Argent a ceste Croix Ancree d Or; which is for further enquirie. But returne we now to

The Historie proceeding on from Prince Pelagius.
1. PElagius, who hauing reigned seauenteene yeares, died in the yeare of Grace, Seauen hundred thirtie sixe: leauing a Sonne and a Daughter.
2. Fafila, who reigned but two years, and dyed, not hauing any issue: His Daughter was
3. Orme^inda, wife to Alphonso, first of the name, King of Gigion, and Ouiedo, Sonne to Peter, Count and Gouernour of part of Biscaye,The first Orthodoxal King of Spaine. issued from Recarede, the first Orthodoxall or sound beleeuing King of Spaine. Of this Ormesinda ensued the custome held in Spaine, that Daughters succeeded in the Crowne, through defect of masle Children. Of this marriage of Alphonso the first with Ormesinda, came three Sonnes and one Daughter.

Froila,

Vimarano, stabd by his Brother Froila, Fraterno primi maeduerunt sanguine muri.
Aurelio. And
Odesinda, wife to Silo.
Alphonso had by a Concubine, a naturall Sonne, named

Mauregatho.

Alphonson the first reigned nineteene yeares, and dyed in Anno Seauen hundred fiftie sixe: Leauing for Successour in the Kingdome his eldest Sonne
4. Froila, whose Reigne continued eleauen yeares and a halfe. By Momerana his wife, Daughter to Eudes, Duke of Aquitaine, he left two Sonnes, and one Daughter.

Alphonso.

Bermundo: And
Ximena, Mother to Bernardo del Carpio. Froila died in the yeere, Seuen hundred,

threescore, and eight, whereby his Brother
5. Aurelio succeeded in the Kingdome, by reason of his Brothers childrens minority in yeeres. He raigned but six yeeres, and dying without Issue, in Anno, Seuen hundred, threescore, and foureteene; he had for Successour in the Kingdome of Ouiedo.
6. Silo, Husband to Odesinda, Daughter to King Alphonso the first. His Raigne was nine yeeres, and died without Issue: by his death, the Bastard, or naturall Son
7. Mauregatho vsurped the Kingdome, which he held but fiue yeeres and a halfe, and died without any child, in the yeere, Seuen hundred, fourescore and nine. This was he, who for the maintenance of his vsurpation, made himselfe tributary to the Moores, of an hundred Maidens yeerely tribute, to wit, fifty of noble extraction, and the like number of meaner mens Daughters: Ambition to raigne, had throwne him into such base and dishonest bargaines. After him, raigned together
8.
Bermundo, AndAlphonso.Brethren, Sonnes of Froila.
Bermundo raigned two yeeres alone, and foure with his Brother. By Imilona his wife, hee left two Sonnes, very young in yeeres.

Ramiro: And

Garcia.


By the death of Bermundo, happening in the yeere, Seuen hundred, fourescore, and fifteene; his Brother.
9. Alphonso, called the Chaste, second of the name, raigned nine and twenty yeeres. He liued chastely with his wife Bertha, of whom hee neuer had carnall company. And this was the man, to who^ the Angels brought the Crosse, whereof before wee haue made mention. He deceased in the yeere of Grace, Eight hundred, twenty, foure: And had for his Successours
10.
Ramiro, AndGarcia,Sonnes to the King Dom Bermundo.
Ramiro out-liued his Brother six yeers in the Kingdome, and by Vrraca of Castile his wife, he had two Sonnes.

Fortunio, And

Garcia.


Ramiro died in the yeere eight hundred, thirty, and one, leauing for Successour in the Kingdome, his eldest sonne.
11. Fortunio, or Ordogne.
Who by Mugna his wife, had fiue Sonnes, and one Daughter.
Alphonso,Bermondo,Nugno,Odoacre: AndFroila.
As for the Daughter, she is not named.
Ordogne Fortunio, dyed in the yeere eight hundred, forty, one, hauing raigned ten yeeres, leauing the Kingdome to his eldest Sonne.
12. Alphonso, third of the name, whose Raigne continued forty sixe yeeres: by Ximenia his wife, he left foure sonnes.
Garcia,Ordogne Fortunio,Froila: AndGonsales, the Arch-deacon.
By the death of Alphonso the third, happening in the yeere eight hundred, fourescore, and sixe, his eldest Sonne.
13. Garcia succeeded in the Kingdome, who raigned but three yeeres, and hauing no Issue by his wife, the daughter to Nugno Fernandez of Castile, the Kingdome came to his Brother
14. Ordogne Fortunio, second of the name, who raigned eight yeeres, and died in Anno, Eight hundred, fourescore, and seuenteene. He had three wiues: By the first, named Eluira, hee had foure sonnes, and one daughter.
Sancio,Alphonso, fourth King of the nameRamiro, second King of the name.Garcia: The Daughter wasXimenia.
His second wife, Ragonda of Galicia, was by him repudiated: and in third mariage, he espoused Sancia of Nauarre. By these two wiues he left not any Issue, and by his death
15. Froila, second of the name, sonne to Alphonso the third, vsurped the Kingdome, being sirnamed the Cruell, who raigned but one yeere and a halfe: By Mugna his wife he left three Sonnes.
Alphonso, King.Ordogne Fortunio: AndRamiro.
He had a Bastard beside, called by his owne name, Father to Pelagius, who was a Deacon.
16. Alphonso, fourth of the name, second

Sonne of Ordogne the second, was King of Ouiedo and of Leon, who reigned sixe yeares. By Vrr^ca Ximenia of Nauarre, his wife, he left but one Sonne*
Ordogne Fortunio, Sirnamed the Bad.
By the death of Alphonso the fourth, happening in the yeare nine hundred and foure, succeeded his Brother
17. Ramiro, second of the name, who reigned twentie yeares. By Thereza of Nauarre, his wife, he had three Sonnes and a Daughter.
Bermondo.Ordogne, King.Sancio: AndEluira, who was shorne a Nunne.
By the death of this Ramiro the second, which was in the yeare of Grace Nine hundred twentie foure, the Kingdome came to his second Sonne
18. Ordogne, third of the name, who reigned but fiue yeares. Hee had two Wiues, the first of them being called Vrraca, Daughter to Ferdinando Gonsales, Count of Castile, was diuorced.
By Eluira his second wife, he had a Son named
Bermondo, second King of his name.
19. Sancio succeeded in the Kingdome, after the death of King Ordogne the third his Father. He was sirnamed the Grosse, and his reigne endured but twelue yeares: for he died in the yeare, Nine hundred fortie one, leauing the Kingdome to his onely Son, which he had by his wife Th^r^za, named
20. Ramiro, third of the name, who reigned foure and twenty yeares. By his wife Vrraca he had no issue, and by his death, happening in the yeare Nine hundred threescore and fiue, the Kingdome came to
21. Bermondo, second of the name, Sonne to King Ordogne the third, his reigne continuing seauenteene yeares. He had two Wiues, the first whereof was named Velasqueta, who was Mother to Christina the wife of Dom Ordogne the Blinde. And of this marriage ensued a plentifull Linage, which may serue to vnderstand the generall Historie of Spaine.


Alphons^.


Ordogne.


Pelagius* and a Daughter named Don^a A^oncia Ordognez, wife to Dom Pela^us, sirnamed the Deacon, Sonne of Froila, Bastard Sonne to King Froila, second of the name. And by the marriage of this Adoncia, or Alonceta of Le^, and Pelagius of Leon, were borne three Sonnes and one Daughter.
Pedro Ordogne.Pelagius.Nugno: And the DaughterTheresa, Mother to the Count of Castile Dom Suero de Castro.
The other wife of King Bermondo, second of the name, was Donna Eluira, Mother of
Alphonso the fift King: And ofThereza, a religious Nunne.
He had moreouer a Son and a Daughter, by one or two Concubines.
Ordogno: AndEluira.
Bermondo the second dyed in the yeare of Grace, Nine hundred fourescore and two: Leauing for Successour his Sonne
22. Alphonso, fift of the name, who reigned sixe and forty yeares: And by his wife Eluira, Daughter to Menlendo Gonsalez, ensued a Sonne and a Daughter.
Bermondo: And
Sancia, wife to Ferdinand of Nauarre, the first King of Castile.
By the death of Alphonso the fift, happening in the yeare of Grace One thousand twenty eight, succeeded in the Kingdome his Sonne
23. Bermondo, third of the name, who reigned nine yeares: And by his wife Thereza, Daughter to Sancio, Count of Castile, he had but one Sonne
Alphonso, who died very yong.
So that by the death of Bermondo the third, which was in the yeare One thousand thirtie seauen, and leauing no issue; the Kingdome of Leon came to his Sister
24. Sancia, Wife to Ferdinand.
First of the name, King of Castile (second Sonne to the King of Nauarre, Sancio the Great) who created the County of Castile to be a Kingdome, as we haue elsewhere said. By this marriage of Sancia, and Ferdinand first of the name, called the Saint, were borne in the lifetime of Bermondo the third.

Vrraca.

Sancio, King of Castile, first of the name: And

Eluira.

After the death of King Bermondo, and ^n the same marriage, were borne
Alphonso, King of Leon, sixt of the name: And

Garcia.

The eldest of these two Bretheren,
25. Alphonso, sixt of the name, was the fiue and twenti^h King of Leon, in the year One thousand sixtie seauen. He reigned one and fortie yeares in the said Kingdome of Leon, and came to the Crown of Castile: Hauing had foure wiues; by the last whereof ensued
26. Vrraca, Queene of Leon and Castile.
She was twise married; first to Raymond of Bourgongne, of the House of the Counts of Bourgongne, issuing from that of France. And this was the reason, why the said Raymond bare, D'Azur a trois Fleurs de ^s d'Or, as the Counte of Lancarote writeth in his Historie of Andolouzia, the first Booke, and hundred Chapter. The said Raymond was made Count of Galicia: And of this marriage was borne
Alphonso Raymond, King.
In second marriage shee had to Husband, Alphonso, called seauenth of the name, King of Leon; of Nauarre by vsurpation, and of Arragon in his own right. With her he had but bad successe, and no issue. The Sonne of the first marriage, was

Raymond.

27. Alphonso of Galicia, eight of the name, exalted to be King of Leon (for the disordered life of his Mother, before she died ^n the yeare* One thousand one hundred twentie two. Whose reigne lasted thirty fiue yeares. By his wife Donna Berenguela, daughter to the Count of Barcelona; he had many children, in number whereof was
28. Ferdinand, second of the name, who in the right of his Mother, came to the Kingdome of Leon, the yeare of grace One thousand one hundred fiftie seauen, and reigned thirtie one yeares. He married three wiues. By the first, Vrraca, In^nta of Portugall, he had
Alphonso, King
In second marriage he espoused Thereza, of the House of Lara, descended from Dom Pedro de Lara, one of the first Counts and Iudges of Castile: but by her he had no Childe.
His third wife was Vrraca L^ez: By whom he had two Sonnes.
Sancio Fernandez: AndGarcia.
29: Alphonso, ninth of the name, eldest Son to Ferdinand the second, was King of Leon by the death of his Father, happening in the yeare One thousand one hundred eightie eight. The said Alphonso reigned two and fortie yeares, and in his reigned was fought the memorable Battaile of Muradal, otherwise called of Tolosa, whereof we haue related the perticularities in the former discourse. By his wife Theresa of Portugall, he had one Son and two Daughters.
Ferdinando.Sancia: AndDulcina.
By his second wife Berenguela of Castile, he had two Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
Ferdinando, King.Alphonso, Lord of Molina.Constance, a Nunne. AndBerenguela, wife to the Count of Brenne, King of Ierusalem.
And by a Concubine he had a Bastard, named Roderigo Alphonso of Leon.
30. Ferdinand, third of the name, was King of Leon by the death of his Father, which happened in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred and thirty. This was the same Ferdinand, who by aduise and counsell of his Mother, vsurped the Kingdome of Castile, which belonged to his eldest sister Madam Blanch of Castile, Queene of France, Mother to the King Saint Lewes. For, by the marriage of Alphonso King of Castile, called the Noble, fourth of the name, and Elianor, Daughter to Henry, second of the name, King of England, were borne nine Children.
Blanche, Queene of France, Mother to Saint Lewes the ninth.Berenguela, Queene of Leon, Mother Ferdinand the third.Sancio, dying in his Infancie.Vrraca, Queene of Portugall.Ferdinand deceased yong.Malfada, dying in her youth.Constance a Nunne.Leonora, Queene of Arragon.Henry, first of the name, King of Castile,

who reigned but three yeares, without hauing any issue by Malfada of Portugal his wife: from whom he was seperated by iudgement of the Church, Pope Innocent the third then sitting in his holy Seate, because they were married in the fourth degree of consanguinitie.
Two Daughters more, dying in infancie.
By the death of Henry, first of the name, King of Castile, Ferdinand King of I^ vsurped the Kingdome of Castile, against the House of France. And in this Ferdinand, the Kingdomes of Leon and Castile remained conioyned and annexed together, without being any more deuided.
The rest of the succession and Genealogie of the Kings of Leon, is to be seene in that of Castile, in larger relation.


The Order of Saint Iames, called of the Sword; Instituted in the yeare One thousand One hundred fiftie and eight.
L'Ordre de S. Iacques dit de L'Espee.THe Count of Lansarote, in the first Booke of his Historie of Andalouzia (Imprinted during my first voyage into Spaine, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred eighty eight) in the two and thirtieth Chapter, speaking of the Institution of Knights, of the Militarie Order of Saint Iames (the onely subiect of


this Discourse) auoucheth the beginning thereof to be, vnder the Reignes of Alphonso, ninth of the name, King of Castile, and of Ferdinand, King of Leon, El primer Lugar en esta Histori^ tiene la de Sanctiago Patron de Espagna Cuyo principio de Religion, y Orden de Cauelleria fue fiendo primer Maestra della Dom Perez Fernandez Natural de Fuente Encalada, lugar del Obispado de Astorga, en tiempo de los Reyes Dom Alonso el Noueno de Castilla, y Dom Fernando su Tio Rey de Leon. Siendo sumo Pontifice Alexandro Tercero, que f^e electo en el Anno de 1158.
The words of the Co^ de Lansarote.The Order of Saint Iames, Patron of Spaine, had for the first Great Maister thereof, Dom Perez Fernandez, a Natiue of Fuente Encalada, the place of the Countries bounds, and the Diocesse of Ast^rgua: In the times of the Kings Dom Alphonso the ninth of Castile, and of Ferdinand of Leon. And sitting then in the Holy Seate at Rome, Pope Alexander third of the name, elected in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred fiftie eight.
The ma^ke or noate of this Order, is the representation of a Sword, being of Red Sattin imbrodered, and a Scallop-shell of the same vpon

the said Sword, which the Knights of this Order doe weare on their brests,Concerning the marke or noate of the Order. and on the left side. Now, why the said Order is called Of the Sword, (^earmed in vulgar Spanish-Lagarto) Dom Roderick Ximenes of Nauarre, Archbishop of Toledo, and Primate of Spayne, in the Seuenteenth Booke of his Chronicle, deliuereth the reason, concerning this deuise of Saint Iames of the Sword, and why it is of Red couller, rather then any other.


Rubet Ensis Sanguine Arabum.
The Escutcheon of this Order, is D'Or a l'Espee de Gueules,The Escutcheon of the Order. et la Coquille au mitan de mesme. And as for the Banner of Saint Iames in Galicia, it is in like manner D'Or a la Croix Fleurdelizee de Gueules, Cantonnee de Quatre Coquilles, and d'vne au mitan de la dicte Croix, de Gueules.

Las Armas y Escudos de la misma Orden, son la misma Espada Roxa, con vna Venera in medio della, y el Campo de Oro: aunque en el Pendon las ^raen diferentes, que traen la Cruz Roia de Calatraua con cinquo Veneras in Campo de Oro. Las Veneras son insigniat del Apostol, que vsan los peregrinos en los Sombreros en el Sancto Viage, quando lloganda a su Sancto Sepulchro las cogen en las orillas de el mar en testimonio de su Romeria. Assi como quando quan a Hierusalem, trayan Palmas, de donde se Viniero a llamar Palmeros los Peregrinos.

The Armes and Escucheons of the same Order, are the same Red Sword, With a Scallop sh^ll in the midst, in a Field of Golde. It differs (neuerthelesse) from the Banner of Saint Iames, Which is D Or, a la Croix de Calatraua de Gueules a Cinq Coquilles de mesmes. Those Scallops or Cockles are the Enseignes and the markes of the Apostle Saint Iames, whereof Pilgrimes make vse, in their Holy Voyage to the S^pulchre of the said Apostle. They gather them on the Sea shoares, and fasten them in their Hattes or Hoodes, as a marke of their Pilgrimage, Like vnto them, that goe the great Voyage to Ierusalem, and at their returning thence, doe bring Palmes with them. And this is the reason, why (in elder times) such Pilgrimes were called Palmers, only in regard of their Palmes.
Heere let it serue for a generall aduertisement, that all the Great Maisters of the Military Orders in Spayne, haue alwayes neere or about them,Concerning the Great M^isters of Militarie Orders in Spayne. into any parts wheresoeuer they goe, be it in Peace or warre: Thirteene Knights Commanders, for their ayde and seruice, as also to assist them in Councell, being called Los Trezes. Which will well serue to vnderstand the Histories of Spayne, in describing the Battailes and Encounters, wherein haue bin personally present, the Great Maisters of the Orders, either of Leon, Galicia, Portugall or And^louzia, Prouinces which were long time vnder the Hommage and authority of the Kingdome of Leon, sending euermore those Thirteene (as occasions serued) to the said Great Maisters. In the description of the Knights of the vanguarde, conducted by Diego Lopez de Haro, in the Battaile of Muradall, Dom Pedro Arias, Maister of Saint Iames, with the Knights of his Order.Diego Lopez de Haro (...) the Battaile of Muradall. Among whom were Garcia Gonsales de Candomio, Comendador Mayor de Leon. y Treze: Dom Fernan Perez Comendador y Treze: Ruy Gonsales de Mansilla, Comendador de l'Hospital de Toledo y Treze: y Fernan Garcia de Lerma Comendador de las Tiendas y Treze: y Dom Fernan Esteuan de Villarruuia y Treze: Ruy Gutierrez de Villa Garcia Comendador de Montreall y Treze, etc. All Knights of the Order of Saint Iames: which will guide any Gentleman, reading the Histories of the Militarie Orders of Spayne, described by Morales, and Radez d' Andrada.
The Order of the Knights of Saint Iames of the Sword, tooke beginning in the Kingdome of Galicia, vnder the Homage of Leon, to second the Monkes of Saint Helie, in the same Kingdome.
These Monkes of Saint Helie in Galicia, perceiuing the great affluence of people,The Monkes of Saint Helie in Galicia, and their care of poore Pilgrimes. which dayly resorted to Saint Iames of Compostella on Pilgrimage, and that the high wayes were impeached by the Moores, by which meanes, the poore Pilgrimes sustained a thousand miseries: They builded Hospitalles, which might serue for house-roome and lodgings to the said Pilgrimes of Saint Iames, to releeue, helpe and heale them, in the case of sicknesse or other distresses. The first Hospital which they builded,Buylding of Hospitalles. was that of S. Marke the Euangelist, in the Suburbs of the Citty of Leon. The second, in the marches and limits of Castille, sirnamed De las Tiendas: and afterward many other, on the great high way of S. Iames, which to this day is called The Frenche Way.
Thirteene Gentlemen, mooued with zeale, and in meere Charity to the Monkes of Saint Helie of Galicia, who had done so much for the poore Pilgrimes of Saint Iames (taking this Apostle of Spayne to be their Patrone:) made sollemne vowes, to guarde the passages of the said Frenche Way,The ^oyning of thirteen Gentlemen with the Monkes. against the Moores and Robbers of Spayne. They communicated their purpose to the Monkes of Saint Helie, and fell to agreement, to make one Corps du garde among themselues.
The Monkes and their Priour should exercise all actions of Iustice, in Spirituall occasions, as well on the Knights, as Priests and Clearkes, admitted into the seruice of the said Order. But concerning the Knights, they had a Gouernour and Commander, a Great Maister, who had good knowledge in all Temporall occurrences, by whom was payed the Tenthes and other Rights, to the Monkes of Saint Marke. At the beginning of this Order, these Knights were not maried: but afterward, they had such permission graunted them.
The first Hospitall which these Knights of Saint Iames erected, was in the Suburbs of Leon, ioyning that there of Saint Marke, to the Monkes of Saint Helie, who gaue them the foundation whereon to build theirs. And the first Great Maister of this Order,Dom Pedro Fernandez, de Puente En^alada the first Great Maister of S. Iames, and their Habite. was Dom Pedro Fernandez de Puente-Encalada, a braue and valiant Knight. Their habit was a Gowne and Hood white, on the brest a Crosse of Red cloth, finishing like the Blade of a Sworde, the Hilte therof Crosletted, and fashioned after the Auncient manner, with a Scallop of the same, on the closing of the Sword to the hilte: And thereupon they were called the Knights of Saint Iames of the Sworde. At the beginning they had their haire on their heads cut close, and their crownes shauen bare, like to the Monkes of Saint Helie: with whom they liued in common, and made their vowes of Chastity, Pouerty and Obedience; but they maried soone after, as hath bin said, and had their benefites seperate by themselues, the right of Tenths reserued for the Monks. Both the one and other kept and obserued the Rule of S. Augustine, in their profession.
The Great Masters going to Rome,The First Great Maister of this Order Dom Pedro, accompanied with the number of his Knights, went to Rome, and presented himselfe before Pope Alexander the Third: who confirmed their Rule, in Anno 1175. the third of the Nones of Iuly, approuing also what had bin disposed by Cardinall Hyacinthe, his Legat in Spayne.
These Knights came (soone after) into bad agreement with Dom Ferdinand King of Leon: who suspected them, to fauour the King of Castille his aduersary. So that they forsooke their Conuent of Saint Marke at Leon, and withdrew into Castille, where they were well entertained. Dom Alphonso gaue them the Towne and Castell of Veles, in Latine called Vrcesia,Prouident care for losse of no benefits. where they builded a Conuent; which they made the Chiefe of the Order. And because they would not loose the possession of S. Marke at Leon; they sent thither (from Chapter to Chapter) the Brethren of their Order (after the death of the King of Leon Ferdinand) to maintaine themselues in the possession thereof. Neuerthelesse, at the charges of the Knights of Leon, and with prouiso, that they should acknowledge alwayes them of Vcles, to be the chiefe men of the Order, as accordingly it was done for some time.
But afterwarde, they of Saint Marke at Leon, would no longer acknowledge them of V^les in Castille to be their Superiours;(...) two House, fall to fa^tion. but made their faction apart, encreasing greatly in goods in Extremadura, a riche Prouince, conquered from the Moores by the Kings of Leon.
This order of S. Iames, was established likewise in Portugall, where it attained to many Commanderies, confessing Vcles to be chiefe of the Order: vntill the time of the King of Portugall Dom Denys, who would haue a Great Maister and Chiefe of the Order alone in his owne Kingdome, without any subiection to that of Castill.
The ability and power of these Knight.These Knights of Saint Iames became wonderfull rich and plenteous: so that they could bring to the Field a Thousand compleate Launces, of Vcles and Leon.
The Great Masters were chosen by the Thirteene Knights, Commanders of the said Order, and Gouernours thereof; who deposed them likewise, if occasion serued.
This Order hath more riches alone by it selfe, then all the rest in Spayne together: An infinity of dignities, Conuents, Monasteries, Hospitalles, Commanderies and Vicaredges. For, First of all.
The two Heads of the Order, are they of Vcles and Leon.
Foure Hermitages, as namely
S. Saluador des Monstiers, neere to ^^l^resca.S. Maria de Cagnamanes, in the field of Momiell.S. Maria de la Pegna, neere to the Towne of Segura, on the Mountaines: AndS. Anthony de l'Alhambra.
Two Colledges in the Vniuersity of ^^lamanca, and rich ones.
Sixe Monasteries of Nunnes, in title of Commanderies, where the first is.

Of the Holy-Ghost at Salamanca.
Of S. Faith at Toledo.
Of S. Crosse at Vailledolid.
Of S. Iames at Granada.
Of S. Ollalia at Merida: And
Of S. Iames at Iunquera of Barce^^na.


Fiue Hospitalles.
The First Saint Iames of Toledo, perti^ulerly ordained for such, as haue the di^ease of Naples, brought by the Spanyards ^nto Italy. They had taken it before, ^rom the Negroes of Pamphila of Narua^^, which brought it into Spayne, from ^he Conquest of the West Indiaes, accor^ing to the testimony of Spanish Authors, ^n the Indian History.
The Second. S. Iames at Cuenca.
Las Tiendas, in Olde Castille.
The Hospitall of S. Marke at Leon: And
The Great Hospitall of V^les.

The Commaunderies are a very great ^umber, Sometimes bound to furnish all ^arres, which were made against the Moores, with Three hundred Threescore ^nd Eight compleate Launces.
The Commanderies belonging to the Great Maistership of Vcles, are
1. The Maior Commaunderie of Castille.2. Secondly, that of Paracuellos.3. Monthernand.4. Mora.5. Los Barrios.6. Montreal.7. Horcaio.8. El Corral de Almagner.9. El Campo de Critana.10. Alhambra.11. Membrilla.12. Montison.13. Bedmar.14. Vacas.15. Segura de la Sierra, the best Commaundery in all Spaine.16. Yeste.17. Moratalla.18. Caranaca.19. Aledo.20. Ricote.21. Biedma.22. Ciesa.23. Soconos.24. Torres.25. Cagnamares.26. Montiell.27. Carrizosa.28. Vilhermosa.29. Villanueua de la Fuente.30. Bastimens del Campo de Montiell.31. Sacucellamos.32. Villa-maior.33. Villa-Escusa de Haro.34. Bastimens de la Mancha.35. The Riuer of Tayio.36. Huelamo.37. Oreia.38. Estremera.39. Sancta Croix de la Sarsa.40. Villoria.41. Villa Runia.42. Alpages.43. The Priorie of Vcles.44. The Chamber of Priueledges of the Order: And45. Alorqui.
Those which acknowledge the Iurisdiction of Saint Marke of Leon, are1. The Maior Commanderie.2. Aquilareio.3. Calcadilla.4. La Puebla de Sancho Peres.5. Los Santos.6. Villa franca.7. La fuente del Maestre.8. Almendralegio.9. Lobon.10. Montijo.11. Meria.12. Alcuescar.13. Riuera.14. Azebucha.15. Hallame.16. Ellotiua.17. Palomas.18. Ornachos.19. Regna Hinoiosa.20. Medina de las Torres.21. Valentia del Ventoso.22. Monasterio.23. Montemolino.24. Vsagra.25. Azuaga.26. Guadalcanal.27. Mures.28. Benacuza.29. Estepa.30. Las Casas de Corduba.31. Les Bastiments de la Prouince de Leon.32. The Priorie of the Conuent of Leon.33. Villa-nueua d'Al^scar.34. Venamext: And35. La preuoste de Bienuenida.
In Olde Castile are1. Pegna.2. Vsenda.3. Estriana: And4. Castrotorana.
Beside which are the Commenderies5. De la Torre d'Ocagne.6. Sarca.7. Merauall.8. Castelloia de la Cuesta.9. Barra: And10. Castrouerde.
In the Kingdome of Valentia are the Commanders of1. Museros.2. Enguerra.3. Orcheta.4. Sagra.5. Zenet: And6. Tradelle.
The Knights and other beside of this Order.This Order (without accounting the Kingdome of Portugall) hath more then Sixe hundred Knights, Which weare the habite of Saint Iames; beside the Commanderi^s and Dignities: More then two hundred Brethren, Clearkes at Masse, and others, which haue actuall residence in the Conuents, Vicaredges and other Benefices of the said Order. There are many Great Lords of Spayne, who hold (...) great Honour to them, to weare the habite of Saint Iames, although without any Commaunderies. The Emperour Charles the Fift, to acknowledge the great seruices,The Emperour Charles, the Fifte ^^d weare the habite (...) this Order. which hee had receiued by the braue Knight Dom Ferdinando Cor^^^^^ M^^quesse of Val, who Conquered the great Citty of Mexico, and her rich Prince Motecumacin: Had this habite of Saint Iames presented him, which he refused, except he had a Commanderie of the said Order.
Which was instituted, to make Warres vpon the Moores, who (in those times) ouer awed Spayne: but now since they are vtterly dislodged thence, the subiect of this Institution wanteth and ceaseth. Pope Adrian the Sixt incorporated the Great Maistership of this Order to the Crowne of Castille, by the death of the last Great Maister Alphonso de Cardegna.The Order anexed to the Crowne as other were. This annexion was made in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred ninety and three, So that since then, the Kings of Spayne haue bin perpetuall Administratours of the said order of Saint Iames of the Sword, and so continue.
This Order encreased as well in Portugall, as in Leon and Castille. Sancio, First of the name,King Sa^c^o his ^ounty to this (...). and Second King of Portugall, imparted to them the bootie, which he had conquered from the Moores, and gaue them of his owne demaines. The head bountie of the Order of Knights, belonging to Saint Iames of the Sworde in Portugall, was lands giuen by the said Sancio the First, as namely, Alcazar de Sal, Palmela and Almada, which neuerthelsse were but simple Commanderies, and acknowledged for Great Maister and Chiefe of the Order, him of Vcles in Castille: which was so continued, vntill the reigne of Dom Denys, the Sixt, King of Portugall (Institutour of the Order of Christus) who exempted the Knights of Saint Iames of Portugall, from obedience and subiection to the Great Maister of Castille, and would needes ordaine, that Alcazar de Sal, (for alwayes after) should bee Chiefe of the Order; which yet notwithstanding, was (since then) transferred from Alcazar to Palmela.
L^^ques de Vitry, in the sixe and twenty Chapter of his Occidentall History, w^^teth that the auncient Seale,Of (...) O^der. belonging to the Counsell and Chapter of this Order, was composed with a Sword in the midst, hauing on the right side a Sunne, and a Crescent on the other, and for the Legend: Sello de la Caualeria de Sainct Iago: B^^

^hat of the Moderne, had a Crosse Fleurdlized in Sealing and counter-sealing, which (...) neuer read in any of the Histories of Spaine. The Count of Lansarote indeede maketh mention, of the Conquest of the Castell of Vilches, performed against the Moores in a day and a night, immediately after the Battaile of Vbeda, wonne by the three Kings of Nauarre, Leon and Arragon. Which place was held to be impregnable, and therefore the three Kings went thither with the Christian Armie. Although it was seated on an inaccessible Rocke, free from Scaling or vndermining;A Hidalgo belonging to the Great Maister of Calatraua, first mounted on the Wall. yet it was wonne by an Hidalgo, belonging to the Great Maister of Calatraua, Dom Roderigo de Aza, who was the first that mounted on the Wall, and fixed downe there the Standard of Castile. To whom, for hauing so valiantly besiedged the place, and for becomming Maister thereof in a night and a day: the King gaue him for Armes L^scu d'Azur a vn Soleil d Or entoure d' Estoiles de m^sine: Et dans le Rond dudict So^eil, de Castill^, party de Leon. Armes retained by the descendants of that Hidalgo; which yet maketh nothing to this purpose.



The Order of Saint Iulian, called of the Peare-Tree; Instituted in the Kingdome of Leon, in the yeare One thousand one hundred threescore and seauenteene. CHAP. V.
THE Order of Saint Iulian of the Peare-Tree,L'Ordre de S. Iulian Du Poirier. was Instituted in a place called Pereiro, the principall Monastery and Conuent thereof, seated foure Spanish miles from Ciudad Rodorigo, on the Riuer of Coa. Ferdinand, second of the name,The Citie of Roderigo. King of Leon, and of Galicia, by his Ordonance and Pragmatical Sanction, made himselfe Patron or Protector of this Order,Ferdinand Kin^ of Leon Protector of the Order. in the yeare One thousand one hundred threescore and sixteene. The yeere following, One thousand one hundred and seauenteene. The said Order was approued by Pope Alexander, third of the name, at the request and supplication of Dom Gomez Fernandez,


who was the first great Maister of the said Order, calling himselfe Priour. Pope Lucius the third, confirmed it likewise, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and three, and exempted it from subiection to the Bishopricks Diocessane. The second Great Maister of this Order, was Beneit Suarez, who obtained a new confirmation of Pope Innocent the third, dated in the yeare, One thousand two hundred and fiue. The first Armes of this Order was L'Escu d'Or, a la Croix Fleurdelisee de Synople, chargee en Coeur d'vn Escu d'Or au Poirier de Synople. The Knights of this Order, kept both the name and the Armes of the Peare-Tree; vntill they went to dwell in a place called Alcantara, as wee intend presently further to shew you.



The Order of Alcantara; Instituted in the Kingdome of Leon,L'Ordre D'Alcantara. and in the yeare One thousand two hundred and foureteene. CHAP. VI.
AFter the Battaile of Muradall, wonne against the Moores (as we haue formerly declared, when we ended the discourse concerning the Order of Nauarre) Alphonso the ninth, King of Leon,Alcantara besiedged by King Alphonso the ninth. went to besiedge the Citie of Alcantara, famously renowned for her goodly Bridge, erected ouer the Riuer of Tayo (in Latine called Tagus) vpon the marches of Port^g^^ and Leon. He became Maister thereof, hauing conquered the Moores, in the yeare One thousand two hundred and thirteene: And gaue the guard thereof to Dom Martin Fernandez de Quintana, who was the twelfth Great Maister of the Order of C^l^traua.
About fiue yeares after, this place was giuen by them of Calatraua, to Nugno Fernandez, third Great Maister Of the Order of Saint Iulian of the Peare-Tree, and to


the Knights his Bretheren and Companions: who by the reason of this change,The Knights of S. Iulian became Knights of Alcantara. forsooke their auncient appellation, and stiled themselues Knights of Alcantara, whereto from the beginning they were vnde^ obedience and subiection. At the first they were vsed to weare a kinde of Scarfe, or Band of Red Colour, containing about three or foure fingers in breadth, vpon their white Scapularie. And within a while after, A Greene Crosse Flourdeluced; b^^ corrected and disallowed by the Maisters of C^l^traua.
The first Great Maister of Alcantara.He that first tooke the name of Alcantara, was D^^ Diego Sancio, fourth Great Maister De Perrero, in the time of Pope Lucius, second of the name, and in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and eleauen. They exempted themselues from obedience to them of C^l^traua, forsaking their first Armes of the Peare-Tree; and wore the Greene Crosse Fl^^redeluced vpon their brests, towards the left shoulder, and vpon their Scapularie, according to the rule of the Cisteaux, whereof they made profession, but liued vnder the Order of Saint Benedict. As yet, euen to this day, the Nouices of this Order, on the dayes when they obserue their Feast of Easter; they weare the Scapularie, and long Hood of White Tamine. At the first they made profession of Chastitie, vntill the Pontificalitie of Pope Paule the fourth: who permitted them to marrie, as they did of Calatraua.
Here may you see the very words of the profession of those Nouices, that are of this Order.

The profession made by the N^^^ces of this Order.
Domine ^rater N. Ego N. Miles Ordinis Alcantarae facio Deo, and Domino Magistre, and Vobis qui eius nomine hic istis, and promitto vobis Obedientiam, Castitatem coniugalem, (...) Conuersionem morum meorum de bene in melius, omni tempore vitae mea vsque ad ^^tem, secundum regulam Sancti Benedicti, and modum viuendi concessum huic Ordini (...) Alcantara.


Maister and Brother N.I.N. Knight of the Order of Alcantara, make to God, an^ (...) you Maister, and to you that are here in his name; to you all, I promise Obedience, Coniug^

^ersion of mine owne manners, from good to better, all my life time, euen till death: Accor^^ng to the Rule of Saint Benedict.

Of this Order maketh mention the Count of Lansarote. Despues el Anne 1218. ^ndo tra^adada a la Villa de Alcantara, que les dio la Orden de Calatrauo y su,The Cou^t of Lansarote ^^tion. Maestre ^^m Martin Fernandez a los Freyles d'ella y a su Maestre Dom Nunno Fernandez* c^ntal ^nd^cun, que su Orden fuesse visitada, y corregida por el Maestre de Calatra^a, y Sus ^ccess^res p^ra siempre, y sellamo de Alcantara, y traxer^n la Cruz Florete^da Verde, (...) Qual Vsoro^ por Armas en Campo de Oro.
After the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred and Eighteen^,(...)When the Order of Cala^^aua was translated to the City of Alcantara, th^n was Maister of the Brethren D^m Martin Ferdinandez. And afterward became Maister Dom Nunno Fernandez, with ^^ch condition, that the Order should be visited and corrected by the Maister of C^latraua, ^d his Successours for euer, being at Alcantara, and shall weare the Greene Cr^^se ^loure-^eluced (which they shall vse for Armes) in a Field Gold.
The last Great Maister of Alcantara, was Dom Iuan d'Estu^^^ga,Dom Iuan (...) of A^. made Archbishop ^^d Cardinall, and working his promotion to such dignities: hee dismissed him ^elfe from the Great Maistership of this Order, which had betweene fortie and ^fty thousand Duca^es of Rents, And by this dismission made in the yeare One ^ousand foure hundred fourescore and fifteene; Pope Alexander, sixt of the name* Spanyard borne in Valentia in the Kingdome of Arragon, vnited and annexed this ^reat Maistership to the Crowne of Castile, in fauour of King Ferdinand of Arragon, and Queen Isabel his wife. And euer since that time, the Kings of Spaine haue en^yed the Reuennewes of the Commanderies, belonging to the Orders of Saint Iames (...) the Sword of Calatraua and Alcantara, whereof they are entitled, and named P^r^tuall Administratours.


The Order of Calatraua,(...) Instituted in the Kingdome of Castile, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fiftie eight.
CHAP. VII. The Originall of the Kingdome of Castile.
CAstile is a Prouince, which in former times was subiected to the auncient Kings of Leon; and which being enlarged or augmented by them of Portugall and Galicia, soone after became erected into Kingdomes.Castile and Leon goue^ at first by Iu^ges of Co^^ts. Both the one and the other were gouerned by Iudges at the first; and the first of them of Castile, had the name of Counts, who are no other then Iudges. Nugno Belchides,


or Belides, a Germaine Gentleman, and a Natiue of Cologne, desirous to fight against the Moores (as hath bin reported to vs) made his voyage to Spaine; where he espoused Donna Sola, Daughter to the Count and Iudge Diego Porcelos, about the yeare of Grace, eight hundred fourescore and foure.
It is the opinion and perswasion of the Spaniards,Concerning the d^scent of Diego Por^^^s. that this Diego Porcelos, was descended from Begorre, and that they which went to the Conquest of Nauar, with the King Dom Garcia Ximenes: in time also afterward conquered the Citie of Burgos, in the elder Castile. In memory whereof, the Predecessours of the said Dom Diego Porcelos, Porterent de Sobrarbre, qui ^id Or au Chesne de Synople, a la Croix pommettee de Gueulles en Chef, and en poincte vne (...) ^u Truye de Sable (first Armes of this Noble House) sur vne motte de Synople.
Looke in the Tract of Nauarre.In this Marriage of Nugno Belchides, with Donna Sola, were borne the Child^^^ formerly remembred, as namely of Cid Ruis; who in like manner was Iudge of ^^stile, as had beene before him his Predecessors Nugno Nugnez Rasura, and Lain Ca^^ great Lords renowned in the Chronicles of Spaine. Which report, that for (...) cruelty of Leon Froila,Leon Froila a ^^rant, Second of the name, the Inhabitants of old Castile reuo^^ from their obedience to him, and established Iudges to rule ouer them, in the ye^^ Eight Hundred, Foure Score and Sixteene, after a Battaile wonne by the Mocr^^ the Val de Iunquera, against the Christians in the same yeare. And that the two (...) Iudges of Castile, were
The two first Iudges of Castile.Nugno Rasurez: AndLayn Caluo.
But the last man of these named, gouerned the Martiall and Warre-affaires; a^^ the other exercised the occasions of Iustice.
It is a matter certaine and assured, that Dom Alphonso, Sixt of the name, King (...) Leon,The first Count of Castile. married Donna Vrraca his Daughter, to Raymond of Bourgongne, of the Roy^ House of France, whom hee established the first Gouernour and Count of Cast^^^ So saith one, approuing him to beare the said Title of Count, and bare also (as w^ haue said) D'Azur a Trois Fleurs de Lys d'Or. Which is best without number, ^cause the Shield or Escutcheon of the Sacred and holy Kingdome of France, w^^ neuer reduced to this Ternary or true number; but at the ending of the Reigne (...) King Charles, Fift of the Name, called the Wise, or the beginning of his Son^^ Reigne Charles the Sixt.
In this Marriage of this Raymond of Bourgongne, and Donna Vrraca, the Infant^ (...) Leon, was borne their Sonne
Alphonso Raymond, King of Leon and of Castile, as it is affirmed.
Dom Vela, Second Count of Castile.The Second Count of Castile, established by the said Dom Alphonso the Sixt; w^^ the Count Dom Vela, who peopled Salamanca, and who by being issued of the ho^^^ of Barcellona, Portoit d Or a Quatre Paulx de Gueules, a l'Orle and la Bordure d'Az^ Chargee de Hu^^l Croix de Hierusalem. Because hee made one in the Voyage to (...) Holy Land: And of this Dom Vela, descended in Spaine, the Families and Lin^g^ of the Roderigoes.
The Third Count, Dom Suero de Castro.Dom Suero de Castro was the Third Count, being descended of the Ligne of N^g^ Belchides, by Dom Diego Lainez, who peopled Pegnafiell in Castile, one of the Seign^^ies belonging to the Crowne of Nauarre. This Suero de Castro, Portoit d'Arge^^ Six Tourteaus d Azur mis en Paulx.
Dom Osorio de Campos, fourth Count.The Fourth Count was Dom Osorio de Campos, of whom are descended the Fam^lies of Villalobos, and the Osorios. This Count Portoit d'Or a deux Loups, ayants les y^^ creues de Gueules.
The Fift Count.Dom Roderigo Ruy Gonsales Giron was the Fift Count who peopled Valladolid, bei^^ issued of the Family of the Cisneros, of whom descended the Girons. His Armes a^^ D'Or a trois Girons, endenchez de Gueullos en Pal, a la Bordure Eschequee d'Or and (...) Gueules de deux Traicts.
The Sixt Count.The Sixt was the Count Dom Pedro de Lara; Qui Portoit de Gueules a deux Cha^^eres f^ssees d'Or and de Sable, and a chacun des ances huict testes de Serpents de Symp^^ This de Lara was elected Iudge of Castile, about the yeare, One Thousand, One Hu^dred.
This Ligne of the first Iudges or Counts of Castile, is very much intricated, a^ that which now wee haue spoken of, is drawne from the History of the Count (...) Lansarote,(...) a very diligent Antiquary. Qui Portoit en Armes de Gueules a la Cr^^ vairee, au Cim^er d vne Tour d'Argent Masonnee de Sable sommee d'vn Caualier (...) Sainct Iacques de l'Espee, tenant son Coutelas d'Argent, a la Garde doree de la main dr^^ and de Dautre vn Teste de More de Sable.
The Chronicles of Spain, which they call a Generall History, are full of repo^^ and Discourses (for the most part) without any heedfull respect. The diligent se^^ches for matters of truth,Authors of best (...) are (...) followed (...) are to be found in the Roules and Treasuries of the Crowne Royall, Audiences, and Monasteries of ancient Foundation. Stephen Garibay, A^brose de Morales, Ieronimo Surita, Argoto de Molina, and the like Authors, of we^

^ualified and good temper, flye in another Ayre, and with a fairer wing: ^ut by following the common high road way, what can be said of such dire^ion?
The Countie of Castile, being rendered Soueraigne; Gonsales Nugnes Iudge of Ca^ile, espoused Donna Ximenia, Daughter to Count Nugno Fernandes, slaine by the ^ing Dom Ordogne: Of which marriage was borne Gonsalues, first Count proprieta^ or owner of Castile. Sancio, first of the name, the nineteenth King of Leon, made generall assembly at Leon, to intrap there (cunningly) such as had combusted his ^^ate, while he was gone to take better order for Cordoua. Fernand Gonsales (for whom ^e plot was perticularly prepared) went thither so well accompanied,A traine prouided for Ferdinand Gonsales. as Sancio was ^ompelled to strike saile. Among other things which Gonsales had, was a Horse of bodly shape and pace, and likewise a Hauke, which all Spaine could not yeelde ^other of fairer flight. Sancio grew desirous to haue these two creatures, at any price (...) paiment whatsoeuer, but was no way willing to haue them by gift, because he ^ould not stand beholding to their Maister. The King and he concluded on sale (...) the Gennet and Hauke at a certaine price, payable within such a time as they ^d agreed on. Which being past with want of paiment, the couenanted summe ^ould then double euery day, vntill the time of actuall paiment. His Treasurers ^glecting to discharge the dues, the Count (a long while after the tearme was ex^red) demanded his money, and the vsance agreed on. The account of the prin^pall being summed vp, and the daily profit thereon depending; the whole ac^unt amounted to so high a rate, as all the Treasures of the King of Leon were ^ot sufficient to make full paiment. Which when King Sancio had well considered (...), to auoide further prolonging, and to be acquitted of his whole debt to the ^ount: he left Castile to him in free proprietie,Castile fully acquitted and surrendred to the Count. and discharged him likewise for ^llowing times, of all Hommage, Prerogatiue and Iurisdiction, any way claime^le by the Crowne of Leon, but stood fully released thereof before-hand. And from ^nce tooke beginning the Soueraignty of Castile, which happened in the yeare of ^race, Nine hundred threescore and fiue.
We haue obserued in the Treatise of Nauarre, that King Sancio the Great,Sancio the Great, Emperour of the Spaines. who ^led himselfe Emperour of the Spaines, had to wife Donna Nugna, Daughter to ^ncio Garcia, second Sonne to Garcia Fernandez, Sonne to Ferdinand Gonsales, ^rst Count proprietarie of Castile. This Donna Nugna, by the death of Garcia her ^other (slaine in the Citie of Leon, and neuer married) was Countesse of Castile: ^hich Sancio the Great created to be a Kingdome, and gaue it as an Appennage and ^ortion to their second Sonne.
I. Ferdinand, first King of Castile, (...) the yeare of Grace, One thousand ^irtie foure. Hee was likewise King (...) Leon, in regard of his wife Donna San^a, Sister to the King of Leon Dom Ber^^nd, third of the name. And in this ^arriage were borne (according as we ^ee haue noated in the Genealogie of ^on)
Vrraca.Sancio Fernandez, King of Castile.Eluira.Alphonso, King of Leon, sixt of the ^ame: AndGarcia.
II. Sancio Fernandez was the second ^ing of Castile, second of the name, hau^^g respect to the Count proprietarie (...) Castile Sancio Garcia, his Great ^randfather. Hee reigned no more then sixe yeares, or thereabout,Ferdinand the first King of Castile. and by his death (happening without issue) his Brother
III. Alphonso, King of Leon, was the third King of Castile, first of the name, and sixt of Leon: who reigned thirtie fiue yeares, lacking three or foure moneths. He was married sixe seuerall times. By his first wife Agnes, he had not any issue. By his second wife Constance, he had
Vrraca, Queene of Castile, wife to Raymond of Bourgongne, her first Husband, by whom shee had a Sonne and a Daughter.
Alphonso Raymond, King of Castile and Leon: And

Sancia.

His third Wife was lame, named Mary, a Moore by Nation, by whom he

had a Son named

Sancio.

His Fourth Wife was Bertha, an Italian, by whom he had not any Issue.
His Fift Wife was Isabell a Spanish Lady, by whom hee had two Daughters
Sancia; AndEluira, Queene of Naples.
His Sixt Wife was Beatrix, a Natiue of France, and by her hee had not any Childe.
Hee had also two Concubines, the last whereof is not named; but the first was called Ximenia Nugnez de Guzman, and by her he had two Daughters.
Eluira, Countesse of Tolosa; AndTheresa, First Countesse of Portugall.
By the death of this Alphonso, happening in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, and Eight, or thereabout.
IIII. Vrraca, his Eldest Daughter was Queene of Leon and Castile, and in right of her, her Second Husband
Alhonso, King of Castile, Second of the Name, and of Leon the Seauenth, Vsurper of the Kingdome of Nauarre, as we haue formerly said, who deceased without Issue.
The Castilians expulsed the said Queene Vrraca, for her wicked life, and elected for their King her Sonne
V. Alphonso Raymond, (Sonne to Raymond of Bourgongne) Third of the name, King of Castile and Leon, Eight of the name, who began to reigne in the yeare One Thousand, One Hundred, Twenty and Two. By Berenguela his first Wife, Daughter to Dom Raymond Arnauld, Count of Barcelona, he had
Sancio, King of Castile.Ferdinand, King of Leon.Constance, Queene of France.Sancia, Queene of Nauarre: AndGarcia.
By his Second Wife Rica, of the House of Suabae in Germany, he had one Daughter
Sancia, Queene of Arragon.
By Mary his Concubine, he had
Esteuaneta, Wife to Ferdinand Roderigues: And of this Marriage was borne Pero Fernandez de Castro, First Knight Of the Order of the Bande.
By an other Concubine, Gontruda, Sister to Diego d'Apricio, he had
Vrraca, who was Queene of Nauarre.
By the death of the said Alphonso Raymond, happening in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fifty Seauen his Eldest Sonne
VI. Sancio was the Sixt King of Castile, Second of the name; who by Bla^ of Nauarre his Wife, had one onely Sonne
VII. Alphonso, King of Castile, Fourth of the name (by the death of his Father who reigned but two yeares) his Reigne extended to Fiue and Fifty yeares. And by Eleanor, Daughter to the King o^ England Henry, Second of the name, (...) had
Blanche, Queene of France, Mother to Saint Lewes, Heyre of Castile.Berenguela, Queene of Leon.Sancio, died an Infant.Vrraca, Queene of Portugall.Malfada, died a Nunne.Constance, a Nunne.Eleanor, Queene of Arragon.Henry, King of Castile; And
Two Daughters that died in their Infancie.
This Alphonso dyed in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred and Fourteene and after him succeeded his Son
VIII. Henry, First of the name, wh^ reigned but three yeares. By Malfada o^ Portugall his wife, hee left not any issue* by his death, Berenguela the Second daughter possessed himselfe of the Kingdome of Castile, wherein she enthroane^ her Sonne
IX. Ferdinand, Sonne to the King o^ Leon Alphonso, Ninth of the name Vsurper of the Kingdome of Castile, against the King Saint Lewes, reigning i^ his vsurpation Thirty Fiue yeares. Th^ Ferdinand, Second of the name, by B^atrix (daughter to the Emperour Philip^ his first Wife had these Children.


Alphonso.


Fredericke.


Ferdinand.


Henry.


Philip.


Sancio.


Emanuel.

Leonora, who dyed vnmarried; And
Berenguela, a religious Sister.

In Second Marriage hee espoused ^lix of Poitiers, a French Lady, and by he^ he had two Sons and a Daughter.



Ferdinand.

Lewes: And

Leonora.


In the person of the said Ferdinand, the Kingdomes of Leon and of Castile, became annexed and vnited together, without being (any more afterward) separated or diuided one from another. Hee began to reigne in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred and Seauenteene: and dyed in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred Fifty Two. After him succeeded in the Kingdomes of Leon and Castile, his eldest Sonne
X. Alphonso, King of Castile, Fift of the name, called the Wise, in regard of his Astrologie. By Violanta of Arragon, his Wife, he had a plenteous Progeny, to wit, Fiue Sonnes and Foure Daughters.
The Sonnes were
Ferdinand, tearmed, de la Cerda.Sancio.Pedro.Iohn: AndIames.
The Daughters were
Berenguela.Beatrix.Isabell: AndLeonora.
By a Concubine Margeria de Guzman, he had
Beatrix, Queene of Portugall.
Ferdinand de la Cerda, his Eldest Son, had to wife Madame Blanche of France, Daughter to the King Saint Lewes, by whom he had two Sonnes;
Alphonso; AndFerdinand.
Alphonso marrying in France, tooke ^o Wife Malfada (a Lady of Lunell in Languedock, betweene Montpelier and Nismes) Daughter to the Viscount of Narbonna, by whom hee had two Sonnes;
Lewes Count of Clermont; AndIohn Charles, Constable of France.
Lewes, Count of Clermont, tooke to Wife Leonora de Guzman, by whom ^ee had
Lewes, Count of Clermont,Iohn de la Cerda; AndIsabell de la Cerda, Wife to Ber^ard, Bastard of Foix, of whom are descended the Dukes of Medina de Coeli:
Ferdinand, Second Sonne to Ferdinand de la Cerda, Eldest Sonne to Alphonso the Wise, had to Wife Ioane or Iane de Lara, by whom he had a Sonne and a Daughter.
Isabell de la Cerda, Wife to Iohn Manuell, Father to Iane, Queene of Castile, Wife to Henry the Bastard King of Castile; And
Iohn cald de Lara, Heire to his Mother.
Iohn, Fourth Sonne to Alphonso the Wise, tooke to Wife Mary Lopez Diaz, Heyre of Biscay: And in this Marriage was borne Iohn, called with one Fye, Father of Isabell, Wife to Iohn Nugnez de Lara; Alphonso the King yet liuing.
XI. Sancio his Second Sonne, possessed himselfe of the Kingdomes of Leon and of Castile, (which belonged to the Children of his deceased Elder Brother Ferdinand de la Cerda) in the yeare Two Hundred, Foure Score and Foure, and reigned Eleuen yeares. The said Sancio, Third of the Name, by his Wife Mary of Castile, Daughter to Alphonso, Lord of Molina, had foure Sonnes and two Daughters.
The Daughters were
Isabell, Dutchesse of Bretaigne; AndBeatrix.
The Sonnes were
Ferdinand.Alphonso-Philippo.Henry; AndPedro.
The said Sancio The Third, dyed in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Foure Score and Fifteene; After whom succeeded his Sonne.
XII. Ferdinand, Third of the name in Castile, of whom the Reigne continued Seauenteene yeares: And by Constance of Portugall his Wife, were borne a Sonne and a Daughter,
Alphonso; AndLeonora.
XIII. Alphonso, Sixt of the name, King of Castile, the Eleuenth and last of Leon, Authour of the Order of the Band, succeeded in the said Kingdomes, by the death of Ferdinand the Third his Father, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and twelue: who by Mary of Portugall his Wife, had two Sonnes.

Ferdinand, who died very young; And
Pedro, King of Leon and of Castile.

By Leonora Guzman his Concubine,

and Lady in Amorous embraces, hee had a great list or traine of Bastards, or naturall Children. Pedro,Sancio,Henry. By one wombe.
And
Fredericke,Ferdinand,Iohn; AndIoane of Castile, Wife to Ferdinand de Castro.
Let there bee no misconst^uing the ^ame of Guzman.Wee haue in this Genealogie very often times made mention, concerning the name of Guzman, so many wayes allied to the Royall House of Castile: But you must obserue withall, that there are in Spaine, many Families of the Sirname of Guzman, very famous and much renowned.
The Ancient Guzmans, are
Them of Baesa,Of T^rall,Of Nieble the First,Of Nieble the Second,Of the Algaua; AndThe Guzmans of Hardales.
The Armes of the ancient Guzmans.The Ancient Guzmans dwelling in the Kingdome of Baeca of Baesa, who bare D'Argent a Cinque Ermines, a l'Orle and Bordure de Gueules chargee de Huict Saultem d'Or. It is a very long time since that race was quite extinct. For they which beare the same name (at this day) in Andalouzia, haue deriued their descent from the house of the Garcias, issued of the Great Maister of the Order of Calatraua, Dom Lewes Gonsales de Guzman, Lord of the City of Anduiar in the Territory and Kingdome of Iaen. For the ancient Guzmans were Lords of the Castell D'Auiados, about foure miles from the Royall City of Leon.
The chiefe Seate of the ancient house.Wee haue found that about the yeare Nine Hundred and Fifty, the Chiefe place of this Ancient House, was Can de Roa, the dwelling of the Count Nugno Nugnez de Guzman: who was the first Lord, issued and descended of the first Iudges and Counts of Castile, and (who in the end) came to be Kings.
In the yeare Nine Hundred, Fourescore and Ten, the King of Leon Bermond or Bermund,Nugno Fernandez de Guzman. Second of the name, caused to bee giuen to Nugno Fernandez de Guzman, the grounds and Pasturages of Sora, for the good Seruices which hee had done to him.
And in the yeare One Thousand Three Score and Eight, did liue Aluaro Diaz de Guzman, First of the name, Lord of the Tower of Guzman, in the Merindads of Cerrato.
Aluarez Ruyz de Guzman.In the yeare One thousand one hundred and fourescore, or thereabout, there is found in the Histories of Spaine, remembrance of another, named Aluarez Ruyz de Guzman, in the time of the Emperour Dom Alphonso of Spaine, vnder whom, the Count Dom Pedro was the first stemme or branch of the Familie of the Guzman. And that he espoused Vrraca Ruys de Castro, Sister to Dom Ferdinand Ruyz de Castro: And of this marriage was born Pero Ruyz de Guzman,Pero Ruyz de Guzman. who was married to the sister o^ the Count Dom Gomez de Mansanado, called Eluira Gomez de Mansanado: of whom issued two Sonnes, Nugno Perez de Guzman, and Guillen Perez de Guzman, who were both present in person at the Battaile of Muradal, otherwise called Des Naues de Tolosa, and D'Vbeda.
Dom Diego Lopez de Haro.This Guillen Perez tooke to wife Eluira Rodriguez, Daughter to Ruy Dias, Lord o^ Los Cameros, and to the Countesse Vrraca Diaz de Haro, Daughter to Dom Diego Lope^ de Haro, tearmed the Good, Lord of Biscaye, of whom we haue formerly set down^ the descent, and who in her first marriage espoused Count Aluar Nugnez de Lara. I^ the second Bed she had Pero Nugnez de Guzman, and other masse children, with on^ Daughter, called Mayora Guillen de Guzman.
Concerning this Pero Nugnez de Guzman, hee was Great Adelantado of Castile, and one of the very worthiest Knights of King Ferdinand, called the Saint, at th^ Conquest of Seuille.Pero Nugnez de Guzman. Hee married the Sister to the King of Leon Dom Alphonso, named Vrraca. And at the partition of the Lands of Seuille, conquered from th^

Moores, and done in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred fiftie and three mention is made, that this Pero Nugnez had there so large a proportion, euen as according to a great Lord. He was Father to Alphonso de Guzman, tearmed the Good, a Knight much renowned in the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon, and throughout all the frontiers of the Moores; onely for his valour and expertnesse in Armes.
In Spaine they hold, that this Noble Family is issued of a Brother to the Count of Bretaigne, who being thence sent in martiall affaires to Leon; was there married to Ramirez of Leon, and that to conserue the memory of their extraction; these Guzmans retained the Armes of Bretaigne with the Ermines. It is further said, that this Brother was also a kinsman of Agricol or Agrior le beau Iouuent,The descent of this Family out of Bretaign issued likewise from the House of Bretaigne, but dwelling in England, and one of the Knights of the Round Table, in the time of King Arthur. Which Agricoll bare likewise of Bretaigne, according as we haue obserued in the sixt Chapter.
But it is a matter most certaine, that the House of the Guzmans was descended from Bretaigne, and that an infinite number of Princes Sons,Proofe for their descent from Bretaigne. and other great Lords of France, did heretofore passe into Spaine, to fight against the Moores, and there continued their dwelling. Among whom was one named Guillaume, William, Brother to a Count of Bretaigne, who tooke alliance with the House of Count D. Nugnez, Lord of R^a; and that in his descent, the bloud of Guzman made a commixion with his of Bretaigne. In testimony whereof, the greater part of the Guzmans were, and are called Guillammes, which in Castile they call Guillen, by common kinde of speaking.
Some there are who say that the Sirname of Guzman is a Germaine or Almaigne word, compounded of these two dictions, Guz-Man, Good-Man, Honest-Man:Concerning the sirname of Guzman. As North or Nor Man, by being issued from the North; Hot-Man, a Rich-Man in Mines of Gold and Siluer, and an infinite number more, of the like composition.
There is found likewise, the Armes of the said Guzmans, Qui sont d'Azur a deux Chaudrens fessez ou Eschiquetez d'Or and d'Azur aux Ances compournes de mesme,The Armes of the Guzmans. a douze Testes de Serpens de Synople aux deux Oreilles, a l'Orle varice de mesme, chargee de quatre ^etits Chaudrons de mesme. Armes which are common to the very greatest Houses of Spaine and of Castile: As to them of Lara, Pacheco, Asa, Dasa, Fuente Almexir, Herrera, Biedma, and to infinite other beside.
The Guzmans of Toral haue for Armes D' Azur, aux deux Chaudieres d'Or f^ssees,Guzmans of diuers places. ^ncees and oreidees (as we haue) said flanque d'Argent a huict Ermines en Croix de Sable.
The Marquesse of Algaua, and those of Hardales; Les deux Chaudieres a l'Orle d'Argent de huict Ermines de Sable.
For them of Floraz, and of Flores (which is but one and the same Family) D' Azur ^u Chasteau somme de trois Tours d'Or, a l'Orle d Argent, chargee de huict Ermines de Sable.
Those of Cifuentes, and those of Almansa; Portent d'Argent a cinq Ermines de Sable, (...) l'Orle, and Bordure de Gueulles a huict Saultours d'Or: which were the first Armes of the auncient Guzmans de Baesa.
In this Illustrious Family, there hath bin three Ladies,Three Noble Ladies that yeelded Kings to Spaine. that haue yeeled Kings ^o Spaine.
The first was Ximenia Nugnez de Guzman, Mother to Dogna Therese, Daughter to the King of Leon Dom Alphonso the sixt; who had to her Dowrie the Kingdome of Portugall, married to the Count Henry, a French Prince, issued of the House of Bo^ogne and Lorraine.
The second was Dogne Mayora Guillen de Guzman, Mother to Queene Beatrix, and Daughter to the King Alphonso the Wise: who had in marriage the Kingdome of Alguara, married to the fift King of Portugall Alphonso, third of the name.
The last was Dogna Leonora de Guzman, Daughter to Pedro Nugnez de Guzman: by whom Alphonso, King of Leon and Castile (eleauenth and last of the name) had King Henry, second of the name.
But that which hath bin the greatest glory to this Family,Saint Dominick Guzmand descended of the same Familie. and made it shine throughout all Christendome; was that (from thence) issued the faire splendour of the Church, Sainct Dominicke Guzman (Sonne to Dom Foelix de Guzman, and

Donna Ieanne d' Asa, being natiues in the Towne of Caleruega, the dwelling place of the Noble Familie of Asa) Founder and first Institutour of the Order of Saint Dominicke, which we call the Iacobines at Paris, and elsewhere. An Order, out of which haue come so many Popes, Cardinals, Bishops and Doctors, famous for their seruice in the Church; and in such plenty, as there is not any other Order of Religion, which may be compared with that of Saint Dominicke. From whence the Kings of Spaine (euen to this day) doe deriue the principall excellencie of their Blood and Genealogie; according as is most curiously figured in delicate Copper plates, described by Frier Fernando del Castillo, Prior of the Monastery of Saint Mary D'Athoc^, in his Historie of the Order of Saint Dominicke.
Concerning the Armes of the Order.At the last Generall Chapter of this Order, held in the great Conuent at Paris, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and ten, being the Feast of Pentecoast, I saw the Armes of that illustrious Religion renowned in all parts of the inhabited world. One, D'Argent au Giron d'vne piece de Sable: Another of diuersitie of deuise; but both badly fashioned. As I shewed to the reuerend Father Seraphim Banquy, nominated Bishop of Engoulesme, Reuiuer or restorer of the Schooles of S. Thomas of Aquin in the said Conuent, a man of singuler integritie of life, and with whom I haue had very great acquaintance, and who (within a while after the said Generall Chapter) forsooke France, and returned backe to Florence.
The true Arms of the SocietieBut it is necessary for them of that Company to vnderstand, that here they may learne the true Armes of their Religion, which is: Vn Guyron ou Giron de Huict pieces d' Argent and de Sable, and sur iceluy vne Croix Fleur de lizce, partie de l'vn en l autre de mesme (that is to say, of Sable on Siluer, and Siluer on Sable) a la Bordure compence de Huict pieces de mesme, de Sable and d'Argent a Huict Estoiles de l'vn en l'autre de mesme, a Huict Bezans, and Tourteaux pareillement partiz d Argent and de Sable. The figure therof is here rep^esented, according to the truth of History.


Croix de l Ordre d^s Cheuali^rs, and de la Religion de S. Dominique.The Crosse of the Order, concerning the Knights: And them of the Religion of S. Dominicke. CHAP. VIII.
THis Excellent Patriarch was Founder of the Military Order of Knights of Iesus Christ: Instituted to warre against the Albigeois Heretiques, which were scattered and dispersed ouer all Languedock, Gascoignie, Prouence, D^^phine Sau^ye and Lombardy; a fight performed to the very vttermost, by the Prelates


and Gentlemen of France: As you may read in the History of Simon de Montfort, and the warres conducted by our Kings, Lewes the Eight, Saint Lewes his Sonne, and the Kings their Successors, against obstinate impugners of the Faith.
And this may serue to giue publike knowledge, what manner of Crosse was carried and worne by those Prelates, Princes, and Lords, with others beside that Crossed themselues against those obstinicie.
Great difference there was betweene them that were crossed for beyond the Seas,The (...) of (...) worne the cause. for defence and Conquest of the Holy Land, and them that were of this Order. For they which voyaged ouer the Seas, especially if they were of the French Nation, tooke for their kinde of

Crossing on the Breast, the Crosse of Ierusalem (which was Potence and Cantonnce de Quatre Croisettes) the Colour being Red, the English White, the Germaines Blacke,The Countries seueral colors. the Flemmings Greene, and the Italians Yellow. And the Crosse Merchants, that went against the Albigeois, wore vpon their Breasts, the Crosse of Saint Dominicke, in the said forme as you behold it here figured, Blacke and White, as it is obserued by Pere Fernando del Castillo, all along his Historie, the first Booke, and nine and fortieth Chapter.
Vso per Deuisa esta sancta Religion la Cruz Floreteada de Los Colores de su Habito, Que son Blanchoy Negro, que tambieu lo fueron de la Caualeria Militar, que ^isine Sancto Domingo instituta in Francia, y Lombardia por el Papa Honorio, contra los Rebeldes de la Iglesia. This Holy Religion vsed for their Deuise, The Crosse Flouredeluced, with the colours of their Habits, which were White and Blacke. And so were they likewise of the Knights Militarie, which the same Saint Dominicke Instituted in France and Lombardie, confirmed by the Pope Honorius, for such as rebelled against the Church. But returne we now againe to the Genealogie of the Kings of Castile.


CHAP. IX. A further proceeding in the Pedegree or Genealogie of the Castile Kings.
BY the death of Alphonso the Wise, happening in the yeare One thousand three hundred and fiftie, after he had reigned eight and thirty yeares; then his Legitimate Sonne Dom Pedro, sirnamed the Cruell,The cruel and tyrannicall reig^e of King Pedro. Reigned eighteene yeeres in crueltie and Tyrannie. For the whole time of his Gouernement was full of murders, massacres, euen of such as were dearest and neerest to him. So that all the Children of Leonora de Guzman, were compelled to seeke for their owne safetie, some in France, others in Arragon and Portugall, and their Mother bloodily massacred at Tilauera by the Queene. He put to death also all her Children, which he could get into his hands, and in her presence he caused a Monke to be burned, of the Order of Saint Dominicke, who had foretold; that himselfe should be slaine by the hand of Henry of Castile (who was Count of Transtamare) his Bastard Brother, in reuenge of his other Brethren, whom he had caused to be murdered.
He had to wife lawfully, Blanch of Bourbon, sister to the Queene Iane of Bourbon, wife to Charles the fift, called the Wife, Daughters to Peter Duke of Bourbon,Blan^h of Burbon wife to King Pedro the cruell, and her death. a Prince of the Illustrious Bloud of France. Three dayes after this marriage, he sent her prisoner to Toledo, and from thence to Cuenca. Finally, in the yeare One thousand three hundred threescore and one, he caused her to be poysoned in the Prison of Medina Sidonia. Her body was receiued by the French, who carried it along with them, and made en^errement of it at Tudela in Nauarre.
To reuenge the death of this worthy Princesse,Reue^ge sought by the French for the death of Queene Blanch. the French proclaimed Warre against this Pedro the Cruell, and ioyned themselues with the Count de Transtamare Henry of Castile, Bastard Sonne of Alphonso the eleauenth. The Generall of the French Armie (consisting of tenne thousand Horse, and twentie thousand men on foote) was Bertrand de Guesclin, a Gentleman of Bretaigne, the very worthiest Captaine among all them of his time, and who (for his many vertues) was made Constable of France. Vnder him marched in this Armie, Iohn of Bourbon, Count de la March, Cousine to the deceased Queene Blanch of Bourbon; Anthony, Lord of Beau^u; Arnauld d'Endreghen, Marshall of France) Le Begne de Villenes; Eustace d'Embrotecourt, Hugh Caurelee; Gaultier Husse, Mathew de Gournay; Perducas d' Albret, and an infinite number of other great Lords of the Kingdome,Henry Crowned King of Leon and Castile. who in the space of fiue and twenty dayes, conquered the greater part of the Kingdome of Leon and Castile, whereof was Crowned King the Count of Transtamare, Henry of Castile, called second of the name: which was done at Toledo, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred threescore and sixe.
Pedro the Cruell, made recourse with his Treasures to the English, who reseated him againe in part of his Kingdome; by the ouerthrow of King Henry, who was disarmed

sooner then he should haue bin, and Pedro gouerned his Kingdome in like manner as before.
His Contrary, being relieued once more by the French, and they conducted by the same Bertrand du Guesclin: it was the hope of Dom Pedro the Cruell, to raise the Siedge from Toledo with sixe hundred Lances: but he was surprized at Montiel, and Poniarded or Stabd by King Henry his Brother, according to the Prophesie of the Iacobine of Saint Dominicke de la Calcade,The death of Dom Pedro the Cruell. the three and twentieth day of March, in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred threescore and eight: And thus ended King Pedro, and his cruelty together.
Bertrand du Guesclin, whom the Spanish Histories doe tearme Beltran de Claquin, Constable of France, receiued great recompences in the Kingdomes of Castile and Leon, as also in Andaluzia, and namely in the Citie of Molina, but not Medina, according as it is written in the denumeration of the Constables belonging to France.
Many great Houses in Spaine deriued of the French.With him went in this iourney for Castile, and to the seruice of King Henry the second against King Pedro the Cruell, great store of French Gentlemen; where they began to make their dwelling, and were the Stockes or Plants of many great Houses, renowned in those parts to this very day. And those Spanyards that are of the best temper, will truely acknowledge, that all the Histories of the world haue spoken of the French, to be famous for their valiancie, aboue all other Nations ouer the Earth. Ninguno de los Autores en general, y en particular a est en dido tanto la pluma, que de Francia non aya siempre mucho mas, que dezir. Not any Authours in generall or perticuler, but haue extended their Pens, much more for the French, and speaking alwayes largely of them. So saith the Count of Lansarote, in the second Booke of his Historie, the fourescore and fift Chapter; according to the testimonie of whom, was
Gaston Phoebus de Foix and his Sonne.Bernard de Bearne, Bastard Son of Gaston Phoebus, Count of Foix, and Lord of Bearn. This Bernard tooke Alliance in the House De la C^rda, issued of the Bloud Royall of Castile: and of them are descended the Dukes of Medina Celi, whose Armes are De Castile, and Leon Escartelees de France.
Remond Gutierres passed out of Gascoigne into Spaine, Father to Pedro Gutierres, Lord D' Acugna,Pedro Gutirres Lord of Acugna and other families. the Originall or Sourse of the Dukes of Ossona, by the Sirname of Giron in Andaluzia; of the Marquesses of Villena being Dukes of Escalona, by the Sirname of Pacheco: of the Marquisate de Ville-Neufue du Fresna, by Sirname of Pertocarrero; of the Counts de la Puebla de Montalban, by the Sirname of Pacheco and of Girona; of the Marquesse of Moya, by the Sirname of Cabrera, and of the Marquesse d'Alcala, by Sirname of Portocarrero. The Armes of this Pedro Gutierres Lord of Acugna are D'Or, a Neuf Coins, ou Triangles d' Azur, de trois en trois en Fesses, a l'Orle d' Argent, chargee de Cinq Escus des secondes Armes de Portugal.
Of Arnold de Solier Lord of Vilialpando.Arnauld de Solier, the Daughter of whom was married to Iohn de Velasco, Great Chamberlaine to the said King Henry the second of Castile; and the said Arnauld Solier was Lord of Vilialpando. Of this marriage are descended the Velascoes, Constables of Castile, who bare for Armes, D' Argent a la Croix Fleurdelizee d'Azur, clechce en Croix couppee d'Argent a l'Orle, endenchee d'Azur.
Pedro Nugro C^t of Buelna.Iohn Nugno, Father of Pedro Nugno, Count of Buelna, and Lord of Cigales a French Knight, issued of the House of France, whose descent is renowned in Granado, and at Valladolid. The principall Succession whereof is falne to Donna Blanche Nugno at Herrera, and of Portugall, Countesse of Buelna, Lady of Cigales, of Pedrasa de la Serra, of Arroyo del puerto, and of others Seigneuries: wife to Bernardino de Velasco, Constable of Castile. The Armes of this Familie are D Or a Sept Fleurs de Lys d'Azur, which is of Thouars in Poicton.
Messire Henry Rubin (that is Robert) de Braquemont (great Vncle to Robert de Braquemont,Robert de Braquemont Admirall of Fra^ce who vnder Charles the sixt was Admirall of France) married in Castile with Dogna Ignez de Mendosa, daughter to Dom Pero Gonsalez de Mendosa, and to Dogus Ald^nce d'Atala, Daughter to the Predecessours that were Lords of the House De l Infantadgo, and of this marriage are descended the Lords of Pegnaranda. The Armes of this Bracquemont are De Sable au Cheuron d'Argent. And for Deuise,

^l portoit d'Argent a vn Maillet, et vne Esquierre de Sable. The Spanyards call a Maillet Maso, and an Esquierre Cabrio. Vpon this deuise hath rimed a Spanish Authour, named Gracia Dei, and sheweth, that he bare himselfe valiantly against the English ^s well for the loue of Charles the fift his king, as for the Maides sake whom he maried.

Con su Cabrio, et con su Maso
De Argen en la prieta Sterra
Bracamonte con su Braso
Desbarat o gran pedaso
De gente de Inglaterra,
Por su Rey, par la Poncela,
Y meior Vincio la tela
Mossen Enrique Rubin
Con Don Beltran de Claquin.
En la fraterna pelea.

Of Messire Monet da Viegas, a Gascoigne Captaine, is descended the house of Coello, much renowned in the Kingdome of Castille, and elsewhere in the Prouinces of Spayne,The descent of the House of Coello. ^in Portugall and in Andalouzia: as is obserued by the Counte of Lansarote, in his Second Booke of the Life of King Henry of Castille, Third of the name, the hundred fifty and three, and two hundred twenty three Chapters. Il portoit pour Armes d'Argent au Lyon rempant de Gueules, charge le Col et le Corps d'vne bande d'Azur Eschiquette d'Or et de Gueules de deux traicts, Coronne Lampasse, et Arme d'Or, a l'Orle d'Azur chargee de Huict Croix Fleurdelisee de Gueules.
Arnauld de Fontaine, Authour of the house of Fontaines in Andalouzia, whose Sepulcher is yet to bee seene at entring into the Church of S. Marke at Seuille with his Shield, which is D'Or Cinq Fleurs de Lys d'Azur en Saulteur,The House of the Fountaines in Andal^uz^a Which Seigneurie of the Fountaines is falne into the house of the Guzmans, in the person of Aluaro de Guzman et de Fontaine. His descendands haue therto added L'Orle de Gueules a Huict Chaudrons Eschicquettez d'Or, et de Sable.
Robert de Betancour, Second Son to the Lord of the said place, and of Longue-Ville in Normandie, who dwelt likewise in Castille. One of his descent and ligne,The first King of the Canaries. named Iohn de Betancour, was first King of the Canarie Ilands. Stephen de Gariuay or Garibay, in the ninth Chapter of this sixteenth Booke, writeth, that in the yeare of Grace, 1417. Queene Constance, Regentesse of Castille for her Sonne King, Iohn Second of the name, gaue in free gift to the said Messire Iohn de Betancour, the Ilandes of the Canaries, with the title of King: Which she did at the request and entreaty of Robert de Braquemount, Admirall of France, to whom this Betancour was a neere kinseman,Betancour conquered the Ilande, of the Canaries. who conquered the said Ilands, and builded his first Castell in that part of Lansarote, which hee made the chiefe seate of his new Kingdome. This was the man, that first sented and collected the windes for the East Indiaes, and there made his memories. In this voyage he was assisted by good store of the Nobility of France and Gascoignie, namely of two Gascoigne Captaines, the one called Salles, and the other Mauleon, very expert both in the Arte of Nauigation; because they were the first Adelantadoes and Discouerers of the Newe Worlde. This Betancour Portoit d'Argent au Lyon rempant de Gueules; Mauleon Portoit de Gueules au Lyon rempant d'Or, et de Sable, Portoit de Gueules a Quatre Aigles d'Argent.The first Discouerers of the New World. there are diuers other houses and Linages in Spayne and Gascoignie, which beare these Sirnames, and Armes also.
Iohn de Betancour gaue the Canaries to his Eldest Sonne Messire Maciote de Betancour: of whom are descended many famous houses in Portugall and Castille. This Isle of Lansarote is falne to Dogna Constance de Herrera, who stiled herselfe Lady of Roia, and of ^etancour, Countesse of Lansarote.
It may be tearmed then a presumptuous errour, to make Christopher Columbus the first discouerer of the New World, attributing to him onely all the honour,Christophere Columbo a Gonouese not the first Discouerer of the New World. which was due to the Auncient French Captaines: of whose memories hee might easily possesse himselfe, and all the Cardes of their Nauigations, so much tardied and neglected by the miserable estate and condition of France, vnder the long Reigne of King Charles the Sixt. And yet notwithstanding, all the glory is giuen to Christopher Columbus, whom the Spaniards cal Christouall Colon primer Conquistador de el nueuo Mondo de las Indias:

of whose Ligne descended the Dukes of Veragua. Il portoit l'Escu en Manteau, le primier de Gueules au Costeau d'Or,The Armes of Columbus. et l'autre d'Argent au Lyon rempant de Gueules: t^ poincted Argent vnde d'Azur, a Cinq Isles d'Or, a vn Monde de mesme, et pour De^iz^ ceste Legende a l'Entour..

A Castilla, y a Leon
Mundo nueuo dio Colon.

Thereby to declare, that this New Worlde was discouered by him, vnder the Reigne, and at the charges of Isabella, Queene of Castille and Leon, Wife to King Ferdinand of Arragon, vsurper of the Kingdome of Nauarre, Returne we now againe to our Auncient French Paladines, that made their habitation in Spayne, when they went thither with the Constable Du Guesclin.
Guillaume Lord of Limoges, Cousin to Guillen de las Casas.Messire Guillaume, Sonne and Brother to the Viscountes of Limoges, Lord of Cazaulx (Cousine to them of Betancour, King of the Canaries) of whom descended Guillen Signor delas Casas, Great Alcay of Seuille: In the great Church whereof is to be seene their Sepulcher and Monument, and their Armes, which are D'Or a Cinq Rocqs en Saultoir de Sable, a l'Orle d'Azur chargee de Huict Aigles d'Or.
The Familie of Lando.Iohn de Lando, of whose Ligne are descended many braue Gallants in Castille, that beare the Sir name and Armes of Lando: which are De Gueules au Saultoir d'Or, a l'Orle d'Argent, chargee de Dix Lyonceaux de Gueules.
The Familes of Montison and Bernal.George de Montison Bernard, and of him descended the Families of Montison, and of Bernal. The Armes of the said George were De Sable a vn Chasteau somme de trois Tours d'Or, Escart^le d'Azur au Bras arme de Argent, tenant vn Flambeau d'Or en Pal, allume de Gueules.
Arnauld de Geguiers, tearmed in Spanishe Segarra, a Knight of Bourgongne, famous for valiancie:The Familie of Segarra. of whom descended the Noble Knights of Seuille, of the name and Sirname of their Founder, and also of his Armes. Qui sont d'Or a Trois Bandes d'Azur, a l'Orle de Gueules, which is of Bourgongne.
Now concerning Messire Bertrand de Guesclin or Glesquin, Lord of Tours in To^raine; he was Lord of Molina, and of many great Landes in Castille and Andalouzia. Of the Lady of Saria his Wife,The Issue of Bertrand du Guesclin. he begot two braue Sonnes, to whom he gaue the Sirname and Armes of Tours, but not of Guesclin, who caried D'Argent a l'Aigle esploye de Sable, Lampasse, ^t Arme de Gueules, au Baston de mesmes brochant sur le tout. Wheras such are issued of his Ligne, Portent d'Azur a Cinq Tours en Saultoir d'Argent masonnees de Sable. One of those two Sonnes, named Bertrand de Tours, and in Spanishe Beltran de Torres,Of his two Sonnes. was Commaunder of Mondela, of the Order of Calatraua, as Radez d'Andrada hath obserued in his Tract of that Order, the Three and Thirtieth Chapter. The other held the succession of his Mother De Soria, and of him are descended diuers great personages, among whom was Dom Garcia de Torrez, Bishop of Burgos. Behold summarily the List and numeration of the principall Houses, issued of the Frenche Paladines, which passed into Spaine for the Seruice of
An obseruation of the French passages into Spayne.Henry, Second of the name, King of Leon and Castille. For from the time of his Father
Alphonso the last, Eleuenth of the name, and the Sonne of the said Henry the Second
Iohn, First of the name, and his Sonne and Successour
Henry the Third, And
Iohn the Second, his Sonne:
Many braue Frenche Knights passed hence to succour them in Spayne, who made their dwelling there: and (euen to this instant day) we see many worthy Families noated by their Armes, sowne among the Floures de Luces of France.
The (...) of Salado wun by the Kings of Castille and Portugal.At the Battaile of Salado, wunne by the Kings of Castille Alphonso, Eleuenth and last of that name, and Alphonso of Portugall, Seauenth of the name, against the Kings of Marocco Albohacen, and him of Granado, named Ioseph, on Monday the Eight and Twentieth day of October, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred and Forty, the Banner of the holy Croissade, blest in Auignion by the Pope then sitting, and by him giuen to the Archbishop of Tolledo Dom Gil Carrillo d'Alborno, was deliuered, (by consent of both the Christian Kings of Castille and Potugall) to bee caried by Messire

Hugh de Glesquin, that is Guesclin (Great vnckle by the Fathers side to the Constable of France Bertrand du Guesclin) a worthy braue Frenche Knight, very valiant of his person, and Zealous in the seruice of God.
El Rey de Castillo mando que el Pendon de la Sancta Cruzada (que el Papa auia imbi^do) fuesse iunto al pendon Real, y entre lo a Dom Hugo Caualiero Frances,The wordes of the Chronicle set down by the Author. que moraua en la Ciudad de Vbeda que era buen Christiano, y Hombre de buen Vida: y antes d'Esto el Rey auia Armado Cauallero, y casada en aquella Ciudad.
The King of Castille gaue commaunde, by whom he would haue the Gonfanon, and the Banner of the Holy Croissade (which the Pope had sent vnto him) should be caried with the Colonelle, and that it should be deliuered to Messire Hugh, a French Knight, dwelling in the Citty of Vbeda, Who was a man man without reproche of life, and whom the King had (before) Armed and made a Knight, and married him in the same place of Vbeda. And heere you may see the Genealogie of this Alfier Maior of the Holy Croissade of Salado.
In the yeare One Thousand, Three hundred and Twelue,The Martiall Expedition for Arragon against the Moores of Valentia. many French Gentlemen went for Arragon, to the seruice of King Iames, in the Expedition of Armes, and warring on the Moores of Valencia. Among whom were Hugh Bertrand, Frances Bertrand and Raymond Bertrand, being Brethren, with many other Gentlemen Poicteuines, and of the same Parentage. Albeit these Bertrands were originally, of the last Countes of Tolosa, and of Saint Gilles in Prouence. The most part of them became dwellers in Arragon and Cathalogna, but some other of them in Castille, among whom was Hugh Bertrand, the first Sonne to this Hugh Bertrand, to whom the King of Castille Alphonso the last, caused to be giuen in mariage, the heire of the house of Cueua, rich and abounding in goods, both in and about the Citty of Vbeda. And from thence are descended them of the house of Cueua, which haue retayned the proper names of Hugh and Bertrand.
The Authour of the Chronicle of Dom Michaell Lucas, Constable of Castille,Dom Bertrand de la Caua, and his descente. writeth, that Dom Bertrand de la Ceua, was Son to Diego de la Caua, and he youngest Sonne to Gilles Martin de la Caua, Regent of the Citty of Vbeda; issued of Hugh the French Knight, who was Alfier Maior of the Banner Collonell of the Croisade, in the Battaile at Salado, who passed from France into Spayne to Warre against the Moores, with Raymond Bertrand his Sonne, and many other Crossed Gentelmen. Dom Beltran fue hijo de Diego de la Cueua, et nieto de Gil Martinez de la Cueua, Regidor de Vbeda, descendente de Dom Hugo Cauallero Francez, que fue por Alpherez del Pendon de la Cruzada en la Batalla del Salado, y passo de Francia a Espagna a la guerra de los Moros con Dom Remon Baltran su primo, y con otros Cruzados, quae passaron del Reyno de Francia,
This Raymond Bertrand, Brother to Hugh,Raymond Bertrand de Perillos. tooke the Sirname of Perillos (of the Seigneurie of Perillac in Quercy, or Cahourry, neere to Tolosa) and dwelt in the Kingdome of Valencia: where he was Father to Frances de Perillos, Viscounte of Roda in Cathalogna, and Brother to Bertrand de Guesclin, if we may giue credite to the Chronicles of Spayne.
Hugh Alfier Maior, Husband to the rich Heire of La Cueua:Chiefe Standard-Bearer. Porta de France Escartele des Armes de sa Femme (which are those of Cueua) d'Or a deux paulx de Gueules, ente en pointe d'Argent, au Serpent Dragonne, comme sortant d'vne Caue de Synople a l'Orle de Gucules, chargee de Huict Saultoires d'Or. Armes retained by the heire to the House of Dogna Isabella de la Cueua, Countesse of Saint Stephano, and Lady of Solera.
Betweene Tolosa and Carcassonna, renowned Cities in Languedock, passing by the Mountaines, to proceed on by Rec de Mineruez, for descending to Haute-riue: In the time of Alphonso, King of Leon and Castille, Sirnamed the Emperour; passed into Spayne to warre vpon the Moores, two French Knights,Of two worthy Knights of France named Ponces. both of them being named Ponces (a name common in Languedock and Prouence, in regard of Saint Pons de Tomitres, the Bishops See for Recs de Carcassonna) the one Lord of Cabrieres, in the Countie of Venisse, and the other of Rec de Mineruez, and so by reason of him, called Ponce de Mineruez (heeretofore issued of the Counts and Gouernours of Tolosa Ponce, both the Father Remond and his Sonne) who had to wife Eluira, Daughter to the King Dom Alphonso the Sixte: by whom he was made Seneschall, Great Maister, and his Alfier Maior, about the yeare of Grace One Thousand, One Hundred and Forty.
The Counte Dom Vela Ponce.Of this mariage came the Counte Dom Vela Ponce, who by Eluira, Daughter to Counte Fernandez de Traua, had the Counte Dom Ponce de Viegas, Husband to an other Eluira, Father and Mother to Count Pero Ponce, the Husband of Aldonsa Alphonso, the naturall and bastard Daughter to the King of Leon Dom Alphonso, and to Aldonsa de Sylua, his Loue Lady, daughter to Martin Gomez de Sylua, and Vrraca Ve^* In regard of this Alliance, they of this house bare the Armes of Leon, whereof they tooke the title and Sirname, which likewise are the Armes De la Sylua. In this Mariage were borne three Sonnes: Iohn Perez Ponce, Ferdinand Perez Ponce, and Ruy Perez Ponce, who was Maister of Cal^traua.
The great honour of Ferdinand Perez Ponce.Pernan, or Ferdinand Perez Ponce, was one of the very greatest Lords of the Kingdome, and so subscribed himselfe to the Priueledges of Seuille, confirmed by Alphonso the Wise, in the yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred, Threescore and Eight. He had to Wife Dogna Vrraca Gutierrez de Menesez, Daughter to Gutierrez Suarez de Meneses, and to Eluira de Sosa, Daughter to Iohn Garcia de Sosa, and Vrraca Fernandez. Of this Mariage issued two Sonnes, Pero Ponce de Leon, and Fernan Perez Ponce. The eldest whereof tooke to Wife Sancia Gilles Bragansona, of the linage of Pereira, daughter to Gill de Nugnez de Bragantia, and Mary Perez. And of this Marriage was borne one Sonne, and three Daughters: Roderigo Ponce: Isabella, Iana and Vrraca.
The Gouernour of the Asturies.Rodorigo Ponce, Gouernour of the Asturies, was tearmed the Chaste; because hi^ Wife Isabella de la Cerda, and he liued chastely together. So that he leauing not any issue; Fernan Perez Ponce came to the inheritance of his Nephewe. And the Daughters were
Isabella, who had to Husband Pero Fernandez de Castro, Sirnamed the Warlike, Father and Mother to Ferdinand do Castro and Iana Ponce of Leon, Queene of Castille, the Wife to the King Dom Pedro.
Iana espoused Iohn Alphonso, Bastard Sonne to Dionisius King of Portugall. And of this Mariage issued Vrraca, Wife to Aluarez Perez de Guzman, Father and Mother of Theresa Aluarez,Aluarez Perez de Guzman. Wife to Gutierrez d' Aquilar. And the last Daughter was
Vrraca, Wife to Enrique Enriquez, youngest Sonne to the Infant Dom Enrique.
Fernand Perez Ponce, Vncle to Roderigo the Chaste, was Husband to Isabella de Guzman, Daughter of Alphonso Perez de Guzman, called the Good, and Mary Alphonso Cornella: By her he wa^ Lord of Marchena, and had also two Sonnes; Pero Ponce de Leon, and Fernan Perez Ponce, Maister of Alcantara.
Pero Ponce of Leon, Lord of Marchena, tooke to Wife Beatrix de Cherica, Daughter to Dom Iaymes, Lord of Cherica; and Beatrix de Lauria, Daughter to Rogero de Lauria (Admirall of Sicilie for the King of Arragon,Rogero de Lauria Admirall of Sicilie. vsurper of that Kingdome against the House of Aniou, after the Sicilian Euensong) and to Saurina, Daughter of Berengarie d'Entensa, Sonne to the Infant Dom Iaymes, and Elfa d'Albarrazin, youngest Sonne to King Iames of Arragon; and Thereza Gilletta of Bidaure In regarde of this Alliance with the House of Arragon, the said Lord of Marchena, and his descendants, deuided their Armes of Leon, with them of Arragon: A l'Orle de Gueules chargee de Huict Escussons d Or,Bidaure on of (...) House of Nauarre. a la Fesse d'Azur, which is of Bidaure, one of the twelue principall Houses of Nauarre. Of this Marriage was borne Iohn Ponce of Leon, whom the King of Cast^lle Dom Pedro the Cruell (subiect of this digression) caused to bee slaine vpon no occasion, and died without issue, leauing the Succession to his Brother.
Pedro Ponce of Leon, Brother of Mary, Wife to Fernand Lord of Ledesma, Brother to King Henry the Second, of whom we spake, and died without any Heire: and of Leonora, Wife to Lewes, Sonne of Alphonso de Cerda, Father and Mother to Iohn de la Cerda (slaine by the commande of King Pedro the Cruell) and of Isabella de la Cerda, Wife to Roderigo Aluarez Ponce.(...)
Pero Ponce of Leon, had the succession of the Lord of Marchena his Father. By his Wife Sancia de Baesa, Daughter to Iohn Ruys de Baesa, and Theresa de Haro, he had Pero Ponce, Successour in the Sates and Seigneuries of his Father, and Iohn Ponce, slaine by the Moores of Granado. The descent of the Elder, continueth to this present in the Family of Roderigo Ponce of Leon, Counte of Medellin, Lord of Marchei^, who espoused Dogna Maria d'Aiala, Daughter to Pero Lopez d'A^ala, Great Chauncellour of Castille. Of this Marriage issued three Sonne and two Daughters, Iohn Ponce

de Leon, Lewes Ponce de Leon, Lord of Villa-garcia, and Fernand Ponce de Leon. The Daughters were Sancia, Wife to Alphonso Perez de Guzman, Lord of Orgaz, and Dogna Eluira, Wife to Alphonso Fernandez de Cordoua, Lord of Alcaudeta, Iohn Ponce de Leon, Count of Arcos, and Lord of Marchena, was Father to Roderigo Ponce de Leon,Roderigo Ponce de Leon M^^quess^ (...) Cadiz. Marquesse of Cadiz, and Manuell Ponce de Leon, with other Sonnes and Daughters beside. Rodorigo Ponce, Second Count of Baylen, had to Wife Yrlansa de Sandoball and de Guzman, Daughter to the Lord of Fuentes; of whom came Foure Sonnes: Manuell, Fernand Bishop of Leon; Rodorigo Ponce, and Iohn Ponce de Leon, of the habite of Saint Iames. Dom Manuell, Count of Baylen, espoused Katharina de Cordoua Daughter to ^rances Pacheco, younest Sonne of Alphonso d'Aquilar: and by her he had Dom Roderigo Ponce de Leon, Count of Baylen, a Knight renowmed in the Citty of Oran, for fighting against the Moores of Barbarie.
Now, to shew that this principall and very greatest Ligne of Spaine, is descended from France (the fruitfull Nurserie of the whole worlds Nobility) the auncient Armes of this first Count Ponce Lord de la Minerue in Languedock, were Escniquettees de Trois Traicts de Azur, a Cinq Aigles d'Or en Saultoir (to witt, two in Chief, one in the hart,The Armes of the f^rst Cou^t of (...) Langue^ and two in Pointe) et de Gueules a quatre Huchetz, ou Trompes de Chasse, et Cors d'Argent, l'vn en Che^ entre deux Aigles, deux en Fesse, l'Aigle entre deux, et vne en Poincte entre deux Aigles.
I should neuer make an end, if I would obserue all the Families issued of the Noble Frenche, passing hence into all the Prouinces and Kingdomes of Spayne,The Moores (...) v^urpers in Spa^ne. only to fight against the Moores, who had vsurped the most part thereof, and so small a number of naturall Spanyards there left: as well it might haue bin without all hope of resource or recouery, for being deliuered from those infidell dogges; but by the succour of the Noble Frenche. C^me we now to our Kings of Castille.

A Briefe Genealogie of the Kings of Castille.
XV. Henry, Second of the name (the peaceable King of Castille, by meanes and succour of the French, by Iane Ma^uch his Wife, had a Sonne and a daugh^er.
Iohn, King of Castille; And
Leonora, Queene of Nauarre.
By Beatrix Leonora Ponce his Concu^ine, he had
Frederick Duke of Beneuentum.
By Eluira Iniqez, an other Concu^ine;
Ioane, Wife to Alphonso, Sonne to the Marquesse de Villena Dom Alphonso.
By two other Concubines;
Alphonso, Count of Gigion; And
Violanta, Wife to Pedro, an other Son ^o the Marqu^sse de Villena.
Henry, died in the Eleuenth yeare of ^is Reigne, and of Grace One Thousand, Three Hundred Threescore and Nine^eene, and then succeeded his Legitimate ^onne
XVI. Iohn, whose Reigne likewise ex^ended to Eleuen yeares, being twise mar^ed. By his first Wife Leonora of Arra^on, he had two Sonnes, and a Daughter, ^hat died in her young yeares.
His Sonnes were
Henry, King; AndFerdinand.
Hee had not any Children by Beatrix of Portugall his Second wife: And he deceased in the yeare One Thousand, Three Hundred, Fourescore and Tenne, leauing the Kingdome to his Eldest Sonne.
XVII. Henry, Third of the name, who Reigned Sixteene yeares. By Constance of Lancaster his wife, he had two Daughters, and a Sonne:
Mary, Queene of Arragon,Iohn, King of Castille; AndConstance.
By the death of Henry, happening in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred and sixe, the Crowne of Castille came to his only Sonne
XVIII. Iohn, Second of the name; but by reason of his minoritie, Queene Constance his Mother gouerned the Kingdome. This is the same woman, that gaue the Islandes of the Canaries to Iohn of Betancour, a Frenche Knight, whereof hee made the Conquest for her, as we haue already said. The said King Iohn of Castille espoused Mary of Arragon, Daughter to his vnckle Ferdinand, and by her he had two Daughters, and a Sonne
Constance died young.Leonora; AndHenry, King of Castille.
By his Second Wife Isabella of Portugall, Daughter to the Infant of Portugall Dom Iohn, Maister of Saint Iames, he had a Daughter and a Sonne.

Isabella, Queene of Castille; And

Alphonso.


The Reigne of this King Iohn the Second, continued Forty Eight yeares: And by his death, happening in the yeare of Grace, 1454, succeeded in the Kingdome his eldest Sonne
XIX. Henry, Fourth of the name, Sirnamed the Impotent, who Reigned One and twentie yeares. In his first mariage hee espoused Madame Blanche of Nauarre, whom he repudiated without any occasion, or hauing any knowledge of her, himselfe not being naturally a man. Hee became amourous of Iane of Portugall, who was his Second wife: to whom (without regard of his owne impotency) he graunted permission, to haue a Minion to lye with her, by whom shee had a Daughter
Iane, nourished as if shee had bin the Kings Daughter.
By the death of this King Henry the Impotent, happening in the yeare, 1475, his Sister by the second bed
XX. Isabella was Queene of Castille, and of Leon, who tooke to be her Husband
Ferdinand, King of Arragon and of Cicilie, by whom she had two Sons and three daughters.

Michaell, who died young.
Iohn, dying young also.
Iane, Queene of Spayne,
Mary, Queene of Portugall; And
Katharine, the occasion of the mishapps of England.

Vnder the Reigne of these Kings the Moors of Granado, were exterminated, by the surprizall of Granado,The Moores driuen out of Grauado. their chiefe and capitall Citty. In memorie whereof, the said Kings entred at the point of their Armes, D'Or a la Grenade de Gueules fuellee de Synople. The name of Catholique King, was giuen to the Kings of Spayne after this Conquest: And Christopher Columbus began the Conquest of the Newe World. The said Queene Isabella reigned Nine and Twenty yeares, and died in the yeare of Grace, 1504. By her death her Eldest Daughter.
XXI. Iane, was Queene of Castille, Leon and Granado; Wife to Phillip, Arch-duke of Austria, Count of Fl^nders and the Nether-Lands. And By this Marriage were borne
Leonora Queene of Portugall, and afterward of France.
Charles, called the Fifte, Emperour, King of Spayne.
Isabella, Queene of Denmarke.
Ferdinand, Emperour by the demission of Charles his Brother.

Mary; And

Katharine.


After the death of Phillip the Arch Duke, happening before his Wife; Shee became some-what troubled iniudgment.
XXII. Charles, in the life time of his Mother, tooke the Gouernment of the Kingdomes of Spayne, and reigned Two and Fortie yeares. By Isabell his Wife, Daughter to the King of Portugall, he had Foure Children:
Phillip, King of all the Prouinces of Spayne, and of the Indies, and Lord of the Lowe-Countries:Mary, Empresse.Iane, Married in Portugall; AndFerdinand, who died young.
By two Concubines hee had a Sonne and a Daughter:
Margaret, Dutchesse of Parma and Placentia, sometime Gouernesse of the Low-Countries; And
Dom Iohn d'Austria, dying without children; Famous for the Battaile of Lepanto. By the renunciation of Charles the Fift to the Empire, and to the Estates of Spayne, his Eldest Sonne
XXIII. Phillip, Second of the name, came to the Crowne of Spayne, during the life time of his Father, in the yeare One thousand, fiue hundred fifty and eight, and Reigned fifty yeares. He had foure wiues.
By the first Wife, Mary of Portugall, he had
Charles, who died vnmaried.
By his Second Wife Mary, Queene of England, he had not any issue.
By his Third Wife Madame Elizabeth of France (who died great with child) ehe had two Daughters.
Isabella Clara Eugenia, Lady of the Lowe-Countries, liuing yet at this present, Wife to Albertus of Austria, formerly a Cardinall, but without issue; And
Katharine, Wife to Charles Emanuell, Duke of Sauoye, who hath a plenteous progenie.
In Fourth Marriage hee espoused his Ni^ce, Anne of Austria, and by her he had Fiue Children.

Charles, deceassing young.
Laurens-Ferdinand, dying young also.
Diego (that is Iames) likewise dying young;
Phillip, King; And
N. A Daughter dying young.

By the death of King Phillip the Second, happening in September, One thousand, fiue hundred fourescore and eighteene, his onely Sonne
XXIIII. Phillip, Third of the name (reigning at this present) came to the Kingdomes of the Spaynes and Indiaes. By his Wife Margaret of Austria (deceasing in Childebed Sixe Hundred and Thirteene) he had Three Sonnes, and as many Daughters.
Anne, Married to Lewes the Most-Christian King of France and of Nauarre. Thirteenth of the name, now Reigning.
Phillip, Husband to Madame Elizabeth of France, Sister to the said Most Christian King.
Mary, who is vnmarried.

Ferdinand,


Laurens

And a Daughter, dying after her Mother.
Now, as concerning the Armes of Castille, euery one knoweth, that they are De Gueules au Chasteau somme de Trois Tours D'Or: As is to bee seene in the Glasse windowes of the Holy Chappell Royall, in the Pallace at Paris, which Armes of Castille,Concerning the Armes of Castille. are those of the Queene of France, Blanche of Castille, Mother to Saint Lewes. But as we haue said concerning the Armes of Leon; the same diuersitie is there touching them of Castille. For Floriano d'Ocampo, a Spanish writer, and the Doctour Perez Antonio Beuthero write, that the King of Castille and Leon Alphonso, Ninth of the name to^ke for Armes after the Battaile of Vbeda, De Naues de Tolosa,Miram^melin vanquished by the Christians in memory of the Castell of Ferrall, or the Tent or Pauillion of Miramomelin, ouercome by the Christians in the yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred and Twelue. And that before this Battaile, the Kings of Castille had no other Seale, but their owne Figure on Horseback, and likewise had no other Armes.
In iustification of their saying, they further write, that Dom Alphonso Raymond, Fift King of Castille (who began to Reigne in the yeare of Grace One Thousand, One Hundred Twentie and Two) caried no other Armes (during his life time) but L'Escu de France,The Armes of D^n Alphonso Raymond. Fift King of Castille such as had bin brought into Spayne by Raymond of Bourgongne his Father, and Guy of Bourgongne Archbishop of Vienna, who afterward was Pope, named Calixus the Second. Which the Count of Lanserote holdeth for a matter most certaine and assured, speaking concerning the Priueledges of the Auncient Monasteries of Spayne.
En los Priuilegios de los Monoies de Sahagun de los Reyes que le signen no se hallan Armas si^o vn Rey a Cauallo. Cosa aueri gada, e llana ^s que Dom Remon neruo del Sancto Rey Ferdinand Casado con Donna Vrraca su Hija, que era dela Casa Real de Francia, hermano del Conde de Borgonna,The allegation of Count de Lanser^te. y de Guido Arcobispo de Viena tuuo Armas de Francia, succediendo en el Reyno de Castillia Dom Alonso hijo del mismo Dom Remon, que se llamo Emperador de las Espannas temia l'Escudo de las mismas Armas.
Others doe holde, that Nugno Belchides, an Allemaigne Gentleman dwelling at Burgos in Castille, brought thither those Armes, and made such apparance thereof by his owne high deseruing^, as the tongue of scandale or disgrace, could no way blast his reputation. But for my selfe, I am of the minde, that it hath beene at all times (and vnder the first Iudges) a knowne certaintie; that these Armes were in frequent ^e; yea Armes very easie to take from the name of the Countrey, without the inuention of any other. For, as the same Counte (formerly alleadged) saith.The Seale appertaining to the Councell of Castille. El origen de Toma^ Castillo por Armas fue, por allusion del mismo Reyno de Castilla. And thereupon he produceth the figure of the Auncient Seale, belonging to the Councell of Castille; within the Roundure or Circle whereof was depicted an high mountaine, wher^n was planted a Castell, charged with three imbattailed Towers: and within an other Circle, which made the engitting of the Seale, this Legend written in old Gothishe Letters.



@ Sel: Del: Concell: De Castiella.
Garibay concerning King Alphonso the Ninthe.ET Gariuay escrit, Chapitre Trente Quatre, du Liure Douziesme, qu' Alphonce Neusuiesme vsoit disdictes Armes auparauant la Bataile de Muradal gagnee l'A^ Mille Deux Cents Douze: comme nous auons dit, and le preuue par l'Original d^^ Priuileges escrits en Parchemin en Langue Latine, aux Seaux pendants en Lacs de Soy de diuerses couleurs, dans lesquels Seaux, d'vn coste est vn Roy a Cheual, and de l'a^tre v^ Chasteau, lesdicts Priuileges donnez en la Cite de Sainct Dominique de la Calcade es A^^e^ Mille Cent Quatre-Vingts Sept: et Mille Devx Cents et Sept. Passons aux Ordres Militaires du Royaume de Castille.
And Gariuay, or Garibay, in the Foure and Thirtieth Chapter of his Twelfth Booke writeth, that Alphonso the Ninth, vsed the same Armes before the Battaile of Muradall, wunne in the yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred and Twelue, as we haue already said, He approueth it by the Originall of Priueledges, written in Velam in the Latine tongue, with Seales hanging on Strings of Silke fastened to them, of diuers coullers, On which Seales, vpon the one side was a King mounted on Horsebacke; and on the other side a Castell, Which Priueledges were giuen and graunted in the Citty of Saint Dominicke de le Calcade, in the yeares One Thousand, Two Hundred and Seauen.
Proceede we now to other Orders, in the Kingdome of Castille.



The Order of Calatraua, Instituted in the yeare One Thousand, One Hundred Fiftie and Eight. CHAP X.
THe first Military Order of Castille, was that of Calatraua (heeretofore a frontire place of Castille and Tolledo, Oretum Germanarum by Ptolomie, in the diocesse of Calatraua,Of Calatraua in elder times. seated vpon the Guadiana, on^ of the Principallest Riuers in Spayne, in Latine called Ana) which tooke birth and Originall in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred Fifty and Eight, according to the lefte testimony of Spanishe Chroniclers, as heere you may reade their owne words.
La Orden De Calatraua, comenco en el Anno de 1158. en tiempo del Rey don Sancho de Cast^lla, tomando nombre del Castillo de Calatraua. El qual siendo de la Orde^ de los Templarios, y no hallandose poderosos para defender lo contra la fuerca de los Mores, lo dieron al Rey Don Sancho, Y Ofreciendose Raymundo Natural de Burueua Abad del Monasterio de Sancta Maria De Fitero, que es el re yno de nau arra de la Oren ^e Cislel, y Frey Diego Velasquez de la misma Orden (que a^tes auia sido gran Cauallers en Armas) y otros Caualleros, y Hermanos d'esta Orden a su defensa. El Rey se la dio, Yde Aqui tvvo Principio Esta Orden Y Caualleria cuia insignia es la Cruz Rox^ Floreteada, que tomaron por Deuisa en los pechos a imitacion de los Cauelleros Franceses de la Sancta Cruzada, que por estos tiempos passau^n a la guerra de vltra Mar. S^ Armas sen la misma Cruz en campo de Oro, y a los lados d'ella dos Trauas Azules, por alusion del Castillo de Calatraua, de donde tuuo su Principio.
And as the Authour hath made it Spanishe, so is it thus Englished.
The Order of Calatraua tooke her beginning in the yeare One Thousand, One Hundred,A^ hath b^^ (...) in the (...). Fifty and Eight, Vnder the Reigne of Sancio, Third of the name, hee being Sirnamed the Desired, El Desseado, Sixte King of Castille, (Sonne to Alphonso Raymond, King of Castille, Sonne to Raymond of Bourgongne, Husband of Vrraca, Daughter to Ferdinand the Saint) and tooke his appellation of the Cast^ll of Calatraua, which is an Arabick worde, properly signifying a Castell, a dicti^^

retained yet to this day, in the names of Calataiud, Calacanasor, Calahorra, Calazeit and Cala, in the territorie of Seuille: that is as much to say, as the Castels of Taiud, Canasor, de Horra, and of Zeit. So this name of Calatraua is compounded of the Arabicke Cala, and of the Spanish Trauas, which signifieth Entarues, and Menotes,The composion of the name Calatra^. Manacles, Giues or Yrons, to fasten about the feete and wrists of Prisoners, This Castle hauing bin wonne from the Moores of Andalouzia, and wherein they lockt vp Christians very strictly; was giuen to the Knights Templers, onely to guard and defend it. But they vpon tydings, that the Moores leuyed a puissant Armie for regayning the same Castle; began to quake timerously, and scratch their heads for further consideration; being vtterly distrustfull of their owne Forces, and so rendered vp the Castle to King Sancio of Castile.
Before whom Dom Raymond, a natiue of Bureua, Abbot of the Monasterie of Santa Maria de Hytero, presented himselfe (they being places scituated in the Kingdome of Nauarre) and he being of the Order of the Cisteaux; with him also was Fryer Diego Velasquez, of the same Order. He hauing seene some courses of the world, had bin a Knight of great renowne, famous for his prowesse and valiancie, and some other Brethren of the said Order, and diuers other Knights beside, who offred themselues to keepe this frontierd Castell, whereto the King very gladly condescended: And from hence arose the Order of Calatraua.


The Armes and Noates, Is a Red Crosse Flouredeluced, which the Knights of this Order tooke for their Deuise, and weare vpon their breasts,The manner of their Crosse and emblazon thereof. by the modell of the French Knights of the Holy Croisade, at such time as they went to conquer and guard the Holy-Land. The Shield of their Armes was D'Or a la mesme Croix de Gueulles, and en pointe aux deux costes d'icelle Deux Entraues and Menettes d'Azur: So affirmeth the Count of Lanserote. This Abbey of Hytero is in the Diocesse of Palenca in Castile, seated vpon the Riuer of Pisuerga.
After that the King of Castile had giuen the place to these Monkes,The Nobilitie assisted bounteusly to good a begin^ing. they were quickly assisted by the Nobilitie of Castile and Tolledo, who furnished them with Money, Armes, Horses, munition and victuals, necessary for keeping a Castile, that was to expect a long besiedging. And the more to animate and encourage them in well doing, the same King Sancio made a present to God, the Virgin Mary, and to the Abbot Raymond, his Monkes and Congregation of the Order of the Cis^eaux; of sundry liberall gifts both present, and alwayes after to perpetuitie; with the said Castle of Calatraua, all the confines, Mountaines, Lands, Riuers, Medowes, Pasturegrounds, Rights,The Kings libera^ty to the Order of Calatraua. Nominations, Reasons, and Actions, appertaining any way thereinto the Kings of Castile, which he ratified by his Letters Patents, and were giuen in the yeare before dated.
The Abbot Dom Raymond, (hauing taken possession and seizure of the place) plan^ed his Monkes therein, and went backe to his Monasterie. And there (in the neighbouring parts round about it) he assembled together a great number of people,The discreets prouidence of Abbot Raymond. amounting (well neere) to twentie thousand mens who with their Goods, Housholdstuffe, Families and Cattell, came and peopled in and about Calatraua, so that the Moores durst neuer be so bold, as once aduenture to besiedge it.
Now, in the time of Alphonso, fourth of the name, King of Castile, and called the Noble; a great number of Noble Castillians, hauing vndertaken the Rule and Cloathing of this Order of Calatraua: it fortuned that the Order augmented and encreased wondrously. And now (of themselues) they grew desirous, to be vnder the Gouernment of a great Maister, that might make them apt, and leade them forth to Warre. In imitation of other Militarie Orders of Knights, as of the Sepulcher, the Temple, Saint Lazarus, Saint Iohn, and other Orders of Palestine. The Great Maister had his Counsell, consisting of thirteene Commanders, and Officers of Receipts.
The first Great Maister of this Order, was Dom Garcia Redon.
After whom succeeded Dom Martin Perez of Syon.
And next to him was Successor Dom Nugno Perez de Quignones, who was slaine in the Battaile of Alarcos,The Battaile of Alarcos, wonne by the Miramomelin (this Arabicke word signifieth The Prince of beleeuers) Ioseph Macemud passing out of Affrica to Seuile, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred fourescore and fifteene. The King Alphonso of Leon, was brought sore wounded out of the Battaile, which was lost by him, and wherein dyed Sancio Fernandez de Lemos, Great Maister of the Order of Saint Iames of the Sword; Dom Ruy Velasco, Commander Maior of the said Order; Iohn Arias de Monteroso,Such as perished in the Battaile. Knight of Galicia, and thirteenth man of the said Order: Dom Ruy Gonsales Giron, a wealthie Burgesse of Castile; and Dom Sancio Garcia de Salzedo, a mightie rich man, Lord de la Casa d' Aiala, and an infinite number of Christians beside.
The fourth Great Maister was Dom Martin Martinez.
The Knights of this Order had their first Conuent at Calatraua, and then afterward at Ciruelos, at Buxeda, at Corcoles, and at the Castle of Saluatierre, and vnder their twelfth Great Maister Dom Nugno Hernandez:The chiefe place of the Order at this present. Their chiefe place of Order was established at Couos, where it remaineth yet at this present. This Order hath bin in such manner enriched by the Kings of Leon and Castile, that at the warres against the Moores, they alwayes furnished three hundred Lances compleate; which is the ordenarie furniture for the Gendarmerie or Compleate Horse, belonging to the Commanderies of the said Order. And here you may see what number there are of them in Castile, Leon, Galicia, Andalouzia, with other Prouinces and Kingdomes of Spaine.

A Catalogue or Calender of the Commanderies, belonging to the Order of Knights of Calatraua.
1. The Maior Commanderie.
2. Clauerra.
3. Obreria.
4. Argamasilla.
5. The Commanderies of Malagon.
6. Mansanares.
7. Almagro.
8. Montanxeulos.
9. Daymiel.
10. Villaruuia.
11. Val de Pegna.
12. El Viso.
13. Sancta Cruz.
14. Fuente el Moral.
15. Les Casas de Ciudad-Real.
16. Castellanos.
17. Almodauar del Campo.
18. Puerto-llano.
19. Corral de Caracuel.
20. Piedra-buena.
21. Herrera.
22. Fuente del Imperador.
23. Carrion.
24. Guadalerza.
25. Mestansa.
26. Castilseras.
27. Balesteros.
28. Alcolea.
29. Possuelo.
30. Torroua.
31. Bolagnos.
32. Moral.
33. Almiradiel.
34. Hauanilla.
35. Las Casas de Seuille.
36. Les Cases de Cordua.
37. Belmer.
38. Villa-franca.
39. Lopera.
40. Canaueral.
41. Ximena.
42. Recena.
43. Pegna de Martos.
44. Biuoras.
45. Moratalaz.
46. Torres.
47. Canena.
48. Valaga.
49. Almoguera.
50. Carita.
51. Auignon.
52. Verniches.
53. Las Casas de Talauera.
54. Las Casas de Toledo.
55. Huerta.
56. Val de Carauanes.
57. Las Casas de Plaisance.
58. Ateca.
59. Cerezuela.
60. Ottos.
61. Calatraua la Vi^ille.



Commanderies that are in Arragon.
1. Alcaniz.
2. Monroijo.
3. Pegna Roija.
4. Fraxaneda.
5. Ralfas.
6. Castelserat.
7. Laguna rotta.
8. Et Molinos.

In Valentia there are many places belonging to this Order,Chiefe Priories in Castile. wherof the most prin^ipall Priories are in Castile; as namely those of Seuille, Granado, Iaen, Alhama, Fuen^aliente, Porcuna, Suquesa, and Villatoro.
This Order was approued by Pope Alexander, third of the name, who tooke it ^nto the especiall protection and safegard of the Apostolicall Seate,Approbation and confirmation by Popes. in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred threescore and foure: And confirmed by Pope ^nnocent, third of the name, One thousand one hundred fourescore and nine^eene.
At the beginning,The first habite. these Knights did weare their Roabes and Scapularies of white ^olour, as formerly did the Cisteaux Monkes. Pope Benedict, third of the name, dis^ensed with them for that habite Monasticall: And Pope Paule the third gaue ^^em permission to marrie once in their life time;Dispensation for mariage. but not to haue any benefit of a ^econd mariage.
The last Great Maister of this Order, was Dom Garcia Lopez de Padilla, who dyed ^n the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred fourescore and nine; when Fer^inand of Arragon and his wife Isabella, King and Queene of Leon and Castile,The Great Maistership ioyned to the Crowne of Castile. found ^he meanes to ioyne and annexe the Great Maistership of Calatraua to the Crowne ^f Castile: which reunion happened by permission of Pope Innocent, eight of the ^ame, in the same yeare before obserued. So that (in time) the three Great Maister^hips of the Orders of Saint Iames of the Sword, Of Calatraua, and of Alcantara, were ^nnexed to the Crowne of Spaine, in fauour of Prince Charles, afterward King of ^he Spaines, and Emperour, fift of the name: By the Buls of the Popes, Alexander ^he sixt, Leo the tenth, and Adrian the sixt. By whose meanes, the Kings of Spaine en^^y the Reuennues of these three Great Maisterships, whereof they beare the titles, ^nd qualifie perpetuall Administrators.


The Order of the Band, or of the red Scarfe; Instituted in Castile, in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred and thirtie: By the King of Leon and Castile, Dom Alphonso, eleauenth and last of the name. CHAP. XI.
THE first perticuler Order,L'Ordre de la Band^, and de l'Escharpe Rouge. established by the Kings of Castile, to honor their Nobilitie (being not restrained vnder a^y Monasticall Rule) was that Of the Band, or of the Redde Scarfe: in regard that the Knights of this Order, did weare a Band or Riband of redde Silke, containing the bredth of foure fingers, and in the forme or fashion of a Scarfe, from the top of the left shoulder, descending vnder the right arme.The time of the Institution It was Instituted by the King of Castile and Leon Dom Alphonso, eleauenth and last of the name, in the yeare One thousand ^hree hundred and thirtie; according to the testimony of Dom Antonio de Gueuara, ^ishop of Mondognedo, in the Epistle which he wrote to the Count of Beneuentum

Dom Pedro Pimentello, inserted among his Golden Epistles; but he nameth this Institution to be done in the Citie of Palencea.
None but yonger Brothers, and meane Gentlemen, of poore and slender sufficiency,The Knights to be entertained. were receiued into this Order of the Band. And yet they must haue followed the Court the space of ten years (or fought three times at the least) against the Moores. And here we haue set downe the Rules and Obseruations, which the Knights of this Order receiued in their Colling or Embracing, and were sworne to keepe inuiolably.

The Articles and Constitutions for the Knights of the Band.
1. THat the Knight of the Band stood obliged, to speake to the King, for the defence of his Countrey, and good of the Common-wealth.
2. That he must speake to the King nothing but pure truth, without lying or ^terie, and must reueale whatsoeuer he hath heard spoken, either against his person, (...) the State.
3. A Knight once conuicted of Lying, shall walke a moneths space, without wearing a Sword.
4. He is not to keepe companie, but with Martiall men and Souldiers, or such (...) are aduanced to charges and dignities of his owne qualitie: but not with Mechanicall Artizans, and men of base or vile condition.
5. He must keepe his faith and promise inuiolably, to and with all men, of what estate or qualitie soeuer they be.
6. He must be prouided of Armes and of a Horse well appointed, vnder paine of loosing the title of his Knighthood.
7. And on the same perill he standeth, if he be seene mounted on his Mule, without his Band, and Sword.
8. He is not to make any complaint of wounds by him receiued in war: neither is to vaunt of his valour and manhood.
9. He is not to make any account, if he be mockt, scorned or railed on by any body: but to haue all his carriage discreete and graue, and wholly measured by the leuell of honestie.
10. He is not to vse any Gaming at Cards or Dice: and must not pawne or engage his Habits, Armes or Horse.
11. He must be courteous towards Ladies and Gentlewomen, to whom he shall performe honor and seruice, to his vttermost power.
12. If any quarrell happen between him and another Knight of the Band, he standeth bound, to commit it to the Arbitrement of other Knights of the Band, such as shall be appointed thereto.
13. Any Knight that vsurpeth to weare the Band, without hauing receiued it from the Kings hand; shall stand engaged, to defend himselfe against two Knights of the Order of the Band. And if it so happen, that he haue the victorie; he may lawfully keep and maintaine it: but if he be vanquished, he shall be banished from the Court.
14. Euery strange Knight, that winneth the prize either in Iousts, Tourneyes, or other Actions of Armes, against the Knights of the Band; shall be receiued and admitted into the Order.
15. Any Knight of the Band, that setteth hand to his Sword against another Knight of the same Order; shall be banished the Court for two Moneths space, and during the time of two other Moneths after; he shall weare but an halfe Band. But if (...) wound his Companion; he shall remaine imprisoned halfe a yeare, and is to be banished the Count for another halfe yeare.
16. The King onely is to be Iudge for the Knights of the Band.
17. All the Knights of the Band stand obliged to accompany the King, at all times and as he shall goe to warres.
18. The Knights of the said Order shall weare the Band, when they march in wa^ against the Moores onely: but if their seruice shall be required any where else, then they are to abstaine from wearing it.
19. All Knights of the Band, are to meete together three seuerall times in the

yeare, that they may speake to the King, for those things which necessarily con^^rne the Order; when it is to bee appointed by the King, that they shall bee all ^ell mounted and armed. And those Assemblies or meetings are to bee in the ^onthes of Aprill, September, and at Christmasse.
20. They are to exercise Iousts, Ioco de Canna and Pikes, also to mannage their ^orses, on such dayes as are ordained for them.
21. No Knight shall remaine in the Court, without seruing some Lady or Gent^^woman; to enioy her in Marriage, or otherwise in honor.
22. All Knights of the Band, are bound to be present at such Tourneyes; as shall ^e performed within Ten Miles of the Court.
23. If it so happen, that a Knight of the Bande, doe marry within Twenty ^iles distance from the Court; the other Knights are to keepe him company, and ^onour his Spouse with Presents, yea, and to performe actions of Armes, as it be^ommeth Knights to doe.
24. All the first Sundayes of euery Moneth, the Knights are to bee present at ^^e Pallace, and in the Great Hall Royall, to exercise all kindes of Armes before ^^e King* yet without any malice, spleene or heate of choler, but onely in louing ^anner to exercise their Armes.
25. Any Knight sickning, or being neere to death, is to be visited, exorted ^^d comforted by his Companions: And after his decease, the said Compani^ns are to bee assisting at his Funeralls, and to weare mourning the space of (...) Moneth, in which Moneth they are to abstaine from Iousts and sports of ^rmes.
26. The Band of the Knight deceased, shall bee deliuered to the King by the o^^er Knights, who must intercede and moue his Maiesty, that one of the deceased ^nights Sonnes may be receiued into their Order, or to obtaine of him some gift ^nd recompence to his Widow, for her more honourable maintenance in the de^^ee of Nobility, or for Marriage of her Daughters.
This Order the first Chapter whereof was held in the City of Bourgos, and the ^eare of the Institution) was obserued by the same King of Castile, last of the name:The First Knights of the Order, and the First Chapter. ^ho gaue it (within a while after) to his foure Sonnes, and to fifteene other Knights ^nly, to make vp the number of Twenty persons.
His Sonnes were
Dom Pedro, King of Castile and Leon, Sirnamed the Cruell.Dom Henry.Dom Ferdinand; AndDom Telio.
Of the Fifteene, the first man was Dom Pero Fernandez de Castro, Great Maister ^f the Hostell to the King Alphonso, and Knight of Saint Iames, the most valiant ^ord that was then in all Spaine: who was the man that put on the Kings ^^ght Spurre; (I meane the King Alphonso) when he was made Knight of the Bande.
And the other was Dom Lewes de la Cerda, who was Sonne to the Infant of Ca^^ile that did put on the left Spurre. According as it is obserued by the Count of ^ansar^te in the first Booke of his Nobility, the Hundred and Eleauenth Chapter, ^nd these are his wordes.
Despues en el Anno de 1330. quando el Rey Don Alanso instituyo la Orden de la Vanda, ^fue armado Cauallero en la Iglesia de Sanct Iago en Bourgos: la calcaron las Espuelas Dom ^ero de Castro, y Dom Luys de la Cerda hijo de l'Infante Dom Alanso. Y quando el Rey ^^mo Caualleros a los ricos hombres, el Primero fue Dom Pero Fernandez de Castro. El qual ^uego que recebio la Orden de Vanda, la dio y armo a otros catorze Caualleros. And heere ^ollow the Fifteene Knights.

^t the First Chapter were made these Fifteene Knights.

^Ero Fernandez de Castro.


Iean Nugnez.


^enry Henriquez.


Alphonce Fernand Cornel.


Lopez Dias d'l Amasan.


Ferdinand Perez Porto Carrero.


Charles de Gueuara.


Ferdinand Henriquez.


Aluarez Garcia d'Albornoz.



Garcia Ioffrey Tenorio.


Iean Esteuanes.


Diego Garcia de Tolede.


Martin Alphonce de Cardone.

Concales Ruy de la Vegua, and
Iean Alphonce de Benauides.


At the Second Chapter were made these twenty Knights.

GArcia Laso de la Vega.


Ferdinand Garcia Duque.


Garcia Fernandez Tello.


Pero Goncal d'Aguero.


Iean Alphonce Cariello.


Inigo Lopez Horosco.


Garcia Guttierres de Caruaiall.


Guttierre Fernandez de Tolede.


Diego Fernandez de Castiello.


Pero Ruys de Villegas.


Alphonce Fernandez Iueze.


Ruy Goncalez de Castagneda.


Ruy Ramirez de Guzman.


Sance Martinez de Leyua.


Iean Goncalez de Bacan.


Pero Trillo.


Suero Perez de Quignones.


Goncalo Mexia.

Ferdinand Cariello, and

Iean de Roias.



At the Third Chapter, these Seauenteene Knights.

PEro Aluarez Osorio.


Pero Perez de Padilla.


Gil de Quintagna.


Iean Roderiguez de Villagas.


Diego Perez Sarmiento.


Mendo Rodriguez de Viezma.


Iean Fernandez Cornell.


Iean de Ceruezela.


Iean Roderiguez de Cisneroz:


Oreion de Liebana.


Iean Fernandez Delgadillo.


Gomez Capiello.


Beltran de Gueuara.


Iean Tenorio.


Obierto de Tordesillas.

Iean Fernandez de Bahamon; and

Alphonce Tenorio.


At the Institution of this Order, there were none receiued or entertained, b^^ men of the most noble and Famous Families of Spaine, the greater part where of are gone and expired. But the rest haue conserued themselues in Honour and great wealth,Two noble Families yet remaine of this Order. euen to this instant. As the Velasques, Manriques, Pimentels, M^ndosaes, de Cordua, Pacheco, d'Estuniga, Faiardos, Aurellanos, Tendillas, Cueuas, Andridas, Fonsecas, Luna, Villandrado, Stomayores, and others at this present illustrious i^ Spaine, whom they tearme Grandes: who haue permission to couer their heads in the Chamber of the King of Spaine.
This Order was continued by the Successors, Sonnes and Descendants of the said Alphonso, King of Leon and Castile, last of the name. For vnder the Reigne of King Iohn, First of the name, the Emperour Sigismond hauing made a Voyage into Spaine,The Emperour Sigismonds comming into Spayne. to the end of mediating the quietnesse of the Church, then troubled with a Schisme betweene the Kings of Arragon, Portugall and Castile: the same King Iohn gaue this Order to some Princes and Lords, attending in the traine of the said Emperour Sigismond, as Garibay hath related in his History.
And concerning this Order of the Bande, the memories thereof are to bee found in most part of the noble Houses of Spaine, as well in Castile and Leon, as in Portugall, Arragon and Nauarre, in the Armes charged with Bandes, some of Gueules or of Synople, and the Mettals and Colours retained in the noble Science of Herauldry, the most part of which Armes haue the Bande held and supported by two Leopard^ mouthes, which they tearme Dragantes.




The Order of the Doue, or of the Holy-Ghost: Institutee in Segobia in Castile, in the Yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Three Hundred, Threescore and Nineteene: By John the First, Sixteenth King of the Name, of Castile. CHAP. XII.
IOhn, First of the name, the Sixteenth King of Castile,L'Ordre de la Col^mbe ou du Sainct Esprit. was Author of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, otherwise tearmed of the Pidgeon or Doue. Instituted in the City of Segobia, in the yeare of Grace, One Thou^^nd, Three Hundred, Three Score and Nineteene.
But there are some Spanish


^uthors, who doe report ^^d referre this Institution to ^ing Henry, being his Sonne, ^^d Third of the name.
But bee it referred either to ^^e Father or his Sonne;The Collar of the Orde^. one ^f them caused the number of ^ollars to bee made, linked or ^chained with Rayons or sple^^at beames of the Sunne, On ^^ant or wauing and pointed, ^hereat hang a Doue of Gold ^amelled with White, the ^ye and Beake or Bill being ^ueules or Red, comming o^^r the Brest, euen as if it flew, (...) descended downe from ^eauen to the Earth.
Hee adorned himselfe with ^is Collar,The distribution of his Collers. on the Feast^^y of Pentecoste, in the yeare ^^fore specified, and distribu^^d the other Collars to his ^ost intimate Fauourites: gi^^ng to each of them a faire ^nned Booke, containing ^e Statutes and Ordinances ^^ereof, which hee would ^^ue them to obserue and ^^epe.
But this Order was of small ^^ntinuance, by reason of the ^^stitutours death, which hap^^ned in the very same yeare ^his Institution: it being left without any resource and memory, to the Kings his ^escendants in Castile.
Laudamus Veteres, sed nostris vtimur Annis.



The Order of Saint Sauiour of Montreall, called the Order of Arragon: Instituted in the Kingdome of Arragon, in the Yeare, One Thousand, One hundred and Twenty, by Alphonso, Eighteenth of the Name, King of Nauarre and Arragon.
CHAP. XIII. The Originall and beginning of the Kingdome of Arragon.
L'Ordre de S. Saueur de Montreall.THe First King of the Gothes, that from the plenteous and abounding Gaules, attempted the Conquest of Spaine (saith Augustino Crana^^, (...) Spanish and Romane Antiquary) and made his people to dwell i^ the Prouinces seated in the steepie descending Vallies, amongst those high aspiring Mountaines, called Pyrenean, and namely in the Countries of Rousillion, Cerdaignia, and Cathalogna, so called by the Gothe^ and Alains, was King Vallia, as wee haue formerly said in the Second Booke Page 194. in the yeare of Grace, Foure hundred and Twenty. For they are but dreames and idle imaginations,Contradiction in diuers of the Spanish Writers. to referre their beginning and first entrance, to the Kings Athanaricus and Alaricus, who neuer saw Spaine, except it were in painting, where at the most iudicious Writers of Spaine make a meere mockery, as a thing imagined, and farre from any certainty; so speaketh (and very aduisedly) the Count de Lansarote in his Andalouzia. Yo no signo estas Antiguedades y principios, por tenerlos (...) sin fundamento, sino las cosas mas communes y llanas segun la sensillez de aquellos pr^^^ vos tiempos, onde nitenian noticia de las Armas de los Reyes Godos, ni aun de las Histori^ dellos. I follow not the Principles of those Antiquaries, to hold them fundamentall, except in matters that are most common, and according to the most sensible of those precedent times, wherein no notice was taken, concerning the Armies of the Gothish Kings, nor (...) of their Histories.
R^derick^ last King of the Gothes in Spaine.It is a matter most certaine and assured, that after the death of Rodericke, the last King of the Gothes in Spaine; the Moores possessed themselues of the for^^med Prouinces, and had the enioying of them still: vntill the time of Charles Martell, Duke of the French, who gaue charge to his Kinsman Odilon, Duke of ^^uaria to conquer them, as indeed hee did.
But by reason of his death, the Moores reconquered those places formerly take^ from them, and namely the City of Barcelona, which they possessed till the time of our King Charlemaigne,Barcellona surrendred to King Charlemaigne by a ^panish Moore named Zatun. to whom a Spanish Moore surrendred it, making himselfe his Liedgeman, Subiect, and Tributary, as is obserued by all the ancient Annalist^ of those times, both Spanish and French, Barcinona Hispaniae Ciuitas quae iam pride^ a Francis defecerat, per Zatun Saracenum Praefectum eius, Carlo reddita est. But as the Saracins make Trophees, of infringing and violating the faith which they giue (...) Christians: so this Zatun (by little and little) turned his coate and credit, and being taken by the French, was banished perpetually. And the Gouernment of that good City (with the neighbouring Prouinces) giuen by Charlemaigne to a Count of his owne House, named Bera, which happened in the yeare of Grace, Eight Hundred and One.
Bera fighteth (...) single (...).This Bera (to little or no purpose at all called Bernard) was accused of Fellony and Treason, so that hee was enforced to fight himselfe in single Combate, and in an enclosed Field against him that had accused him, and threw downe his Gauntlet as wager of Battaile. By want of witnesses to auerre the Fact, hauing beene vanquished, and knowne for a false lyer by his owne confession: King Lewes the Debonnaire, Sonne and Successour to Charlemaigne, banished him to the City of Reue^, in

^he yeare Eight Hundred and Twenty. In whose place and office he established as Gouernour in all those Prouinces, a neere Kinsman of his owne named Bernard, who brought the Moores of the Countrey to tearmes of duty and obedience. But being accused (through enuy) of some priuate familiarity with the Empresse,Bernard displaced, and another appointed. Wife ^o Lewes the Debonnaire: he was remoued, so that an Alemaigne or Germaine Lord or Count, named Geoffrey d' Aria, was appointed in his place, he being the most forward and actiue man at Armes, amongst all them of his time, and hee had the Gouernment.
This Count had to his Wife a French Lady, named Almira, of whom hee begot a Sonne called
Geoffrey, Sirnamed The Hairy, to whom our King and Emperour of the Romanes Charles, called the Baulde, gaue for his Armes his Escu d'Or, charge de Quatre Paulx de Gueules* by reason of foure fingers all bloodied, which the said Geoffrey the Hairy returning from a charge vpon the Moores, had laid on his Shield by the said Charles the Baulde.
The Spaniards are all of this consent, that from thence came the Armes to the Count of Barcellona, and to the Kingdome of Arragon, euen to this present.
The Count of Lansarote writeth, that in the Battaile so famously renowned,The Armes of the Count of Barcellona and Arragon. called Des Naues de Tolosa, the King Dom Pedro of Arragon, had not any particular Standard and Banner: because (saith hee) long time before that, the Kings of Arragon had forsaken the Armes of that Kingdome (which were D'Azur a la Croix pattee au pied fiche d'Argent au Quartier d'Honneur) and receiued them of the Count of Barcellona, which were, D Or a Quatre Paulx de Gueules, Armes, which according to the testimony of Antonio Beuthero, were won by the same occasion, and by Geoffrey of the Allemaigne Nation, to whom the Emperour Charlemaigne gaue to Wife, one of his owne Kinswomen, called Almira.
This Geoffrey was Lord of the Castle d'Aria, in the County of Rousilion,Of Count Geoffrey, and his Sonne ^irnamed the Hairy. and afterward Count of Barcellona. Hee had a Sonne named the Hairy, Successour in the said County of Barcellona, who being with his Barcellonians present in the Army of the Emperour Lewes the Debonnaire (wee must read his Sonne Charles the Baulde) in the Battaile which hee gaue against the Normans: at the issue thereof, all couered with blood, which ran out of his wounds, the Emperour perceiuing the Count to haue a Golden Shield, gaue him those Quartre Paulx de Gueules, for Armes to him and his Descendants. And the Kings of Arragon, euen to this day, doe hold them for their Armes Royall.
Iostre el Velloso hallandose coulos Barcellosnesneses en ayiuda del Emperador Ludouico,The Author^ owne wordes in Spanish.en la Batalla, que tuuo con los Normandos, saliendo della tinto en sangue de heridas que recibio, lleuando en el Armes el escudo darado sin deuisas, el Emperador Vnto quatre dedo de sumano en la sangre del Conde, y lopasso de alto a Baxa por el Scudo diziendole: Estas Seran, Conde, Vuestras Armas de las quales vsaronsus Decendientes, y vsa la casa Real de Arragon.
To the same Geoffrey the Hairy,Part of the Countie of Arragon giuen to Geoffrey the Hairy to hold of the Crown of France. Charles the Bauld gaue likewise part of the Countie of Arragon, newly conquered by the French from the Moores: to hold with that of Barcellona, and the Lands of Rousillion and Cerdaignia in full propriety, hee and his Descendants, vnder Liedge Homage and authority of the Crowne of France, whom the Counts and Kings of Arragon long time acknowledged for their Soueraignes, setting downe at the beginning of their publique Acts, the name and yeare of the Reigne of the most Christian Kings of France; vntill the time which we haue formerly obserued in the Second Booke of these Recherches.
Wee haue heeretofore declared, that Aznar, youngest Sonne to Duke Eudes,Aznar the first Count of Arragon. despoiled of Aquitaine by the French Armies; made his retreat into Nauarre, where he had a Sonne named likewise Aznar, First Count of Arragon, who was the Father of
Galindo; And ofXimene^ G^rcia.
Galindo was inuested by the King of Nauarre Garcia Inigo, in the small City of Iaca, the first Conquest of Garcia Ximenes made vpon the Moores, and some other places else thereabout, with title of Count of Arragon, vnder Authority and liedge homage to the Crowne of Arragon.How the Countrey first tooke name. This extendure of the Countrey, watered by the small Riuers of Arga, and of Arragon, hath taken name of the said Riuer of Arragon, which falleth into the great Flood of Iberus.
The principall City of this Kingdome is Sarragossa (seated on the said Flood of Iberus) named by Pliny in the Third Book and Third Chapter of his naturall History Salduba, placed or ranked by Paulinus, among the very fairest Cities of Spaine.
And indeed it is so, for I my selfe being there a whole Lent time, in the yeare Foure Score and Eight, am able to auouch it for truth.
The Count of Arando Vice-Roy of Arragon.At that time the Count of Arando made his entrance thereinto, according to the quality of a Vice-Roy, and Gouernour of Arragon, to whom the King of Spaine (within a while after) shewed but slender kindnesse, because he had medled a little too farre, in the businesse of the Secretary of State Dom Antonio Perez, who dyed at Paris, some few yeares since.
The Counts of Arando had their first dwelling on the Riuer of Duero, where was their House Arando de Duero, hauing diuersity of Armes belonging to this House.
The Armes of the Counts of Arando.For some carried De Leon party de Gueules a vn Chasteau plante sur vn Pont d' Argent masonne de Sable a vne Riuiere Ondee d'Argent and d' Azur. And others carried simply De Gueules audict Chasteau and Pont a Trois Arches d' Argent and Six Ondes d' Azur, and d' Argent a la Bordure d'Or, chargee de Huict Arrests de Lance, which in Spaine they call Arandelas, d'Azur. Returne we now to the first Count of Arragon.

The Genealogie of the Counts of Arragon, and proceeding from Dom Galindo, on to the whole Succession.
Dom Galindo left three Children:
Toda, Wife to the King of Nauarre Fortunio Garcez, Sonne to Garcia Inigo.Ximenez Aznar; AndEndregot Sirnamed de Galindo.
The Eldest of these two Sonnes was Count of Arragon, who dyed without Issue, as his Brother likewise did: And then the County of Arragon came to the Brother of Galindo.
Ximenez Garcia, who was Father to
Garcia Aznarez, Count of Aragon, Father to
Fortunio Ximenez, Fift Count of Arragon, who died without Children: So that the Countie fell to
Endregot de Galindo, who left but one Daughter that was named
Vrraca, Wife to the King of Nauarre Garcia Inigo, Third of the name, and Seauenth King of Nauarre.
By this Alliance, the Countie of Arragon was ioyned and annexed to the Crowne of Nauarre. Vntill the time of King Sancio the Great, Fourth of the name, who in fauour of Ramiro his Bastard, the Sonne of Dogna Caia, Lady of Ayuar, his Concubine, aduanced the County of Arragon to bee a Kingdome which hee gaue to the said
I. Ramiro, First King of Arragon in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Thirty and Foure, and his reigne was Two and Forty yeares.
Hee took to Wife Ermesinda, Daughter to Rogero, Count of Bigorre, by whom hee had two Sonnes, and the like number of Daughters.
The Sonnes were
Sancio Ramirez; AndGarcia, Bishop of Iaca.
The Daughters were
Sancia, Countesse of Tolosa; AndTheresa, Countesse of Prouence.
By a Concubine hee had a Bastard Sonne named
Sancio, whom hee made Lord of Ayuar, Atares, and of Xauierra;
By the death of King Ramiro, happening in the yeare, One Thousand, Threescore and Sixteene: after him succeeded in the Kingdome his Eldest Sonne
II. Sancio Ramiro, First of the name, ^ho reigned Eighteene yeares. This ^as the man that vsurped the Kingdome ^f Nauarre, as we haue already related (...) you.
By Foelicia his Wife, Daughter to the ^ount of Vrgell, he had
Pedro, King.Alphonso, King of Arragon, and of Na^^rre by Vsurpation: AndRamiro, a professed Monke at Saint ^^ns de Tom^eres in Languedocke, King of ^rragon likewise.
By a Concubine the said Sancio left a ^astard Sonne named
Garcia, who was Bishop of Iaca, after ^^e death of his Vncle.
Sancio dyed in the yeare of Grace, One ^housand, Fourescore and Foure, after ^hom succeeded his Eldest Sonne, na^ed
III. Pedro, First of the name, who ^igned Fourteene yeares. By his Wife ^^rtha, a Florentine, hee had a Sonne and Daughter.
The Sonne was
Pedro, dying in his Fathers life time.
Isabella, the Daughter, who likewise ^ed before her Father. And hee him^^lfe dying without any other Children, (...) the yeare of Grace, One thousand, ^ne Hundred, and Eight, l^ft the King^ome to his Brother.
IIII. Alphonso, First of the name, v^per of the Kingdome of Nauarre, who ^igned Eighteene yeares. Hee tooke to ^ife Vrraca, Queene of Castile and Leon, ^iddow to the Count of Galicia, Ray^^nd of Bourgongne, by whom hee had ^o Issue. So that by his death happening (...) the yeare, One Thousand, one Hun^red, Thirty and Foure, his youngest and ^^st Brother
V. Ramiro, Second of the name; a Pro^^ssed Monke, in the Abbey of S. Pons (...) Tomieres, was the Fift King of Ar^^gon.
The Kingdome of Nauarre was re^^ced into her first Stemme Royall, in ^^e person of Garcia Ramiro, the Nine^enth King of Nauarre, as wee haue al^^ady said. This Mon^e King tooke to ^ife Agnes, Sister to William, Count of ^ictiers, by whom hee had one onely Daughter
Peron^lla, o^herwise called Pe^tronilla (...) to Raymu^^d B^rengario^, Count of Barcellona: who for the cruelty and carelesnesse of his Father in Law the Monke King, was made Regent in the Kingdome of Arragon.
By his wife he had
Raymond Alphonso, King of Arragon.Pedro.Sancio.Adoncia, Wife to the King of Portugall: AndN. Wife to the Count D'Vrcell.
By the death of this Monke-King. happening in the yeare of Grace One Thousand, One Hundred, Threescore and Two: the Eldest Sonne of his Wife Peronella Raymond, who caused himselfe to be named
VI. Alphonso, Second of the name, was the Sixt King of Arragon, and Count of Barcelona, a County vnited and anexed to the Crowne of Arragon. Hee had by his Wife Sancia, Daughter to Alphonso Raymond, King of Castile and Leon,
Pedro King of Arragon.Alphonso, Count of Prouence.Ferdinand a Religious Fryer.Constance, Queene of Hungarie, and Empresse.Leonora, Countesse of Tolosa: AndDulcia, a Religious Nunne.
Alphonso, Count of Prouence, second Sonne to the said King Alphonso, had to wife Mary, Countesse of Folcaquier: And this marriage was borne
Raymond Berengarius, Husband of Beatrix, Daughter to Thomas, Count of Morienna (which is Sauoye.) And in this marriage was borne foure Daughters, all of them Queenes, as namely
Margaret, Queene of France, wife to Saint Lewes.Leonora, Queene of England.Or Elianor.Sancia, Queene of England likewise, and Empresse: AndBeatrix, Queene of Naples and of Sicily, also Countesse of Prouence.
King Alphonso reigned almost Foure and Thirty yeares, and dyed in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Fourescore and Sixteene, leauing his Eldest Sonne
VII. Pedro, Second of the name, to enioy the Crowne of Arragon, which he held Eighteene yeares, hee being twice married. Fi^st to Beatrix, Sister to Mary,

Countesse of Folcaquier, by whom hee had

Raymond Berengarius.

By his Second Wife, Daughter to the Count of Montpelier, VViddow to the Count of Commenges, hee had
Iames or Iaimes, afterward King.
By a Concubine, hee had a Bastard Daughter
Constance, Wife to Guillem Raymond de Moncado, Seneshall and Gouernour of Cathalogna.
King Pedro dyed in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred and Thirteene, after the Battaile of Muradall; After whom succeeded his youngest Sonne
VIII. Iames or Iaimes, First of the name, whose time of Reigne continued Threescore and Three yeares. He had two Wiues; the First was Leonora of Castile, Daughter to King Alphonso the Ninth, by whom hee had a Sonne named
Alphonso, that dyed in his Fathers life time.
In Second Marriage hee espoused Yoland, Daughter to the King of Hungary, by whom he had a plenteous Issue.
Pedro, King of Arragon.Iames, King of Maiorica.Sancio, Archbishop of Toledo.Isabella, Queene of France.Ferdinand.Yoland, Queene of Castile.Constance,Sancia,Mary.
Ouer and beside these his legitimate Children, hee had by three Concubines;
1. Theresa Gil de Bidauae, Pedro, Lord of Ayerbes; And Iames, Lord of Xerica.2. Berenguela Fernandez, he had Pero Fernandez, Lord of Ixar.3. Sancia, Daughter to Sanceo, d'Antilla.

Ferdinand Sanceo.

Iames, King of Maiorica, his Third Sonne, tooke to Wife Escleremonde de Foix, and in this Marriage were borne.
Iames, a religious Frier.Sanceo, King of Maiorica.Ferdinand.Philip; AndSancia.
Ferdinand, Fourth Sonne to the said King Iames the First, had two Wiues: The first was Madame Isabella, Princesse of Morea, by whom he had
Iames, King of Maiorica; AndFredericke.
By his Second Wife of the House of Ciprus, he had

Ferdinand.

Iames, Eldest Sonne of Ferdinand and the Princesse of Morea, tooke to Wife Constance of Arragon, and of this Marriage issued
Isabella, Marchionesse of Montferat; And
Iames, Heyre of Maiorica.
King Iames the First, dyed in the yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred, Threescore and Sixteene: And had for Successour his Sonne
IX. Pedro, Third of the name, who reigned nine yeares: By his Wife Constance, Daughter to Mainfroy Bastard Son to the Emperour Fredericke, Second of the name, he had Sixe Children.

Alphonso, King of Arragon.
Iames, King of Sicilie, (by Vs^pation after the Sicilian Euensong) and afterward of Arragon.
Fredericke, King of Sicilie.

Pedro.

Isabella, Queene of Portugall; And
Constance Yoland, Queene of Naples.

By three Concubines, hee had three Bastard Sonnes
By Mary Nicolosa.Iames Perez.By Agnez Sapata.Ferdinand. And by another namelesse,Sancio.
This Pedro the Third, dyed in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Fourescore and Fiue, after whom succeeded his Eldest Sonne.
X. Alphonso, Third of the name, who in the Sixt yeare of his reigne died without Issue: And by his death, the Kingdome of Arragon came to his Second Brother
XI. Iames, Second of the name, who reigned Sixe and Thirty yeares. He had by his first Wife Blanche, Daughter to Charles, called the Cripple King of Naples, Tenne Children.


Iames, a Religious Frier.
Alphonso, afterward King.
Pedro, Count D'Ampurtas.
Raymond Berengarius, Count de ^ages.
Iohn, Archbishop of Tolledo.

Constance.

Mary, wife to the King of Castile.
Blanch, a Religious Nunne.
Yoland, Princesse of Tarentum; And
Isabella, Empresse, wife to Fredericke ^^e third. His other wife was Mary ^f Cyprus, by whom he left no issue, ^o more then by Esclisenda his fourth, ^armed of Moncado; or by his first I^^bella Daughter to Sancio, King of Castile, ^om whom he was seperated by iudge^ent of the Church.

By a Concubine he had a Bastard Son ^amed
Iames, made Count of Luna.
King Iames, second of the name, died (...) the yeare of Grace, One thousand three ^undred twenty and eight; and then suc^e^ded his S^nne
XII. Alphonso, fourth of the name, ^ho reigned eight yeeres. By his first ^ife ^he^^^, Countesse and Heire (...) Vrg^ll, hee had fiue Children, two ^hereof died in their Infancie, the other ^ere
Pedro, afterward King.Iames Count of Vrgell: AndConstance, Queene of Maiorica.
In second Marriage he had Elianora of ^astile, by whom he had two Sons
Ferdinand, Marquesse of Torto^: AndI^hn.
The said Alphonso dyed in the yeare ^ne thousand two hundred thirtie and ^xe, leauing for Successour his eldest ^onne
XIII. Pe^^o, fourth of the name, ^hose Reigne continued One and fiftie ^eares. Hee espoused Mary, second Daughter to Phillip, third of the name, King of Nauarre; And by her bee ^ad
Constance, Queene of Sicilie.Iane or Ioane, Countesse d'Ampu^as.Mary: AndAlphonso, who died yong
By Leonora Eluira of Portugall his second wife, he had no Children. His third wife was Constance of Sicilie, by whom he had
Iohn, afterward King.Alphonso.Martin, who was King.Leonora, Queene of Castile.
In fourth Marriage he espoused Sibylla de Fortia, Widdow to Artall de Fosses, and by her he had but one Daughter, named
Isabel, Countesse of Vrgell.
This Pedro dyed in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourscore and seauen. And after him succeeded his Sonne
XIV. Iohn, first of the name, who reigned but eight yeares, and who had two Wiues. His first was Mathea, daughter to the Count of Armaignack, by whom were borne
Iames, who dyed yong; AndIoane, wife to Mathew of Castelbon, who was Count of Foix.
In second mariage he espoused Yoland, Daughter to the Duke of Bar: And in this marriage were borne
Ferdinand, who liued but eight dayes: AndYoland of Arragon, wife to Lewes, Duke of Aniou, and King of Sicilie. From which marriage issued
Lewes.Rene; AndCharles, Count du Maine. Already we haue obserued the Genealogie of the said House of Aniou, in the due and best beseeming place.
XV. Martin, first of the name, Brother to King Iohn, deceased without heire Masle; forcibly vsurped the Kingdome of Arragon, and Seigneuries thereon depending, notwithstanding the Couenants and Conditions agreed on in the Contract of Marriage, of the Infanta of Arragon Dogna Iana or Iane, with the Count of Foix, whereby it was namely and especially couenanted, that if the said King Iohn chanced to dye without an heire masle, begotten and borne by his owne body in lawfull marriage; the said Infanta Ioane or Iane, and the Count of Foix her Husband, and their Children and descendants should come to the Crown of Arragon. A Contract agreed on, and signed by the said Martin, with the Estates of the Kingdome, assembled then at Valencia, tearmed the Great.
This Martin, before his comming to the Crowne, had married Mary, Countesse of Luna, and by her he had
Martin, who was King of Sicilie, and dyed before his Father without issue. In second marriage the said King of Arragon espoused Margaret of Prades, by whom he had not any children. And the same Martin dyed in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred and twelue.
Here endeth the Latine Historie of Arragon, written by Hieronimo Surita: And next succeeded in the Kingdome of Arragon
XVI. Ferdinand, first of the name, Brother to King Henry, third of the name, King of Castile, who reigned but foure yeares. And by Leonora d' Albuquerque, a Princesse descended of the bloud of Castile his wife: he had seauen Children.

Alphonso, King of Arragon.
Iohn, King of Nauarre in right of his wife, and of Arragon in his owne right.
Henry, Maister of the Order of Saint Iames of the Sword, in Castile.
Sancio, Maister of the Order of Alcantara.

Pedro.

Mary, Queene of Castile; And
Leonora, Queene of Portugall.

This Ferdinand, first of the name dyed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred and sixteene, leauing for Successour his eldest Sonne
XVII. Alphonso, fift of the name, who reigned two and fortie yeares. He dyed without issue by Mary of Castile, his lawfall Wife; but left (by diuers Concubines)
Ferdinand, King of Naples.Mary, Lady Marquesse of Ferrara.Leonora, Princesse of Rossano.
XVIII. Iohn, second of the name, was Successour to his Brother Alphonso, in the Kingdome of Arragon, of Naples, Sicilie and other Seigneuries, in the year of Grace, One thousand foure hundred fiftie eight. In first marriage he espoused Blanch, Queene of Nauarre, in right of whom hee was King of the said Kingdome; And by her hee had three Children.

Charles, Prince of Nauarre and of Arragon, etc.
Blanch, wife to Henry the Impotent, King of Castile. And
Leonora, Queene of Nauarre.

This Prince Charles, dyed in the lifetime of his Father, Aged as hath bin formerly obserued in the Genealogie of Nauarre, leauing two Sons and a Bastard Daughter.

Phillip, Maister of the Order of Mo^tes^.
Iohn, Bishop of Huesca: And
Anne, Duchesse of Medina Celi.

In second mariage, the said Iohn the second, espoused Ioane or Iane, Daughter to Fredericke Henrique, Admirall of Castile. And in this marriage was borne
Ferdinand, tearmed by the Spaniards, L'Infant le Fortune, Duke of Monbl^, and afterward King: And
Ioane, Queene of Naples.
By sundry Concubines he had
Alphonso, Count De Villahermosa.
Iohn, Archbishop of Sarragossa, named in the Obligation of Fiue hundred thousand Crownes, due by the said Kings Father, to the most-Christian King, Lewes, eleauenth of the name.
Leonora, wife to the Count of Ler^, Constable, and Authour of loosing the Kingdome of Nauarre.

Ferdinand: And

Mary.


By the death of the said Iohn of Arragon, happening in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred threescore and nineteene, his Sonne
XIX. Ferdinand, second of the name, King of Arragon, Nauarre, Sicilie, Mai^rica, Sardinia, and others of his Stemme; of Castile and of Leon by Madam Isabel^ his wife, and of Nauarre by practises and vsurpation. We haue obserued the Linage of the said Ferdinand, and of Isabel his first wife, in that of Castile. In second marriage, he espoused Germana de Fe^x, and by her he had a Sonne
Iohn, who dyed in his infancie.
He had diuers Bastards by diuers Concubines; for of the Vicountesse of Eb^ls, was borne
Alphonso of Arragon, Archbishop of Sarragossa: And
Iane or Ioane of Arragon, wife to the Constable Bernardino de Velasco.
By Toda de Bilbao, a Biscaine his Concubine, he had
Mary of Arragon, a Religious Nunne;
By Boucetta de Pereira, a Portugaise: Another
Mary of Arragon, a Religious Nun also.
The said King Ferdinand reigned seauen and thirtie yeares, and by his death, all the Kingdomes and Prouinces of Spaine (Portugal excepted) were reunited into one Body and sole Monarchie, meeting in the person of the Emperour.
Charles the fift, Father of
Phillip the second, who made himselfe Maister of the Kingdome of Portugall; And
Phillip the third, reigning at this present.
Wee haue formerly seene, that the Kingdome of Arragon had two kindes of Armes, and that the first were wholly suppressed, and the second remained; which we behe^d magnificently painted, on the great Gate of the Bridge at Sarragossa, on the side towards Nauarre. In the Haule along the Arch of Saint Iohn Baptist, and other publique places of the said Citie.
It hath had a third Armes, to wit;The Battaile of Alarco^ ^gainst foure Kings Moores. L'Escu d'Argent a vne Croix de Gueulles (which is that of Saint George de Montesa) Cantonnee de Quatre Testes de Roys Mores de mesme ^au Bandeau Royal. In memorie of the Battaile of Alarcos, wonne from foure Kings Moores, at the Siedge of Huesca by the third King of Arragon, Pedro first of the name, One thousand fourescore and sixteene; As is reported by Ieronimo Surita, in ^his first Booke, and two and thirtieth Chapter of his Annales of Arragon.
Dom Pedro Primero deste nombre, Tercero Rey d'Aragon, auiendo vencido en el Anno 1096. cerca de Huosca grandes exercitos de Moros con muchas muertes de los Enemigos en ^a Batal^a, que dizen d Alcoraz. Y siendo hallados entre ellos quatro Principes Moros con insignias Reales, y riquissimas tocas en las Cabesas, las tomo por Deuisa en memoria desta victoria pintadas de color roxo en Escudo a quarteles en campo de Plata, y en medio, d'el Escudo vna Cruz roxa como la de san Iorge de Montesa, que diuide las quatro Cabesas.
But these Armes were not of any long continuance; because they were forsaken vnder the Monke King Ramiro, who tooke the auncient Armes of Geoffrey the Hayrie.
Let vs now come to the Militarie Orders, Instituted in the said Kingdome of Arragon.



CHAP. XIIII. The Institution of the Order of Saint Sauiour of Montreall; or The Order of Arragon.
ALphonso, the eighteenth King of Nauarre by vsurpation, onely by that name, and first of Arragon, was (for his great Warres, which he made all his life time against the Moores of Spaine) named The Warriour,The Warriour and Emperour of the Spaines. and Emperour of the Spaines; because he saw himselfe King of all the Realmes, that is to say, the Christian Prouinces of Spaine, in the yeare One thousand one hundred and eight. For, of his owne chiefe Stocke and Stemme, he was King of Arragon and Nauarre by vsurpation. And by his wife Donna Vrraca of Castile, he was King of Leon, Castile and of Tolledo; yet by her he had not any issue, but expelled her from his company, for her lubricious and dishonest life.
He made very strong warres vpon the Moores of Arragon; from whom he conquered Sarragossa, called by the Romaines Salduba, which he made the Capitall Citie of the Kingdome of Arragon, hauing wonne it by force in the Moneth of December, Anno, One thousand one hundred and eighteene.
He caused his Armie to take rest all the Winter time, in the parts about Sarragossa, at a place called Xelsa, sometimes a very good Towne, a Colonie of the Romans, and by them named Iulia Celsa.
When the Spring began to appeare, and lend the world her gladsome smiles; he entred into the Field againe, and besiedged Tarassona, formerly belonging to the Crowne of Nauarre: against which also hee preuailed, and added it to the Kingdome of Arragon. In the end, he threw his forces on the Moores neighbouring about Sarragossa, from whom, in the yeare One thousand one hundred and twenty,

he tooke perforce Turiaso, Alauona, Epila (which was credited to haue bin the an^cient A C^tie in Spaine beyond (...). Sagunt, built by the Carthaginians) Cala-Taiud (a Citie built neere to Antique Bilbilis, by a Moore King, named Taiud) Hariza and Daroca, very neere whereto ioyned the Spring of the Fountaine of Xalon, in a goodly strong place, naturally


seated. And this Alphonso the Battailer or Warriour, for a Trophee of his Conquests; caused a Citie to be built (for brideling and curbing the Moores of Valencia, which he named Montreall.
(...) Bernard Abbot of Chairuaux.At this time was very famously renowned (for sanctitie of life) Saint Bernard, Abbot of Clairuaux, a French Gentleman, Lord of Fontaines,An O^ of beggi^ (...) a Village and Castle distant about halfe a mile from Pijon, on the side of Talan. This Castle is (at this present) possessed by Monkes Fu^illatines, who haue caused a Chappell to be erected, in the same place where Saint Bernard was borne. And this Abbot gaue and prescribed to the Knights Templers, what Rule they ought to keep and obserue: but he obtained of this Alph^nso, the same place of Montreall, giuen to the said Templers, with charge to warre incessa^ily against the Moores. King A^phonso granted his request* and for their further encouraging in warre and well doing: he granted them the fift part of all the Conquests, which should be made vpon the Moores, beside many great Reuennues, which he granted them, out of his demeanes and Court of Arragon.
But those Templers hauing bin exterminated and defaced in the Councill of Vi^nn^ (as we shall declare vnto you in more fitting place) Anno, One thousand three hundred and eleauen: he instituted other Knights in the same place of Montreall, deriued from the best Houses in the Kingdome of Arragon. They retained the name as the Knights Templers had done,(...) being called Knights of Saints Sauiour; wore a White Roabe, and on the Breast an Ankred Crosse Red: And their Rule was somewhat conformable with that of the Templers, but onely that they had power to marrie. The Kings of Arragon were Soueraignes of the said Order, whereinto were entertained s^ch Gentlemen of Arragon, as shewed their best deuoire in the warres against the Moores. It had many rich Commanderies, the most part whereof are grounded on the demeanes of the Kings of Arragon; the like happening to this Oder, as did to the Great Maisterships of Saint Iames of the Sword, of Alcantara, and of C^latraua, reunited to the Crowne of Spaine, as hath bin said.
The same Ceremonies obserued in France, for giuing the Order of Knighthood, to any Lord or Gentleman;(...) were practised throughout all the Spaines. To bathe on the Eeue of the Ceremonie; to haue the Sword hallowed; as we haue noated in the Order of the ^and, giuen to King Alphonso, the Institutour of this, as Iereni^

Surita, obserueth in his Annales of Araagon, in the life of Ferdinand, second of the name, King of Arragon, made Knight in the Citie of Sarragossa by the Duke of Gaudia, the euening before his Coronation.
The same Surita, speaketh of the Crowning of Alphonso, fourth of the name, King of Arragon, performed on Easter day, in the yeare One thousand three hundred twentie and eight, by the Archbishop of Sarragossa, Dom Pedro de Luna. After which Coronation, the King made two hundred Knights, the principall whereof were these
Iames de Xerica.Pedro d' Arborea.Raymond Folke, Count of Cardanna.Arnand Rogiero, Count of Paillars.Lopez de Luna.Alphonso Fernandez d' Ixera.Iohn Ximenes d' Vrrea.Pedro Cornello.William de Ceruillona.Otho de Moncado: AndAnthonio de Foix.
Who after they were made Knights by the Kings owne hand, deuided the rest among them, to whom they guirded on their Swords, and put on their guilded Spurtes: after they had performed the Eeues watch, and other Ceremonies in such cases required.


The Order of our Lady of Montesa; otherwise tearmed the Order of Valencia: Instituted in the Kingdome of Valencia, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and seauenteene. CHAP. XV.
IN the yeare One thousand three hundred and tenne, at a generall Counsell, assembled in the Metropolitaine Citie of Vienna in Daulphine,^'Ordre de Mortesa, di^ de, Valencia. by Pope Clement, fift of the name: the Religion of the Knights Templers, was wholly abolished and defaced throughout Christendome; for such causes as we shall declare, when we come to speake concerning The Orders of the East. Two yeares before, the Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem,The Christians driuen out of Palestine. expelled (as the other Orders and Christians were) out of Palestine, were enstalled in possession of the goodly Isle of Rhodes, by a Bull granted from the said Pope Clement the fift.


The Templers being thus wholly exterminated, in Arragon, vnder the Reigne of Dom Iames, King of Arragon, second of the name,The Institution of the Order. was instituted a new Order of Knights, called Of our Lady of Montesa, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and seauenteene, at Montesa, in the Kingdome of Valencia. The Statutes of which Order, were altogether answerable to that of Calatraua, vnder the Rule of the Cisteaux. And those Statutes were confirmed by Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, Successour vnto Pope Clement the fift. They had great goods and reuennues, as well in Arragon, as in Valentia and Cathalogna.
The first Great Maister of this Order, was Dom William d'Errillo,The Habite of the Order, and dispensation afterward. who tooke the white habite of Calatraua, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and nineteene, at the Monasterie of Saint Crosse, by the hands of the Commander D'Alcaniz. These Knights were afterward dispensed withall, to weare the cloathing of the Cisteaux,

in the due place whereof (for the noate or badge of their Knighthood) they vsed (...) weare a full Red Crosse vpon the breast, by a priuiledge granted them by Pope Benedict the thirteenth, confirmed soone after by Pope Martin, fift of the name. And for the Shield or Escutcheon of their Armes,The Shield of Armes. it was D'Or a la dite, Croix de Gu^les, tearmed The Crosse of the Knight Saint George, Patron of the Kingdomes of Na^n and Arragon.
Soone after was Great Maister of the said Order, the Infant Dom Iames of Arragon, eldest Sonne to Iames, King of Arragon, second of the name. This Prince, Successour of the Kingdome, to please King Iames his Father, had espoused Donna Leonora Infanta of Castile. Neuerthelesse, when the Estates met at Arragon, and held their Session there,A vowe made against marriage and succeeding in the Kingdome of Arragon. I meane at Tarragona, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and twentie, this Prince being vpon the point of marrying the Princesse (by whom he might haue succeeded in the Kingdome of Castile) forsooke there his wife, declaring to King Iames his Father: that (long time before) he had made a vowe to God, neuer to marrie, nor to succeede in the Kingdome of Arragon. So that, notwithstanding all the speeches, both of his Father, and the States of Arragon and Valenci^, he gaue ouer his right of eldership, to his yonger Brother Dom Alphonso, who was King of Arragon, second of the name, causing the King his Father to enfranchise him. By vertue of which enfranchisement, he released the Generall States from the Oath of fidelitie, which they had taken to him, when he was sworne Prince of Arragon, Valencia and Cathal^gna.
The Prince entred into the Order o^ S. Iohn of Ierusalem.He receiued the habite of the Order of Knighthood, belonging to the Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, at the hands of Dom Bernard Solier, Commander of the said Order, in the presence of his Brother Dom Iohn of Arragon, Archbishop of Tolledo* Dom Simon de Luna, Archbishop of Tarragona; Dom Berengarius, Bishop of Vico; and Dom Raymond d'Ampurtas, Prior of Saint Iohn in Cathalogna. But afterward he gaue ouer that Order, and tooke the same of Montesa, whereof he was made Great Maister.
The vnion of Arragon, Valencia and Cathalogna.In the same Session of the States held at Tarragona, was made the perpetuall vnion of the Kingdomes of Arragon and of Valencia, as also the Principalitie of Cathalogna; without any power of dis^vniting, or seperation in sunder vpon any subiect or occasion whatsoeuer should ensue.
This Kingdome of Valencia, tooke name of the chiefe or Capitall Citie, seated along on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea of Spaine. Her auncient Inhabitants were called Contestanes,Valenoia won from the Mo^r^ and lost again seperated by the Mount of Orospeda, from the Batestanes, dwellers in Murcia. Valencia was conquered from the Moores, by that great Spanish Captaine called Le Cid Ruys Dias de Biuaro, against the Moore Aben Iaph. But wonne againe by the same Moores, after the death of the said Cid; and so held vntill the yeare One thousand two hundred thirtie and fiue.
Dom Iames (in Spanish Iaques) King of Arragon, first of the name, being resolued to vn-nestle them: aided himselfe by the deuision, which happen^d among the factions of Zeit, Aben-zeit, and of Aben-zaen, who stroue which of them should rule and command. Zeit made himselfe subiect to the King Dom Iames, embraced the Christian Faith and Religion, being named at the Font of Baptisme Dom Vincent de Bellius: and married with a Christian Lady of the Citie of Sarragossa, named Dominies Lopez. By fauour and friendship of this Dom Vincent; King Iames possessed himselfe of the most parts and places in the Kingdome of Valencia,(...) and besiedged the principall Citie, being especially assisted by Bernard Count of Foix, Pedro Amella, Archbishop of Narbona, and many French Gentlemen beside. By whose valiant carriage, it was surrendered to him against Aben-zaen, the eighteenth day of S^ptember, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred thirtie and e^gh^.
The Composition was, that Zaen should withdraw himselfe to Denia (Dianium in Latine with his Iemmes and Iewels, and the Inhabitant Moores, being to the number of fiftie thousand men. In this manner was this great Citie left vnpeopled, and to fill the same againe, were sent thither many Colonies of naturall Cathalanes and Arragonians, to whom was quartered the emptied Citie, and the Fields round

^ut were distributed, by direction from the Foure Commanders,The Foure chiefe Commanders that ordered the especiall affaires. deputed and ap^nted for the businesse of Dom Iames of Arragon, as namely Dom Berengarius Pa^ola, Bishop of Barcellona; Dom Vidalio Cauelia, Bishop of Huesca; Dom Pedro Her^dez d'Apagra, and Dom Simon d'Vrrca, Knights of Arragon, Three Hundred and ^urescore heades of Families peopled this Citty and conquered Lands, deriued from (...) Nobility of Arragon and of Cathalogna, and of the olde Souldiours in their seuerall ^ndes, that were imployed at this Siedge, and other enterprises against the Moors: to ^om power was giuen and priueledge, to b^ (afterward in times to come) gouerned ^d iudged, according to the Lawes, Rights, S^ile and Forme of Arragon. To whom ^re restrained the Christian Families, which were found in the said Citty, who not^hstanding the Moores, kept and vs^d the Christian Catholique Religion,The forme of Gouernement in the ^hurch of Saint Sepulcher, called at this present, of the blessed Saint and Apostle ^nt Bartholmewe.
The Bishops See was reseated in this Citty, the principall Mosco or Temple where^ was dedicated to God, and cleane purged of Mahometisme:The first Christian Bishop there. the first Bishop where^ was Dom Frederigo Martinez, being made Suffragane to the Archbishoprick of ^rragona. Albeit in the time of the Gothishe Kings, the Church of Valencia ac^owledged for her Metropolitane, the Archbishop of Tolledo.
The first Vice-Roye of Valencia (at this present called the Great) established by ^m Iames: was named Dom Roderigo Lizana.


The Order of the Looking-Glasse of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Instituted by Ferdinand, the Infant of Castill, in the Yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Tenne. CHAP. XVI.
FErdinand, the Infant of Castille, Duke of Pegnafiell, Sirnamed The Infant of Antequera, because hee had conquered that strong place from the Moores, after a mighty Battaile wherin the Moores lost Fifteene Thousand men,Fifteene thousand Moores slaine in one Battaile all lying together slaine in the Field of Battaile, in the yeare of Grace, 1410, In honor wherof, he Instituted a new Order of Knighthood, tearmed in Spanish: L'Orden dell Iarre de Sancta Maria.
Which Order was composed of such Potts, as wee vse to call Bough-Potts, with their mouthes full of Lillies,Bough Pottes for Floures. enter^ced with Griffons; to preserue the memory of the Conquest of the Citty and Castell ^f Antequera, reputed to bee impregnable. The Institution thereof was in the said ^eare Foure hundred and tenne, though others speake of the yeare One Thousand ^ure hundred and thirteene.
At the first Chapter, helde in the Church of Saint Mary de Medina del Campo,The first Chapter of the Order. at ^at time (after the Bathe and Watching solemnely on the Eeue, according to the routed ^anner) the Infant of Castille Ferdinand, elect King of Arragon, after the death of King Martin, as being the very neerest, by reason of Leonora of Arragon his Mother, ^ister to the two last Kings of Arragon, in the Moneth of Iune Foure Hundred and ^welue, and Crowned (the yeare following at Sarragossa) was first of all Honored with this Order:What Knights followed the King in the Order. And after him
Ruy Lopez d'Aualos, Constable of Castille.Diego Fernandez de Quignones, Gouernour of the Astures.Aluaro Perez de Guzman.Iohn Hurtado de Mendosa.Martino Vasquez.Ferdinand Perez d'Aiala, Gouernour of Guipuscoa:Raymond de Guzman.Garcia Fernand Manriquez.Charles d'Arcillano de los Cameros.Roderigo de Naruaez.Gutierro de Torres: AndSancio Gonsalez Cherino.
This Order was transported from Castille into Arragon; where it continued (^cording to the testimony of Surita) vnder the Sonnes of the said King Ferdinand.


The Order of Iesus Christ, Called De Christus. Instituted in the Kingdome of Portugal^ in the Yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Three Hundred, and Twenty. By Dom Denis or Dionisius the Sixte, King of Portugall.
CHAP. XVII. The Originall and Beginning of the Kingdome of Portugall.
L'Ordre de Iesu^ Christ d^ct de Christ^.THe Historians of Spayne doe all write with one conse^, that the Kingdome of France is, and hath beene (fro^ all times) the fruitfull Orchard, or liuely Nursery o^ Princes, renowned for valiancie thorow out all Region and Prouinces of the World, And that at one and selfe same time, hath beene noated to issue from the Roy^^ House of France, Foure Princes, which gaue sourse and Originall to as many Kingdomes, or became Maister of them. En vn mismo tiempo sal^ron quatro Ca^dleros de su Reyno, que occuparoy quatro Coronas (...) mayores de la Christiandad.
William duke of Normandie.William, of the house of Normandie was the First, who hauing vanquished ((...) foughten Battaile) Har^ld, King of England: was Crowned King thereof in the C^^ of London, the yeare of Grace One thousand, threescore and seauen.
Raymond of Bourgongne.Raymond of the House of Bourgongne was the Second, who went into Castille (...) fight against the Moores, perfourming there such admirable actions of Armes: th^ he espoused Dogna Viraca, the Infanta of Castille, and legitimate Daughter to King Alphonso, Sixt of the name, Conquerour of Tolledo: By whom he had a Sonne, Emperour of the Spaynes, Dom Alphonso Raymond, Seauenth of the name, King of Leon a^ Castille. This passage of Raymond of Bourgongne, is by the Spanish writers themsel^^ said to be in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fourescore and eight.
(...)In the third place is Henry, of the House of Bezanson, who in the same yeare O^ thousand fourescore and eight, tooke to Wife Dogna Theresa, naturall Daughter to the same King Dom Alphonso the Sixt, and Dogna Ximena Nugnez de Guzman; by wh^ he had in marriage the Kingdome of Portugall.
Godfrey of B^n.Godfreye, of the House of Bouillon and Lorrain was the last: who hauing conque^^ the Kingdome and Holy Citty of Ierusalem, in the yeare of Grace One thousand fourescore and nineteene, he was there Crowned the First King.
And heere I must confesse, that the Spanish Historians haue bin negligent enough, in seeking after the Genealogie of this Henry (whom they tearme of Bologne) First Count of Portugall, and whom also they make naturall and originally, of the Citty of Bezanson (without the County of Bourgongne) called in Latine Visontio, a word which

^e Spanyards and Portugalles haue much mistaken, to be Bisantium, and from thence ^ue drawne the originall and descent of this Count Henry, euen from the Imperiall ^itty of Constantinople, grosse errours helde by Vasaelus and Gariuay.
The Archdeacon of Verdune, in the Booke which he wrote of the Bishops of the ^id Church, setteth downe, that this Count Henry, Sirnamed of Lorraine, issued of the ^oyall House of France, who passed into Castille: was made Lord of Portugall,Count Henry made Lord of Portugall by the Archdeac^^s misconstruction. he be^g younger Brother to Thierry, Duke of Lorraine, and to Godfrey, Baron of Ioinuille. ^e affirmeth withall, that these three Brethren were Sonnes to the Count of Bologne, ^onne to Eustace Counte of Bologne, of the Royall house of France; As also of Ida, Dutchesse of Lorraine and Bouillon, issued and descended of the same Royall House of ^rance; And that in this Marriage were borne Eustace, Godfrey and Bauldwine, who was King of Ierusalem after Godfrey of Bouillon his Brother, who conquered the Holy Citty. This is the Archdeacons Gibberish in Iangling, concerning the Table Ge^ealogie of the Illustrious Ducall House of Lorraine, whereof there can bee now no ^uestion vrdged: but onely that of Bologne, which is otherwise recorded in the ^egisters of the Courte of Parliament, where all the Pedegrees and Genealogies are ^o be seene, issued and descended of the Sacred Crowne of France.
Bologne of France, and Saint Paul were erected and aduaunced into Counties,Bologne and Saint Paul made Counties. vn^er Homage to the Crowne of France; in fauour of Adolphe of Flanders (youngest Sonne to Baldwine the Baulde, Second of the name, Count of Flanders, who had the ^aid two Counties to his lott and partage: but being deceased without Issue, the said ^wo Counties returned to his elder Brother Arnoull, Counte of Flanders. Arnoull, Second of the name, Counte of Flanders, hauing committed a fellonious offence against Lothaire, King of France: these two Counties were falne into his hand, who ^nuested therein two Sonnes of William, Counte of Ponthieu,The two Counties fell to the King. Arnoull or Arnoulle the Eldest Sonne, had the County Bolongne in Fiefe, and the youngest had Saint Paule in Arriere Fiefe, vnder Homage and Authority of the Crowne of France: as we haue already shewne in the discourse of the Golden Fleece.

The Genealogie of the Countes of Bologne, according to the Records.
I. ARnoull, Count of Bologne, had one onely Daughter named Mahauld (in Latine Mathildis) Countesse of Bologne, Wife to Adolphe, First of the name, Count of Guines, Comes Guinarum. Of this Marriage came
II. Raoull, Counte of Bologne, and of Guines, who had to Wife Rosella, Daughter to the Counte of Saint Paul, by whom he had two Sonnes:
Eustace, First of the name, Count of Bologne AndGeoffery, Bishop of Paris, High Chauncellour of France.
III. Eustace, First of the name, Count of Bologne, tooke to Wife Ida, Sister to Godfrey, or Gozedon, Duke of Lorraine, Sirnamed the Crump-shouldred. And in this Mariage three Sons were borne.
IIII. Godfrey of Bologne, Lord of Bouillon, who was the First King of Ierusalem, and Counte of Bologne;
V. Baldwine, King of Ierusalem after his Brother, and Count of Bologne; And
VI. Eustace, Second of the name, who was Count of Bologne, and who had but one only Daughter, named
VII. Cohalda, Countesse of Bologne, Wife to
Stephen, Counte of Bologne, King (during his life) of England, as we haue before reported to you, in the discourse of the Blewe Garter. In this Marriage were borne two Sonnes and a Daughter.
The Sonnes were
Eustace, Third of the name, Count of Bologne AndWilliam of Bologne: But both these Brethren died without any issue, and the Daughter their Sister
VIII. Mary was a Religious Nunne, and an Abbesse in England.
Such was the Genealogie of the First House of the Countes of Bologne. Wherein the Archdeacon of Verdune, could not meete with Count Henry, the first here ditarie Counte of Portugall, who cannot be found to bee issued of the House of Bologne, and who (according to Iohn le Feron, in his Catalogue of the Chauncellours of France)

Portoit d'Azur a Cinque Bastons d'Or, au Chef de Gueules, charge de ^^rois C^ d'Argent. And the house of Lorraine (before Godfrey of Bologne, first Latine King of the Holy Citty of Ierusalem, according to the same Feron in his Constables.) Po^ d'Argent au Cerf de Gueules, somme d'Orsans nombre. Contrarie to the opinion of the Archdeacon of Verdune (formerly alleadged and very subiect to caution) who g^ueth for Armes to this Illustarious house, D'Argent a la Croix de Gueules (...) d'Escarboncle d'Or Pommete et Fleuronne de huict pieces. Setting aside then the Genealogie of this Counte Henry of Portugall, the Histories of Spayne doe tell vs; that (...) the former dated yeare, One thousand fourescore and eight.
Went into Spayne many Frenche Knights and Gentlemen, to maintaine the cause of the King Dom Alphonso, Sixt of the name; Among whom were Raymond, of the House of Bourgongne; Henry of Lembourg, a Flemming; and Raymond, Count of Tolosa (who are written by some to bee Cousines and neere Kinsmen) to make head against the Miramomelin Haly Abenacha, the chiefe of the Musulmans of Affrica and Spayne.The three French Princes married to three Sisters. And to acknowledge truely the vertues of these three French Princes, according to the degree of their valour and merit; they were all maried to three Sister^ giuing the legitimate Daughter Vrraca to Prince Raymond of Bourgongne, Sirnamed of Bezanson, who was made Counte Hereditarie of Galicia: To Counte Henry of Le^bourg, the Bastard Daughter Theresa, with the Lands of Portugall conquered from the Moores, and those which his Sonne in Lawe and hee could conquer afterward, in title of an hereditary County to him and his descendants: And to Count Raymond of Tolosa, the other naturall Daughter Eluira: Which mariages are recorded vnder the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, fourescore and foureteene.
With Prince Henry, First Lord of Portugall, passed into this Prouince of newe Conquest (the Frontiers and Limitrophing Lands of the Mariscoes) and them comprehended within the enclosure and bournes of the Riuers of Duero and du Mino, Port^, Braga, and of Guymaranes) many Gentlemen both French and Flemmishe. E^ es^ mismo tiempo passaron a Castilla con estos dos Principes Dom Remon, et Dom Henrique munchos Caualleros Franceses de los Reynos de Francia, y Estates a ellos suiectos. Among them of highest worth and valiancie, were Robert de la Corne, and William his Brother, Alcaydes and Lords of A^ognia, Authours of a Noble Familie, bearing the same Sirname: and Rolin Gonsales, Alcayde and Lord d'Azambuya, Chiefe of the House of the same Sirname; and these of the Sirname, and Seigneuries of Alm^da d'Arruda* de Castagrera, de Lourinhano, de Ville Franche, and de Ville-Verde, all great Houses in Portugall (decended from the Conquerours of the Citty of Lisbona, Chiefe in the Kingdome of Portugall.
Of this Marrige, of Prince Henry, Count of Portugall, and Dogna Theresa, issued a Sonne, and two Daughters.
The Sonne was
Alphonso Henriquez, First King of Portugall.
The Daughters were
Theresa Henriquez; AndAl^ousa Henriquez.
By the death of Henry of Lembourg, first Count of Portugall, happening in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred and twelue; his only Sonne
I. Alphonso Henriquez tooke the title of King of Portugall, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand one hundred thirtie and nine: And his Reigne (with the yeares when hee was Count) are reckoned to be Threescore and Twelue yeares. Hee had to wife Malfada Henriquez de Lara, Daughter to the Counte Manriquez de Lara, Lord of Molina, a great Commaunder in Castille, by whom hee had a Sonne and three Daughters.
The Sonne was
Sancio, afterward King.
The Daughters were
Vrraca, Queene of Castille.Theresa, Count of Flanders; AndMalfada.
By a Concubine he had a Bastard Son.

Pedro Alphonso.

II. Sancio, First of the name, by the death of his Father, happening in the yeare, One thousand one hundred fourescore and foure; was the Second King of Portugall, who by his wife Aldoncia, o^ Dolcina, Daughter to Raymond Berengarius, Count of Barcellona, had foure Sons and fiue Daughters.
The Sonnes were
Alphonso, afterward King.Ferdinand (whom we call Ferrand) of ^ortugall, Count of Flanders by his Wife, ^risoner to King Phillip Augustus.Pedro, Counte of Vrgell in Arragon; AndHenry.
The Daughters were
Theresa, Wife to the King of Leon Dom Alphonso.Malfada* Queene of Castille.Sancia, a Religious Nunne.Blanche; AndBerengcula.
By two Concubines he had diuers na^rall Children; by the first, named Ma^a Arias, he had a Daughter
Vrraca; And a Sonne calledMartin.
By his Second Concubine named Maria Perez de Ribera, hee had these na^urall Children.
Theres^ Sancia.Gil. Sancio.Constance Sancia; AndRuy Sancio.
Sancio the First Reigned Eight and ^wenty yeares, and by his death, happe^ing in the yeare of Grace One thousand ^wo hundred and twelue, his eldest Son.
III. Alphonso, Second of the name, was the Third King of Portugall, who ^eigned no more then eleuen yeares. By ^is Wife Vrr^a of Castille, Daughter to Alphonso the Noble, King of Castille, hee had three Sonnes, and one Daughter.
The Sonnes were
San^^^, afterward King.Alphonso,Ferdinand; And the Daughter wasLeonora, Queene of Denmarke.
By a Moore his Concubine, he had a naturall Sonne

Alphonso Martinez.

IV. Sancio, Second of the name, Sirnamed Capello, succeeded in the Kingdom of Portugall, by the death of his Father, happening in the yeare, One thousand two hundred, twenty and three. He had no issue by Mincia Lopez his Wife: And for his (...) city of Gouerning the State, they made Regent his Brother
V. Alphonso, Third of the name, who was King by the death of his Brother, happening in the yeare of Grace, 1257. and reigned two and twenty yeares. By Mahauld, Countesse of Bologne his Wife, he had two Sonne*
Ferdinand; AndAlphonso.
He repudiated his lawfull Wife without any cause, to espouse the Bastard Daughter of Alphonso the Astrologer, and of Maria de Guzman Beatriz, by whom he had
Denys or Dionysius, after King.Alphonso.Blanche, a Religious Nunne; AndConstance.
By two Concubines, he had
Leonora; AndFerdinand Alphonso.
This diuorce and repudiation, done without cause, was the meanes of blemishing wholly Portugall, by the notoriousnesse of the fact, yea, euen extending to Children borne in loyall and lawfull mariage. And from thence proceeded the pretention, which the late Queene Mother Katharine de Medicis (issued of the House of Bologne) made to the Crowne of Portugall, after the death of the last King of Portugall, Dom Sebastian.
VI. Dionisius, or Denys, First of the name, was the Sixt King of Portugall, by the death of his Father Alphonso, in the yeare, One thousand two hundred threescore and nineteene, and his Reigne continued Sixe and Fortie yeares. By his Wife Isabella of Arragon, Daughter to King Pedro, hee had two Daughters, and ^ut one Sonne, named
Alphonso, who was King after him.
The Daughters were
Isabella; AndConstance, Queene of Castille.
By diuers Concubines, he had
Pedro, Counte of Portalegro, a man th^ was very singulerly learned.Alphonso Sancio, Count d'Albuqerque.Iohn.Ferdinand.Maria, Wife to Dom Iohn de la Cerda; AndBeatrix a Religious Nunne.
VII. Alphonso, Third of the name, succeeded in the Kingdome of Portugall, by the death of his Father, who deceased in the yeare One thousand three hundred twentie and fiue, and Reigned two and thirtie yeares. By Beatrix of Castille his Wife, he had Sixe Children.
Pedro, afterward King.Maria.Alphonso.Denys or Dionisius.Iohn; AndEleanor, Queene of Arragon.
After the death of the said Alphonso, happening in the yeare One Thousand, three hundred fifty and seauen, his eldest Sonne
VIII. Pedro, only of that name, came the Crowne of Portugall, wherein hee reigned tenne yeares. Hee diuorced his first Wife Blanche, Daughter to King Pedro of Castille, and tooke Constance, the Daughter to Iohn Manuell, by whom hee had foure Children.

Lewes, dying in his Infancy,
Ferdinand, who was King,
Maria, Wife to Ferdinand, King of Arragon; And
Beatrix, that died in her Infancy.

By two Concubines, the first whereof was Agnes de Castro, he had
Alphonso,Denys; AndBeatrix, Countesse d'Albuquerque.
By the other, called Theresa Gallega, he had
Iohn, who was Maister of the Order D'Auis, and King of Portugall.
IX. Ferdinand, Eldest and Legitimate Sonne to King Pedro the First, was King of Portugall, and his Reigne lasted seauenteene yeares. By Leonora Telles de Menesez his Wife, he had one only daughter
Beatrix, Queene of Castille.
By a Concubine he had
Isabella, Countesse of Gijon.
X. Iohn, the naturall Sonne to King Pedro the First, vsurped the Kingdome of Portugall, and therin maintained himselfe by force, against the King of Castille, and Beatrix of Portugall his wife, the lawfull heire, and reigned nine and forty yeares: From the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and fiue, to the yeare One thousand foure hundred thirty three. By Phillip of Lancaster, an English Lady and his wife, he had eight Children.


Blanche,


Alphonso

Edward, who was King,
Pedro, Duke of Coimbre,
Henry, Duke of Viseo,
Iabella, last wife to the Duke of Bourgongne Phillip, called the Good.
Iohn, Maister of Saint Iames, Father to Isabella, Queene of Castille; And
Ferdinand, Master of the Order D'Auis.

By a Concubine, named Agnes, hee had
Beatrix, Countesse of Ar^ndell; AndAlphonso, Duke of Bragancia, Co^ d'Oren, and of Barcellos.Pedro, Duke of Coimbre, tooke to wife Isabella of Arragon, by whom he had fiue Children.
Pedro, Constable of Arragon,Iohn, King of Cyprus, in regard of his Wife,Isabella, Queene of Portugall,Phillip, a Religious Nunne,Iames, Cardinall; AndBeatrix, Wife to the said Lord ^uestain.
XI. Edward, Sonne to King Iohn the First, came to the Crowne of Portugall by the death of his Father, happening in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred thirty and three, and reigned but fiue yeares. By Leonora of Arragon his wife, Daughter to the King of Arragon Ferdinand the First; he had Sixe Children.

Alphonso, afterward King,
Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo,
Phillip, a Daughter,
Leonora, Wife to the Emperour Frederick, Third of the name,
Katharine; And
Ioane or Iane, Queene of Castille.

Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo had to Wife Beatrix, Daughter to his Vnckle Iohn of Portugall, Maister of Saint Iames, by whom he had foure Children.

Leonora, after Queene,

Dominico,

Emanuell, Great Maister of Christ^, and afterward King of Portugall,
Isabella, Duchesse of Bragancia.

XII. Alphonso, Fift of the name, King of Portugall by the death of his Father, which happened in the yeare, One thousand, foure hundred, thirtie and eight, came to the Crowne, and Reigned three and fortie yeares. By Isabella his Wife, Daughter to his vnckle Pedro, Duke of Coimbre, he had foure Children.

Iohn, who had but a short time of life.

Iane,

Ferdinand; And

Henry.


By the death of the said Alphonso, happening in the yeare, One Thousand foure Hundred, Fourescore and One, came to the Crowne the Sonne of his Sonne Ferdinand.
XIII. Iohn, second of the name, whose reigne continued foureteen years. ^y Leonora his wife, Daughter to his Vnckle Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo, he had ^ut one Sonne
Alphonso, dying in his Fathers life ^me.
By Anne of Mendosa, his Concubine, ^e had
George, Maister of Saint Iames, and D'Auis.
By the death of Iohn the second, chan^ing in the yeare, One thousand foure ^undred fourescore and fifteene, the Crowne of Portugall came by proximity ^f Bloud, to the Sonne of Ferdinand, Duke of Viseo.
XIV. Emanuel, who reigned sixe ^nd twenty yeares. By Isabella of Ca^ile his first Wife, eldest Daughter to Ferdinand and Isabella, Kings of Ca^ile, Leon, and Arragon, he had one Sonne
Michael, who l^ued very few dayes.
In second Marriage he espoused Ma^ia of Castile, Sister to his first Wife, of whom were borne ten children
Iohn, afterward King.Isabella, Queene of Castile, and Em^eresse.Beatrix, Duchesse of Sauoye.Lewes, Father to Dom Antonio, the ele^ted King of Portugall.Henry, Cardinall.Alphonso, Cardinall.Katharina.Ferdinand.Edward: AndAntonio, who dyed so soone as he was borne.
In third Marriage he had Leonora of Castile, Daughter to Phillip, Archduke of Austria, sister to the Emperour Charles the fift, by whom he had two Children
Charles, who dyed in his Infancy.Maria, deceasing at Lisbone, being aged sixe and fifty yeares.
By the death of the said Emanuel, which was in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred twenty and one, his Son
XV. Iohn, third of the name, succeeded in the Kingdome of Portugall, of whom the reigne was sixe and thirty yeares. By Katharine of Spaine his Wife, sister to the Emperour Charles the fift, he had eight children.


Alphonso.

Maria, Princesse of Castile.

Katharina.


Beatrix.


Emanuel.


Phillip.

Iohn, Father to King Sebastian; And

Antonio.


Which Iohn the third, dyed in the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred fifty and seauen, leauing the Kingdome to his yongest Sonne
XVI. Sebastian, who reigned One and twenty yeares. By Ioane or Iane of Spaine, Daughter to the Emperour Charles the fift, he left not any issue: but dyed in the warre of Affrica, the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and eighteene. And by his death succeeded next in the Kingdome of Portugall, his Vnckle the Cardinall, named
XVII. Henry, Archbishop of Euora, Sonne to the King Emanuel, who reigned but one yeare and an halfe, or thereabout. And by his death, the Kingdome of Portugal and the East Indiaes were reunited to the Crowne of Spain, in the person of
XVIII. Phillip, second of the name, King of all the Prouinces, Father to
XIX. Phillip the third, reigning at this present.


Concerning the first King of Portugall, Alphonso Henriques.
IN the description of the surprizall and Conquest of the potent Citie of Cordoua and Baesa, from the Moores of Andalouzia, in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred fortie and seauen; it is said that Alphonso, King of Leon, Castile and Tolledo, Sirnamed the Emperour, was assisted by the forces of Nauarre, conducted by their King Garcia Ramirez, who was there in person, and that Armie on the Sea, by the Prince of Arragon, Dom Raymond Berengarius, Count of Barcellona, absent.
There is not a word spoken of the succour, nor forces of the first King of Portugall Alphonso Henriquez,Two reasons for not naming Alphons^ Henriquez. and that for two reasons. The first, because hee was in distaste with the said Alphonso, King of Castile, in regard he had declared himselfe to be King of Portugall (which relied on homage to the Kingdome of Leon) without his consent, he being a Subiect and Liedge-man to him. The other, in regard that this new King was then impeached at the Moores Warres of Estremadura, which he led on with such violence: that he tooke from them the Citie of Saint Iren, on the day of Saint Michael, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fortie seauen. And afterward, the Castle of Mafra (where he made Gouernour Ferdinand de Monteiro, who was the first Maister of the Order of Euora, tearmed D'Auis, vnder the Rule of Saint Benedict) with that of Cintra, and the puissant Citie of Lisbona (after a Siedge of fiue Moneths) valiantly taken, the fiue and twentieth day of October, in the said yeare One thousand one hundred fortie seauen, as before we haue spoken.
And without giuing the Moores any leasure to take knowledge of him, he conquered and wan from them Alanguer, Obidos, Torresuedras ^nd other places, by the surprizall whereof, he vn-nestled the Moores of Estremadura, whom he pursued beyond Tayo (one of the most renowned Riuers of Spain, called by the Latines Which deuideth Castile from Portugal, where ra^^ll is found like Gold. Tagus) where he became Maister of Alcazar de Sal, of the Cities of Euora, and d'Yelues, de M^^r^, Serpa and de Veia, where the Moores were all put to the edge of the Sword. From Coimbre, the Seate and Royall abiding of the Kings of Portugall, was transferred by this King, vnto the Citie of Lisbona, the very goodliest, and best stored with Merchants, in all the Prouinces of Spaine.



The Crosse and Armes of the Order, called D'Auis; Instituted also in the Kingdome of Portugall vnder the Reigne of the first King of Portugall, Alphonso Henriquez; And in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred forty seauen. CHAP. XVIII.
C^o^x and Ar^^^ (...) ^'Ordre (...).DVring the Reigne of the first King of Portugall, Alphonso Henriquez, was Instituted the Millitarie Order, called D'A^is, and vnder the Rule of Saint Benedict, Father of Religion throughout the West, as Saint Bazile was in the East: Basilius in Oriente, Benedictus in Occidente. For like as all the Knights of the East,Or^^^ of the East (...) W^st, (...). deriued and squared all their Orders, by the Monasticall rule of that great Doctor Saint Bazile: euen so did the Monkes of the West, draw their Originall from that of Saint Benedict, reputed (by that bright Beacon in the Holy Church Saint Augustine) to be Authour of all the Orders of Chanons Reguler in Christendome, yea, and Secular also, as is to be seene in the Church of Paris, and in most part of Cathedrall Churches of France.
Alphonso Henriques, first King of Portugall, hauing conquered from the Moores the Citie of Euora, in the yeare before obserued, One thousand one hundred fortie seauen;(...) confessed and acknowledged, to hold it of God, and of the Virgin Mary. And to maintaine it against the Moores, he placed there a Garison or number of braue spirited Knights: who offred to yeelde him a due account of their Seruices, and to defend the Citie against the Moores. The Knights of this Assembly, made themselues knowne vnder the name Of Fellow Brethren of Saint Mary of Euora, giuing themselues the name of Bretheren, and the place of their abiding was tearmed a Fri^rie,

Fraternitie, or Brotherhood, which was their first dwelling, and without the ^aid Citie of Euora, where yet is to be seene the ruines, prints and steps of their old Castell, flancked with goodly Towers, and engirt with strong Wals. Their principall Church and Chappell, was dedicated to the Prince of Intelligences, the Arch-Angell Saint Michael.
Now, concerning the three first Great Maisters of this Order of Bretheren of Euora, ^hey were these.
I. Ferdinand de Montereiro, to whom the King gaue (as we haue already said) the Gouernment of the Castell of Mafra.The three first Great Maisters of the Order.
II. Gonsales de Viegas: And
III. Fernand de Yannes, to whom the same King of Portugall Alphonso Henriquez, gaue the strong Castle D'Auis, by him conquered from the Moores, on the frontiers ^nd confines of his new Kingdome: And thereby the Knights of this Order were named The Bretheren D'Auis, who went thither from Euora, which was their first Mannor and dwelling. And of this Castle D'Auis, they conserued the memory in their Shield of Armes, which they tooke thus.
D'Or a la Croix Fleurdelisce de Synople, and en pointe Deux Oiseaux, ainsi que des Cor^eaux, de Sable. Le Orden de Auis tuuo su principio en el Anno de 1147.The Orders, Escutcheon of Armes. en tiempo del ^ey Dom Al^nso primero Rey du Portugal. L'lamose al principio la Caualleria de Ebora, porque tuuo su Conuento en la Ciudad d'este nombre. Su primer Maestre sellamo Dom Fernando Monteiro; despues sucedio en el Maestrado Dom Fernand Yannez, a qui el Rey Dom A^enso de Portugal dio el Castillo de Auis Anno 1161. y siendo allirans la dado el Conuento ^rimero, sellamo De Auis. Vse por segnal vna Cruz como la de Alcantara, y por Armas la ^sma Cruz en Campo d'Oro, y al pie della dos Aues negras por alusion del nombre de Auis.
Thus you see what is said by Damiano a Goes, a Portugall Knight, in his History of Portugall; Radez de Andrada, in his History of the Knights of Calatraua; and the Count of Lansarote, in his Nobility of Andolouzia.
This Military Order of Portugall was confirmed by Pope Innocent, third of the name, in the fourth yeare of his Pontificalitie, and of Grace, One thousand two hundred and foure, then reigning in Portugall, Sancio, first of the name, Sonne and Successour to Alphonso Henriques. This King Sancio gaue to the said Order D'Auis,The bounty of King Sancio to the Order. these places and Seigneuries of
Valeillas,Alcanebe,Geromegna,Alcantade,
Alpedrino, and others in the Kingdome of the Algarues, in recompence of the Knights s^ruice of this new rising Order, who had performed little lesse then wonders at the surprizall of Sylues, the principall Citie of the Algarues,The taking in of Sylues in the Algar^es, which hee had conquered from the Moores, by ^ide and succour of some number of English and French Ships, wherein were many Knights of France (at their passage ouer the Seas, with the Kings of France and England, Phillip Augustus, and Richard) who being bea^en with a storme, and sundered from the Fleete by tempestuous windes, in the straite of Gibraltar; by a better fauouring gale, saued themselues in the Roade and Hauen of Lisbona.
In following time, and in the yeare One thousand two hundred and thirteene, the Order of Calatraua, and the seauenth Great Maister therof Dom ^oderigo Garcez de Asa, gaue to the Great Maister and Bretheren Knights D'Auis,The Knights D'Auis submit to the Order of Calatraua. that which they had and possessed in the Kingdome of Portugall. In acknowledgement whereof, the Knights and Great Maister of the said Order D'Auis, submitted themselues to the Order of Calatraua, being wholly subiected to their Rule, Statutes, visiting and Coertion, according to them of Alcantara, who did the like. Neuerthelesse this chanced to be altered, by reason of the Warres, moued betweene the Kings of Portugall and Castile, and in the time of Iohn of Portugall, seauenth Great Maister D'Auis) naturall Sonne to the King of Portugall Pedro, onely of that name, and who possessed himselfe of the Kingdome against his lawfull brethren) when the Order D'Auis would no longer acknowledge that of Calatraua.


A briefe Noate concerning the Order of Christus and of Portugall.
NOw, as concerning the Order of Christus, or of Portugall: It was Instituted by the sixt King of Portugall Dom Denys or Dionysius,At what time the Order of Christus was instituted. in the yeare One thousand three hundred and eighteene. And willed, that the Knights of this Order should goe cloathed in Blacke, and weare vpon their Breast a Crosse pattee of Red Silke, and another full White Crosse ouer the Red, so that they appeared as two Crosses together. And the Shield of Armes belonging to this Religion, was D'Argent a ces^ double Croix.
The confirmation of the Order.

This Order was confirmed in the yeare One thousand three hundred and twentie, by Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, who prescribed and gaue them the Rule of Saint Benedict. Pope Alexander the sixt gaue them permission to marrie, as well as other Militarie Orders of Spaine. The first great Maister of Christus, was Dom Gil Martinez, who before had bin of the Order D'Auis; and their first Conuent was at Castro-marin, but afterward translated into the Citie of Tomar; more neerely neighbouring on the Moores of Andaleuz^, and of the Estremadura.
This Order had Commanderies, not onely in P^rtugall and the Algarues,The Commanderies belon^ing to the Order. but in Affrica and the Indiaes, and especially in Brasile; which made the Maistership thereof seeme so wealthie, that it amounted to the yearely Rent of an hundred thousand Ducates. And this was the reason, why it was annexed inseperably (as well as that D'Auis) to the Crowne of Portugall; the Kings whereof hauing taken the title of perpetuall Administratours of the Orders D'Auis and of Christus.
The Crosse* Collar and Armes of the Order*The Crosse and Collar of this Order, is to be seene in the Quire of the Gray Friers at Paris, on the Chaires at the left side, and wreathed about the Armes of some Portugall Lords, refuged in France, with the King Dom Anthonio their Maister, who dyed at Paris, and whose Hart is, at the Aue Maria, but his Body remaining in the said Gray Friers at Paris (as yet vnburied) in the Chappell de Gondye: where vnder the State Canopie; may be seene the Armes of Portugall, the Crosse and Order of Christus, and an earthly Spheare, which serued as a Deuise to the last Kings of Portugall.
The reason of adding the Spheare to the Armes of Portugall.Concerning this Deuise of the Spheare, it was taken by Emanuel, the foureteenth King of Portugall, by aduise and perswasion of Iohn, King of Portugall, first of the name. Who councelled him so to doe when he was a yong man, to adde a deuise to his Armes, and carrie a Spheare, wherein might be portraied the Celestiall Circles: as seeming to foretell thereby, that vnder this Emanuel (who he thought should be his Successor in the Kingdome) the Portugals would discouer to their great gaine and perpetuall renowne) a new Heauen, and Countries as farre remoated from vs, as the Indiaes East and West. As indeede it came so to passe* vnder conduct of that great Portuguize Captaine Vasco de Gama, who embarqued himselfe at the Port of Lisbone the ninth day of Iuly,Vas^ de G^ma the f^ous Portuguize discoue^. in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred and seauenteene, doubling the Cape of Bona Speranza in Athiopia, because from thence the Ships sailed into Arabia, and to the Indiaes, as also into many other parts of the world, from whence they brought infinite Merchandises to the said Port.
Moreouer in those coasts was the Prouince of Zophala, richly abounding in Mines of Gold, from Mozambiga Gama sailed into the Isle of Mombaza; and from thence to the rich Kingdome of Melinda;Calicut the richest P^rt of the (...). and the two and twentieth day of May, fourescore and eighteene, Gama tooke landing at Calicut, the very richest Port of the Indiaes for Spiceries. Such was the first discouery of the Eastern Indiaes, which did so highly enrich the Kingdome of Portugall: whether Vasco de Gama returned well and safe, to the

^ort of Lisbone, about the beginning of the Moneth of Iune, One thousand foure ^undred fourescore and nineteene.
Now, as concerning the Armes of Portugall, they haue bin diuers,The Armes of Portugall alt^ed and changed. by the saying ^nd testimony of the Spanyards; who haue let slip (vnder silence) those bo^^e by Henry of Bezans^n or of Lorrain, first Hereditary Count of Portugall. For, if he was of ^^e House of Lorraine, the auncient Armes of the Kingdome of Austrasia, were ^holly like to them of the House of Austria, which are De Gueulles a vne Fesse d'Ar^ent; as Guydo Coequillus obserueth in his Historie of Neuers, the two hundred and ^ne and thirty Page.
If he was of the House of the Counts of Bourgongne (as there is more apparance ^hat he was, rather then otherwise) he had caried of the County, which is D'Azur (...) Lyon rempant d'Or, Lampasse and Arme de Gueulles, seme de Billettes d'Or.
And yet notwithstand, very true it is, that the said Henry of Bourgongne did beare either the one or other, but rather to make knowne to the Spanyards, that he was ^escended of the House of France: he did the very same, as his Cousine Raymond ^f Bourgongne did, who vpon the same subiect, neither bare of Bourgongne the Du^hie or Countie; but of France sans nombre, as we haue before declared more at ^rge: By his example, Henry de Bezanson Porta d'Or a Trois Fesses d'Azur semees de ^rance sans nombre, a la Bordure de Gueulles.The Armes of Henry de Bezanson Armes long time retained by the Kings of Portugall, after the death of the said Henry of Bezanson. For the same Historian ^uydo Cocquillus, in the two hundred ninetie and eight Page of his Historie writeth; ^at he had seene in the Chamber of Accounts at Neuers, a Charter of the yeare ^ne thousand two hundred fortie and two of Mathilda, Countesse of Bologne,Mathilda the Countesse of Bologne. wife to ^lphonso, Sonne to King Alphonso of Portugall, second of the name. On the Great ^eale whereof are the Armes of the said Alphonso of Portugall: A faces seme^s de ^eurs de Lys (he forgot the Field of the Escutcheon) Le Centre Seal (which is the ^iuie Signet) party de Fleurs de Lys sans nombre, and de faces a vn bord rond. The words ^grauen about it, are these. Mathildis Comitissa, Bononiae, Moretaniae (that is Mor^igne) Clarimentis (that is Clairmont in Auuergne.) Thus speaketh Cocquillus, by intelligence whereof is to be noated, that whatsoeuer was spoken before, concer^ing the Armes of Henry of Bezanson, Count of Portugall; Cocquillus forgot to em^azon. Or else it was the Printers fault,The Authours owne words of hi^ French Impression. who ordinarily passeth too slightly ouer ^ost important words of the Historie. As in the Impression of this Worke, which ^ould require a very great Errata, onely thorow their negligence that were imploy^d therein.
This Alphonso, Husband to the Countesse of Bologne Mathilda, was the same man,The Regent of Portugall, that afterward became the vsu^per. ^hom we haue obserued, to be made Regent for the fift King of Portugall, third of ^e name, in the yeare One thousand two hundred fiftie and seauen. Who had ^o his lawfull Wife the said Mathilda Countesse of Bologne, by whom he had the ^hildren formerly mentioned, and who (to maintaine himselfe in his vsurpation) ^ft her, without any cause, and espoused Beatrix, naturall Daughter to the King of ^astile, Alphonso the Astrologer.
Which is much more iustified by the priuie Sealed Charter,The priuie Sealed Charter a more exact assurance. formerly spoken ^f, affirming, that at the same time, the House of Bologne Portoit de France sans ^ombre, in regard of Monsieur Phillip of France, Legitimate Sonne to King Phil^p Augustus, called the Conqueroer (for those reasons heretofore alleadged:) for ^e said Monsieur Phillip of France married Mahauld of Bologne, Countesse of ^logne, and of Dom-Martin, or Damp-Martin, which is but all one (Daughter to ^da, Countesse of Bologne, and to Renaud, Count de Damp-Martin) and of this ^arriage was borne their onely Daughter, Iane of Bologne, Wife to Gaucher de Cha^il^n.
Marriage thus made betweene Monsieur Phillip of France,Armes giuen by King Phillip Augustus to his Sonne. and the said Ma^uld Co^e of Bologne: King Phillip Augustus his Father, gaue him L'Escu de ^ance, sa^ n^mbre, au Lambeau de Gueulles. And for Appanage or portion, the ^ountie of Clermont in Auuergne: Du Tillet writeth, that it was the Countie of Beau^.
In second Marriage the said Countesse of Bologne. Mahauld,The second marriage of Mahauld or Mathilda. by command of the

King Saint Lewes, and of Queene Blanch of Castile her Mother, espoused we said Alphonso of Portugall, whereon ensued the Children before remembred: bee the said Prince of Portugall vsed his wife vnkindely, as wee haue already told you. Returne we now to the Armes of Portugall, according to the Spanyards owne relation, who say, that
The first King of the said Kingdome Dom Alphonso Henriquez, hauing vanquished fiue Kings of the Moores in a fought Battaile, and wonne away their Banners from them, in that famous encounter made at Ourique, and in the yeare One thousand one hundred thirtie and nine: He tooke for Armes L'Escu d'Argent charge de Cinq Escussons d' Azur mis en Croix,Diuersitie of opinions concerning his Armes, and the reason of taking them. and rangez en Saultour. Which deuise the King tooke in honour of the fiue wounds of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ (and which he beheld in Heauen on the day of Battaile at Ourique) and with a ioyfull heart, for so happy and glorious a victory.
Others doe write, that he gaue himselfe those Armes, in memory of the Thirtie Pence, which the Iewes gaue to the Traitour Iudas, for the sale and deliuery of his Lord and Maister, our Sauior and Redeemer Iesus Christ, that they might spend their rage and furie, vpon the onely Lambe of innocence. For the fiue Escutcheons, charged with fiue and twentie Pence, ordered in forme of a Crosse; represented the Bed of bitternesse and sorrow, whereon our Lord Iesus Christ endured Martyrdome, to redeeme vs by his Bloud (of ineffable merit) from eternall death, and the throne of Hell.
An addition to the Armes by Alphonso the third.Some others doe hold, that in the same Battaile before remembred, King Alphonso won sixe Penons and Banners, belonging to as many Princes of the Moores. In memorie whereof, Il y prit l Escu d' Argent, charge de Cinq Quines d'Azur, which being ioyned altogether, make vp the Senarie number. And that Alphonso, third of the name, fift King of Portugall, of whom wee haue formerly spoken, added to those Armes L'Orle de Gueulles, chargee de Sept Chasteaux d'Or, in fauour of the Royall House of Castile; from whence he tooke to wife Dogna Beatrix, naturall Daughter to the King of Castile Alphonso the Wife, and to Dogna Maiore Guillen de Guzman: By which Marriage the Kingdome d' Algarue came to the Crowne of Portugall.


The End of the Sixt Booke.



Of those Orders of Knighthood, which (from time to time) haue beene created and Instituted in Allemaigne, or Germany: The Seauenth Booke.

The Order of the Dragon Ouerthrowne, or turned vpside downward: Or of Hungaria. Instituted in Germany and Bohemia, by the Emperour Sigismond, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Foure Hundred and Eighteene. CHAP. I.
WEe haue in some of our former Discourses,L'Ordre de Dragon Reuerse. obserued the particularities of the Generall Councell of Constans, held in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Foure Hundred, and Fifteene, against the erroneous and depraued Doctrine of diuers, amongst whom were reckoned Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prague, said to be reuiuers of the Albigeois Religion, reputed Heresie in those times, condemned by the precedent Councells.

And in that of Constans, the

^d esteemed Prophets, Iohn ^sse, and Hierome of Prague ^ere burned: because they ^ould not abiure the Religion Wickliffe, wherewith those ^o Preachers had instructed ^e Kingdomes of Hungaria and ^hemia, with other Seigneu^es of Germanie, appertaining (...) the Emperour Sig^smond,The care of the Emperour Sigesmond for the good of the Church. ^ho laboured with his vtmost ^deauour to plant peace in the ^hurch, making no spare of ^s toyle and trauaile, into En^and, France and Spaine, for ^u^ation of those Princes, to ^trespond and ioyne with ^m in so holy an enterprise: ^hich hee brought to passe by ^eanes of the Councell of ^nseans; determined in the ^eare Foure Hundred and ^ghteene. For ioy whereof,The Institution of the Order. ^ee established the Order of ^e Dragon ouerturned, fa^ously renowned (for long ^me) throughout all Germany, ^a, and in Italy in regard that ^e Emperours, who were Suc^essors to the said Sigismond, honoured the Princes and Vi^es of the Empire with this Order.
The Crosse and Habite of the Knights.The Knights whereof did dayly weare a Crosse Flower-deluced with Greene, as their ordinary noate or Embleme: but on Sollemne and Festiuall dayes, they vsed to weare a Scarlet Cloake, and on the Mantlet of Greene Silke, a Tortis or double Chaine of Gold, at the ende whereof hung a Dragon ouerthrowne, her wings seeming broken, enamelled with diuers coulours, according as the Diuell and his Arch-Ministers and Darlings, doe vary and disguise their cunning pactises, thereby to deceiue and seduce poore ignorant people.
This Emperour Sigismond, King of Bohemia and Hungaria, was of the Illustrious House of Luxembourg,The Emperours Descent. Sonne to the Emperour Charles, Fourth of the name, nourished and educated in the Court of the King of France Philip de Valois, Sixt and last of the name, whose Coutt was most magnificently maintained, beyond all the Princes of Christendome.
Princes Electors of the Empire, and the Officers thereto belonging.Charles the Fourth was Author of the Golden-Bull, for Establishing the Electors of the Empire, and the Officers thereof directed by the Quaternian number of Foures: as for example,
Foure Dukes, which are
Brunswicke,Bauaria,Suauba; AndLorraine.
Foure Landesgraues, which are
Thuringe,Hessen,Luctotemberg; AndHalsatia.
Foure Marquesses, which are
Of Misnia,Brandenbourge,Morauia; And ofBada the lower, otherwise called Baden.
Foure Bourgraues or Captaines, which are
Of Maidenbourg,Nuremberg,Reneck; And ofStrombourg.
Foure Earles or Counts, which are
Of Cleues,Schuartzembourg in Cilie,Saxonie; AndSauoye.
Foure Counts Captaines of the Empire, for conduct and leading their men of warre.
Flanders, which is not of the Empire; but vnder Authority and homage to the Crowne of France, and therefore it beareth another name
As Tyroll,Aldenbourg; AndFerrara.
Foure Lords, which are of
Millaine,L'Escale,La Mirandola: AndPadua.
Foure principall Abbots, which are of
Fulda,Kempten,Wissembourg; AndMurbach.
The Foure Mountaines of the Empire, which are
Of Munnerberg,Friberg, or Fribourg,Heidelberg; AndNurenberg.
The Foure Burroughes of the Empire, which are
Aldenbourg,Meidenbourg,Rotenbourg; AndMeckelbourg.
The Foure Great-Marshalls of the Empire, which are the Lords of
Bappenheines,Iuliers or GulichMisnia; AndVistinge.
The foure Barons of the Empire, which are the Lords of
Limbourg in Franconia,Tockembourg,Westerbourg; AndAndeluualden.
The Foure Knights of the Empire, which are the Lords of
Andelauu,Meldinghen,Strondecke; AndFronberg.
The foure Metropolitane Cities of the Empire; which are of
Ausbourg,Aix la Chappelle,Spire (AndLinberck.
The foure Villages of the Empire; which are
Bamberg,Vlme,Higuennaw; AndSelestad.
The foure Rusticks of the Empire, which are
Cologne,Ratisbone,Constance; AndSaltzbourg.
The foure Possessions of the Empire, which are
Ingelhim,AltdorffLiechtenaw; AndDenckendorff.
The foure great Rangers or Huntsmen of the Empire, are the Lords of
Hurn,Vrach,Scombourg; And ofMetsth, neere to Kur at the Grisons.
The foure Officers Hereditary of Suaba in the Empire, are these
The Esquire Caruer of Vualpourg,
The Cup-Bearer or Taster of Radach.
The Marshall of Mardorff; And
The Chamberlaine of Kemnat.
The Foure Esquires and Valets of the Empire, are the Lordes of
Waldeck.Hirten de Fulchen,Arnsperg; AndRabnaw.
But the most part of those Ancient Seigneuries, are changed at this present,Antiquities are alwayes subiect to alterations. and the goods or benefits belonging to them, are past into the greatest Houses, erected now into Dukedomes, and other Titles of Honour, according as times alter and change all things, and the willes of the Emperours, who exalted and mounted to d^grees of honour and excellencie, such as themselues pleased, and deiected others.
Because there is nothing more certaine and constant in this mutable world; then vncertainty and inconstancie it selfe.
Now, as concerning the number of the Princes Electours, as now at this present it is, and consisting of Seauen; some haue referred their Institution to Pope Gregory,Institution of the Princes by some opinions. the Fifth of that name, a Saxon by nation, at such time as hee Crowned for Emperour Otho the Third. To whom (say they) hee gaue the Empire of Germany, with charge and condition, that the Emperours his Successors, should bee elected of the Germaine Nation: And
Whosoeuer hee was that should bee elected by those Electors, must beare Title of Elect Emperour, and King of the Romaines; vntill hee should be Crowned by the Pope, after which Coronation, hee should then be stiled Augustus, and Emperour of the Romaines.
But this opinion can haue no subsistence. To small purpose would the Popes intrade themselues, to transferre the Empire of the West, won by the French, and with the deare expence of their blood.
But Princes are oftentimes forgetfull of great Seruices,A common erour in some great men of these times. which they cannot recompence to the very least step of merit; rather growing crosse and vnkinde to them, to whom (indeed) they stand most obliged.
And so hath it fared with the French, by whom the Popes are in possession of the Exarcate of Rauenna, and all that which else they enioy in Italy: For the pretended Donation or gift of Constantine, is but a meere Fable and Chimera.Rome gouerned by Lieutenant to the Emperours. Rome hath alwaies bin ruled and gouerned by Lieutenants to the Emperours; witnesse Sigibert, speaking of the Emperours Constans the Second, and Constantine Ponogat. Charlemaigne established a Parliament at Rome, for the gouerning of Italy, and here vpon it was, that the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa, at making his entrance into Rome; made a mockery of the Romaines behauiour, who in a vaine friuolous, and ^ong premeditated Oration, would haue made him beleeue, that the Empire was giuen to the Germaines by the Popes.The Emperours answers to the Romaines. But hee shut vp their mouthes with these ^ew words. Romanorum Imperium maiorum meorum Francorum sanguine emptum, eisdem quibus accepi manibus, tueri conabor.
Those Authours which liued in the time of the said Pope Gregory, haue left nothing written, concerning this Institution of the Electours; no more did they, which traced the life of the Emperour Otho.
The iudgement of Onuphrius ab^ut the Princes Electors.Onuphrius the Great Antiquary, in his Chronicle, and in his Treatise of the Imperiall Assemblies, giueth vs to know, that Election of the Emperours by Seauen Electors, was the Institution of Pope Gregory, who was Tenth of the name, about the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Threescore and Twelue.
There is a great Interuall and length of time, betweene this Pope, and Gregory the Fift, who sate in the Chaire of Saint Peter, in the yeare Nine Hundred, Fourescore and Fifteene: whereas Gregory the Tenth began to sit in the yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred, Threescore and Eleauen. He iumpes well, that can mount one, almost Two Hundred and Fourescore yeares at one leape.
In the Registers of the Parliament, is set downe the Alliance and confederacie, sought and made by the King of the Romanes Philip (elected Emperour) with Philip Augustus, King of France; against King Richard of England, elected also King of Germany, by the ill-willers to the King of Germany. In which Confederacie, there is not one word spoken of the Electors, but onely of the Princes of the Empire.




Confoederatio Imperatoris and Domini Regis.
PHILIPPVS G. Romanorum Rex semper Augustus, Notum, etc. Quod propter dilectionem quam mutuo habuerunt erga Dominum Philippum Regem Francorum genitor noster Fredericus and Henricus Frater noster (piae recordationis) Romanorum Impera^^res, hanc Confoederationem propter bonum pacis, and publicam vtilitatem cum charissi^^ amico nostro Philippo illustri Rege Francorum duximus ineundam, in hunc modum. Quod nos eidem adiutores erimus nominatim contra Ricardum Regem Angliae, and Comiten Othonem nepotem ipsius, and Baulduinum Comitem Flandriae, and Hayulfum Archiepiscopum Coloniae, and contra omnes alios inimicos eius, vbicunque cum honore nostro id facere poterimus, bona fide and sine malo ingenio, quando locum and tempus id faciendi habebimus. Si aliquis de imperio nostro eidem Philippo Regi Francorum malum, vel ipsius regno, si ille qui deliquisset, non emendaret, hoc per Nos, vel per nuntios nostros, per pacem, vel per rectum in Marchia competenti infra quadraginta dies postquam id sciuerimus per pradictum Regem Francorum si fuerimus citra montes; vel Episcopus Metensis hoc sciuerit si fuerimus vltra montes, Dominus Rex Francorum poterit se vindicare de eo sine interruptione, and nos innabimus eum bona fide. Nos non retinebimus in Imperio nostro aliquem h^munem de Regno Franciae siue Clericum, siue Laicum contra voluntatem charissimi a^^^i nostri praedicti Regis Franciae. Praedictus Rex Franciae quandocunque voluerit poterit se vindicare de Comite Flandriae, de terra quam idem Comes habet in Imperio tam in Feod^ quam in Dominio, and hoc sine interceptione. Nos bona fide promittimus, quod si scirem^^, quod aliquis quaeret malum Philippi Regis Francorum Illustris, vel eius Regno, nos bona fide id disturbaremus, and si non possemus disturbare, id nuntiaremus eidem Regi. Et quando, Domino violente, coronati fuerimus in Imperatorem, has conuentiones eidem Ill^stri Regi Francorum renouabimus, and sigillo nostro confirmabimus. Nos autem in manu Ne^el^nis venerabilis Suessionensis Episcopi fiduciauimus, quod omnia praedicta bona fide obseruabimus. Id etiam de mandato nostro dilecti Principis nostri Conratus Vuirteburgensis. B. Mettensis. Chiethelmus Constantiensis Episcopi. Theodoricus quoque de Greuch, Fredericus de Ceolre, Hartemanus de Kareberch, Godefridus de Vehingre, Euerhardus de E^resten Comites; and de latere nostro Trusardus Camerarius noster. Warnerus de Rosseuach, Warnerus de Bollands, Warnerus de Ceangue milites iurauerunt, quod bona fide studebu^t, quod haec a nobis obseruentur and teneantur. Id quoque adhuc vnum Archiepiscopum, and vnum Episcopum iurare faciemus.
Datum Wannaci Anno Dominicae Incarnationis Millesimo Centesimo XC. Oct^m, Regni Tertio Kalendas Iulij, nostri primo. Per manum Conradi Imperialis Aul^ Pr^thonotari^.




In the yeare One Thousand, Two Hundred Fifty and Seauen, Richard of Eng^nd, Earle of Cornewall, Brother to the King of England Henry, Third of the name, ^s elected King of Germany, after the death of William Count of Holland. At that ^me then, the number of the Electours were not limited or restrained to Seauen. or heere you may read the Text of Mathew Paris, who reporteth the Catalogue ^d number of the Princes of Germany, with their Order of Precedencie, who had ^ight and Electiue Voyces.




The Princes of Germany that had their Voyces in case of Election.
HI sunt maximi in Alemania, ad quorum nutum pendet electio ipsius regni, quod est quasi arra Imperij Romanorum: Archiepiscopus Coloniae, cuius titulus est sacri Impe^ Proto-Cancellarius post honorem Archipraesulatus: Archiepiscopus Maguntinus, Archi^iscopus Treuerensis, Rex Bohemiae, Comes Palatinus de Rheno, Dux Austriae, Dux Suauiae, ^i and Comes Bauariae, Dux Poloniae, Marchisius de Misne, Marquitius de Brandeberg, ^ux Saxoniae, Dux de Brunsuic, Dux de Carentene, Dux de Melai, Dux Brabantiae, qui (...) Louaniae, Landegrauius, Turingiae, Marchio Mixiae. Inter omnes hos Magnates super^inens est Archiepiscopus Coloniensis, qui coronare tenetur Regem Alemanniae apud A^isgranum, ab antiqua, and approbata consuetudine.




Now like as, or according to the same manner,The Institution of the Popes Conclaue. as when Pope Gregory the Tenth in the Councell held at Lyons, vnder the Reigne of Philip the Hardy, Sonne and ^uccessour to the good King Saint Lewes, in the yeares, One Thousand, Two Hun^red, Threescore and Twelue, and Thirteene) made the Decree, that whensoeuer ^e death of a Pope happened, the Cardinalls should be lockt vp, vntill they were ^ll come to one agreement, and had giuen their nomination of another. Euen so, ^onfusion happening in Election of the Emperours, by plurality of them that had ^heir electiue Voyces and Suffrages; the same Pope Gregory the Tenth sent to pray, ^equest, and entreate the Princes of Germany, to finish the Interregnum which lasted ^n his time, to the great hurt and preiudice of Christendome, and to prouide reme^ie for the like happening afterward.
Which accordingly they did, electing for Emperour Rodolph Count of Haspourg. Whereby wee are to vnderstand, that the Popes motion and request had exceeded ^ll reason, if the Seauen Electours had at that time beene instituted.The ordaining of the Seauen Electors a moderne matter. But most ^rue and certaine it is, that the reducing the Electors to the number of Seauen, is a ^oderne matter, attributed (according to Munster and other Germaines) to the Em^erour Charles of Luxembourg, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, Fourth of the name, who had beene nourished the most part of his youngest yeares in the Court of France, vnder the King Philip le Bell, his Sonnes and Successours.
Others write, that Pope Clement, Fourth of the name, a Narbonnois by Nation,Another opinion concerning Pope Clement. ^nd Predecessour to Pope Gregory the Tenth; was Author of those Seauen Electors, and that his Institution was confirmed by the Bull of the Emperour Charles ^he Fourth.
But this opinion is out of all apparance, and the dates of the times are thereto contrary and repugnant.
So that the most likely opinion, is of them that ranke it in the yeare, One Thousand, Two Hundred, Threescore and Twelue: For Iohn Carion, followed by Melancthon, in the Fourth Booke of their Chronicles, write, that before the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa, First of the name, who died in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fourescore and Nine, in the City of Seleucia beyond the Seas; there was no speech at all of the Electours.
Otho of Austria, Bishop of Frisinghen, Luitprandus, Schafnaburgensis,No great certainty of the Seauen Electors Originall. and other ^ncient Historians of those times haue left, neither found any thing written thereof. Sabellicus in the ninth Booke of his Aeneids, Auentinus and others sing the same Song.
When the Emperour keepeth open Court, and walketh in ceremoniall manner, the Archbishop of Treuers is placed before him; he of Mentz or Magunce is on

the Emperours right hand,The Emperours Order in Court. and hee of Cologne on the left. The King of Bohemia holdeth ranke next to the Archbishop of Magunce, hauing next to him the Count Palatine of the Rhine; and neerest to him is the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquesse of Brandenbourg.
At riding or goi^g in Processions, etc.In Processions and generall Entrances into Cities or Townes, the Archbishop of Treuers rideth or goeth alone before the Emperour, who following next, rideth in the midst of the Archbishop of Magunce, that taketh place on his right hand, and he of Cologne on his left. Behinde them come the other foure Electors all afront, they two of Bohemia and Saxonie in the midst, and the other two goe on either side of them.
A Modell of the Persian Empire.Some haue written that this number Seauen of the Electors of the Empire, was deriued from the patterne and modell of the Court of the Persian Kings; who had neerest to them seauen Great Lords of the Kingdome, whereof the Great S^r^, (that is to say, the High Priest) was the Chiefe, by Councell of which seauen Lord^ the whole Empire of Persia was gouerned.
And those seauen Great Lords were called, by Title of Excellencie and Honou^, Princes,Hest. 1.1.4. as wee learne in the History of Hester, the first Chapter, by these wordes, Septem Duces Persarum atque Medorum, qui videbant faciem Regis, and primi post eum r^fidere soliti erant. The seauen Princes of Persia and Media, which saw the Kings face, and which sate the first in the Kingdome. And their names were Carshena, Sheth^, Admatha,The names of the Seauen Princes. Tarshis, Meres, Mars^na and Memucan, a president of very singular example.
Now heere you may behold the dignities of these Seauen Electours of the Empire, the three first whereof are Ecclesiasticall persons, and the other foure Secular.
The Dignities and Offices of the Seauen Princes Electors.1. The Archbishop of Magunce, Primate of the Germanies, prime Prince Electour, and Arch-Chancellour of Allemaigne or Germanie.
2. The Archbishop of Treuers Arch-Chancellour of Italy.
3. The Archbishop of Cologne, Arch-Chancellour of the Gaules.
4. The Duke of Saxony, Great or High Marshall of the Empire, who beareth the Imperiall Sword, which Office and place we in France call the Constable.
5. The Marquesse of Brandenbourg, Great Chamberlaine of the Empire.
6. The Count Palatine of the Rhine, Lord High Steward of the Empire.
7. The Duke of Bohemia, Great Cup-Bearer or Taster of the Empire.
Which dignities and Offices are figured and represented in these fiue riming Verses following.

Moguntinensis, Treuerensis, and Coloniensis,
Quilibet Imperij fit Cancellarius horum.
Et Palatinus Dap fer: Dux Portitor ensis:
Marchio Praepositus Camerae: Pincerna Boemus.
Hi statuunt Dominum cunctis per saecula summum.

Concerning Hungary, and her ancient Inhabitant.Hungaria (which heretofore was called Pannonia the Lower, and the ancient Inhabitants Peonians, afterwards Panonians) tooke that name of the Scythian Nation, (and were acknowledged by the same Title) who in the yeare of Grace Foure Hundred and One, leauing the sourse or Spring of Tana, in Latine called Ta^ais, went to possesse themselues of the higher and lower Pannoniaes.
Cadaris, the first King of the Hunga^.Their first King after this seizure made, was named Cadaris, after whom succeeded the cruell Attila, ouerthrowne in a Battaile fought on the Plaines, and in the fields of Sologne, betweene Orleans and Bourges, as wee haue formerly related to you in the Second Booke of these Antiquities.
His Reigne continued foure and forty yeares, after whose death his Sonnes and those of Bleda, his Brother whom hee had caused to bee put to death) succeeded, euen to the time of our King Charlemaigne, who made himselfe Lord and Maister of both the Pannoniaes, and made the Prince of Hungaria that then gouerned, his Tributary (as Aeghinard telleth vs) who was called Doxis* Charlemaigne sowed there some seedes of the Christian faith,The first embracing. receiued and embraced by some of the Inhabitants: but fully planted and grounded by the Sonne of Doxis.


The Genealogie of the Kings of Hungaria.
^. GEysa, first Christian King of Hungarie, at the request and earnest ^rayers of our King Charles the Bauld.
Kadaris, and Attila, Kings of Hungaria, ^n despight of the Romaine Emperours ^hat liued in their time, to Adde Afflicti^n to the vanquished (according to the an^ient Prouerbe of the Gaules) forsooke ^heir auncient Armes De Sable au Loup ^ssant d'Argent; and tooke D'Argent a (...) Aigle esploye de Synople: Armes retain^ed by the Princes of Hungarie, vntill the ^rst Christian King Geysa, who tooke D'Argent a Trois mottes de Terre de Syno^le, a la Croix Archiepiscopale, ou Patriar^ale de Gueulles, to preserue the memo^e of the Church of Strigonia, begun to ^e build^d by the said King Geysa, and fi^ished by his Sonne and Successor.
II. Saint Stephen, the second Chri^ian King of Hungarie, who there ordai^ed and ^app^ted Archbishops or Mo^opolitaine See, which happened in the ^eare of Grace, nine hundred fourescore ^nd seauenteen. And from thence it pro^eeded, that the Kings of Hungaria haue ^etained to this present, the double Crosse or Deuise. But they did take o^er Armes, to wit, Burele d'Argent, and ^e Gueulles de huict pieces. The foure ^esses of Siluer, doe represent the foure ^rincipall Riuers which water Hungarie, ^s namely Danubie, Sauo, Nyssa, and Dra^: which wash and water all the Lands ^f Hungarie, making them fertile and ^ch in Mines. Saint Stephen tooke to wife Gisela, Sister to the Emperour Saint Henry, and by her he had many Children; ^mong whom was Saint Emerie. By rea^on of this death, Sarola his Sister had a ^onne named
III. Peter, who inherited the Crown ^f Hungarie, but his Subiect pluckt out ^s eyes; for his tyrannicall and disorde^d life. And by his death, the Crowne ^ame to the Sonnes of Michael, Brother ^o King Geysa, they both being the Sons ^f Doxis. This Michael left three Sons, ^s namely
Canutus.Ladislaus, that is Lancelot; AndVazullus.
Ladislaus was Father to three Children, to wit
D'Andreas, afterward King.Leuenta: AndBela, afterward King.
IIII. Andreas was the fourth Christian King of Hungarie, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand seauen hundred, who left three children,
Salomon.Adelaida: AndDauid.
After the death of Andreas, Salomon his eldest Sonne came to the Crowne: but it was vsurped against him by his Vnckle
V. Bela, who held the Kingdome three years: And by his death his Nephew
VI. Salomon, enioyed the Crown of Hungarie, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand threescore and three.
Bela, left three Sons, namely
Lambert.Geysa, afterward King: AndS. Ladislaus, King likewise.
Salomon made an agreement with these two last named, to reigne during his life time: but thirteene yeares after, the Ball of diuision was thrown between these two Princes, which was the cause that
VII. Geysa, second of the name, and his Brother Ladislaus expelled Salomon out of the Kingdome, whereof they possessed themselues, and the said Geysa was King three yeares onely, when by his death
VIII. Ladislaus, a man of sanctified life, a great Iusticer, and who liued chastely all his life time with Gisella his wife, Sister to Zelomira, King of Dalmasia, who had espoused the Sister of the said King Ladislaus, to whom by his Testament (if he chanced to die without issue) Zelomira should leaue Dalmasia and Creatia, with especiall charge and condition, that they should remaine inseperably vnited to the Crowne of Hungarie, as afterward it came to passe. In his time King Salomon forsooke the world, and became an Hermite in the wood of Istria, where he liued solitarily in all perfection and holinesse of life. Ladislaus reigned nineteene yeares, and dyed blessedly (his dead body working many famous miracles) in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fourescore and fifteene. He left two Sonnes
Coloman; AndAlmo, whom King Ladislaus had (by his Will and Testament) preferred to the Kingdome, although he was the yonger Brother, as well in regard of his milde and gentle manners; as because Coloman the elder was misshapen, one eyed and halting, being beside of a very cruell and wicked disposition. Neuerthelesse, soone after his Fathers death;
IX. Coloman possessed himselfe of the Kingdome, and made warre vpon his Brother, when he surprized by treason, with his Sonne Bela, causing both their eyes to be pluckt forth of their heads, and to be shut vp in a Monastery. He reigned One and twenty yeares, and died in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred and foureteene, leauing behinde him three Sons, to wit
Stephen.Ladislaus, dying yong: AndNicholas, a naturall Sonne.
X. Stephen, second of the name, by the death of his Father came to the Crowne of Hungarie, albeit he was but eight yeares old, and reigned eighteene. In regard he had not any Children, he adopted for his Sonne and Successour in the Kingdome, his Cousine Bela, whose eyes his Father had caused to be puld out, and shut vp in a Monastery.
XI. Bela, second of the name, reigned nine yeares, and dyed of a Dropsie, in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred forty and one. He left foure Sons
Ladislaus, King sixe Months.Geysa, afterward King; AndAlmo.
XII. Geysa, third of the name, succeeded in the Kingdome by the death of his Father. His Reigne lasted twenty yeares, and he had two Sons, as namely
Stephen, afterward King; AndBela, King also.
By the death of Geysa (a Prince endued with most sweete and affable nature) happening in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred threescore and one, his eldest Sonne
XIII. Stephen, third of the name, succeeded him, against whom his Vnckle Ladislaus sought to vsurpe the Crowne, which he held the space of six Moneths, and (by his death) his Brother Stephen likewise vsurped the Kingdome. But he was vanquished in a fought Battaile by the said Stephen; who dyed the same yeare as the Battaile was giuen, being the yeare of Grace. One thousand one hundred threescore and thirteene, leauing for Successour in the Kingdome after him, his Brother
XIV. Bela, third of the name, the reigne of whom lasted but a short time. He left two Sonnes,
Aymery; AndAndrew.
By the death of Bela, rancked among the number of the Saints, for his holines of life, succeeded him in the Kingdome his eldest Sonne.
XV. Aymery, whose reigne continued eight yeares, and he deceasing in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred, left the Crowne to his Son
XVI. Ladislaus, second of the name, who reigned but sixe Moneths, leauing the Crowne to his Vnckle
XVII. Andrew or Andreas, second of the name, who reigned foure and thirty yeares. He made one in the Croissade, and went in the voyage to the Holy Land, giuing the care and keeping of his wife Gertrude, to a Lord of the Countrie named Baucban, who had to his wife one of the very fairest Ladies in Hungarie, that alwayes kept company with the Queene. This Queene had a Brother, who grew very earnestly amorous of that beautifull Lady, and obtained his pleasure of her, by the base brokage and close contriuing of the Queene, who compassed the meanes, to cause her Brother lye with the Lady, vnder the name of her Husband Baucban, to whom his wife (much distasted with so vile a deed) disclosed the secret. Hereupon he fell into such a frenzie and iealousie, that he had slaine the Queenes Brother, but onely he preuented it by flight; neuerlesse, he gaue the Queene so many stabs with his Ponyard, as she expected hourly the ending of her life.
The King being returned from his holy voyage, called before publique Iustice Baucban, whom he had left Gouernor of his Kingdome, to vnderstand the reason, why he had committed this violence on the person of the Queen his wife. When he had heard the whole matter at large related to him; with his owne mouth he gaue the sentence of absolution to Baucban, and condemned the Queen to be burned

aliue, which accordingly was executed; that both men and women might take example, for medling in such wicked busines. Andrew by his first wife Gertrude had three Sons and a Daughter.

Bela, afterward King.
Coloman. And

Andrew.


The Daughter was
Saint Elizabeth, wife to Lewes Landsgraue of Thuringe,
By another wife he had one Son
Stephen, Father of Andrew, who was afterward King.
This King Andrew, being a valiant Prince, and a great Iusticer, died in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred thirty and fiue, leauing the Crowne to his eldest Sonne
XVIII. Bela, fourth of the name, who reigned forty yeares, and dyed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred threescore and fifteene. He had two Sonnes:
Bela, dying in his Fathers life time. And
XIX. Stephen, King of Hungary, fourth of the name, whose reigne continued foure and twenty yeares. He was traiterously slaine by one of his Minnions or Fauourites, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred fourescore and nineteene: He left a Son and a daughter.
XX. Ladislaus, King of Hungarie (third of the name) by the death of his Father.
The Daughter was
Mary, wife to Charles, King of Sicilie. And in this marriage were borne many Children, to wit
Charles, sirnamed Martell, Father of
Charles, King.Clemencia. AndIane of Sicilie.S. Lewes a Gray Fryer, Bishop of Tolledo.Robert Charles, otherwise called Carobert.Phillip-Lewes.Raymond.Berenguela.Eleonora; AndBlanch.
Ladislaus being deceased without issue
XXI. Andrew, third of the name, Son to Stephen, yongest Sonne to Andrew of Beyond the Seas, called the Iusticer, second of the name, was Ki. of Hungarie. Which Andrew the third dyed without issue in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred and one, but in his life time, Charles Martell of Sicilie layed claime to the Kingdome of Hungary, in the right of his Mother Queene Mary, and with him Charles his eldest Sonne, being supported by some Lords of the said Kingdome of Hungarie.
After the death of the said Andrew the third,Variance among the Hungars for election of their King. the Hu^gares (being deuided among themselues) elected for their King Wenceslaus, who was of Bohemia. Others gaue their voyces to Otho, Duke of Bauaria, who made his entrance into Hungary; but slunke away suddenly after his entrance. These deuisions were (at the length) determined, in a generall Assembly of the Estates of the Kingdome, who (with one consent) adiudged, and gaue the Crown to
XXII. Charles of Sicilie, Sonne to Charles Martel, and the Queene of Sicilie Mary of Hungarie; Crowned King in the yeare One thousand three hundred and ten, who left behind him three Sons
Lewes.Stephen; AndAndrew, Father of Charles, King of Sicilie.
XXIII. Lewes, by the death of his Father, was King of Hungarie, who sought to reuenge the death of his Brother Andrew, Husband to Iane Queene of Sicilie; from whom he laboured to vsurpe the Kingdome of Sicilie. He died in the year of Grace, One thousand three hundred fourescore and two, he being aged threescore and sixe yeares old: Leauing behinde him but two Daughters by Margaret, sister to Cazimire, King of Poland, deceasing without issue.
The Daughters were
Heduelga; AndMary, wife to Sigismond of Bohemia, Brother to Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, Sons to Charles of Luxembourge, Kings of Bohemia, and Emperours of the Romaines, the one after the other.
This Sigismond was Author of the Order of the Dragon Ouerthrowne;Predictions supposed concerning this Order of the Dragon. the onely subiect of this discourse. The Germaines, Agents and followers of Marthin Luther, a Succeeder in the Doctrine of Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prage, condemned and burned at the Councill of Constans; had made some publique declaration, against the Institution of this Order. Seeming to blaze abroad, that in former times, vnder the Emperors of Germanie, the Dragon had bin the Signale of the Empires faire fortunes and

felicitie, euen as it was in the times of the first Romaine Emperours. Whereto was added, that Charles of Luxembourge, King of Bohemia, Emperour, fourth of the name, and his Sonnes, Successours in the Empire and Kingdome of Bohemia, had bin the subiect and motiue cause (thorow their extreame couetousnesse) of loosing not onely Bohemia and Hungary, but generally the whole Estate of the Empire in Germanie and Italie, hauing (for certaine prices and summes of money) sold the Cities and Countries subiected to the Empire, displuming the Eagle, like to the Crowe of H^race, and brought it to a bare honorable title, without profit, power or any subsistance, but onely by the subuentions and helpes of the Germaine States, which are but Arbitrary, and according as the necessities of the Turkish wars doe presse them.
The Triumphal e^trances of the Emperors into RomeNow, it is a matter most sure and constant (according to the testimony of Ammi^nus Marcellinus, in the life of Iulian the Apostata, his sixt Booke) that the Romaine Emperours, making their entrances in Triumphall pompe: had borne before them on Pikes and long Statues, artificiall Dragons, made of light materials, and hollow within, their mouthes and throates wide gaping, onely to receiue in the ayre, by meanes whereof they lussed and whistled like Serpents: their Tayles couered with Crimosine Taffetie, floated with the windes, like to shining writhing Adders. According as it was obserued by the Poet Claudian In Ruffinum.

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Spirisque remissis
Mansuescunt varij vento cessante DRACONES.

And at the sixt Pan gyricke;
Hi volucres t^llunt Aquilas: hi picta DRACONVM,Colla leuant, multusque tumens per nubila Serpens.Iratus stimulante Noto, viuitque receptisFluctibus, and vario mentitur sibila tractu.
In like manner the Emperours of Germanie, when they marched in a ranked Battaile,A Dragon carried as Colonell of the A^mie. they caused a Dragon to be carried, planted vpon a Waggon or Chariot appointed for War, engirt and guarded with the best Souldiours in all the Armie. Our auncient Historians, in describing the Battaile wonne by Phillip Augustus, called the Conqueror, King of France, second of the name, against the rebellious Flemmings, and their Count Ferrand of Portugall; Regnand Count of Monstroeil, Bologne and of Dampmartin; the King of England Iohn; and the Emperor of Germanie Otho, fourth of the name;The ^^ttaile of Bouu^ines. doe say, that the French conquered the Dragon, which the said Emperour Otho caused to be carried vpon a great Armed Chariot. This was at the Battaile of Bouuines, wonne by King Phillip Augustus, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hvndred and fifteene, in the Moneth of Augustu, but the day I haue not remembred.
Rigordus, in the life of Phillip Augustus, Ab opposita parte stabat Otho in medio agminis cons^tissimi, qui sibi pro vexillo erexerat Aquilam deauratum super Draconem, pendentem in pertica oblonga erecta in Quadriga. And a little after Et ita Imperator oftendit militibus nostris dorsum, and a campo recessit Aquila, and Draco cum Carro dimissa, and praedae expostae: Et ibidem capti sunt duo Comites cum Bernardo, and Girardo: Carrus discerpitur, Draco Francitur, Aquila alis cuulsis, and Confractis ad ipsum Regem defer^ur.
William the Breton, at the beginning of the fift Booke of his Phillipides, that is to say; Of the life of King Phillip Augustus; speaketh thus
Mox Otho Imperij declarans signa, volensqueIam quasi promeriti rem praelibare trophaeiSTANDARDVM aedificat, miroque insignit honore,Imperij vt fasces tanto illustrante paratuSe Dominatorem totius disputet Orbis,ERIGIT IN CARRO PALVM, PALOQVE DRACONEMImplicat, vt possit procul hinc atque inde videri,Hauriat and ventos, cauda tumefactus, and alis,Dentibus horrescens, victusque patentis hiatu,Quem super aurata volucer Iouis imminet alaTota superficies cuius nitet aurea SolisAemula, quo iactat plus se splendoris habere.
And at the beginning of his twelfth Booke.

CARRVS quo reprobus erexerat Otho DRACONEM,
Quem super auratis Aquilam suspenderat alis,
Cogitur innumeras in se sentire secures,
Fragminibusque dolet ignis cibus esse minutis,
Nec saltem vt superent fastus vestigia tanti,
Cumque suis pereat damnata superbia Pompis.

But come we now againe to Sigismond. It was in the time of his Reigne, when ^he Battaile at Nicopolis was lost from the Christians, and won by the Great Turke Baiazeth, in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and sixteene, on Monday before the day of Saint Michael in September.


A Briefe Relation of the Battaile fought at Nicopolis, betweene the Christians, and Baiazeth the Turkish Emperouor.
SIgismond had obtained of the most Christian King, Charles the sixt,The succour of Knights and Squires in France. the succour of a thousand Knights, and as many Esquires, the most valiant Gentlemen in his Kingdome, with such troupes of braue disposed Souldiours, as amounted well neere ^o twelue thousand. Of them was chiefe Leader and Commander Iohn of Bour^ongne, who was Count of Neuers (Eldest Sonne to Phillip the Hardie, Duke of Bourgongne) conducted by Phillip of Artois, Count d'Eu, and Constable of France: The Counts of March, Henry and Phillip de Bar; Frances Enguerran, Lord of Couey ^nd Count of Soissons; Guy de la Trimouille, Lord of Sueilly; William his Brother; ^ohn of Vienna, Admirall of France; Iohn de Maingre, called Boucicault, afterward Marshall of France; Renauld Lord of Roye; the Lords of Saint Paule, of Montorell, ^nd of S. Py; the Hazele of Flanders; the Lord de la Riuiere Montquell, and many other Lords, of very great experience in the managing of Armes.
Baiazeth, to raise the Siedge of Nicopolis in Bithinia, came thither with two hundred thousand men.The power of Baiazeth, to (...) of Nicopolis. Twentie thousand Turkes were vanquished (in an Am^uscado) by the Lord of Coucy, accompanied onely with fiue hundred Horse; which ^red choller and anger in the Counts of Neuers and Eu, who enuied the glory of this ^aliant Captaine.
Sigismond was of the minde, that the Hungars should haue the first place of preferment on the day of Battaile; because they were fashioned,A consideration for appointing the Order of the Battaile. inured and made apt to ^ight with the Turkes, and that the French should be in the grand Battalion of the Armie. The Lord of Coucy (who dyed prisoner at Byrsa) was of the same opinion; ^et contraried by the Lord de la Trimouille, who alleadged for his reasons, that this was an vndoubted signe of cowardise and feare. But Coucy auouched, that it was the ^afest and most assured counsell; For in occurrences of Warre (quoth he) men must ^uffer themselues to be guided by reason, and not by contempt or misprising the enemies forces. Moreouer, he would place the tayle of his Horse, where Trimouille ^urst not set his Horses head.
Thus good counsell was interpreted to the worst, and onely for the sinnes of the French; who with the Germaines, English and Flemings,Quarrell and (...) deaf to all good aduise. to the number of twenty ^housand men; were round engirt with the Infidels Armie, and instantly slaine in the Field: But of the Turkes to the number of threescore thousand men: The Hun^ars and the Emperour saued themselues, without so much as looking on the enemy, ^eauing the Strangers in the crowdes.
Foure hundred of reserued Prisoners, on the morrow had their throates cut be^ore the Pauillion of Othoman: but certaine French Lords,The bloudy issue of the Battaile. to the number of ^xe and twentie, were spared, and ransommed at two hundred thousand Flo^ines.
Iohn de Neuers, euen at the point of perishing by the Sword; One Deruis hau^ng seene his countenance; stayed Baiazeth from putting him to death.A man so named, or his Office. Assuring ^im, that he would be the subiect and cause, for the effusion and expence of more

Christian bloud; then Othoman, and all them of his Law, were able to doe with all their power.
The Turkes buried their dead, but left the Christians lying in the Field of Battaile,Buriall denied the Christians without admitting them any buriall, because they should be foode for the Foules of the Ayre, and saluage beasts of slaughter. But contrary to their hope or expectation, there they remained thirteene Moneths, as white as Snowe, and without any attaint: which euidently declared, that their death equalled Martyrdome, dying in defence of their Faith. The Count D'Eu, and Guy de la Trimouille dying prisoners, without seeing any more their Countrey of France.
Sigismond, dyed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred thirtie seauen, being the threescore and tenth of his Age; and of his Reigne ouer the Romaines seauen and twenty; the seauenteenth of Bohemia; the fifteenth ouer the Hungares; and fift of his Empire. He was the Father of
XXV. Elizabeth, wife to Albert, Duke of Austria, Kings of Hungaria and of Bohemia; and Emperour of the Romaines, who dyed of a dissenterie, by hauing fed too much on Melons, One thousand foure hundred thirtie and nine. And by his death, the Lords of Hungarie (awaiting for the Posthumous fruite of Queene Elizabeth, left great with childe) elected for their King
XVI. Ladislaus, fourth of the name, Duke of Lithuania, Brother to Cazimir, King of Poland; whose reigne was of very small continuance, being slaine in the Battaile of Varne, wonne against the Christians, by the Turke. During his Reigne
XXVII. Ladislaus, fift of the name (the Posthumous Son to Albert of Austria, and Queene Elizabeth his Mother) was Crowned King of Hungarie at the age of foure Moneths: the Realme being Gouerned (during his minoritie) by the great and renowned Captaine Iohn Huniades. The said Ladislaus was affianced to Madam Magdalen of France, fift Daughter to King Charles the seauenth, called the Victorious, and dyed (hauing neuer seene her) in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fiftie and eight, it being the nineteenth of his age. After his death, the Lords of Hungarie elected for their Soueraigne and King
XXVIII. Mathias Coruinus, Sonne to the great Captaine Huniades, Crowned King of Hungarie by the Emperour Fredericke, with the Crowne of Saint Stephen, the sixt yeare of his Reigne, and of Grace One thousand foure hundred threescore and foure. His Reigne continued seauen and thirtie yeares, and dying without issue, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred fourescore and fifteene; the Crowne of Hungaria fell to
XXIX. Ladislaus, sixt of the name (Sonne of Wenceslaus, Brother to Cazimire King of Poland, and Elizabeth; Queene of Hungarie) who had for Successour in the Kingdome
XXX. Lewes his Sonne, who reigned but a little time, and by his death happening in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred twenty and sixe, the Crown of Hungarie came to his Sister
XXXI. Anne, Wife to Ferdinand of Austria, in the Royall House whereof, the Kingdome of Hungarie remaineth euen to this present, in the persons of the Emperour.
XXXII. Maximillian of Austria, Father to the Emperours
XXXIII. Rodolphe, Second; And
XXXIV. Mathias, second of the name.



CHAP. II. The Originall and Genealogie of the Kings of Bohemia.
BOhemia is a Prouince of Almaigne or Germanie (on all sides enclosed with the Forrest of Hircynia) washed or watered with two great Riuers, of the Elle^, and of Multauia,Prage the chief Citie of Bohemia. whereon is seated the Citie of Prage, it being the Capitall or chiefe of the Kingdome. It was (at the first) gouerned by Dukes, but afterward, vnder the reigne of the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa, first of the name, Bohemia

^w erected to a Kingdome by the said Frederick, in the yeare of Grace,At what time it became a Kingdome. One thou^d one hundred fourescore and eighteene. This great Prouince was first inhabited ^cording to the testimony of Tacitus in his Germania) by the Bourbonnois people of ^le, as well as Bauaria, and from it enued, that she hath still retain^d her Auncient ^e of Boia, and of Boemia or Bohemia; A Boijs Galliae Populis:Retayning still her Auncient name. Afterward chased and ^ulsed thence by the Vandales, who (by Tatitus) are called Marcomans; which by (...) Countreys name were tearmed Bohemians, or Bohem-Mans, and not Marcomans (...) Vandales.
The First Christian Prince of this Prouince (which was in eldertimes vnder the ^mage and Iurisdiction of the King of Morauia,Borsi^^^ the first Christian Prince of Bohemia. which at this present is but a Marqui^e, and Bohemia a Kingdome) was named Borsinus, who died in the yeare nine hun^ed, or there about, the tenth Duke of Bohemia: Father to Radislaus Duke; Father Duke Bo^^slaus: Father to Duke Boleslaus, Second of the name; Father to Duke ^^leslaus, Third of the name; Father to Iamires, Duke; Vnckle to Bisetislaus, Duke, ^o died in the yeare of Grace one thousand fifty and two.
This man tooke out of a Monastery of Nunnes, erected at Ratisbonna (a village of ^uaria, called in the Cosmographicall Itinerarium of Ethi^us, Augusta Tiberij,Iutha a Nunne taken out of a Monastery. and af^ward in vulgar speech Reginoburgum, Reganesbourg in the Chronicle of Lauresheim, ^d Regensbourg, where the Monastery of Saint Hemerian is, and wherein was shorne ^onke Childerick, last King of France of the descendants of Clouis, the yeare of Grace ^uen hundred and fifty) the Daughter to the Emperour Otho, Second of the name,Rage and Reuenge pursuing the rape. ^led Iutha; whose father pursuing this rape and outrage, entred into Bohemia ^th a potent Army, resolued to put all to Fire and Sword. The two Armies being ^on the point of ioyning, Iutha fell on her knees prostrate before her Father, obtay^g pardon of him for her reape. But because the Emperour had made a sollemne we and Oathe, to establish his Throane Royall in the very middest of Bohemia: by agreement made betweene the Father in Law, and his new absolued Sonne,The Imperiall Seate erected in Bohemia by Otho. hee ^sed to be built a Royall Seate of Free Stone (high and Stately) in the Countrey of ^eslauia, which is the middest and nauill of Bohemia, in memorie of this perpetuall a^ement. And the Emperour permitted his new Sonne in Lawe, and his successours (...) Lords and Dukes of Bohemia, to beare of the Empire, that is to say De Gueules (...) Aigle esploye d'Or Eschiquete de Sable. Armes retained yet to this d^y by the Mar^esse of Morauia, and by the descendants of this Biteslaus, who by his Wife Iutha ^d fiue Children.
Spitignio, Duke by the death of his Father.The issue of B^teslaus and Iutha.
Vratislaus, Duke by the death of his Brother, and Proclaimed King of Bohemia (...) the Emperour Henry the Fourth, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hun^ed fourescore and sixe.
Conrard, who vsurped the Dukedome (but he tooke not on him the name of King) ^ainst his Brothers Children, and Reigned no longer then Seauen Moneths.
Vratislaus, First King of Bohemia, had many Sonnes, whereof none succeeded him the Kingdome, because
I. Ladislaus, the Sonne of Conrard, made himselfe to bee inuested in the Kingdome, (...) the Emperour Frederick Barbarossa, so to continue to him and his Successours, in ^e yeare before remembred. He had for his Successour in this newe springing King^me, his Sonne
II. Frederick, God-sonne to the Emperour Barbarossa, who had for Successour
III. Primislaus, Father to Wenceslaus; And
IIII. O^^ocarus, otherwise called Primislaus the Second, inuested in the Kingdome (...) Bohemia by the Emperour Phillip, Sonne to the Emperour Frederick.Huldrick or Huldr^c^ Duke of Carinthia. This Otto^us acquitted to the Duke of Carinthia Huldrick (seeing himselfe without Children) ^rinthia, Carmola, the Marquisate of Sclauonia, and many other Lands beside, as wee ^ll haue occasion to speake of heereafter.
Now concerning this Ottocarus (whom the Italians called Odoacre^) hee had for ^eat Maister of his Pallace Rodolphe, Counte of Habspourg, who being come to the ^periall dignitie; sent to summon Ottocarus, to render vp to him the Dukedome of

Austria, whereof hee had possessed himselfe in the vacancie of the Empire, after (...) death of Richard of England: And yet Ottocarus had Married Margaret, Sister (...) Frederick Duke of Austria, but deceassing without issue, and Ottocarus himselfe had not any Sonne. Whereupon the said Rodolphe alleaged, that the Dukedome of A^stria was a Masculine or Male Fiefe of the Empire,Austria a ^^asse Fiefe of the Empire. from which (according to the Selicque Law) Daughters were excluded, and so the sirright ceassing, he was the very ^^rest heire of the house of Austria, in regard of his Mother. Furthermore, he would haue restored to him the Dukedomes of Carinthia, Carniola, Carnia, the Marquis^ of Sclauonia, and other lands, by him acquitted to Duke Huldrick, which he had (...) power to alienate, without permission of the Emperour first obtained. but Ottocu^^^ contemning the Emperour, because hee had formerly bin at his seruice; sent able^^^ refusall both of the one and other.
Now both prepared to stand vpon their guard, the Emperour to reduce Ottoco^^^ to reason,An accord made betweene Ottocarus and the Emperour. and Ottocarus to defend and maintaine his Conquest. Yet to auoyde those inconueniences, which ordenarily doe attend on warrs; an agreement was labourd betweene the two Princes, whereby Ottocarus rendered to the Emperour the Dukedome of Austria. But in regard of the other Lands demaunded, there was a trea^ about a double alliance, of the Emperours Sonne, named Rodolphe, with Agn^, Daughter to Ottocarus, and a Sonne in Lawe of Ottocarus, with a Daughter of the Emperours. Young Rodolph had no long time of life, yet of this mariage he lef^ Sonne, named Iohn, who slew the Emperour Albert his Vnckle.
After this agreement, Rodolphe hauing recouered the Dukedome of Austria, sent a^ other summons to Ottocarus, to doe him homage for the Lands acquired from H^drick; which Ottocaru^ flatly refured to doe. Vpon this deniall, both parties were v^ in Armes, and the Armies ready to encounter, being not a mile distant eche from other, but that of the Emperour farre the greater. Ottocarus sent his Ambassadours, to mediate some agreement with the Emperour, offering him such Homage as he ^quired: prouided, that it might bee done in perticuler (for preseruation of Royall dignitie) and within the Emperours Tente or Pauillion, which being graunted, the Emperour caused his Pauillion to bee erected in the very highest parte of the Army, and vnder it a lofty Throne Royall and Canopy of State, ascending vp Ten or Twelue degrees; to the end, that this Homage might be seene of the whole Armie, yea and of the King of Bohemiaes too.
When hee was entred into the Pauillion Royall, he ascended (in all reuerence) (...) high as to the Emperours Seate, at the foote whereof hee prostrated himselfe, and tooke the accustomed Oath vpon his knees. As the Emperour held his hands according to Order;Ottocarus ouertaken in doing his homage. instantly the whole Pauillion opened in foure parts, and suncke (...) downe to the ground: by meanes whereof, Ottocarus was publiquely seene on (...) knees before the Emperour, by both the Armies, which formerly he had so highly disdayned. Th^ wife of Ottocarus hearing tydings of this homage; sent so many despightfull messages to her Husband: that he left his Army in the Field, and defied the Emperour, who presently prepared to meete with his enemy.
The Battaile was fought in Austria, betweene the Riuer of Danubie, and the Towne of Laha: where Ottocarus was buried, being slaine by a Noble man of Styr^^, and with him Foureteene Thousand Bohemians, beside a great number of prisoned taken.Ottocarus slaue in the Battaile. This Battaile happened in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred threescore and nineteene, according to the Germaine Chronicles: or after Marti^^ Cromerus, One thousand two hundred and fourescore. To verifie the auncient Prouerbe, which saith: Que tel pense reparer sa Honte, Qui l'accroist, et l'augmente: (...) that so seeketh to repaire his shame, doeth rather augment and encrease it.

A Chronologicall prosecution of the Royall Pedigree of Bohemia.
After this Ottocarus the First, succeeded his Sonne
V. Othocarus, Second of the name, King of Bohemia Father of
VI. Wenceslaus, who being in yeares, espoused Iutha, Daughter to the Emperour Rodolphe of Habspourg, First of th^^ name, whose death happening not long after, the Princes of Germany offered the Empire to the said Wenceslaus, in regard

^f his manifold great vertues. But hee ^fused so weighty a Charge, thankeful^ (...) and modestly returning them an^ere. That he had care and paine enough, (...) gouerne the Kingdome and Seigneuries ^te him by his Father. Some haue ^rther obserued, that this Prince was of ^reat integrity and holinesse of life: Hee ^eigned but sixe yeares, and left the King^ome to his Sonne
VII. Wenceslaus, Second of the name, Prince as vicious, as his Father had bin ^ertuous, and for his whoredomes, hee ^as wounded to death by a Thuringian, ^hose wife he had dishonored; dying (at ^e age of eighteen yeare,) in the Citty of ^lmuch, the Cathedrall of the Marqui^te of Morauia, and leauing no Chil^ren
VIII. Henry of Carinthia, Husband to ^nne of Bohemia, Sister to the said Wen^slaus, possessed himselfe of the King^ome: from which hee was expulsed by ^e Emperour Albert, who gaue the ^ingdome of Bohemia to Raoull, or Ro^olph his Sonne, to whom he entended (...) haue espoused Elizabeth, Daughter to ^enceslaus the Saint. But while they ^ere treating about this mariage, the Em^erour Albert was slaine by his Nephew, ^nd Henry of Luxembourg was chosen ^mperour: who caused the Princess^ E^zabeth to be brought to his Court, aged ^bout Eighteene yeares, where he espou^ed her to his Sonne (who then was but ^oure yeares olde) to whom the Citty of ^rage was deliuered: and since that time, ^he Kingdome of Bohemia continued in ^he House of Luxembourg, to the time of ^he Emperour Sigismond, during the space ^f an hundred, twenty and sixe yeares, ^nd vntill the time of the Emperour Si^smond, the subiect of this our present ^iscourse. For
IX. Of Elizabeth of Bohemia, and her Husband Iohn of Luxembourg, King of Bohemia, who reigned more ^hen threescore yeares, were borne two Sonne:
Iohn, Prince of Morauia; And
X. Charles, King of Bohemia, and Emperour by the name of Henry the Fourth, Authour of the Golden Bull, ^ou^ished (as wee haue already said) in ^he magnificent, Court of our King Phillip of Valois, the most famous among all Princes of Christendome: he was the Father of Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, and of
Sigismond, King of Hungarie, both of them Emperours, and Kings of Bohemia each after other.
XI. Wenceslaus, Third of the name, was King of Bohemia at two yeares of age. At Fifteene hee began to gouerne the Estate: and in the same yeare he was elected King of the Romanes: dying when hee was aged Seauen and Fifty yeares: and then succeeded him his Brother
XII. Sigismond, King of Bohemia, but formerly of Hungaria; and in this marriage was borne their one and onely Daughter, named
XIII. Marie Elizabeth, wife to Albert of Austria, Kings of Bohemia and Hungarie, and in this marige were borne
XIV. Ladislaus, Second of the name of Hungaria and of Bohemia, dying before hee was Married; And
Elizabeth, Wife to Wenceslaus, Brother to Casimir King of Poland; in which mariage was borne
XV. Ladeslaus, Third of the name, King of Hungaria and Bohemia, after the death of George de Pogiebrach, and Martin Coruinus, to whom appertained not the Kingdomes of Hungarie nor Bohemia. The said Ladislaus being dead, did leaue two Children:
XVI. Lewes, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, who died at the Battaile of Varno (wonne by the Turke) and left no issue. So that by his death, the Kingdomes of Hungarie and Bohemia came to his Sister
XVII. Anne, Wife to Ferdinand of Spayne, Archduke of Austria, and Emperour by the dismission of his eldest Brother Charles the Fift. Since which time, the said Kingdomes of Hungarie and Bohemia, haue remained to the House of Austria, in the Royall persons of
Emperours and Kings of Hungeria and Bohemia.Maximillian, Father toRodolphe, Brother toMathias reigning at this present


Iohn of Luxembourg being King of Bohemia, tooke not the Armes of Mora^ia, but kept his owne, which are D' Argent au Lyon rempant de Gueules Coronne d'Or; retained to this present, by Kings of the most Illustrious House of Austria. Qui Portent de Hongric Escartele de Boeme,Kings of the famous House of Austria. et sur le tout d'Austriche, qui est de Gueules a la Fesse d'Argent, party de Bourgongne Ancienne: In regard of the Alliance made by the House of Austria, with Charles the last Duke of Bourgongne.
From the time of Sigismond of Luxembourg, and his Sonne in Law Albert of Austria, Emperours and Kings of Hungaria and Bohemia, the Order of the ouerthrowne Dragon was in high esteeme, throughout all the Countreys of Germanie, and in the Kingdome of Hungarie.A^ Order of Knighthood in Bohemia call^ of the Tusin. But in the Realme of Bohemia, there was an other perticuler Order by it selfe (so saith Hieronimus Romanus, and some other Historians) called The Order of the Tusin; whereof I could neuer read nor vnderstand the Originall, forme or meaning, which maketh me therefore rather affect to say nothing thereof, then to sp^ake Ignorantly.
Hierommus Romanus maketh mention of a Spanish Captaine, being a Castilean or Leonois, named Dom Diego de Valera, who was by the Emperour Albert of Austria, (Sonne in Law to Sigismond) made Knight of the Order of the Dragon, as King of Hungarie, and Emperour of Germanie: And of the Order of the Tusin, as King of Bohemia; and of the Disc^plines,Order of the Disciplines of Austria. as Duke of Austria. But he hath not let fall from his penne, any meanes of enstructing vs, what the Orders of the Tusin of Bohemia, and the Disciplines of Austria were
Yet very sure and certaine it is, that in the Kingdomes of Leon and Castille, there are very Noble Families, bea^ing the Sirname of Valera, who carie in Armes D'Azur a^ Lyon rempant d'Or, Escartele d'Or a Quatre Croissants toincts ensemble en forme de An^elet; d'Azur, a la Bordure de Gueules, chargee de Huict Saultoires d'Or, Los de l'Apellido de Valera traen por Armas Escudo de aquartell: En el primero, y vltimo Leon de Orgo en campo Azul: y en los otros, en cada vno vn Lunel en campo de Oro: y por Orla ocho Aspas de Oro en campo Roxo; So saith the Count of Lansarote in his Nobilitie.



The Order of Austria; And of Carinthia, Called of Saint George. Instituted by the Emperour Frederick, Third of the name, and First Arch-Duke of Austria: In the yeare of Grace, 1470.
CHAP. III. Concerning the Genealogie and Originall of the House of Austria.
L'Ordre d'Austri^ he et de Carinthi^ d^^i de Sainct George.THe Originall of the House of Austria, the First, and most Famous of Christendome (next to that of France) descended from the Kings of France of the first Ligne; if we may credite Valdezio and Augustino Cranato the Romaine. They both agree together, to trouble the quietnesse of France, in case of precedency of Spayne before the other, and both haue written in their owne Language; That the House of Austria descended in the true ligne of Pharamond. But th^se men haue no other warrant or authority, then their owne braine.
Such as seeme to haue interpreted themselues more clearely, are of Opinion; that the Countes of Habspourg (the sourse and spring of the House of Austria) are descended of Thebert,The (...) ^all of (...). W^ter otherwise called Theodobert, Second of the name, King of Austrasia (whereof the Duchie of Lorraine made part) Son to Childebert Second of the name, King of Orleans, that is to say of Bourgongne and of Austrasia. In which censure and c^nceite, both the one and other haue much mistaken themselues.
For Saint Gregorie of Tours, the prime man of our Auncient Annalists, and all our Chroniclers whatsoeuer, sing all in one key and noate: That this Theodobert was vanquished by his Brother Thierry (Second of the name, King of Orleans) in two fo^ght Battailes, the first giuen neere to Toull in Lorraine, and the other before the Citty of Cologne. In both which, the said Theodobert hauing saued himselfe, was ye^ slaine by treason (so saith Ado Viennensis) and his head caried to his Brother Thierry,

who, by his death, made himselfe King of Austrasia: which happened in the yeare of Grace sixe hundred and seuenteene.
This Thiebert or Theodobert had two Sonnes and one Daughter,The Issue of Theodobert. by the Queene Theudichilda his Wife, as namely
Sigebert, bearing the name of his Grandfather,Meroueus was the other Sonne, AndBerthoara, a Lady absolutely perfect in beauty
These children were deliuered to their Vnckle Thierry, who sent them to the Citty of Mentz, whether Queene Brunhault or Brunechild, their Grandmother was come before them. This Queene was more cruell then a Tyger of Hircania: She caused Sigibert and Meroueus to be murdered, but kept their Sister neere her selfe.The words of the Monke Aimonius. We learne by Aimonyus the Monke, in the Third Booke of his History of France, the fourescore and seauenth Chapter, these are his owne words. Theodoricus compositis de sententia rebus, inde cum multis spolijs progressus; secum abduxit filios fratris sui, cum filia quae specie intebat decora. Dum Metos aduenisset, respexit Auiam suam Brunichildum ^nibi obuiam sibi venisse, Quae arreptis Theodoberti filijs, eos sine mora nec itradidit (Shee caused the eldest to be strangled) et minorem quidem natu, Meroueum nomine, lapidi illisum innocentem coegit exalare spiritum; the younger had his head fla^ quashed with a stone. But the Daughter was afterward assured to Prince Adaluado,Brunehault the cruell and bloudie Queene of France* Sonne to Agil^lphus, King of the Lombards.
Brunechilde or Brunehaulte was Daughter to Athanagilde, King of the Vuisigothes of Spayne, a Princesse so contrary to the Bloud of the Kings and Princes of the most illustrious Bloud of France; as She caused Tenne of them to dye in diuers kindes. She was wife to Sigibert King of Austrasia, Sonne to King Clothaire the First. Of her and the said Sigibert came Childebert King of Austria, Second of the name by hi^ Father, and after the death of Gunthran his Vnckle, was King of Orleans. The said Childebert the Second espoused Sedeluba, by whom he had a Sonne and a Daughter, Thierry, and Theudelinda; and by a Concubine he had Theodobert, of whom they would deriue the House of Austria.
Brunechilde for her bloudy cruelties, was first relegated or bannished at Rouen, by the said Theodobert, King of Austrasia; but returnng thither againe,The sentence giuen a a^st Queene Brunchault, and her death. She caused Childebert and his wife to bee poysoned the very same day: procuring afterward Thierry, King of Orleans and Austrasia, to be poysoned in the same manner. But being con^icted of so many murders, Clothaire the Great, Second of the name, King of France, ^nd the Generall Estates called a Parliament, by decree whereof in the Citty of Au^b^n, the moneth of May Sixe hundred twenty three: Shee was condemned to be drawne and dismembred by foure vntamed Horses. After which execution, She was buried at Saint Martin d' Athun, where at this present her Tombe is to be seene.
As for Thierry, he was kilde with a clap of Thunder, leauing foure naturall Children or Bastards: the first second and third whereof named Sigibert, Corbo and Mere^eus, were slaine by the commaund of Garnier, Maire of the Pallace to the said Thi^rry, and the last Son Childebert was slaine afterward. How can there then be any appa^ance of reason, why those Spanish writers, should draw the sourse and Originall of the ^llustrious House o^ Austria, from these three Bastards, slaine, and not hauing any issue.The proofe auouched by the Counte of Lansarote for the Archdukes of Austria.
The Count of Lansarote, in the Foure and fiftieth Chapter of his first Booke of Nobility, saith. That the Archdukes of Austria descended of Rodolphe, Second Counte of Habspourg, Landsgraue of Halsatia, and Lord of Strasbourg, issued of the auncient Princes of Allemaign, descended by the Genealogie of the Frenche, Sucedien diendo enel Impe^o Rodolpho Segundo Conde Habspurg Lantgraue de Alsacia, y Segnor de Argentina de ^s antiquos Principes de Alemania de la generation de los Francones. There is not any Prince in Christendome, but holdes it a glory to him, to deriue his descent from the Auncient French, and to be allied to the most famous Floure de Luce. But the Count ^ould haue proceeded on further, and obserued those Princes of Allemaigne or Ger^anie, till he had come to approue the tract of Rodolphe; he left off in too faire away.The House of Austria is descended from the Countes of Habspourg.
Most sure and infallible it is, that the House of Austria is descended of the Lords ^nd Countes of Habspourg, a Castell and Bourgade builded in Swetia, by the first Lords of the said place, named Radpot and his Brother Garnierus, or Warnierus, Bishop ^f Strasbourg, about the yeare of Grace, One thousand threescore and tenne. And the

Histories of Germanie doe tell vs, that the said Garnier, being prouided of the Bishopprick of Strasbourg (one of the very richiest of Germanie, and whereon de^endeth the the Landsgrauiat of Halsatia, who beareth for Armes De Gueules a la Bande Fleuronnee d' Argent) aduanced his Brother Radpot, and layd the first foundation of the House of Habspourg.
In older times they were Iudges of Bishop, temporall Iurisdictons.Radpot was Father to Garnier, Father of Otho; Father of Garnier; Father of Albert, who was made Landsgraue of Halsatia for the Church of Strasbourg: as we haue in France Vidames of Cathedrall Churches; of Chartres, of Mans, of Amiens, of Beauuais, of Mascow, and other more beside.
This Albert was likewise Captaine Generall of Strasbourg which office in Italie they tearme Gonfalonniero, and (for his great seruices) he was made The first Counte of Habspourg,The first Count of Habspourg. by the Emperour Phillip, Sonne to Frederik Barbarossa. The same Abert tooke to wife Heduuica, Daughter to Herman, Count of Kybourg, and of this mariage was borne one Sonne, named
Rodolphe, Second Count of Habspourg, who followed the Courte of the Emperour Frederick, Second of the name; and after his death, he Courted it with Othocarus, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, to whom he was Great Maister of the Pallace, as we haue already said. After the death of Frederick the second, and his Sonnes Henry and Conrard Emperours: Henry, Landsgraue of Hessen; William, who was Count of Holland and Zealand; and Richard of England were chosen Emperours. After whom, there grewe a difference about the Election; because the Marquesse of Brandenbourg fauoured the King of Bohemia Othocarus:Rodolph Count of Habspourg made King of the Romanes and Emperour. the other Princes of Germanie leaned to the contrary. So that, either in a brauado, or else by way of happinesse, this Rodolphe, Count of Habspourg, was declared King of the Romanes, and Crowned Emperour (first of the name) at Aix la Chappelle, in the yeare of Grace, 1273.
The Issue of this RodolpheThis Rodolphe tooke to wife Anne, Countesse of Hohemberg, and of her were borne three Sonnes, and seauen Daughters; whom I must let passe vnder silence, to bee the briefer in discourse. Only I meane to speake of,
Iutha, that is Iudith, Wife to Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia, Sonne and Successour to Othocarus.
The Sonnes we may not omit;
Herman, who neuer had any issue, but dyed drowned in the Riuer of Rhine, the Ices hauing broken his Bardge, on the day of Saint Thomas, One thousand two hundred and fourescore, in the lifetime of his Father. Hartmanno fue abogado en el Rin: The Spanyards appoint this man to the first place, being followed next by
The first taking the name and Armes of Austria by the Sonnes of Rodolphe.Albert, whom the Emperour his Father made Duke of Austria, in a diet which he held in the Citty of Ausbourg: in regard of which Duchie, his Sonnes and descendant^ forsooke the Sirname of Habspourg, and tooke the name and Armes of Austria, as wee learne by Martinus Cromerus, in the tenth Booke of his History of Poland, in these words. Ab eoden Alberto origenem duxerunt illi, qui deinceps illis Regionibus (speaking of the higher Pannonia, which is Austria) praefuere vsque ad nostra tempora, et Karolo^ Quintum Imperatorem Hispaniarum, etc. Regem.
We haue formerly related, that the Duchie of Austria was falne to the Distasse o^ female kinde, by the death of Frederick, Duke of Austria, Brother to Margaret, Wif^ to the King of Bohemia Othocarus, who possessed himselfe thereof in the right of be^ beseeming,The Spanya^ds owne w^rds conce^ng Othoca^. the Empire being then vacant, by the death of Richard of England. An^ the Spanyards speaking of this Othocarus say thus. y. auiendose rebelado con este Est^ do de Austria Othocaro Rey de Bohemia, le vencio Rudolpho Caesar, y dio el Estado de Austri^ contitulo de Dugne a su hijo Alberto agno 1285. de guien traen Origen lo Archidug^es.
The Third Sonne was
Rodolphe, Duke of Sueuia, and King of Bohemia (by reason of the Queene his Wife Agnes of Bohemia,(...) Daughter to the King Othocarus, and sister to Wenceslaus) who ha^ one Sonne by the same Wife, named Iohn; who slew his Vnckle Albert, Duke of A^stria, neere to the Castell of Habspourg and died prisoner in Italie. And as for the Emperour Rodolph the Father, after he had well enriched his Children: he died in the yea^ of Grace, One thousand two hundred fourescore and eleuen, in the threescore an^ thirteenth yeare of his age, and eighteenth of his Reigne.


An Orderly proceeding in the Descent of Austria, being thus deduced from the Originall.
AFter the death of the Emperour Adolphe of Nassau:
I. Albert, Duke of Austria, eldest Sonne to Rodolphe of Habspourge was elected Emperour; who by his wife Elizabeth, Daughter to Maynard, Count of Tiroll, and of Goritia, had sixe Sonnes and foure Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Fredericke, elected King of the Romaines,; but he had as his Competitour and Contrary Lewes, Prince Palatine, (Sonne to his Aunt, by the Mothers side, Mahauld of Habspourge, third Daughter of Rodolphe) elected likewise King of the Romaines, who vanquished him in a fought Battaile, the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and thirtie.2. Otho the Hardy, Father of Frederick, who dyed in the yeare One thousand three hundred forty and foure.3. Leopolde, that dyed One thousand three hundred forty and sixe.4. Albert who dyed One thousand three hundred and eight.5. Henry, who dyed in the yeare One thousand three hundred forty and two.
Rodolphe, Duke of Sueuia, Brother to Albert, had left by Agnes of Bohemia his wife, a Sonne in yong yeares, named Iohn of Habspourge, or of Sueuia. The Emperour Albert his Vnckle, had published himselfe Tutour to his said Nephew, and in that quality seized on his person, and kept him (for some time (at Vienna in Austria. In the meane while, he exalted his owne Sonne Rodolphe to the Kingdome of Bohemia, which appertained to his said Nephew Iohn, in regard of his Mother by fauour of marriage, wherein with Rodolphe, Sonne to the Emperour Rodolphe, it was namely and formally couenanted and contracted, that the death of Othocarus, King of Bohemia happening: Agnes his Daughter, Rodolphe her Husband, or such as descended of them, should inherit the Crowne of Bohemia. Iohn compassing the meanes to escape from Vienna, and knowing that he was not only bereft of the Kingdome of Eche^ia, but likewise of the Duchie of Sueuia: being desperately transported, he slew his Vnckle Albert, neere to the Castle of Habspurge where he was walking. And by this murder, he dyed miserably at Pisa in Tuscanie, in the Conuent of the Augustines, where he was kept in perpetuall prison.
Of all the Sonnes of this Emperour Albert of Austria (this was the man,The Pope gaue away the Kingdome of France, but could not deliuer it. to whom Pope Boniface the eight, had giuen the Kingdome of France, and which he could not deliuer, from Phillip le Bel, King of France and Nauarre) there remained but Albert, his fourth Sonne, all the rest hauing not left any issue. This
II. Albert, second of the name of Austria, had bin Subdeacon of a Church, and a Chanon in the Cathedrall Church of Passawe. Where hearing the death of all his Brethren, he obtained a dispensation, and tooke to wife Ioane, Daughter to the last Count of Peirt, named Huldrick, deceasing without any heire masle in the yeare, One thousand three hundred twenty and foure. By meanes of this marriage, the County of Sungoia came to the House of Austria. Of this Ioane he begat three Sons and as many Daughters.
The Sonnes were
1. Leopold.2. Rodolphe. And3. Albert.
III. Leopold, the third Duke of Austria, ioyned to the said Duchie the Countie of Hogemberg in Sueuia, hauing bought it of the Lord owner, in the year One thousand three hundred threescore and eleauen, and seeking to subiect the Switzers; he was slaine by them in a fought Battaile at Sempach, the twentieth day of Iuly, in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and seauen. He left foure Sonnes by his wife, a beautifull Lady, and Daughter to King Iohn of Arragon.
1. Fredericke, who hauing conueighed Iohn the Antipope from the Councill of Constans; was excommunicated by the same Councill, and the Lands which he had in Sueuia or Suetia, and the neighbouring parts, confiscated by the Emperour

Sigismond, whereof the Switzers possessed themselues. And therefore he had a nick-name giuen him in scorne, being called Fredericke with the emptie Wallet. He had a Sonne named Sigismond (that left not any issue) who engaged the Lands which he had in Sungoia, and the Landsgrauiat of Halsatia, to the last Duke of Bourgongne Charles. And from thence grew the Switzers wars against the said Duke Charles: Who lost his riches at Granzon, his men at Mourath, and his life at Nancy.
The second Son of Leopold, was
2. William, nourished in the Court of the King of Hungary, and destenied to be King of Poland, in regard of his wife; but he was denied and reiected by the Polonians.
3. Ernestus: And
4. Leopold, who seeking to reuenge the death of his Father (whose name he bare) slaine by the Switzers at Sempach; was likewise slaine himselfe by the Switzers, belonging to the Canton of Glaris.
Rodolphe, second Sonne to Albert the Subdeacon, espoused Margaret, Daughter to the King of Bohemia, and Duke of Car^nthia, the onely heire to the Countie of Tyroll, annexed by this meanes to the Duchie of Austria. This Rodolphe dyed by poyson at Millaine, in the yeare One thousand three hundred threescore and fiue, and his body buried in the Church of Saint Stephen at Vienna. He left no issue.
IV. Alb^rt of Austria, third of the name, yongest and last Sonne to the Subdeacon, Duke of Austria, was twise married. First to the Daughter of Charles of Luxembourg Emperour, fourth of the name (Author of the Golden Bull) King of Bohemia. And in second marriage he had Beatrix, Daughter to the Burgraue of Nuremberg. He dyed poysoned by a Physition, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred fourescore and fifteene. By Beatrix his wife he had one onely Sonne, named
V. Albert, fourth of the name, Duke of Austria, Sirnamed the Mathematitian, and by the Spanyards El Sabio, who making warre against Iosso, Marquesse of Morauia, dyed of a dissenterie. By one of the Daughters to the Count of Holland his Wife, hee had one onely Sonne
VI. Albert, fift of the name, who in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred thirty eight, was elected King of the Romaines. Hee tooke to wife the Daughter to the Emperour Sigismond, and by this Alliance hee was King of Hungarie and Bohemia; dying, he left her conceiued with a Posthumous, and when the childe was borne, they called it
VII. Ladislaus, King of Hungary, assured for marriage to Madam Magdalen of France, Sister to King Lewes the eleauenth, but he dyed before hee had a sight of her. And this Princesse was married to Gaston of Nauarre, Prince of Viana, slaine at Libournia neere to Bourdeaux, with the splinter of a Lance in a Tourney. It behoueth therefore to take the Ligne of Leopold, eldest Sonne to Albert, second of the name, fourth Sonne to the Emperour Albert of Austria. Of Leopolds foure Sonnes, not any had issue, but
Ernestus of Austria, that stiled himselfe Duke of Carinthia, who hauing espoused Cymburga, Daughter to the Duke of Massouia in Poland (William his Brother thought to be King of Polonia, but being reiected by the Polonians, he went from the Court of Hungaria, and on meere dispight, passed into Italie, married himselfe in Apuglia, and left no issue) by whom he had foure children, to wit
Albert, who contended for the EmpireKatharine.Margaret: AndFredericke.
Albert the eldest Sonne dyed without issue, as the like did Sigismond, Sonne to Fredericke with the emptie Wallet: So that all the Seigneuries fell to the yongest Sonne of Ernestus
VIII. Fredericke, Duke of Austria, Carinthia, and Styria, Count of Carnia, Carniola, Sclauonia, Cilia, Goritia, Istria and Tyroll, Marquesse of Burgaw of Hohemberg, Veldkirk, Sungaw, Brifgaw and Landsgraue of Halsatia.
This Fredericke deuided all those Seigneuries into two estates; the one called of Vie^na, and the other of Aenipont the seco^d
Vienna had in her Iurisdiction and Authority, Austria, Carinthia, Styria, Carnia, Cilia, Goritia and Istria.
Aenipont had in her prerogatiue, the Lands which the House of Austria, possessed

in Sueuia, the Countie of Veldkirk, and the Seigneuries of Sungaw, Brisgawe, all that Halsatia neighbouring on Strasbourg, and likewise the County of Tirol.
Fredericke seeing himselfe Emperour, and enriched with so many Seigneuries, as were already reduced vnder his power: Tooke the title of Archduke of Austria, and since that time, all they of the House of Austria, as well the Eldest as yongest, Directs, as Collatrals, carried the title of Archdukes of Austria, were they of Vienna, or of Aenipont. Which Seigneurie of Austria hath had diuers Titles; for it carried that of the Marquisate, vntill in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred fifty and one, when the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa gaue the title of Kingdome to the Duchie of Bohemia, and to Bauaria the Title of a Duchie, in fauour of Guelpho his Partaker (whence grew the siding and factions, betweene the Imperiall Guelphes, and the Gibelines, pertakers with the Popes.) And also the Title of Duke, to the Marquesse of Austria, which so continued, vntill the time of this Fredericke, whereof now is the occasion of our present discourse.
He, after the death of his Cousine Albert, was elected King of the Romaines, third of the name (for Fredericke, eldest Son of Leopolde, Competitor with Lewes of Bauaria, is not accounted among the Emperours) in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred and forty, notwithstanding the close vnder-handing of his elder Brother Albert. And this is the same Emperour Frederick the third, who was Authour of the Order of S. George, whereof we shall speake more hereafter.
10. The last Emperour Albert dying, left his wife great with childe, by meanes whereof, the Lords of Hungary named for Tutour of the fruite in the wombe, and their Queene the Widdow, the said Emperour Fredericke the third; with this charge and condition, that if she chanced to be deliuered of a Son, he should be his Guardian, and haue the Wardship of him, vntill he came to the yeares of commanding; but if it proued to be a Daughter, then they would elect and take him for their King. She was deliuered of Ladislaus, as we haue formerly said, and he comming to the age of gouernment: Fredericke would not listen to any resignation, but following the naturall disposition of such honest Tutours, refused to loose what he had kept so long. Iohn Huniades, a very valiant and generous Captaine, vndertooke the matter for King Ladislaus against this Fredericke, whom he constrained to yeelde the King his right, and the places he held in Hungarie from him.
The same Fredericke passed into Italie, where he caused himselfe to be crowned Emperour. He had to wife Leonora, Daughter to the King of Portugall Edward, and the Nuptials were celebrated in the Citie of Naples by the King Alphonso. He dyed in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and thirteene. By his wife Leonora of Portugall he had three children:
Christopher, who dyed yong.
Kunegonda a Daughter; And
IX. Maximillian of Austria, who (at the age of eighteene yeares) was conducted to the Citie of Vienna in Flanders, where he espoused Mary of Bourgongne, the onely Daughter to Charles last Duke of Bourgongne, the very richest heire of Christendome. And by meanes of this marriage, ioyning with the House of Spaine: that of Austria is mounted to that height of greatnesse, as now we behold it at this day. This Maximillian (in the life time of his Father) was elected King of the Romaines, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and sixe Mary of Bourgongne dyed in the sixt yeare after her marriage, and Maximillian in the moneth of Ianuary, One thousand fiue hundred and eighteene. He left three Sons and one Daughter, named
Margaret of Austria, conducted into France, and affianced to Monsieur the Daulphine Charles, afterward King, eight of the name, who comming to the Crowne, sent her backe into Flanders, and tooke to wife Anne, Duchesse of Bretaigne, a Prouince reunited to the Crown of France, the Originall whereof, was as we haue said in the Order of the Hermine.
The Sonnes were
Phillip.Frances. AndGeorge.
dying in their Infancie.
X. Phillip of Austria espoused Dogna Iane of Arragon, Daughter to Ferdinand of Arragon, and Isabell of Castile,

which Iane by the death of her Father and Mother, was heire to the Kingdomes of Leon, Castile, Arragon, Valencia, Granado Tolledo, Maiorica: and by vsurpation of Nauarre, Naples and Sicilie. In this marriage were borne
Eleanor, wife to the King of Portugall, Emanuell: and in second marriage, to King Frances the first.
Charles, King of Spaine, and afterward Emperour, fift of the name, borne in the Citie of Gaunte in Flanders, on the day of Saint Mathias, being the foure and twentieth day of February, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred fourescore and nineteene.
Isabel, wife to Christierne, King of Denmarke; And
Ferdinand, borne in the Citie of Alcala de Henarez in Spaine, Anno One thousand fiue hundred and three: we haue before (in the Tracts of the Orders of Spaine) obserued this Genealogie. Phillip of Austria being gon out of Flanders to Spaine, with Queene Iane his wife, to haue her Crowned there: dyed in the Citie of Burgos in September One thousand fiue hundred and sixe. He was Sirnamed the Great, not for any great viuacity of Spirit, or in regard of his ambition: but for the great and large extendure of those Seigneuries, whereof he was possessed before his death.
Margaret his onely sister, left by Chares the eight, was married in Spaine to Dom Iohn, Sonne to Ferdinand of Arragon, and Isabel of Castile: who being deceased without issue, she was remarried to the Duke of Sauoye Philebert, after the death of whom (not hauing any children) she returned into Flanders the second time, and was (during some space of time) Gouernesse for her Nephew Charles the fift, elected King of the Romaines at the age of twenty yeares; succeeding in the Empire after Maximillian his Grandfather, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred and nineteene. Formerly we haue remembred the marriage and descent of the said Charles of Austria whose Brother
XI. Ferdinand of Austria tooke to wife Madam Anne Queene of Hungary and Bohemia, Sister to King Lewes, Sonne of King Ladislaus, by whom he had diuers Children, both Sonnes and Daughters.
XII. Maximillian, second of the name, Emperour, King of Bohemia and Hungarie, Archduke of Austria.

Ferdinand; And

Charles.


Maximillian tooke to wife Mary of Spaine, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the fift, and by her he had many Ch^ldren.
XIII. Rodolphe second of the name, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Emperor, Archduke of Austria, who deceased without any issue.
XIIII. Mathias, second of the name, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, Emperour, who reigneth at this present.
Ernestus died without children.
Andrew, Cardinall.
Albertus, Cardinall, afterward secularized, and Husband to the Infant of Spaine, Isabella Clara Eugenia, Heire of the Low-Countries, vnder obedience to the King of Spaine, without issue.
Leopo'd, Bishop of Passaw, and Gouernour of the Kingdome of Bohemia.
Elizabeth, wife to King Charles, ninth of the name.
Anne, last wife to the King of Spaine, Dom Phillip the second, and many other Children.
Charles the fift, and Ferdinand Emperours, Sonnes to Phillip of Austria and Iane of Spaine,Partage (...) tout (...) l^autre. deuided betweene them the Estates and Seigneuries both by Father and Mother. Neuerthelesse an vnequall partion, and which (among vs) to this day, passeth as a common Prouerbe. The deuision of Spaine, all goes on one side, and nothing on the other. Because Charles the fift tooke for his share, all Spaine, the Kingdome of Naples, Sicilie, Sardaignia and Maiorica, with all the Low Countries of the House of Bourgongne: Giuing (when all was done) to his Brother Ferdinand, the Patrimonie of Austria, filled with Titles of Kingdomes and Seigneuries, making a goodly show (but very little benefit, the greater part of them being possessed by the Turke) as are the Kingdomes of Croacia, Dalmasia, Rascia, the Archduke of Austria, the Duchies of Styria, Carinthia, Carnia, Carniola, and the Countie of Tyroll: which Realmes and Seigneuries summed vp altogether, value not the reuennues of the Duchie of Normandie. Beside all which, the Archdukes

of Austria, want not the addition (according the custome of Spaine) of a long list,The Dukedome of Normandy of great reuennues. or bedroule of Titles, both of Duchies and Counties, where they haue not any thing to raise.
Now, as concerning the Arch-Duchie of Austria, which is the higher Pannonia, our ancient Annalists report, that our King Charlemaigne reduced and comprehended vnder his power, the whole girdling and circuit of those Countries, obserued by his Secretary of State Aeghinard. Ipse per bella memorata Italiam totam,The Countries related by Eghinard, quae ab Augusta Praetoria, vsque in Calabriam inferiorem, in qua Grecorum atque Beneuentanorum constat esse confinia, Decies Centum, and eo amplius passuum millibus longitudine porregitur. Tum Saxoniam, quae quidem Germaniae pars non modica est. Post eam vtramque Panneniam, and oppositam in altera Danubij ripa Daciam, Histriam quoque, Liburniam, atque Dalmatiam sui iuris effecit, atque perdomuit. Hee might very well say, Vtramque Pannoniam, because as wee haue said already, there is the higher and lower Pannonia.
Austria is the higher, whereof Vienna is the Capitall Citie:Austria is the higher Pannonia, and Hungaria the lower. and the lower is the Kingdome of Hungary, whereof Buda (possessed by the Turke) was heretofore the principall City.
Charlemaigne changed the name of the higher Pannonia, into that of Austria, and afterward (by addition of Letters) it was tearmed Austriche: as wee learne by A^entine in the fourth Booke of his History of Bauaria.
Carolus incolumi milite, naemine resistente, vsque ad Arabonem, and ad confluentem eius, and Danubij, cum triplici exercitu Castra mouet. Ibi aliquot dies statiua habet, and cum non essent qui vincerentur, eam regionem quam Marte coepit, praesidiis validis firmat. Hostes vallis fixis congestis aggeribus excludit. Deinde Boiorum colonias Geroldum Boiariae Praesidem deducere iubet, Templa extrui imperat (for vntill this time the Hungars had followed Paganisme) agros, prata, vineas, inter Praefectos, Equites, Monachorum Magistros Pontificesque Boiariae, sicut vetera testantur Diplomata distribuit, Ea que Regio Austria hec est, Orientalis Boiariae limes tum vocata, adhuc nomen retinet.
And after Charlemaigne, the higher Pannonia was called The Marches of Austria,La Marche d'Austriche, peopled with Colonies taken from the Bauarians, conducted and gouerned by this President of Bauaria.

Concerning the Presidents of Bauaria, and Marquesses of Austria.
1. GIrauld, first Marquesse of Austria, to whom succeeded by Order.
2. Theodoricke, that is to say Thierry.
3. Gotfrid, that is Godefrey, or Geoffroy.
4. Girauld, Second race of the name.
5. Baldericke, that is Bauldry.
6. Sigenard.
7. Leopold.
8. Arnulphe.
9. Gebelhard.
10. R^ger.
11. Engelricke; And
12. C^nrard, who being deceased without an Heyre Male, about the yeare of Grace, Nine Hundred and Fourescore: then began the Second of the Marquesses of Austria, in the person of

1. Albert, Count of Bamberg, called the Cripple, descended of the Dukes of Sueuia, or Suaba, inuested with the Marquisate, by the Emperour Saint Henry, Second of the name. Albert had for his Successor his Sonne
2. Leopold, who dyed in the Pallace of Ingelheim, at the Marriage of the Emperour Henry, Third of the name. Otho,Otho Frisinghen condemned by Auentine, Bishop of Frisinghen, descended of the second Marquesses of Austria, writeth in his Sixt Booke and Fifteenth Chapter; that this Albert had his head smitten off, and that Leopolde was the first Marquesse of Austria, of the Second Ligne, wherein he is argued of ignorance by Auentine, according to the words formerly reported. Whereby it appeareth, that Gerold or Girauld, was the first Gouernour on the Frontiers of Bauaria. And the Gouernours of those Frontiers were (in those times) both before, and afterward acknowledged, vnder the Title of Marquesses: Marchiones Finium, and limitum Rectores.
Lupolde, (thus speaketh the same Bishop of Frisinghen (being as yet in his youth) was present alone on hunting with the Emperour Otho, Second of the name, and wounded a wilde foaming Boare, which the Emperour pursued very closely.
These Marches of Austria growing to bee vacant; Otho established (as Gouernour) Leopold, who held it by way of Benefice, and after him his Sonne
3. Henry, Father of
Ernestus Duke of Sueuia: And of
4. Albert, Marquesse of Austria, Father of
Leopolde, who deceased in the life time of his Father, leauing (neuerthelesse) two Children, to wit
5. Leopold, dying without Issue; And
6. Ernestus, Father of
7. Leopold, Second of the name, Marquesse of Austria, Father to
8. Leopolde the Saint; And to
Papo, Archbishop of Treuers.
Saint Leopolde was the Father of fiue Children, as namely of
1. Conrard, Bishop of Passaw, and then afterward of Saltzbourg.2. Otho, Bishop of Frisinghen, whose learned writings are remaining with vs.3. Leopolde.4. Albert; And of5. Henry, made first Duke of Austria by the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa, First of the name, after whom succeeded his Sonne6. Leopolde, called the Vertuous, Brother toFredericke, deceasing without Issue.
This is that Leopolde, Second Duke of Austria, who went in the Voyage to the Holy Land, when our King the Conquerour Philip Augustus, Second of the name, and Richard of England passed thither also.
Leopolde that dealt so dishonourably with King Richard of Enland.The strong City of Acres, anciently called Ptolomais, and Acon were besiedged during the space of two whole yeares, and finally conquered and taken (by faire force) from Saladine, King of those Marches beyond the Seas, whereof he became Maister againe foure yeares after. Which reprisall happened in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fourescore and Thirteene. In which Seruice Leopolde carried himselfe there so valiantly, that with the first of his Allemaignes or Germaignes; hee wonne a Tower for entring the City, whereon hee planted his Armes and Pennons. In regard whereof wee will say and affirme
The Armes of the first Dukes of Austria.That the first Ma^quesses of Austria, and the two Dukes which succeeded them, carried the same Armes, as namely, D'Azur a Cinq Alouettes d'Or en Saultoir. And the like number is seene En poincte, in those of the Archduke Mathias (who ruleth at this present) before he was Emperour. But now concerning the Antiquity of these Armes, it is first to be considered:
The Romanes defending the Frontiers of D^nubie.That the Romaines, for guard and defence of the Marches and Frontiers of Danubius, held a strong Garrison in the City of Vienna, called Fauienna or Fauina. The Emperour Traian hauing warred on Decebalus, left for Gouernour at Vienna Marcus Aurelius,The Larke. with a Legion of old Soldiers called in French L'Alouette, but in the Latine Tongue Legio Decima, and by his Sirname Alauda; to shew that this Legion was Gaulish, and drawne from the Frontiers of the Rhine. For the word Alouette is precisely Gaulish. So is it reported in the Germaine Histories, yea, and the Spaniards themselues, in these words.
Eransus Antiquas Armas cinco Abubillas de Oro en Escudo Azul. De cuya Deuisa haze memoria Ciceron en la Epistola a Attica, alli dize, que la Region quae Caesar leuanto in Francia traia el Abubilla, y por esto fue llamada Alaudata por lla marse estas Aues as fi en Latin. But the same Spaniards are discontented, when it is said that, El Marques Leopoldo quinto deste nombre por consentimiento del Imperio puso por Armas en Escudo Roxo la Faxa Argentada. For in one and the same case, they ought to render a reason.
The change of the ^n^ient Armes of Austria to moderne.Diuers opinions there are concerning the changing of the ancient Armes of Austria, to moderne; which are De Gueules a vne Fesse d'Argent. Some haue taken them for a Deuice to represent the breake of Day, and the Sunnes rising in the Easte. And concerning what the Spaniards say, that the moderne Armes were taken by Duke Leopolde; they learne from the History of Hungary, written by Bonfinius, in his Fourth Booke and Fourth Decade, as also by Auentine and others, that haue discoursed

thereon. But obserue what is said by Oliuer de la March, First Maister of the Hostell to Philip Archduke of Austria, King of Spayne, First of the name, in the first Booke wri^ten by him of Memories.

Ie ne puis passer par raison, que ie ne deuise aucune chose, pour quoy les Armes de si Noble Seigneurie sont en deux manieres differentes les vnes des autres. Car les anciennes, and ^ieues Armes d' Austriche, sont, and se blasonnent d'Azur a cinq Alouettes d'Or: and les nouelies que l'on dici les Armes de la neufue Austriche se blasonnent de Gueules a vne face d'Argent.

I cannot reasonably let it so passe, in regard I doe not deuise any thing, because the Armes of so noble a Sei^neurie, are in two manners different the one from the other. For the ancient and old Armes of Austria, are and emblazen themselues D'Azur a cinque Allonettes D'Or. And the new, which are said to be the Armes of new Austria, are emblaz^ned De Gueules a vne face d'Argent.
There is some iniury done by this Authour in his narration, for hee calleth Leop^lde ^spar, making him without Children, and that it was his Brother Fredericke, which changed those Armes; contrary to the opinion of all Historians. He proceedeth on afterward, saying.
Que les Chrestiens mal menez des Mescreans, ce Iaspar fut a propos secouru par son Frere ma^sne (that is younger) Frederic, lequ^l auoit vne blanche parure sur son harnois (hee would haue said a white Coate of Armes) pour estre cognu entre ses Hommes, and p^rt^t (...) as dextre vn grand Volet de blanche Soye (hee would say a Scarfe) and parce (...) tr^a tou^es les Bannieres de son Seigneur and Frere, and les Siennes abbattues, and perdues, il prit le Volet blanc en sa ma^n, and plongea ledit Vol^t au sang d^s Morts, tellement qu'il fut tout teinct en R^uge couleur, excepte le milieu du Volet, qu' il tenoit dans samam, qui demeura blanc. De ce fit vne nouelle Banniere, and s^es^ria. Austriche, Seruitour de Iesu Christ, and se ferit si merueilleusement, and de tel courage parmy les Sarrasins, and tant en occit, abbatit, and mesha igna a la bonne suite qu'ileut qu'il redressa la Battaille, and fur^nt Sarrasins d^sconfi^s, and fut le bon Frederic tellement blesse, naure sur son corps en diuerses parties, que la blanche parure, dont ses Armes furent couuertes, and dont ^ay ^deuant touche, fut toute teinte, and rougie de son sang, excepte que ce qui estoit sous la ^nture de son Espee, demeura blanc: and comme le blanc demeura en la peignee du Volet, and fit Face parmy Le Vermeil sang du Noble Prince, pour la deffence de nostre Foy: Et la Bataille gagnec par le vaillant Frederic, il fut si bien pense, medecine, and secouru de ses blessures, qu'en bref temps il fut guary: and pour memoire de la Victoire, ledit Frederic par le C^nseil de s^ Noblesse, changea de la en auant les secondes Armes, telles que ie les ay declarees ^y-dessus.
The Christians being badly dealt withall by the Miscreants, this Iasper was very con^niently assisted by his meaner Brother (he would hau^ said the younger) who had a white ^eeking or ornament vpon his harnesse (he would haue said a white Coate of Armes) to be knowne among his men, and wore a great cloth of white silke on his right arme (hee would haue said a Scarfe.) And because he found all the Banners of his Lord and Brother, and his ^ne likewise to bee beaten downe and lost, hee tooke the white cloth in his hand, and plunged the said Cloth in the bloud of the slaine, so that it became wholly tincturd of a Red coliar; except the midst of the Cloath which he held in his hand, and remained white. Of this hee made a new Banner, and then he cried: Austria, the Seruant of Iesus Christ. Then hee carried himselfe so wonderfully, and with such courage among the Sarrazins, beating downe and killing so many, as also maiming and spoyling them, by the meanes of his (...) and ready followers: that hee repayred the Battaile, and the Sarrazins were discomfitted. Beside, the good Fredericke was so hurt and wounded in diuers parts of his Body; that (...) white decking Ornament wherewith his Armes had beene couered, and whereof I haue (...) sp^ken, was all dyed and made Red with his owne Bloud: except that which was ^nder the girdling of his Sword, which continued white. And as the white remained in the handfull of the Cloth: so it made a Fesse amidst the Vermilion Boud of the Noble Prince for the d^fence of our Faith. And the Battaile being wonne by the valiant Fredericke, hee was so well applyed with medicines, and cured of his wounds, that in a shor^ time he was fully healed.
And for a memory of his Victory, the said Fredericke (by councell and aduice of his Nobility)

changed from thence forward, the second Armes, in such manner as I haue before declared to you.
Thus you see what is said by Oliuer de la March.
Concerning the soile or earth naturally of Austria.The Histories of Germanie doe deduce the subiect of these Armes, from the nature and quality of the earth, or ground of Austria. Which being Red, and thwaned with the great Siluerie Riuer of Danubius, euen as with a Girdle: hath her second Ar^^^ thereby so blazoned, without any other Art or cunning. Returne we now againe to speake of Duke Leopolde.
It was the very same man, that so long time kept King Richard of England Prisoner, whose dangerous and hard aduentures wee haue already spoken of, at his returne from the Holy Land, in the Tract concerning the Orders of England, in the Second Tome of this great Labour, and the Fortie and Seauenth Page.
The death of Leopolde Duke of Austria.This Leopolde on a day falling from his Horse, chanced to breake one of his Legs, the affliction whereof causing him to detest the vanities of the world; hee became an Hermite of Saint Augustines Order, leauing his Seigneuries to his two Sonnes Leopolde and Fredericke. And dyed in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fourescore and Foureteene. Concerning his two Sonnes:
Fredericke the youngest dyed in the Holy Land (when the Emperour Henry the Sixt made his Voyage thither) at the Siege of Damieta, in the yeare, One Thousand, One Hundred, Fourescore and Eighteene. And as for his Eldest Brother
Leopolde, Second of the name, Third Duke of Austria, hee dyed in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Two Hundred, and One, leauing three Sonnes, and as many Daughters.Leopolde the younger his Issue.Henry,Leopolde; AndFredericke.All three deceasing without Issue.
The Daughters were
Margaret, Wife to Ladislaus, Marquesse of Morauia.Gert^ude, Wife to Henry, Duke of Sueuia in first Marriage, and in second to the King of Bohemia Othocarus.Agnes, Wife to Herman, Duke of Carinthia, and in this Marriage was borneMaynard, who was Counte of Tyroll, Father of one only Daughter, namedHaduuiga, that is Auoia, who was Mother to Rodolphe, Counte of Habspourg, and sole heire of the House of Austria.
Quarrell and debate for the succession of Austria.By the death of Frederick, last Sonne to Leopolde, Second of the name, there grewe great debate about the Succession of Austria, betweene the three Brethren in lawe, and Herman, Marquesse of Bada, Husband to Gertrude, Sister to Henry First Duke of Austria, who maintained, that his Wife ought to be preferred before the Daughter of Leopolde.
But the King of Bohemia Othocarus, without listening to any of those pretensions; possessed himselfe of Vienna, the Capitall Citty of Austria, where he builded a Castell, and enioyed the Dukedome foureteene yeares, in the right of his Wife Gertrude,Diuers contend, and a contrary enioyeth. whom he caused to be poysoned, to Marrie the Daughter to the King o^ Hungarie. At the end of the foureteene yeares, he was despoyled of the said Dukedom, by the Emperour Rodolphe, First of the name, as we haue already said. And thus came the Dukedome of Austria to the house of the Countes of Habspourg, who possesse it to this day. Such then is the Genealogie of the Marquesses, Dukes and Archdukes of Austria. Come we now to the Order of Knighthood.



The Order of Knighthood, belonging to Austria and Carinthia; And called Of Saint George.
THE Emperour Fredericke, third of the name, and first Archduke of Austria, was Authour of The Order of Knights of Saint George;The time of the Orders Institution, and the cause. so saith Wolfangus Lazius, in the third Booke of his Historie of Austria. Which Institution is set downe to be in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred threescore and ten, expresly ordained, to guard the Frontiers of Germanie, Hungarie, Austria, Sty^ia, Carinthia, and to hold head against the Turkes, by whose ordenary courses and inuasions, the Marches were very miserably wasted.
The Knights of this Order of


Saint George.A White Coat of Armes, and a plaine Red Crosse. Portoient la Cotte d' Armes Blanche, and la Croix plaine ^^^ge. The Emperour granted to the first Great Maister of this Order, the title and qualitie of a Prince, and for the soiourning and abiding of him and his descendants, Milestad, a strong place in the Dukedome of Carinthia, adorned with a Castle of defe^ce, where was erected a Colledge of Cha^ons, vnder the Rule of Saint Augustine, with a Bishop, who was to be chosen and elected of their body, for direction in spirituall occasions.
Beside Milestad,The Emperors largesse to this Order. the said Emperour Fredericke gaue to the Order, Lands and Iurisdictions reuolued to the Seigneurie of Austria; by death (without heires) of the Lords of Cranichberg, Lords of Trantm^nsdorf, of Skarfenek, and of Saint Pernelle. At the beginning, the Knights of this Order caried themselues very well, for resistance of the Turkes; but in the end (as all things else decline) so they became reduced to nothing.
The Emperor Maximillian, last of the name, would haue replanted and reestablished the said Order, by changing the Red Crosse to another,Intent for readuancement of the Order: entoured with a Ducall Crown and wholly of Gold: but vnciuill wars (about diuersity of Religion) hapning ^n Germanie, quite smothered those diuine seedes: for Christian Religion is the onely sure and safest Foundation, out of which Church there is no saluation.
By reading Wolfangus Lazius, in his History of Austria and Vienna, is proued the persons of the Marquesse Leopolde, vnder the year One thousand one hundred and foure: Of Othocarus, elected Duke of Styria, in stead of Marquesse, in Anno 1180. Of Fredericke, Duke of Austria and Styria in the yeare One thousand two hundred twenty fiue. And the same Lazius writeth, that in the yeare One thousand two hundred forty fiue, Fredericke, Duke of Austria, on the Festiuall day of Saint George (Patron of the most part of the Militarie Orders of Christendome) made an hundred and forty Knights of his owne Lands and Seigneuries, in the Citie of Vienna in Austria, Anno D^^int Millesimo Ducentesimo Quadragesimo Quinto, Fredericus Dux Austriae plenus, and Argento, in Festo Sancti Georgij Centum Quadraginta Iuuenes de terra sua Nobiles, apud Viennam honorifice Gladio and Cingulo Militari Donauit.




Order of Poland; called, The Order of the White Eagle.
CHAP. IIII. The Originall and Genealogie of the Kings of Poland.
How the Country grew to be so named at the first.POlonia, a great and spacious Prouince, became so called of the word Pole, which in the Sclauoni^n tongue signifieth A Field or leuell Plaine of Ground, apt and proper for the exercise of Hunting, whereto the Inhabitants being extraordinarily addicted: they were therefore called Polacks, and Polanders, and their Countrey Poland. But by Froissard, and them of his straine Poulaine, as Bohemia Behaigne. By the Romaines, the whole extendure of the Countrey of Poland, Lithuani^, Tartaria, and so farre as to the Lands in the North; was called Sarmatia, and the Inhabitants Sarmates, a name perticuler, according as that of Scythia was in generall.
Of the two Bretheren Leko and Cieko, and their people.About the yeare of Grace Fiue hundred and fiftie, two Bretheren, named Leko and Cieko, departing out of Croatia, which made part of Sclauonia (called by the Latines Illyria) with a great number of People, enclosed in too narrow a straite: went to seeke their fortune, for larger liberty, and liuing more at ease. They all betooke themselues towards the North and West Summer parts, and after they had trauersed many Woods and Mountaines,Cieko the first Duke of Bohemia* to winne the higher gounds of Pannonia, and to vn-intangle themselues from the Forrest Hyrcynia; they made their setled stay in Bohemia, where Cieko was the first Duke thereof.
As for his Brother Leko, hauing got himselfe free from that great Forrest, which Plinie calleth Syluam incompertae magnitudinis, according as we haue elsewhere said: He tooke the North-Starre for his guide and conduct, and found himselfe (at length) to be in the Champaine Fields of Polonia, where hee stucke downe his Staffe (as we vse to say in a common Prouerbe) establishing his principall abiding in a Marshie ground, seated very difficult for any accesse, about sixe miles from the Riuer of Vuarta.Strange finding a Nest of yong Eagles. Laying the foundation of his purposed dwelling place, at the first stroake of the Pikaxe or Mattocke; was discouered A Nest of yong Eagles, with fine white downie feathers. And of this Nest, which in the Polish language is called Gnasdo, he would haue the Towne to be built, so named. But in time (which eateth and deuoureth all things) the word was corrupted into that of Guesno, turned by the Latines to that of Guesna.
By valour and force of his Armes, he conquered part of Vandalia, as also of Sarnatia,Two Cities built by Leko in memory of his fir^t abiding. and caused to be builded a second Towne or Citie, vpon the borders or banks of Visurgis: to which Citie he gaue the name of Brisemia, but afterward called Bresma. And to preserue the memorie of his first aboade and dwelling, in the forenamed place of Guasda, he tooke for Armes L'Escu du Gueulles a vn Aeigle d'Argent.
It is a matter especially noated by the Naturalists, that Foules or Birds of blacke plumage (such are Eagles and Rauens) being come to their perfection, are all white at their new disclosing.An especiall obseruation of the Natur^list. And that Eagles expose their yong ones against the beames of the Sunne, to looke stedfastly vpon his light: and vnderstand by those meanes, whether they be their owne yong, or of other supposed Birds. In the same manner, the Rauens doe forsake and leaue their yong ones, for the space of nine dayes, to try whether they will be vnlike them or no. During which tearme of nine dayes, that these yong creatures are thus abandoned both by Father and Mother: God (who hath care of all his creatures) sendeth them Flies, which flying into their gaping mouthes, doth nourish and sustaine them, vntill their

white downie Feathers be changed, and turned blacke, and then they become acknowledged and nourished by their Parents.
This is the Doctrine of the Rabbines, deriued from the eight and thirty Chapter of Iob, King of Edom, and mirrour of patience. Quis praeparat Coruo escam suam, quando P^lli eius clamant ad Deum, vagantes, eo quod non habeant cibos? Who prouideth for the R^^en his foode? when his yong ones cryeth vnto God, they wander for lacke of meate. Whereunto the Royall Psalmist giuing good respect, in his hundred forty and seauenth Psalme, saith, that the Diuine Prouidence Dat Iumentis escam ipsorum* and Pullis Coruorum in vocantibus cum. He giueth to the Beast his foode;Poland called the Kingdome of the L^kites. and to the yong Rauens that cry. Of this Leko, the Polonians were (for very long time) knowne by the name of Lekites; and Poland called the Prouince and Kingdome of the Lekites, yea, euen now at this day in Greece, Tartaria, Russia* and diuers other neighbouring Countries.
By the death of Leko, Father of twelue Sonnes, the Polonians, being not growne to agreement, which of them they should take for their Prince and Captaine solely by himselfe: liued vnder the command of those twelue,Leko his twel^^ Sonnes. whom (in a full Assembly of their States, held at Gu^sna, they tooke for their chiefe Lords, and gaue them the name of Vaiuodes, vulgarly called Vaiuodes, that is to say, Captaine of the Warre, and Conducters of Troupes: yet remaining with the Vaiuodes of Walachia, Transyl^^nia, Moldauia and others: but at this day it is changed in Poland, to that of Palatine.
These Vaieuodes of Leko, to the number of twelue, gouerned Polonia, about two hundred yeares, when this Family, being quite ended: the ^olanders would no longer haue so many Maisters to please and content. And therefore, about the yeare of Grace Seauen hundred, they elected for their Duke and Prince, one of their owne Nation, named
Craco, who hauing accepted the charge,The first Duke of Po^nd a^t^ the Va^^^es. established his dwelling at a place of his owne Paternall inheritance, a Castle, very highly exalted on the point of a Rocke, called Veluell: And at the foote was erected a small Towne or Citie, vpon the banke of the Riuer Vistula, giuing also this new built Citie his owne name, calling it Crac^uia, at this day the Capitall Citie in the great Kingdome of Poland. Within the hollow wombe and bowels of the Rocke Veluell was the haun^ and repaire of a huge and dreadfull Dragon (as to this denne) which deuoured all the men and beasts he could lay hold on.Duke Cra^o of whom the Citie of Cra^^uia t^oke na^e. Vntill such time as the said Cra^^ (valiantly resolued) to send daily into the mouth of the Caue three slaine Beasts, whose bellies he had caused to stuffed with a good quantitie of Pitch, Sulphure and small minced straw. So that within some conuenient time, these combustible matters taking fire in the Dragons entrailes, he dyed not very long after.
After this Craco succeeded his yongest Sonne Lek^, second of the name,Leko the second, murdered by his elder brother. third Duke of Poland, slaine by his eldest Brother as hee rode on Hunting, to possesse himselfe of the Dignitie; from which he was expelled, and the Principalitie giuen to
Venda, Daughter to Duke Craco, and Sister to Leko the second: the Polish word Venda, signifieth a Hooke for a Fisher. This Princesse, shunning and flying from marriage, and thinking to bestow an acceptable gift on her Gods: threw her selfe headlong into the Riuer of Vistula, and by her death, the Polanders elected againe for their Commanders
Twelue Vaiuodes, in manner as before, whose Gouernment being wholly extinguished by the Polanders, as altogether tyrannicall and insupportable:Vaiuedes elected againe as Gouernours. In the yeare of Grace, Seauen hundred and threescore, they chose for their Prince and Lord, one of the worthiest among them, famous for valiancy, named
Primislaus, otherwise called Leko, third of the name, who being deceased without any issue, they elected for his Successour
L^^^, fourth of the name, hauing out-run others in the race, wonne a limit prepared to obtaine the Polish Principalitie, whereto hauing attained; he gouerned very happily vntill his death, which happened in the yeare of Grace,Charles Son to King Charlemaigne s^ew Leko the fourth Eight hundred and fiue. For he was slaine by Charles, Sonne to our King Charlemaigne, sent by his Father into Bohemia and Poland, to make head against, and to represse the Nations

descending into Saxonie, which was conquered by the said Charlemaign. After which Leko succeeded his Sonne
Leko, the fift of that name, who (before his death) ordained Successour his eldest Sonne
Popiellus, called the Auncient, who vsed for his common Oath, and swore continually; That Rats might and should eate him. He liued but a short time, and left for his Successour his Sonne (being very yong)
Popiellus, second of the name, who was left in the Tutelage and Wardship of one of his Vnckles by the Fathers side. But when he came to the yeares of capacity to Reigne,A wonderfull iudg^ment of God inflicted on a cruell and bloudy Duke. he caused them all to dye by poison, with the very chiefest Lords of Poland, which outrage and cruelty was reuenged by the hand of Heauen, in very strange and wonderfull manner. For, out of the dead empoysoned bodies; issued such a huge number of Rats; as violently intruded themselues into the Dukes Pallace, especially (contrary to their nature) by swimming ouer a great Meere or Pond of Water, in the very midst whereof Popiellus the Auncient had caused to be builded a goodly Castell and Dongeon, by him named Cruswicke. They fed vpon him, and deuoured him aliue, with his Children and Wife, by whose wicked counsell, he had put so to death the Lords of Poland.
By this exemplarie death of him, happening in the yeare of Grace, Eight hundred twenty three; there was some time of Interregnum, which lasted so long, as till (by common consent) the Polacks elected for their Prince a poore man, named
Poore Piastus and his de^cent Dukes of Poland for many yeares.Piastus, whose descent gouerned Poland a long extendure of yeares, euen vntill the time of Casimire the second, Sirnamed the Great. This Piastus liued sixscore yeares, and Reigned (almost) threescore of them, leauing for Successour his onely Sonne
Ziemouitius, who Reigned One and thirtie yeares, and left the State to his Sonne
Leko, sixt of the name, Father of his Sonne and Successour.
Zemomislaus, Father of
The Polac^s were Idolaters before their first Christian Duke Miecislaus.Mi^cislaus, the first Christian Duke of Poland. Before whose Reigne, the Polacks had for their Gods the Sunne and the Moone a Tree, a Serpent, or any thing whereupon they first fixed liking. But this man hauing espoused Dambrowca, Daughter to Boleslaus, Duke of Bohemia, who was a Christian: embraced Christianity in the yeare of Grace Nine hundred threescore and fiue. He established in his principality nine Bishopricks, two whereof were raised to be Metropolitane Sees and Archbishopricks, as namely Guesna and Cracouia. The first Archbishop of Cracouia, named Lambert,The first Archbishop of Cracouia. was sent to Pope Benedict, seauenth of the name, to render him due obedience, as vniuersall Father of the Christians, Successour to Saint Peter, and said to be chiefe Vicare to our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ on earth: And withall, to entreate his Holinesse, that he would bestow on Miecislaus, the name and title of King. But during the time of this voyage or embassie, the said Prince Miecislaus, chanced to dye, hauing reigned fiue and thirty yeares, in Anno Nine hundred fourescore and nineteene.
Vnder this Duke, the Polish Nobilitie hauing embraced Christianitie, began the Custome,A C^stome long time practise^ in Poland, (...) defence of Christian Religion. long time afterward exercised in Poland, to vn-sheath their Swords, and hold them aloft with their points vpward, when the Priest went to sing the Gospell, and put them vp againe into their Scabbards, after they had heard Gloria tibi Domine. This was thus done as a signe or token, that they were all readily prepared to fight, and spend their Blood to the very latest drop, for defence of the Christian Faith. Next after this Duke Mieceslaus, succeeded his Sonne.



The Chronologicall Succession of Poland, in the title of Kings; after the embracing of Christian Religion. CHAP. V.
I. BOleslaus, first of the name, to whom the Emperour Otho, third of the name, and Sirnamed the Red (being gon on Pilgrimage to Guesna, to the Sepulcher of the Martire Saint Albert, Martyred in Prussia) gaue the Crowne Royall, as well for himselfe, as also his Successours and descendants. So that he was the first Crowned King of Poland, in the Cathedrall Church of Guesna, the yeare of Grace One thousand and one. Martinus Cromerus and other Historians haue written, that with the Royall title of King, the said Emperour gaue Boleslaus the first King: The Lance of the Knight and Martyre Saint Mauritius, reserued and kept yet to this day, in the Cathedrall Church of Craconia. This Boleslaus deceasing in the yeare of Grace One thousand twenty and foure, succeeded his Son
II. Mieceslaus, the second Crowned King of Poland at Guesna, who dyed bereft of his vnderstanding, and vtterly disappointed of iudgement and reason; in the ninth yeare of his Reigne; Of Grace One thousand thirtie foure; and the foure and fortieth of his Age. After his death, there was an Interreguum, thorow the contending and vnderhanding of Pretenders to the Kingdome. And Casimire, Sonne to the King expulsed from Poland, for his madnesse, went priuately to studie at Paris, from whence he retired himselfe into the Abbey of Clugny, where he became a professed Monke and Deacon. The Polanders, after an agreement made among themselues together; withdrew him from Clugny, by permission of the Pope then sitting in the holy Chayre. But the condition was, to pay a pennie for euery head or Commander of a Familie in Poland, as an yearely Patrimonie to Saint Peter: And so
III. Casimire, Sonne to the Franticke Mieceslaus, was Crowned King of Poland at Guesna. He died in the yeare One thousand fiftie and eight, leauing for Successour his eldest Sonne
IIII. Boleslaus, second of the name, Sirnamed the Cruell, who for his bloudy and tyrannicall behauiour, was (after a full Consultation, held in the Generall Tearme time for Poland) dispossessed of the Kingdome. Among other of his notorious Assassinates and murders, was that of Saint Stauislaus, Archbishop of Craconia, Successour to Lambert. Boleslaus, despoyled of all his goods, was constrained to make his retreate into Hungarie, where he slew himselfe, and his body was giuen buria^l in the Churchyard of the Monasterie of Osoy in Carinthia, where yet is to be seene his Tomb, and on it the representation of a Horse, couered with a Foote cloath, and for a Legend round about it, these words. Rex Poloniae Boleslaus, Occisor Sancti Stauislai Episcopi Craconiensis. After Boleslaus (expulsed from the Kingdome) in the yeare One thousand threescore and nineteene; succeeded next his Brother
V. Ladislaus, first of the name, in the yeare One thousand fourescore and two (who would not take on him the title of King, during the life time of his Brother) but stiled him Prince, Heire of Poland. By Prayers which he caused to be made in the Church of Saint Giles (whose body was buried in Languedocke, in the Citie bearing sometime name of a Countie, but to this day the title of that holy Hermite, a Natiue of Athens) he obtained a Sonne by Iudith his wife, Daughter to Ratislaus, Duke of Bohemia. He dyed in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred and two, leauing a legittimate Sonne, named
Boleslaus and a Bastard, called Sbigneo, to whom he gaue Massonia, the higher Polonia, Pomeranica and Prussia: This was the first deuision made of the Kingdome of Poland.
VI. Boleslaus, third of the name, tooke the Title of Prince of Poland, as his Father

before him had done. Sbigneo his Bastard Brother, would needes exalt himselfe against him; but he brought him to tearmes of duetie and obedience, leauing him but the Dukedome of Massouia, taking into his owne hands the higher Poland, Pomerania and Prussia. The Emperour Henry the fourth would haue made Poland tributarie to the Empire; but hee was ouerthrowne in a fought battaile: so that the Emperour was compelled to come to agreement, and to treate on Peace with the Polonians, which was combined by a double Alliance, as namely Adela the Emperours sister, to marrie with Boleslaus, a Widdower of his first Wife; and Christina, Daughter to the said Emperour, with Ladislaus, Sonne to the same Boleslaus. Hee dyed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred thirty nine. By his first wife he had but one Sonne, named
VII. Ladislaus, second of the name, to whom the Father gaue for his lot and portion the Soueraignty of Poland, with the Seigneuries of Cracouia, Siradia, Lancitia, Silesia and Pomerania. By his second wife Adela, he left
Boleslaus the Frisian, who had the Lands of Massouia, Dobrizin, Cuiauia and Culma.
Miecislaus, who was Lord of Guesna, Posnania and of Calassia: He was Sirnamed the Auncient, for his wisedome and cunning.
Henry, Lord of Sandomiria, and of Lublina: And
Cazimire, in swadling cloathes at his Fathers death, but he gaue charge to his Bretheren, to make him an equall part of their goods, when he should come to yeares of gouerning his Estate. Thus were portioned the Sonnes of the second Bed to Boleslaus, after whose death Ladislaus his eldest Sonne, not well contented with those proportions; following the counsell of his wife (a woman of a high and mounting spirit, by being Daughter and Sister to Emperours:) made warre vpon his other Bretheren, who holding all louingly together, vanquished his Armie, enforcing him to forsake Poland, as the like they did to his Wife and Children, who retreated themselues to Conrad, King of the Romaines. So that in the yeare One thousand one hundred fortie and sixe, by consent of the Bretheren, and aduise taken at the Generall Tearmes.
VIII. Boleslaus, fourth of the name, (called the Frisian, in regard his Haire was frizeled or curled) was elected Soueraigne of Poland: who after the death of Ladislaus, expelled from Poland, vsed courtesie towards the Sonnes that were his Nephewes.
Boleslaus, Sirnamed the Haughtie.
Miecislaus; And
Conrad, Sirnamed the Lame or Cripple.
Whom he caused to returne from Germanie into Poland, where he gaue them Silesia for their maintenance. This Boleslaus the Frizian was a valiant Prince, and in the yeare One thousand one hundred threescore and foure, he compelled them of Prussia to burne their Idols, and to receiue the Faith of Iesus Christ. But soone after they returned to their vomit againe, and ouerthrew the Army of Boleslaus, whose Brother Henry was slaine in the Field, and deceasing so without Children; his portion sell to Cazimire. Boleslaus dyed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred threescore and thirteene, leauing one onely Son, named

Leko.

After the death of Boleslaus, his Bretheren and the Princes their Nephewes of Silesia, with the Generall Tearmes assembled together, elected for Soueraign Prince of Poland
IX. Miceslaus, second of the name, Sonne of Ladislaus the second, and Brother to him dead; whose trackes and vertues he followed not, shining most gloriously in so good a Prince; because he addicted himselfe to all tyrannie, for which he was deposed from his Principality at the General Tearmes, and in his place was aduanced his yonger Brother
X. Cazimire, second of the name, who dyed by an impoysoned drinke or amourous potion, which was giuen him by a Woman, of whom he would haue had his pleasure, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred fourescore and twelue. By Helena his wife he left two Sonnes,
Leko. AndConrad, Duke of Massouia and of Cuia^ia.
The Generall Tearmes being held at Cracouia, they there elected for Soueraigne of Poland, the eldest Sonne of Caz^mire
XI. Leko, sixt of the name, Sirnamed the White and the Faire, by reason of his goodly Haire. He was slaine by Swantopolis, whom he had made Captaine of Pomerania, in the yeare One thousand two hundred twenty and seauen. By his death
XII. Conrad, Duke of Massouia, Brother to him deceased, vsurped Poland, and got to himselfe the Treasures and person of
XIII. Boleslaus, called the Chaste (Sonne to Leko the sixt) fift of the name, who during the warre of the Tartares, found meanes to shield himselfe from the guard of his Vnckle Conrad, and withdrawing to his Castles of Sandomiria, was receiued into the Castell of Cracouia. And therefore his Vnckle Conrad made sharpe Warre vpon him, wherein he died, the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred forty seauen: And Boleslaus gouerned the Kingdome of Poland the space of thirty seauen yeares.
He was Sirnamed the Chaste, because he liued sanctimoniously with his Wife Kun^gonda, Daughter to Bela King of Hungarie, a most deuout and Religious Princesse: but her Husband being deceased without issue, in the yeare One thousand two hundred threescore and foureteene, the Gouernment of Poland came to
XIV. Henry, Sirnamed the Bearded man, descended of the Dukes of Vratisla^ia, who had for Successour
XV. Leko, seauenth of the name, Sirnamed the Blacke, Sonne of Cazimire, eldest Son to Conrad, Duke of Massouia, who left foure Sonnes
Cazimire.Boleslaus.Miceslaus; AndZemouido.
Cazimire eldest Sonne, was Father to
Zemouido, Duke of Guiauia, and toLadislaus, Duke of Poland.
Zemouido, Duke of Guyauia, was Father to
Leko; toPrimislaus, afterward King; And toCazimire.
Now, concerning Ladislaus, Duke of Poland, he was Father of
Elizabeth, Queen of Hungarie: And ofCazimire, King of Poland.
Come we now againe to Leko, or Lesko the Blacke, who being dead in the yeare One thousand two hundred fourescore and nine:
XV. Boleslaus his Brother, Duke of Massouia, sixt of the name, succeeded him, being chosen to that charge at the Generall Tearmes. But bearing himselfe (euen from the beginning) with ouer-head-strong violence; he was deposed and displaced from the dignitie, in which respect, he is not reckoned to hold degree in rancke, but his Predecessour and he are accounted but as one man. And then the Office was generally giuen to
XVI. Henry, Duke of Silesia, sirnamed the Honest-man. He dyed poysonned by them of Silesia, in the yeare One thousand two hundred fourescore and tenne. After whose death there was Interregnum fiue yeares in Poland: And then at the Generall Tearmes was elected by common voyce
XVII. Prim^slaus, second of the name, formerly Duke of Pomerania, and of the higher Poland, who was Sacred and Crowned King of Poland, by Iames Suinca, Archbishop of Guesna, in the Metropolitane Church of the said place, in the Moneth of Iune One thousand two hundred fo^rescore and fifteene. His Reigne lasted no longer then seauen Months and eleauen daies being on a day (in the Lent season) surprized at his Table by the Marquesse of Brandenbourg and his own Nephewes, who brooked it enuiously, that the said Primislaus had bin so preferred. After his death, at the Generall Tearmes was chosen to be their King
XVIII. Ladislaus, fift of the name, and Sirnamed Locktek, Brother to Lesko the Blacke, a Prince of faire hope: but seeing himselfe exalted to the Royall Dignitie, he abused it greatly, wallowing in all kindes of vices, so that at the Generall Teames, assembled and held at Cracouia; the said Ladislaus, was deposed, who had Reigned no longer then three yeares, but not Crowned,

neither had any other Title, then Heire to the Kingdome. And in his place, Anno, One thousand three hundred:
XIX. Wenceslaus, King of Bohemia was elected King of Poland, Sacred and Crowned at Guesna. He espoused Rixa, onely Daughter (to King Primislaus, slaine by his Nephewes, as you haue heard) and consequently Heire to the Kingdome of Poland. After they were returned backe to Bohemia, the deposed Ladislaus entred againe into Poland, and made himselfe Maister of some Castles there. As he purposed on further triall of his fortune, Wenceslaus chanced to dye in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and fiue, whose death serued him for a great aduantage, to make him Maister of Craconia. So that, as well in regard of his valiancie, as some good hope conceiued by the Polacks, of correcting his former depraued manners, the said
XX. Ladislaus was reseated in the Kingdome, and by the consent of Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, sitting then in Auignion; at the Generall Tearmes held at Craconia the twentieth day of Ianuarie, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and twenty: He was Sacred and Crowned King of Poland in the great Church of Craconia, where the Ornaments Royall, to wit, the Crowne, Sword, Scepter and Apple or Ball of Gold, were brought thither from Guesna. And after that time, the preferrence for Sacring and Crowning the Kings of Poland, was translated from Guesna to Craconia. This Ladislaus had a Sonne and a Daughter:
Elizabeth, who was Queene of Hungarie; AndCazimire.
Who being come to the age of sixeteene yeares, was married by his Father in Anno One thousand three hundred twenty and fiue to the Daughter of Gedemin, Duke of Lithuania, an Idolatious Princesse. But after she had bin Cathechised and enstructed in the Christian Faith, by the Bishop of Craconia; she was Baptized, and named Anne. By the death of Ladislaus, happening in the Moneth of March, One thousand three hundred thirty and three, his Sonne
XXI. Cazimire, third of the name, called the Great, was Sacred and Crowned King of Poland, with his wife in the Church of Craconia, the fiue and twentieth day of Aprill, in the yeare before dated. His Reigne was seauen and thirty yeares, during which time, he heaped on Poland all wealth and happinesse, he made the Church of Royall structure; the Cities, Townes and strong places of the Land, notably witnessed the Greatnesse of this Prince, who neuer had his equall in Poland: and therefore after his death, he was (vpon good and iust cause) Sirnamed Cazimire the Great. He dyed in the moneth of Nouember, the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred threescore and ten, the sixtieth of his Age, and seauen and thirtieth of his Reigne: not leauing any masle childe begotten in lawfull mariage; nor had he but three Daughters, to wit
Heduiga, that is, Auoy^Elizabeth: AndAnne.
Wherefore, after his death, the Pela^ders were bandied and deuided into many factions a part. For some fauoured Lewes King of Hungarie, Sonne of Elizabeth, Sister to the late deceased King Cazimire. And this Faction finding themselues to be the strongest: hee was brought into Poland, whereof he was Crowned King, the very same yeare as Great Cazimire died.
Others tooke part with Voladislaus, Cousine in the third degree to King Cazimire that was dead, as is written by Martinus Cromerus, in the thirteenth Booke of his Historie, whom we follow in these our abbreuiations. And therefore it is necessary to obserue the Originall of this Voladislaus.
Cazimire, Father to Lesko the blacke, Duke of Poland, and to
Zemouido, Duke of Guiania; And to
Ladislaus Locktek, fift of the name, King of Poland.
Zemouido, Duke of Guiania had three Children.

Lesko.

Primislaus: And
Cazimire, Duke of Guyania and of Massenia, who was Father to Voladislaus, Sirnamed the White Duke: And to

Elizabeth.

This is the same Voladislaus the White, with whom tooke part some Princes and Lords of Poland.
Now Cazimire the Great, seeing that he had none but Daughters, and that by the Law of the Kingdome of Poland, Daughters were excluded from it, and the neerest Prince masle (able to succeede in the Crowne of Poland) was this Voladislaus the White his Cousine: He bent himselfe directly against him, and depriued him of the Dukedomes belonging to his Father. So that this poore Prince was compelled to forsake Poland, and to seeke for shelter in Germanie. Where yet not finding himselfe in safety, he came into France, there to awaite the death of Cazimire his mortall enemy. But his long life, and very vrgent necessities,The hard a^d disast^o^s fortunes, whereto the prince wa^ driue^. forced Voladislaus to become (...) Monke in the Abbey of the Cisteaux, in the Diocesse of Chalon, about three miles from Dijon, where he submitted himselfe, and was profest. But being vnable to endure the austerity of this Order* he was entertained among the Religious Conuerts, in the Abbey of Saint Benigne at Dijon. After the death of Cazimire the Great, the Lords of Poland sent to giue aduertisement at Dijon, concerning the death of his enemy, and that he was desired in Poland, whether he should come with all the speede he could possibly make.
Voladislaus obtained of Pope Clement (being then in Auignion) a dispensation for his profession, and to be re-enabled, for holding rule in the Kingdome of Poland,When hope had attained to the he^ht, death disappointed all. whereunto he was trauailing the second time. But he dyed at Strasbourge in Germa^e, and appointed by his testament, that his body should be carried to Saint Be^^gne at Dijon, where, in the midst of the goodly body of the Church, is to be seene the Monument of this Prince Monke. It is a great Tombe of Stone onely, exalted from the ground about three fingers in height, whereon is engrauen the Picture of this Prince, habited according to the manner of the blacke Monkes of Clugny, the Order of Saint Benedict, holding the very same of Saint Benigne. On his head is placed a Dukes Crowne, and on either side are the Escutcheons of his Armes: Qui ^st vne A^gle party d'vn Lyon rempant, without any other Blazons. About the Tombe ^s engrauen this Epitaphe.




The Epitaph on the Tombe of Voladislaus.
HIc ^acet vir illustris and deuotus Dominus Voladislaus quondam Dux Albus Poloniae, M^nachus huius Monasterij per plures annos existens: postmodum dispensatus per Pa^^m pro successione Regni Poloniae, obijt in ciuitate Argentina hic eligens sepeliri. Anno Domini Millesimo Trecente simo Octuagesimo Octauo. 1. Kalend. Martij. Anima requiescat (...) pace. Amen.




In the person of this Voladislaus ended the Ligne of Piastus, which had held the Crowne of Poland, for the space of fiue hundred and fifty yeares. And for better vnderstanding the hard aduentures of this miserable Prince: the reading of the Bull ^or his dispensation, will giue the best intelligence.




The Copie of the Bull of Dispensation, granted by Pope Clement to the Prince Voladislaus.
CLEMENS EPISCOPVS SERVVS SERVORVM DEI, dilecto (...) v^r^ Vol^d^st to quondam Casi ^^ri Ducis Cuyauiensis nato Militi, Voladi^ D^^^aesis, salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Sedes Apostolica pia mater ani^ ^utem desideranter affectans, personis sibi deuotis generosi sanguinis claritate ful^ (...) s^^ benignitatis gratiam imp^rtitur, in illis praesertim per quas salus hu^ (...) ^^ri^^^^ter creditur prouentura. Sane petitio pro parte tua nobis nuper exhi^ c^ntine^^at, quod in Regite Poloniae de antiqua, and approbata, and hactenus pacifice ob^ruata cons^^tu dine est obtentum, quod aliqua mulier non succedit in eo, idque fuit ibidem ^^cifice obs^ruatum a tempore cuius contrarij memoria non existit; quodque tu^ clarae me^ Casim^ro Regi Poloniae, tertio consanguinitatis gradu per lineam masculinam coniun^t^s, and proxim^^r Masculus per huius^^odi existebas: and quod idem Rex qui nullum super^^tem filium, sed fili as tantum habebat, attendens quod sibi propterea in dicto Regno deberes

succedere, dicteque, filiae excluderentur ab illo, coepit te persequi odio capitali, ^eq^e du^bus Ducatibus quos in eodem Regno pacifice possidebas, nequiter spoliauit, totque ins^as vita tuae posuit, quod te oportuit de partibus illis recedere. Et cum in Alemania te non reputares securum, ad Regnum FRANCIAE transiuisti. Quia non habebas vnde posses secundum priorem statum tuum viuere, decreuisti quod velut Conuersus in Monasterio Cisterciensi Cabillonensis Diccaesis habitares, sed Abbas dicti Monasterij qui tuns erat, recipere te nolebat, nisi promitteres quod in Cisterciensi ordine perpetuo remaneres; and quamuis regularis ordinis totaliter inexpertus existeres, tamen repente regularem professionem in eo secisti. Post medium autem Annum, vel circiter, cum ipsius ^rdinis asperitatem pati non posses, ad Monasterium sancti Benigni de Diuione ordinis sancti Benedicti Lingonensis Diocaesis de licentia praedicti Abbatis accedens, in eo tanquam C^nuersus per annos aliquos moram traxisti. Tandem vero praedicto Casimiro Rege sublat^ de medio, cum dictum Regnum tibi legitime deberetur, ac ipsius Habitatores, and Incole te affectarent in corum Regem habere, and Lodouicus Rex Hungariae Regnum ipsum contra Iustitiam occupasset guerram sibi mouisti. Sed demum dubitans eius potentiam, and quod te interfici faceret, metu Mortis, and necessitate cogente, de consilio aliquorum parentum, and amicorum tuorum ad dictum Monasterium sancti Benigni redijsti, and ibidem per aliquos annos vt Conuersus remansisti, nulla inibi per te regulari professune emissa. QVARE pro parte tua nobis fuit humiliter supplicatum, vt cum nunquam firmum propositum habueris in aliquo regulari ordine remanere, ac praefati Habitateres and Incolae te in eorum Regem habere desiderent, si and in quantum indiges, a quacumque regulari obseruantia te absoluere, tibique concedere quod Comitatus, Ducatus, and quaecumque alia temperalia dominia, ac ipsum Regnum obtinere, and regere valeas, de binignitate Apostilica dignaremur, NOS igitur attendentes sincerae deuotionis affectum quo NOS, and Romanam Ecclesiam reuereris, ac sperantes quod illius per quem Reges regnant, and Principes dominantur, tibi suffragante Clementia predictos Habitatores and Incolas qui Lod^uico praedicto fauentes, contra Nos, and Romanam Ecclesiam in schismatis damnunt damnabiliter sunt collapsi, ad viam salutis and Iustitiae reuocabis, ac considerantes quod olim pr^fatus Lodouicus foelicis recordationis Gregorio Papa Vnaecimo praedecessori nostro super hos humiliter supplicauit, praemissis and aliis rationabili^us causis m^ti, huiusmodi tuis in hac parte supplicationibus inclinati, te a quacumque regulari obseruantia ad quam ex Professione praedicta aut mora quam in pr^fatis M^nasterijs vt praemittitur fecisse dignosceris, quomodolibet adstrictus existis, ex Apostolicae potestati^ plenitudine per praesentes absoluimus, tibi nihilominus concedentes, quod Comitatus, Ducatus, and quaecumque alia temporalia dominia quae ex successione, vel alias iusto titulo a^ te pertinent, and pertinebunt in posterum, ac Regnum ipsum si tibi legitime debeatur, recipere, obtinere, regere, ac etiam gubernare perinde libere and liciter valeas, ac s^ in dicto Cisterciensi ordine Professionem regularem minime emisisses, nullamque in e^s^ Monasterijs, vel eorum altero moram traxisses, constitutionibus Apostolicis, nec non statutis, consuetudinibus. Monasteriorum, and ordinum praedictorum iuramento, cenfirmatione Apostolica, vel quacumque firmitate alia roboratis cont^arijs non obstantibus quibuscumque. Nulli ergo omnino Hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae absoluti^nis, and concessionis infringere, vel ei ausu temeraria contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare pr^sumpserit, indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, and beatorum Petri, and Pauli Apostolerum eius se nouerit incursurum. DATVM AVENIONI Decimo sepimo Kalenda^ Octobris, Pontificatus nostri Anno Quarto.
C.
 C.
 C.
 C.
 Crescentius.

N. GILBERTIN. N





Behold heere the Princes obedience, to yield himselfe in Auignion, and mak^ a scond voyage into Poland.




CLEMENS Episcopus Seruus Seruorum Dei. Dilecto filio Voladislao de Polen^ Monacho Monasterij sancti Benigni de Diuione Ordinis sancti Benedicti Lingenens^

Diocaesis, salutem, and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Cum pro nonnullis nostris, and Romanae Ecclesiae negotijs tua presentia sit nobis plurimum oportuna, presentium tibi tenore mauda^^us quatinus receptis praesentibus ad praesentiam nostram personaliter te trasferre procures, etiam si delectus filius Abbas Monasterij sancti Benigni de Diuione Ordinis sancti Benedicti Lingonensis Diocaesis, aut aliquis alus Superior tuus licentiam super hoc tibi d^xerit denegandam. DATVM Auenioni secundo Nonas Iulij, Pontificatus nostri Anno Quarto.

Sealed in Lead, on Strings of Silke Yellow and Red.


B. DE CVRIA CALVETI.





The History of this Prince, is (as other of the same nature are) a Mirrour or depicted Table of humaine inconstancie: whereto Great men are a thousand times more subiect, then those that are made of meaner temper, that climbe not, but walke contentedly on plaine ground.
After the death of Cazimire the Great:
XXII. Lewis King of Hungarie, his Nephew, by reason of Queene Elizabeth, Sister to the said Cazimire, was Sacred King of Poland in the Cathedrall Church of Craconia, the same yeare as Cazimire the Great, his Vnckle died, the Seauenteenth day of Nouember, by the Archbishop of Guesna. Hee reigned Twelue yeares, and died in Anno One ^housand three hundred fourescore and two, leauing behinde him but two Daughters:
Maria; AndHaduiga.
After his death, there happened Interregnum in Poland, the Polonian Barons being deuided into three seuerall heads by themselues: the first whereof fauoured the cause of Voladislaus the White (as wee haue already said) but that side found it selfe to bee the weakest. An other side would needs mount to the Kingdome Sigismond, Marquesse of ^randenbourg; who had espoused Mary of Poland and Hungarie, Eldest Daugh^er to King Lewes. And the Lords of ^he third side, were affected to the youngest Daughter Heduiga, whom the said King Lewes had promised in mariage to William, (Sonne to Leopolde, Duke of Au^tria, as we haue formerly related to you) whom he had designed for King of Po^and, and entreated the Palatines of Po^ands Kingdome, to receiue him as their King. Which they would not doe, as ^earing not to finde sufficient supporte from his house, to shield and defend ^hem from their enemies. Neuerthelesse, ^o it fell out, that this third part preuai^ed; because the Palatines (assembled (...) Siradia) resolued to take for their ^eene
Heduiga, for whom they sent (within a while after) into Hungarie, to demaund her of the Queene her mother. According to this resolution at the Generall Tearmes, the Princes was conducted to Poland by Demetrius, Archbishop of Strigonia, and Cardinall with the title of foure Crownes; by Iohn Archbishop of Chanadia, and many other great Lords of Hungaria: Shee was Sacred and Crowned at Craconia in the Moneth of October, One thousand three hundred fourescore and foure, by the Archbishop of Guesna Bozenta, and gouerned (for some time) the Kingdome of Poland her selfe alone. King Lewes her Father had assured her to William of Austria to whom she bare great affection: but the Polonians did not thinke well of the matche, and began to contemne the Gouernement of their Princesse: because all men (euen by naturall instinct as it were) doe ill endure the commaund of a woman. For, they will be commaunded by their like, and not by a woman; whom all Lawes, both diuine and humaine, haue subiected to Man.
In the time of this discontent, Iaiellon, the great Duke of Lithuania, sent his Bretheren as Ambassadours into Poland, to present and offer himselfe and his estates to the Polanders and their Queene; with Couenants and Conditions, to abiure Idolatry, and hee and his people to embrace the Christian Religion, vniting also inseparably (for euer after) to the Crowne of Poland, the great Dukedome of Lithuania, and the neighbouring Prouinces vnder his obedience.
Lithuania, is a Prouince of very long and large extendure, which hath limittes and confines Massonia, Prussia and Samogitia: On the East side it is bounded

with Moscouia, and on the South with Roxolania: her Capitall and Metropolitane Citty is Vilna, the Bishops See. All the Regions are seated vnder the North Starre, which is the Pole Artick. We formerly spake, concerning the mariage of the King of Poland Cazimire the Great, to the Daughter of Gedimin, the Great Duke of Lithuania, who left Seauen Children, the Eldest whereof named
Olgerdo, was Father toIagellon,Skirgello,Koribut,Vigunt; AndBorzisoh.
Who were Ambassadours for their Eldest Brother Iagellon, to the Polonians and their Queene Au^ya, to whom they came at Craconia, where being instructed and Catechised; he was with his Brethren Baptized in the Cathedrall Church of Cracouia, the Foureteenth day of February, Anno, One thousand three hundred fourescore and sixe, by the Archbishop of Gnesna Bozenta, and held at the Font by Iohn Bishop of Cracouia, the mariage being sollemnized the same day. Iagellon at his Baptisme was named Ladislaus, and his three Brethren Baptized with him, called in their Idolatry Skirgello, Koribut and Vigunt, were Christened, and named at the Font of Baptisme Boleslaus, Cazimire and Alexander. In this manner were Kings of Poland
XXIII. Ladislaus, Sixt of the name, Sirnamed Iagellon, and his Queene and Wife Heduiga, or Auoya.
Who in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred fourescore and Seauen, caused the Lithuanians to be Baptized, and built the Cathedrall Church of Vilna, in the very same place, where the Idolatrous Lithuanians maintained and worshipped the Fire, which they called Sacred. Queene Heduiga dying in Childebed, Ladislaus tooke in second mariage, Anne, Daughter to William Count of Cilia, and the youngest Daughter of Cazimire the Great, King of Poland: which mariage was celebrated at Cracouia in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred. And the same yeare he Instituted the Vniuersity of Cracouia, causing Professours and Doctours Regents to come thither, from that of Prage in Bohemia.
By his second Wife he had a Daughter, named
Heduiga, Wife to Frederick, Eldest Son to Frederick, Marquesse of Brandenbourg, Burgraue of Nuremberg.
Ladislaus in third mariage espoused Elizabeth, Daughter to a Palatine of Poland, by whom he had no issue: but being maried the fourth time, he had Sophia, Daughter to Andrewe of Kio^ia, whom he maried in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred twenty two, and in this mariage had three Sonnes.

Ladislaus, after King,
Cazimire, dying an Infant; And an other
Cazimire, Gouernour of Lithuania.

Ladislaus died full of yeares, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred thirty and foure, hauing reigned Two and fifty yeares. He deuided the Armes of Poland with them of Lithuania, which are De Gueules au Cheualier arme d'Argent, a la rondele d'Azur charge^ d'vn Croix Patriarchale d'Or: Which the Kings of Poland haue retained to this present.
XXIIII. Ladislaus, Seauenth of the name, came to the Crowne of Poland by the death of his Father Ladislaus Iagellon: he was likewise elected King o^ Hungarie. Hauing assembled a puissa^ Army, he would make warre vpon the Turke, and passing Romania, he came into Macedon, where he fought a furiou^ Battaile against the Turke, whereof h^ had the honour and victory, returnin^ laden with many spoyles, In the te^ yeare of his Reigne, he would aduentu^ vpon the Turke againe, and went to besiedge Nicopolis, called Schilltath, th^ Metropolitane Citty of Bulgaria, when he met with the Turke (who had fou^ times more men then he) at Varna: b^ was ouerthrowne by the Turkes in th^ yeare of Grace, 1444, in the one an^ thirtieth yeare of his Age, the Fourth o^ his Reigne in Hungarie, and tenth in th^ Kingdome of Poland.
After the Battaile hee could not be found either dead or a liue, for some ha^ written, that both his Horse and H^ were swallowed vp together in the Se^ But others say, that sauing himselfe b^ the helpe of his Spurres, hee went (...)

spend the rest of his dayes disguised like a Pilgrim, wandring thorow the World: and that hee dyed at Ierusalem, or else at Saint Iames of Compostella. But howsoeuer it was, hee dyed without Children: so that his Brother
XXV. Cazimire, Fourth of the Name, Gouernour of Lithuania, was King of Poland, Crowned in the yeere of Grace, 1447. the 25. day of Iune. In the yeere ^453. he tooke to Wife Elizabeth, Daughter to Albert, King of the Romans, of Bohemia, and Hungarie, Archduke of Austria: by whom hee had sixe Sonnes, and seuen Daughters.
The Sonnes were,
Ladislaus, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, Husband to Madame Anne of France.

All three Kings of Poland.

Iohn Albert,


Alexander,

Sigismond, surnamed the Great,

Cazimire, deceasing young; and
Frederick, Archbishop of Gnesna, Bishop of Cracouia, and Cardinal of Poland.
Concerning the Daughters, the eldest, named
Heduiga, was married to George, Duke of Bauaria.
Sophia was Wife to Frederick, Marquesse of Brandenbourg.
Anne, wife to Bogeslaus, Duke of Stetina.
Barbara, Wife to George, Marquesse of Misnia.
Elizabeth, wife to the Duke of Legints.
Iane Both dying vnmaried.
And Margaret Both dying vnmaried.
King Cazimire died of the Tisick, in the yeare of Grace, 1492. the 46. of his Reigne, and 81. of his Age.
His Second Sonne
XXVI. Iohn Albert succeeded him in the Kingdome of Poland, Crowned the 27. day of August, in the yeare of his Fathers deceasse, and Reigning but nine yeares, died of an Apoplexi, in the yeare, 1501. He had for successour his brother
XXVII. Alexander, Sacred and Crowned King of Poland by the Cardinall Frederick his Brother the 12. of December in the said ye^re 501. His Reigne was of short continuance, and full of affliction to him, by reason he was falne into a long, l^ngring and incurable disease, and died without issue at Vilna in Lithuania the 19. day of August 506. the fift yeare of his Reigne; And then succeeded after him the Duke of Glogonia, his Brother
XXVIII. Sigismond, called the Great, elected King of Poland the Eighth day of December, in the said yeare, 506. Sacred and Crowned the 24. day of Ianuary following. He was sirnamed the Great, because he was endued with all those vertues, which m^ke a Prince affected of his Subiects. He was married two seuerall times, his first wife was Barbara, Daughter to Count Stephen, Palatine of Transsiluania, and in this mariage was borne their only Daughter
Heduiga, wife to the Electour Ioachim, Marquesse of Brandenbourg.
In second Mariage he espoused Bonna of Millayne, Daughter to Iohn Galeazzo Sforza, Duke of Millayne, and Isabell of Arragon, with whom hee liued Thirty yeares, and by her had foure Daughters, and one Sonne.
The Daughters were
Elizabeth, Wife to Iohn or Ianusius, King of Hungarie.Sophia,Anne, Wife to Iohn, King of Sweden: and in this Marriage, was borne Sigismond, Third of the Name, King of Poland. AndKatherine.
The Sonne was named
Sigismond, King of Poland, Second of the Name.Sigismond the Great died aged fourescore and two yeeres (hauing reigned fortie and two) in the yeere of Grace, 1548. the first day of Aprill: after whom succeeded his onely Sonne.
XXIX. Sigismond Augustus, the nine and twentieth King of Poland, being aged tenne yeeres, and so Sacred, and Crowned in the life time of his Father; with whom hee reigned eighteene yeeres; and alone, foure and twentie yeeres. Hee had three Wiues: as namely, Elizabeth of Austria, eldest Daughter to the Emperour Ferdinand, King of Hungarie and of Bohemia, Brother to the Emperour Charles the Fift. The Second, was Barbara de Radzille, Daughter to a Count Palatine of Poland. And the last, was Katherine of Austria, Sister of his first Wife: but by them all three, hee had not any Issue. Hee died the seuenth day of Iuly, 1572.
His sickenesse hauing beene of very long continuance, and iudged incurable, King Charles the ninth, and the Queene mother Katharine de Medicis, sent into Poland, Iohn Iacques de Monluc, Lord of Balagny (made Marshall of France in the in the yeare fourescore and fourteene) to sound the Lords of Poland, and to worke so in the matter of Election, that fauour might be afforded for Monsieur Alexander of France, Duke of Aniou, and brother to the King. There were many Princes, that aspired to this Election, as namely:
Princes that aspired to the Election of Poland*Monsieur, Brother to the King.
The Archduke Ernestus (Sonne to the Emperour Maximilian) aged twelue or Thirteene yeares.
Sigismond, Sonne to Iohn, King of Sweden, and Anne, Daughter of Poland, aged but eight yeeres onely.
Bazilius Ioanniza, Great Duke of Moscouia.
The Duke of Saxonie.
The Duke of Prussia, Marquesse of Brandenbourge.
And the Vayuode of Transyluania.
Ambassadors sent into Poland from the Ch^istian Princes and the Turke.At the Assembly held of the Generall Tearmes, begun first at Varsouia the tenth day of Aprill, and afterward continued at Plosko; the Princes of Christendome, and the Great Tu^ke also, sent thither their Ambassadours. Pope Gregorie the thirteenth then sitting, sent thither as his Ambassadour the Cardinall Commendon: He that came from the Emperour, was Dom Guillaume des Vrsins, Lord of Reemsbergne: The King sent thither Iohn de Monluc, Bishop of Valencia, and Guy de Sainct Gelai^, Lord of ^nsac, Knight of the Order, and Knight of Honor to the Queene Mother. The King of Spaine, Dom Phillip the second, had there for his Ambassadour Dom Pedro Faiardo, Marquesse de Veles: And the Great Turke sent thither one of his Cha^ns, with his Chiefe Physi^ian: who were heard alone in the Assembly of the Polanders, to whom they said, that the Great Turke their Maister sent to let them know, that of the Pretenders to their Kingdome, there was not any one, whom he thought worthier to be accepted, then the Prince of France.
At the b^ginning of the Assembly at Varsouia, the Ambassador for Spaine demanded Precedency for the King his Master, against him for France, as wel in the Church as in the publique (as we haue shown in our second Book, fol. 293.) And that to these ends he had audience before them from the Pope and the Emperour, and before them for France. The Lords of Poland adiudged yet the Precedency to the King, so that his Ambassadors had audience next to them from the Pope, and the Emperor Maximillian the second, and he from Spaine, who was admitted to speake next after them for France, not brooking any rebuke before so notable an Assembly of the Princes of Christendome, lef^ off his Ambassage, and returned backe from Poland.
Consideration of the Ambassadors conditions.The qualities of these Ambassadors were commendable; as well in regard of their Masters, the most Illustrious Princes of Christendome; as of their own Houses in perticuler. That of the Vrsines is knowne as well in France, as in Germanie and Italie, of whence they are originally descended, both of Naples and of Rome du Mont Iourdain. As for them of France, they were brought thither by one of their Vnckles, Messire Neapolin des Vrsins, Bishop of Mentz. The first was Peter Iuuenall des Vrsins, Father to Iohn Iuuenall des Vrsins,Concerning the des^ert of the Vrsines. Aduocate in the Parliament, and Garde de la Preuoste des Marchants, for King Charles the sixt; afterward Attorney Generall in the Parliament of Paris, and Chancellour to the Daulphine Charles the seauenth. Which Iohn Iuuenal was Father to Messire Iohn Iuuenall des Vrasins, first Councellor, and Maister of the Requests to the said Daulphine Charles the seauenth, afterward King; and afterward Attorney Generall in the Parliament of Paris transferred to Poictiers; next Bishop of Beauua^s, of Laon, and finally Archbishop of Rheimes, prime Peere of France: And of Peter Iuuen^l des Vrsins, Patriarch of Antioc^: Of William Iuuenall des Vrsins, Baron of Trainne^ in Champaigne, Chancellor of France. In the Church of Paris, in the Chappell of the Vrsins, is to be seene the Genealogie of the said Vrsines, on a great Table, fastened to the wall on the right hand, with those Armes which we haue obserued in the Order of the Holy Ghost. Armes which Volateranus in his Philologia writeth, to haue bin giuen by the Senate and people of Rome, to Primienus and Vrsinus, Sons of Caius Vrsins, Captain of Sp^l^tum.
Now, as concerning the House of Monluc, which commeth from Condomois in Gascoignie; it hath produced a great number of valliant Captaines and learned Prelates: among whom was Iohn de Monluc, Bishop of Valencia,Of the Family of Monluc. the best speaking man of all the Prelates in his time. He was brother to Blase de Monluc, who hath sufficiently described himselfe (and in most liuely coullers) in his succinct and sweete Commentaries, written with his owne hand, euen as if he had fought like to an other Caesar. He was also (for his valiancy) made Knight of the Order, and Marshall of France by King Henry the Third, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred threescore and foureteene, at his returne from Poland.
The Armes of this House are D'Azur a vn Loup rampant d'Or,The Armes of Monluc. Escartele d'Or a vn Turteau de Gueules: as I haue seene at Saint Peters of Condome, in the Funerall ^g^rdl^ng of the Church, for burying the said Bishop of Valencia, and Marshall Monluc. Which Blase de Monluc in the last quarter of his Armes, in stead of a dogge or a shee-Wolfe, placed a Bitch or shee-Wolfe of Gold, which are the Armes of the Citty of Sic^na, and which the people thereof tooke,The Armes of ^ienna in Ital^e. to keepe in memorie the braue defence of the Siedge, which the Emperour Charles the Fift had laid thereto, engir^ing it with all his forces. All those of his defence, haue still retained the said Bitch-Wolfe in the last quarter of their Armes. Iames de Monluc, Lord of Balagny, Prince of Ca^bray, made Marshall of France by King Henry the Great, bare aboue ^ll his Armes (such as Blase de Monluc his Vnckle did) those of Cambray, which are D'Or a trois ^us ceaux passants d'Azur coronnez de mesme, ouglez and languez de Gu^u^es. This was the same Lord of Balagny, that began the negotiation of Poland, for Monsieur Alexander Henry of France.
The House of Saint Gelais, is issued of the Auncient and Illustrious House of Lusignan, the roote and stock of so many Emperours and Kings of Ierusalem,Concerning the Famous House of Lusignam. Cyprus ^nd of Armeni^, as also of Constables of France. Ils portent Escartele Le Premier and ^e Quatriesme de Cinq poincts d'Azur, equipolez a Quatre d Argent. Au Second and Sroi^sme d'Argent au Lyon de Gueules, coronne d'Or. Pourtenants et supports deux Griffons d Or, and pour Cimier pellusina: as wee haue formerly noated, in the Tracte of the Knights of the Order of the Holy-Ghost.
As concerning that of Faiardo, it is very highly renowned in Spayne,The descent of the House of Faiardo. in the Kingdome of Murcia. The fi^st dwelling of them of that Sirname, was in the Kingdome ^f Galicia, in the Citty of Sancta Maria de Hortiguera, that is to say of Hortia. And therefore they tooke Armes speaking thereof, and answering to the place of their ^uncient Mannour, to wit. Trois tiges de Hortie de Synople en Champ d'Or, chaque^ge arnut sept fu^^lles, plantees ou esleuees sur trois Roches ou mottes de Terre, sertans de ^x endes d Argent, and d'Azur en pointe.
The fi^st of this Linage was the Counte Dom Roderigo de Romaes,D^m Roderigo de R^maes and his fortunes. Lord of Monter^so and Gallicia, who trauayling in the world, brought out of England a Princesse of ^he Royall House of England, with whom he came to dwell at Sancta Maria de la Herti^, the Princesse being named Milia. Ths Coun Dom Roderigo was Sonne to ^he Count Dom Raymond, Son to the King of Leon Froila. Of this mariage of Roderigo ^nd Milia, descended Houses and Families bearing sundry Sirnames, as of Faiardo,Houses des^e^ded of him and the Princesse. ^iuera, Bahamonde, Gallego, Monterroso, X^tico, Segnorino, and of Lugo, all which beare ^he Armes of the Hortides formerly emblazoned; except the Bahamond^s, who to ^onserue the m^mo^y of their Mother Princesse of England: Portereut d'Azur a vne (...) d'Or, C^r^nne de m^sma, a la Bordure de Gueules, Orlee d'Or, charged d^s^pt Poissons Arg^nt.
After the Battaile Des Naues de Telesa,Most of these Noble Families present at the Ba^tail^ of Tel^sa. the most part of these Families chanu^ed their Armes, to make knowne, that they were present at a day of so ^gh Honour. Those of Gallego, retained still the Hortiaes Armes, and (in ^me) tooke againe the Sirname of Faiardo, as being that of the eldest House. ^ecause D^m Diego Perez de Gallego, Husband to Estenaueta de Bahabon, had a ^onne nam^d
Suarez ^^as Gallego, Husband to Dogna Ignes Garcia de Sanabria, and of this Mariage was borne Pedro Garcia de Gallego, Who had to Wife Dogna Therese ^gnez de Maldonado, Daughter to Nugno Perez de Maldonado, and Dogna

Aldara Fernandez de Chuchukrano: And of this Marriage, issued three Sonnes and foure Daughters: Iohn de Gallego, slaine in the Kingdome of Naples, at the Battaile giuen by the King of Sicily,The Battaile fought in the Kingdome of Naples. Charles of Aniou, against the Infant of Castile, Dom Henry. The second Sonne, was Dom Fernand Perez de Gallego, Great Master of the Order of Alcantara: And the third, was Stephen Perez de Gallego. The Daughters were, Ig^^ Perez de Gallego, Wife to Periagnez de Redonda: Maiora Perez de Gallego, Wife to Ferdinand Arias de Mera: the third, Theresa de Gallego (Wife to Pero Fernandez de Valuerdo) who hauing no Issue by him, shee was the second time married to Gonsalo Lopez de Ribera. The fourth Daughter, was Esteueneta Perez de Gallego, Wife to Ada^ Fernandez, one of the most renowned Knights of Gallicia. In this Marriage, was borne Dom Gonsalo Perez, Great Master of Alcantara, issued from the Count Dom Pero Fernandez de Traua, Lord of Trastamaro.
Iohn Gallego (Sonne to Pero Garcia de Gallego) slaine, as wee haue said, in the Kingdome of Naples,Pero Gallego, surnamed Faiardo. the yeere of Grace, One thousand, two hundred, threescore, and eight, left but one Sonne, aged then but foure yeeres, named Pero de Gallego, surnamed Faiardo, brought vp by his Vnckle Fernando Perez, Great Master of Alcantara. After whose death, hee made his abiding with his Cousin Dom Gonsalo Perez, Great Master of the said Order, who died in the yeere One thousand, three hundred, and twelue.
This Pero Gallego Faiardo had to Wife Dogna Blanche d'Aldana. And in this Marriage was borne Iohn Faiardo: who departing out of Gallicia, went into the Realme of Murcia, with the Count of Carrion, Dom Iohn Sanchez Emanuel, when he tooke possession thereof, after the death of the King Dom Pedro. Which Iohn Faiardo made himselfe famous by the death of fiue Moores,The Honourable and Knightly Valour of Iohn Faiardo. whom he slew himselfe with his owne hand, when they sought to hinder his drinking at a Spring, or Fountaine: as also, by the death of a Captaine Moore, whom hee ran thorow with his Lance, as hee had layd an ambush for him in a Wood. So, that in true acknowledgement of his Valour and Prowesse, the Count of Carrion gaue him the Citie of Labriche, and diuers other Lands in Murcia. Hee had a Sonne,
Dom Alonso Iuannes Faiardo, who was Adelantado of the Kingdome of Murcia (vnder the Count Dom Iohn Sanchez Emanuel,Dom Iohn Sanchez Emanuel, Great Adelantado of Murcia. Generall and Great Adelantado) and there hee performed Actions of Wonder, to defend the Lands of his Gouernment against the Moores of Granada, whom hee vanquished in a fought Battaile at Lorca. Hee was Father to Alphonso Iuannes Faiardo, and of Iohn Faiardo, Source and originall of the Lords of Lepe and Vandonia, of Dogna Beatrix, Wife to Dom Iohn Martinez de Sot^maior, Commander of Arauaca; and of Pedro Lopez Faiardo, Commander of Carauaca.
Alphonso Iuannez Faiardo, Sonne to the Adelantado, tooke to Wife Dogna Maria de Quesada, Daughter to Pero Viaz de Quesada, Lord of Garcies: of which Marriage, was borne Iohn Faiardo,Iohn Faiardo slaine by the Moores. slaine by the Moores; and Pedro Faiardo, Knight, in the Seruice of the King Dom Iohn, Second of that Name, who made him great Adelantado of the said Kingdome of Murcia; Husband to Donna Leonora Manriquez, Daughter of Dom Roderigo Manriquez, Great Master of the Order of Saint Iames. Of this Marriage issued a Daughter, named Louisa Faiardo, married by the Kings Catholique, Do^ Ferdinand of Arragon, and Isabel of Castile, to Dom Iohn Chacon, Great Treasurer of Castile, Sonne to Gonzalo Chacon, Fauourite of the s^id Kings. This Iohn Chaco^ made an exchange with the said Kings Catholique, of the Citie of Carthagena, for the Lands and Seigneurie of Velez. And in this Marriage, was borne Dom Pedro Faiardo, the first Marquesse of Velez: In the Dignitie whereof, succeeded the Embassadour of Spaine (subiect of this Discourse) Dom Pedro Faiardo,Dom Pedro Faiardo* first Marquesse of Velez. Marquesse of Velez, and of Molena, Great Adelantado in the Kingdome of Murcia, Great Commander of Leon, and Great Master d'Hostel to the Queene of Spaine, Councellor of Estate to King Philip the Second, in his Councell of Warre, and held for one of the best iudgement, among all the men of his time.
Returne wee now againe to the Generall Tearmes of Poland: whereat, vpon the Day of Pentecost, in the yeere One thousand, fiue hundred, threescore, and thirteene, was elected and proclaymed for their King, Mounsieur, the Duke o^ Aniou,
XXX. Henry, Second of the name. On the morrow after this Election,Henry of France chosen King of Poland. the Poastes departed from Poland, who brought these tydings to King Charles the Ninth. Which was the cause of raising the Siedge at Rochell, and Peace graunted to the Protestants of France. Hauing left Rochell, and come to Paris, in expectation of the Lords from Poland: he made his entrance thereinto as King of Poland, at the Gate of Saint Anthony, about the midst of September, in the said yeare Threescore and thirteene. From Saint Anthonies Gate,His entrance into Paris as King of Poland. vnder a Canopy of Clothe of Gold, he was conducted to the Church of Paris, and from thence to the Castell of the Louure, where magnificent Triumphes and Reuelles were prepared. At his entrance were erected many Triumphall Arches, but that which appeared of the best inuention, was a great goodly Shippe (which is the Armes of the Royall Citty of Paris, the richest in the World) erected in the midst of Saint Anthonies Streete,A goodly ship and her sumptuous furniture. it being made of admirable greatnesse, Armed with Culuerines, fitted and furnished with Mastes, Sayles, Cables, Tackles and Marriners, Maister, Mate and other Officers; as also with many Banners, Streamers, Pennons and Banderoles: made glorious with the Armes of France and Poland. But those thereto belonging (I meane of Poland) emblazoned D'Argent aux Aigle and Caualier de Sable, by grosse ignorance in the Herauldes and Kings of Armes, and the Painters of those times: were found to be much misliked, and of very sinister presage by the Lords of Poland, the most iudicious among them presaging thereby, that this Royalty would afford them but slender fruite. The outward shape of the Shippe was all of Siluer, and from the Poupe and Prow issued two Fountaines or Conduite pipes of White and Claret wine, with which licquors the Polanders and others well pleased themselues. From vnderneath the Shippe, as out of a flowing Sea (as his Maiesty passed along) arose a youth attired like a Maremaide, singing most sweetly, and with an amirable voyce extolling the prowesse of the King of Poland, in sundry Sonnets, Roundelayes and Vi^elayes, all composed to his Honour, afterward turned into Latine by that learned Poet M. Iohn d' Aurat, and imprinted at Paris, with all the Ceremonies of the said entrance, In the Moneth of October following, the King of Poland departed from Paris; being conducted (so farre as to the Citty of Mentz) by the King his Brother, the Queene his Wife, Queene Mother, Monsieur the Duke of Alanson, and the King of Nauarre.


CHAP. VI. Names, Sirnames, Armes and Qualities of Ambassadours from the Kingdome of Poland, which came to Paris, to guide and conduct thence Monsieur Alexander of France Duke of Aniou, elected King of Poland, and afterward King of France, by the name of King Henry the Third.
ADam Conarky, Bishop of Posnania. Il portoit au premier canton, de Gueules a la Viure d'Argent perie en face. Le second de Gueules a vn Banc (a s'asseoir a l'antique) d'Or, aux acoudoirs de mesme. Le tiers, d'Azur au Donion somme de trois Tours crenelees d'Or, massonnees de Sable. Et le quart d'Azur au Croissant d'Argent, and dessus vne Estoile de mesme. Sur l'Escu, Mitre d'Argent, and Crosse d'Or.
Albert Lasky, Palatine of Siradie, free Baron of Liezmarch, de Gueules au Nauire, and son Mast desarme d'Or, les Proue, and Poupe finissants en Muffles de Lyon de mesme. Tous les Mezals sont tarrez de front.

Cimier. Nauire and Mast desarmez de mesmes.

Nicolas Firley, Capitaine of Casmirie. D'Azur, au Leopard rempant d'Or, coronne de mesme.

Cimier. Lyon naissant d'Or.

Iohn Herbort, Castillian of Sanocia, and Captaine of Primislauia. De Gueules a trois Espees d'Argent, aux Gardes d'Or, plantees en Y Grec, and mouuantes de^^ du Chef, and ^autre de la Pointe, and fichees dedans vne Rondache d'Or mise en Abysme.

Sans Cimer.

Stanislau Crisky, Castillian of Racisnia, and Captaine of Ebrin. D'Azur a^ Lyon naissant d Or; couppe d'vne muraille crenelee de cinq pieces de Gueules, massonnee d'Argent.

Cimier. Vn Lyon naissant, and yssant d'Or.

Iohn Counte of Thenzin, Castillean of Voscinie, Captaine of Lublin, and of Parcomenie D'Argent a l'Aigle esploye de Sable; escartele de Gueules, a la Hache Danoise, que nous disons Manche mal tallee d'Argent. Et sur le tout d'Azur au Lyon Rempant d'Or. Deux Mezails confrontez. Cimier du premier l'Aigle esploye de Sable; and l'autre al^ Manche mal talle d'Argent.
Iohn Sarto Zamolsky, Capitaine of Belsen, and General of Zamescrinie. De Gueules a trois Lances d Or, f^rrees d Argent, deux en Sautour, les Poignees en poincte, and la Treisiesme en Pal, la poignee en Chef.

Cimier. Vn B^uo d Argent.

Iohn Zborou, Capitaine of Eslanorie. De Gueules au Fer de Cheual d'Argent, cl^^e de Sable, a la Croix pattee d'Argent en Abysme.

Cimeier. Vne Canno tenant en s^n bec vne Ouale d'Or.

Iohn de Tomice Castillian of Gnesna.

Nicolas de Tomic^.

Andre de T^mice Count of Porca, Castilian de Mediercie, Capitaine of Gn^sna, and of Valencia.
Pierre de T^mice. Ces Quatr^ portent de Gueules, au Banc a l'Antique d Or, like vnto the Bishop of P^snia.

Et sans Cimier.


Al^xandre ^runsk^. D'Azur, au Caualier d'Argent, tenant sur le poing droict ^n Gerfaut, cu Fauc^n, de mesmes. Le Second Canton de Gueules, au Lyon rempant d Or; le Tr^isiesme d^ Gueules a la fleur de Lys d'Argent, and le Quart d Azur a la Tesle de Bussle (...) de Taure au houc^ d Or.


Cimier. Le premier Quarti^r. Et

Nicolas Ch^^st p^^le (...) Duke Dolica de Nesues, Marshall and Generall of L^^uaria. C^stu^ c^p^rt^it d'Or* a l Aigle de Sable, Arme, and Langue d'Or: charge d' A^ur ^u premi^r Cant^n (which wee teare of honour) de trois Cors d'Or Enguichez d^ Gueul^s. (...) Gu^ules au Dauphin pasme tourne d^Azur, and au mitan vn d Arg^nt. Au Ti^r^, de Gueules au Croissant tourne d'Argent, a vne Croix pattee de na^me (...) d Honn^ur. Et le Quart d'Azur s^me de Croix pattees d'Argent, (...) (...) de m^smes.
(...) du mili^u Tarre de front. C^mier, l'Aigle de Sable.
(...) naiss^nt d Or, l vn and l autre tournez; and l'autre pour Cimier (...) d Or.
The Chancellour of Poland, whom we spake of before, among the others aspirers and pretenders to the Kingdome, Portoit de Synople a Trois faisses peries d'Or en (...) au premier Cant^n; le Second de Gueules an Manche mal-tale. Le trois^es^ de (...) la Cr^ix patte^e d'Argent au Chef d'Honneur, and demy-fer de Cheual, t^^ant du (...) P^^nc^e d'Argent cloue de Sable; and le Quatriesme and dernier de Synople (...) and Arme d'Or, Poupe and Proue de m^sme que dessus.
(...)On the day and Feaste of Pentecost the yeare following One thousand fiue hundred, threesc^^e and foureteene, King Charles the ninth passed out of this life into an other much better, at his Castell Du Bois de Vincennes. Newes of his death was c^rried to the King of Poland Henry, by the Counte of Chemerault, who departing from Paris on the day of Pentecoste, at the ninth houre in the Euening: made such diligent haste,(...) that in riding Post Thirteene dayes, he arriu^d at Cracouia. From whence the King departed secretly, and getting into the Emperours Countries, he crossed ^rioull^, making his magnificent entrance into Venise, from whence he went (...).
By reason of his absence (without any hope of returne, nor any apparance of changing Diomedes and Glancus) the Generall Tearmes were called, in the yeare of Gr^ce, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and fifteene, and Election of a new King to be considered on. Some opinions passed in fauour of the Emperour Maximillian,

Second of the name, but others stood for Stephen Battory,Stephen Battory King of Po^and. Vaiuode of Transyluania. The Polanders being disioynted in opinion, became vnited together by the death of Maximillian, happening in the yeare fiue hundred threescore and sixeteene, so that that Kingdome of Poland remained peaceably to the Prince of Transyluania
XXXI. Stephen Bottory, who espoused the Sister to King Sigismond Augustus,The death of Ste^hen Battory. the Princesse Anne of Poland, by whom he had no issue. Afterward, by the death of King ^teph^n, chancing in the yeare Fiue hundred fourescore and seauen, there were many Princes that presented themselues, to be elected King of Poland, as namely
Rodolphe, second of the name Emperour, King of Hungarie and Bohemia.The Va^uode of Transyluania.The Cardinall Bottorie.The Duke of Ferrara.The Duke of Parma.The P^l^tine Zam^ski, high Chancellour of Poland.S^a^nd of Sweden, Sonne to Iohn, King of Sweden, and the Queene Anne of (...), Sister to King Sigismond Augustus: AndMaximillian, Archduke of Austria, Brother to the Emperour.
The first sixe nominated were put by, and the two last stood for Election; but the contrary part to Maximillian preuailed, so that
XXXII. Sigismond of Sweden, third of the name, was crowned King of Poland at Cracouia, the seauen and twentieth day of December,S^sm^n^ of Sw^en Crowned King o^ (...). in the yeare Fiue hundred fourescore and seauen. And the fiue and twentieth day of Ianuary following, the Archduke Maximillian lost the Battaile, wherein he was surprized by the said King S^gism^nd; to whom he was compelled to release and acquit all his pretences to the Kingdome of Poland. By a Treatie of Peace, King Sigismond tooke to wife Anne of Austria, Cousine-germaine to the said Maximillian.

At what time the Order of Poland and of the White Eagle was Instituted, and by whom.
NOw, as concerning the Order of Polonia, otherwi^^ called Of the White Eagle: It was Instituted by the King La^islaus, fift of the name, Sirnamed Lokter;l'Ordre de Pologne dict de l'Ai^le ^lan^h at the marriage of his Sonne Cazimire the Great, with Anne the Daughter of (...), Duke of Lithuania, in the Moneth of February, the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred twenty and fiue.
And because all Kings, Heralds and Pursuiuants of Armes, ought (of meere necess^tie, and as an especiall Article of their abilitie) to know the nature of all Creatures,Duties mainely concerning all (...) of Armes. Trees, Plants and Houres, yea and of all things belonging to Nature, and concerned in Armes, from the Royall Eagle, so low as to the Ante, from the huge Leuiathan of Whale of the Sea, to the blinde Moale, and from the Ceders of Lybanus, to the humble Hisop^, that they may yeelde the better answere to Kings and Princes, for emblazoning of apt Armes to newly ennobled Gentlemen. It cannot vary much from our purpose, to touch (as we walke on) the nature and properties of the Eagle. Whereon ^o we are the more willingly induced, in regard that the Armes of the (...) ^^r Auncestours, Lords de la My-voye in Vermandois of their owne Race; and o^ (...) d Ara^lay; and of the Montils in Gaslinois, by Alliance of Geneuiefue de l'Isle (Daughter to Raymond de L'Isle, Qui portoit d Argent a deux Lyons passants l'vn sa^ autre de Sable; And of Iane le Sommeilier, Lady de la Chappelle d'Arablay, and des Mont^s, Qui portoit d'Or Escartele de Gueulles) next vnto our Great Grandfather Con^ria ^nne, a Germaine Gentleman, borne in the Citie of Treuers (who came to be Houshold Seruant to King Lewes, eleauenth of the name, being then Daulphine, after the Battaile of Basile, wonne by him against the Switzers in the Moneth of August, the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred forty foure) whose Armes are

D'Or, a la Croix d'Azur, chargee en Coeur d'vn Croissant d'Argent, and Cantonnee de quatre Aigles droicts, and tournez de Sable, Coronnez, Armez, and Lampassez de Gueulles, Deux Sauuages pour Supports and Tenants; and p^ur Cimier, l'Aigle de Sable Coronne, Arme, and Lampasse de Gueulles.
It was an auncient Prouerbe vsed among the Crecians. That the Eagles flight is quite contrary to that of the Partridge; And the Hauke is sharper sighted then the Ant. Likewise the Romaines held it for an vndoubted Maxime, that
Non generant Aquilae Columbam.
The excellency of the ^a^le ^boue all other Foules.The Greekes and Romaines made vse of these Prouerbs, thereby to expresse the excellencie of the Eagle. And the Poet Euripides, hath left vs in writing; That all Birds in generall are Heraulds and Messengers of the Gods: but the Eagle is the King, the Truchman and Interpreter of the great God Iupiter. In like manner, he participateth of the Diuinitie, according to the testimony of Aristotle, in the subtiltie of his sight, beholding the Sunne fixedly; in the strength of his Wings and Tallons; as also in diuturnitie of life, by a long and large time of yeares.
Aquilae maximo honos, maxima and vis.
And like as among the sixe sorts of Eagles, the most excellent is that which is the blackest in colour: euen so the Kings of Armes doe imploy in Armes this Sunnie Creature,The blacke Eagle is beyond all other Colours. with two Mettals, and foure colours, but the richest of all other in Blazon is L'Escu d'Or a l'Aigle de Sable: For the blacke Eagle is aboue all other kindes. He is called by the Greekes, Meneletos, and by the Romaines, Valeria, of lesse corpulence then all the other, but endued with valiancie aboue the rest, and singuler pietie towards his yong ones, because he nourisheth them carefully; being moreouer a Bird altogether truely Royall, peacefull, and without noyse. Minima magnitudine, viribus Praecipua, colore nigricans. Sola Aquilarum foetus suos alit; caetera fugant, sola fine clangore, sine murmuratione, conuersatur in montibus. Others chase away their yong ones, delighting to liue in lowe and waterie places, hunting after Fish, and feeding on Carrion. The black Eagle euermore maketh his abiding in the height of Mountaines, where he may come neerest to the bright beames of the Sunne.
Our auncient French made triall of their Wiues honestie, by casting their yong Infants vpon the Riuer of Rhine: the reuenger of a soyled marriage bed, as we haue already elsewhere said. Euen so in like manner the Royall and Kingly Eagle, approueth his yong Birds by the Sunnes beames, to gaze vpon them with a fixed eye, which if they doe,The Eagles proofe of his yong birds. he nourisheth them kindely and carefully: but if they turne their heads aside, then he reiecteth them, and disauoweth them to be his. Pullos suos etiamnum implumes percutiens subinde cogit aduersos intueri Solis radios: and si conniuentem, and flentem animaduerterit, praecipitat e nido velut adulterinum, and degenerem. Illum cuiu^ acies firma contra steterit, educat.
If a yong Eagle may chance to be stolne out of the Nest, it is no meane matter of wonder,An Eagles knowledge wonderfull. to thinke of the knowledge, which he taketh of him that was his nurse and fosterer, and which he will be sure to recompence by hunting, or otherwise, as I haue seene the proofe thereof by experience, in one brought vp in the Bishops House of Menda in Geuaudar. Homer writeth of his Vlisses, that being twenty yeares space absent from his owne House; he could not be knowne, but by his Nurse and his Dogge. But an Eagle knoweth his nursing and foster Father, among an infinite multitude of men: either by his voyce, whereof he taketh notice in some strange manner, or by his walking, which he will be sure to obserue. This creature is endued with very singuler vnderstanding, and admirable affection towards his Maister; being no way inferiour to the Dogge, the Symbole of faithfulnesse.
A strange History of the Eagle of Sestos.Plinie, in the second Booke and fift Chapter of his Naturall History, reporteth meruailes concerning the Eagle of Sestos, nourished from his Nest by a yong Maide, that kept him to sport abroad on hunting. This faire Maide deceasing, was brought to the pile of wood to be burnt, according to the auncient custome obserued by the Greekes and Romaines, in the manner of their Funerall Obsequies. The dead Maides body was attired all in white Linnen, soft, sweete and delicate, her Head crowned with a goodly Chaplet of Floures, and her body thickly strewed with Floures of all kindes. The Priests and the Inhabitants were cloathed in fine white Linnen Albes,

tuckt vp vnder their girdles vpon


their hippes, their Heads likewise crowned with Floures, bearing branches of Palme and other greene trees in their hands. The body being laid vpon the flaming Pile, perfumed with the purest Arabian Spices, the Ea^le (hauing bin touring aloft all this while, houering and fanning his faire Wingges ouer the Corps, euen as if he performed some Ayne Ceremonie thereto:) At length he descended gently downward, and lighted directly on the Damosels Brest, where he suffered himself to be burnt and consumed, as bearing her faithfull company in death,The words of Plinie as they are in his Hostorie. euen as before he had done ^n life. Percelebris est apud Seston ^rbem Aquilae gloria. Educatum a Virgine retulisse gratiam, Aues pri^, mox deinde venatus aggeren^em. Defuncta postremo in rogum ac^ensum eius iniecisse sese, and simul ^nfligrasse. Our French Lucreti^s delighteth himselfe vpon this ^dmirable Historie (which deser^eth to be painted, after the aun^ient manner, on the Royall high ^ayes of the King) in the fift day ^f his first Weeke. Saying, that ^he Maide being brought to the ^ile:
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. L'Aigle de loing la suitEt tirassant par l'air ses sanglantes entrailles,Honore d'vn Conuoy deux tristes funerailles.Le funebre Vulcan n'a si tost entameA slots s'entresuiuants le corps de l'Aigle aime,Qu'elle iette le sien, qui tout en sang distillePlus vistement qu'vn traict sur la bruslante pile:Et bien qu'il soit cent fois, and cent fois repoussePar le baston sacre du Prestre courrouce,Il cherche toutefois la plus espoisse flame,Et chantant doucement vn obseque a sa Dame,Il se brusle soy-mesme, and mesle heureusementSes os auec les os aimez sicherement.
The English.

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Farre-off the Eagle followes;
And tearing forth in th'Ayre his bloudy entrailes*
With Conuoye honoreth two sad Funerals.
No sooner had his Vulcande-beake made way
For flowing bloudy streames; And euery Spraye
Flaming about the Corps: But the louing Foule
(Lauish in blouds expence, life to controule;)
Most swiftly lights vpon the flaming Pile.
And though th'offended Priest striues all this while
To beate him thence; yet to the thick'st hot fire
Boldly he gets, and singing his desire
To his lou'd Lady, to fill vp the Quire
There burnes himselfe, and blendeth happily
His bones with hers, that lou'd him tenderly.

Famine sonner killeth Eagles then age.Plinie in the former alleadged passage hath written; That Eagles doe sooner dye by famine, then they can by age. Mens liues are growne to be very short, for their vnthankefulnesse, and lacke of knowing God aright, who hath giuen them their being: for, instead of following his Commandements, they doe the quite contrary, addicting themselues to all vices, so that he which liueth least time in the world, doth commit the lesse offences. Beasts and other Creatures, vncapable of reason, haue longer time of life, with meanes to conserue themselues as long therein, as the price and guerdon of their naturall innocency, so doth Hesiodus informe vs in this manner:
Neuf Hommes vid la Corneille criarde,Le Cers autant quatre fois vif se garde,Le Corbeau noir si longuement vieillitQue de trois Cerfs les vies il emplit;Et le Phoenix de neuf Corbeaux egaleLes Iours.
The same in English.

To nine mens liues attaines the bawling Crowe,
To foure as many liues the Hart doth grow.
The blacke hewde Rauen wins as long a date,
As those Harts fulfill in vtmost fate.
Nine Rauens liues the Phoenix equalleth
In length of dayes, etc.

The Eagle is likewise of very long life, as approaching neerest to the proprietie of the Phoenix, which reuiueth it selfe, and gaineth new being and subsistance, within the limits of a iust appointed Age; as we haue more at large discoursed in our third Booke,Naturall propertie, in the Eagle. in the Tract Of the memorable Order of the Holy-Ghost. For Saint Augustine, (without equall in knowledge and learning) doth instruct vs, that from ten yeares to ten yeares the Eagle reuiueth himselfe, getting new Feathers, bathing himselfe diuers dayes in the Sea, or else in some Spring or Fountaine, onely to humect and moisten his body, to cast his inwards and old feathers, to be newly bedewed and sprinkled with fresh bloud, warmed with the ardent heate of the Sunne, the Father and conseruer of naturall heate. So saith the Prophet Esay, speaking of good men, tormented in the tepestuous Sea of the world, yet reposing all their trust in God. Qui sp^r^nt ^n D^mino mut ^bunt fortitudinem, assumerit pennas sicut Aquilae.
That which is most discommodious and hurtfull to the Eagle, is the vpper part of his Beake, which so crooketh and intricateth it selfe ouer the nether iawe, as he cannot take in any ordenary sustenance. And that is the reason, why he knocketh, bruiseth and breaketh this excrescence of his Beake or Hawkelike nose, with many stroakes and blowes, redoubled against a hard Rocke, as beaten on an Anuile, thereby making it to be new and yong againe. For so say the Rabbines and Masscrets* expounding the fift Verse of the hundred and third Psalme,(...) speaking of the man that putteth his trust in God. Renouabitur, sicut Aquilae, Iuuentus Iusti; Making the^ (...) and lus^^, a^ an Eagle. His age shall be more greene and flourishing, then the Spring time of him, that placeth his confidence in the decepts of the world
W^ may hereby perceiue, how the Eagle helpeth and reuengeth himselfe, and (...) Age,(...) when he hath no more strength, to breake the vpper part of his re^bed Beake: Superiore in tantum accrescente rostro, vt aduncitas aperiri non que^^* ^^p^tunt n^n s^n^o, nec aegritudine, sed fame, so saith Aristotle and Plinius secundus. Beside all that hath bin said, this Foule is neuer smitten with thunder and lightning whereto other Animals are subiect, according to the Naturalists: Negant vnou^^

solam hanc alitem fulmine exanimatam. And this was the reason why (according to the Diuiners and Soothsayers of Tuscanie) the Romaines had the Eagle for their Colonell Ensigne and Cornet, which they carried alone in Warre. The other Standards and Banners of the Wolfe, the Minotaure, Horse and Boare,The Colonell Ensi^ne of the Romaines. defending the C^rps du Garde of the Romaine Legions; followed the appointment of Caius Marius, so saith the same Plinie, in the fourth Chapter of his tenth Booke.
God, speaking of himselfe, in a comparison which he made, rather taketh the Eagle, then he would doe any other Bird, promising to the people of Israel, that if they would walke in the pathes of vertue: He would couer and beare them to Heauen, as on the Wings of an Eagle, as you may reade in the nineteenth Chapter of Exodus. Vidistis vos ipsi quae fecerim Aegyptijs, quomodo po^tauerim vos super alas Aquilarum, and assumpserim mihi. So that if there be any one similitude or comparison of excellency, throughout the whole Sacred Scripture: it is most plainely seene, that the Eagle beareth in it, the chiefe and eminent rancke of honour.



The Order of Denmarke, called of the Elephant.
CHAP. VII. The Originall and Genealogie of the Kings of Denmarke.
THE great extendure of this Countrey,The reason for the C^untries ^ame. which to this pres^nt is called Denmarke, in regard of Dan the first Prince thereof; was by auncient Geographers designed vnder the name of Chersonesus Cimbr^ca, a Peninsula or halfe Island, engirt (for the most part) with Mare Britanicum the Brittish Sea, and that of Germanie,The people called the Cimbrians. and with the limitrophing firme Land of Saxonie. From thence it was that the Cimbrians came, with dreadfall multitudes of people, who after they had forradged the fruitfull Gaules, and concluding (...) performe as much in Italie; were ouerthrowne and vanquished by C^ius Marius ^he Romaine Captaine, neere to Aix in Prouence. These are the same people, which ^he Poets name Cimerians, and feigne, that their auncient dwelling or ^biding, was ^^iled or couered with a darke and obscure night, not being at any time illumined ^th the Sunne, the worlds bright eye, by being seated vnder the North-Starre, ^here the Nights are sixe Months wholly, more or lesse, according to the approach (...) absence of the Sunne. And from thence came the fictions of Plutoes Mannour ^ouse, and the Cimerian Night, more obscure then that of Aegypt.

Illis ^ol nunquam Phaeton sua lumina sparsit
Perniciosa super Nox semper tenditur istis.

Some others haue called this halfe Island Scania, Scandinauia, Baltica and Basilia,Diuersitie of names attributed to this Island, and peopling of it, ^hich according to the testimonie of Ptolomie) was sometime inhabited by seauen ^^uerall kindes of People, as namely the Gothes, Lombards, Vandales, Danes, Aroer^ins and Tanians. Of all which, and the perticularities of these Northerne peo^^es dwelling, ample discription is made by Ioannes and Olaus Magnus, Vnckle and ^ephew, Archbishops of Vpsala, and Primates of the Realme of Gothia, tearmed ^^^landia in the^r Histories of the Northerne Regions: As also by Saxo Gramma^us, Albertus Krantsius, and others in the Historie and Description of the King^ome of Denmarke. A part or parcell whereof is Iseland, which some haue ta^^n to be the Isle of Thyle or Thule, and the same thought by the Spanish Poet Seneca,

to be the last, or vtmost of the World: prophetizing in his Medea, that which happened in the life time of our Fathers,Iudgement and opinion of Historians. and hath continued to vs, and so doth dayly, in the discouerie of a new World, and new Lands, farre beyond that of this Isle.

Venient Annis Saecula seris
Quibus Oceanus vincula rerum laxet
Et ingens pateat tellus
Typhisque nouos detegat Orbes
Nec sit Terris vltima THYLE.

Denmark long time gouerned by Kings.It is long time since this spacious Prouince hath beene gouerned by Kings, in regard that the most ancient of our Annalists, Saint Gregorie of Tours, in the third Booke and third Chapter of his Historie of France writeth: That a King of the Danes, named Cochilaicus, about the yeere of Grace, fiue hundred and nineteene, vnder the Reigne of the Sonnes of Clouis, our first Christian King, came with a mightie Nauall Armie, and Pyrated on the Coasts of Austrasia's Kingdome, robbing there a rich Towne, putting the Inhabitants into slauerie: And that Theodorick, vpon the reports of these Tidings,Cochilaicus King of Denmarke by the Prince Theodobert. dispatched away presently Prince Theodobert his Sonne, who ouercame this Armie, as well by Sea as by Land, tooke and recouered back againe the Bootie, and the Captiues, slew Cochilaicus in the field, and put most part of his People to the edge of the Sword: nor had they afterward any desire to forrage the Gaules.
His itaque gestis Dani cum Rege suo nomine Cochilaico euectu Nauali per Mare Gallias appetunt, egressique ad Terras, Pagum vnum de Regno Theodorici deuastant, atque captiuant; oneratisque Nauibus tam de Captiuis, quam de reliquis spolijs, ad Patriam reuerti cupiunt, sed Rex eorum in litus residebat, donec Naues altum Mare comprehena^rent, ipse deinceps sequuturus. Quod cum Theodorico renunciatum fuisset, quod scilicet Regio eius fuerit ab Exteris deuastata, Theodebertum filium suum in illas partes cum valido Exercitu, ac magro Armorum apparatu direxit; qui interfecto Rege, Hostes Nauali^ praelio superatos opprimit, omnemque rapinam Terrae restituit.
Our most Christian Kings haue many times contracted Alliance with them of Denmarke.Marriages of France with Denmarke. That of King Philip Augustus, Second of the Name, called the Conquerour, and Gods-Gift, is very remarkable for the Antiquitie. This great King tooke to his second Wife Engelberga, Sister to Canutus, King of Denmarke, whom he espoused i^ the Church of Amiens, where shee was Crowned by the Cardinall with the faire Hands, William, Archbishop of Rheimes, in the yeere of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore, and thirteene. This illustrious Princesse patiently and sanctimoniously endured an infinite number of bitter griefes and anguishes, at such time as shee was diuorced by our Augustus, who yet afterward tooke her againe, a^ Soissons.
The words contained in this Sentence of Diuorce, doe import, that the King wa^ diuorced from her, because shee was his Kinswoman, in the Degree prohibited by the Church for Contract of Marriage:Proofe of long continued Alliances. Which sheweth, and plainely approoueth that (before this time) there had been Alliance and Affinitie of Kindred betweene the Kings of France and Denmarke, beside Alliances after renewed, according to th^ Occurrences.
I finde, that vnder the Reigne of the most happie, and mirror of Princes in Christendome, Saint Lewes, the King of Denmarke made him offer, to accompanie hi^ with his Nobilitie, Crossed with the Red-Crosse (after the manner of the French) i^ his Voyage to the Holy Land. Whereupon the King gaue him Safe-conduct, Paspor^ and Defray, for him and his Troupes, thorow the Lands of his obedience: as it is obserued by the Monke Matthew Paris, in his Historie of England.
To set downe here the Catalogue and List of the Kings of Denmarke, would aske^ discourse for one of the longest breath to reade. We will therefore satisfie our selues to obserue onely the last Line, which reigneth now at this instant: and that shall b^ the subiect of our Relation.


The Catalogue of the Kings of Denmarke, beginning with the Second Ligne, and continuing to this present.
BY the death of Christopher Duke of Bauaria, King of Denmarke, Sweden and Norway, happening in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred forty and eight.
I. Christierne, Count of Aldembourg and of Dalmenhorst, was crowned King of the said Realmes. He was Sirnamed the Riche, as well in regard of many vertues clearely shining in him, as also by the meanes hee had, not onely of his Stocke and Ligne, but likewise the accession of his Kingdomes. His Reigne continued foure and thirty yeares, and he died in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred fourescore and one. By Dorothie his wife, daughter to a Prince of Ruscia, he left three Sonnes and one Daughter
Olauus, that is Olaus, who died yong.
Iohn, Elected and Crowned King of Denmarke: And
Fredericke, Duke of Schleswicke, and of Hals^tia:
The Daughter was
Margaret, wife to the King of Scotland, Iames, third of the name.
Christierne the Riche, in his owne lifetime caused to be Crowned King of Denmarke, his eldest Sonne
II. Iohn, to whom he espoused Chri^tiana, Daughter to Ernestus, Duke of Sax^nie, Prince Electour of the Empire, in ^he yeare of Grace One thousand foure ^undred fourescore and eighteene, and ^n this marriage was borne a Sonne, named
III. Christierne, second of the name, who tooke to wife Isabel of Castile. Sister ^o the Emperour Charles the fift. For his ^yranny he was depriued of those King^omes, which his Grandfather and Fa^her had held, and himselfe expulsed out of Denmarke by his Brother
IIII. Fredericke, formerly Duke of ^bleswicke and Halsatia, who was Crow^ed King of Denmarke, and caused to be (...) to death in prison at Sundebourg in ^alsatia his Brother King Christierne the ^econd; who by his wife Isabel of Castile ^f two Daughters, to wit
Dorothie, wife to Fredericke Duke of Bauaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine; And
Christiana, wife to Anthony, Duke of Lorraine.
Now Fredericke being dead in the yeare of Grace One thousand fiue hundred thirty and three, Fredericke Duke of Bauaria, pretending that the Kingdome of Denmarke belonged to him, in the right of Dorothie his wife, eldest Daughter to Christierne the second, and being ayded by the Emperour Charles the fift, Brother to the Mother of the said Dorothie; powerfully entred into Denmarke, but was thence expelled and driuen by the Lords of the Countrie, who elected for their King the very yongest Sonne of King Fredericke, who neuerthelesse could not be Crowned, because he was hindered therein by his eldest Brother
V. Christierne, third of the name, who being assisted by Gustane, King of Sweden, obtained the Kingdome of Denmarke. He had to wife Dorothie, Daughter to Magnus, Duke of the lower Saxonie, and by her he had
VI. Fredericke, second of the name, Father to Anne, Queene of Great Bretaigne: And to
VII. Christierne, fourth of the name, who Royally reigneth at this present.
But returne we now againe to Christierne, first of the name, called the Rich.
Valdemar, King of Denmark, deceasing in the yeare One thousand three hundred threescore and fifteene: the Kingdome of Denmarke fell to the Female kinde, in the person of
Margaret, the onely Daughter of Valdemar, who tooke to be her Husband Aquine, King of Norway; by whom she had one onely Sonne named Olaus, who dyed (without Children) in the life time of his Mother, the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred fourescore and seauen. This Woman (during her life time) Gouerned the Realms of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, a Kingdome which shee had conquered (perforce) from the

Son to Albert Duke of Mekelbourg, whom she vanquished in a foughten Battaile, and made him her war prisoner for the space of seauen years; vntill such time as he redeemed himselfe, by paying a great summe of money for his ransome. This couragious Queen, seeing her selfe to be without any issue, adopted as her Son
Ericke or Edricke, Duke of Pomerania, Crowned King of Denmarke, Norway and Sweden, according to the will of his putatiue Mother. He dying without Children, the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred thirtie and nine; his Nephew, Son to his Sister:
Christopher, Duke of Bauaria, was Crowned King of Denmarke, as already we haue said. And by his death in the yeare formerly noated, not leauing any issue by Dorothie his wife, Daughter to Iohn, Marquesse of Brandenbourge; the Crowne of Denmarke changed againe, to a new race or Familie.
Iohn Count of Aldembourg and Dalmenhorst, had a Sonne named Fredericke, who held those two Counties by the death of his Father. Fredericke left Theodoricke, who espoused Margaret, the sole and onely heire to Adolphe, Duke of Schleswicke and Halsatia, and of this marriage was borne
Christierne, first of the name, called the Rich, who carried these titles and qualities. Christierne, par la grace de Dieu, Roy de Dannemarc, de Suede, Norduege, and de Gothie: Duke de Schleswick, d'Holsace, de Stormar, and de Dictmarson, Comte d'Aldembourg, and de Dalmenhorst. Christierne, by the Grace of God King of Denmarke, of Sweden, Norway and Gothia; Duke of Schleswicke, of Halsacia, of Stormar, and of Dictmarsen; Count of Aldemburg and of Dalmenhorst: Titles which the King his Successors, and descended of his Lign, haue still retained.



L'Ordre de Dannemarke Dict de L'Elephant.The Institution of the Order of Denmarke, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred threescore and eighteene, by Christierne, first of the name, King of Denmarke, Norway and Sweden, etc. CHAP. VIII.
HAuing so good occasion, to speake againe of this worthy Prince Christierne, first of the name; let me entreate you to take notice, that this is the same man, who Instituted The Order of Denmarke, called Of the Elephant, vnder inuocation of the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God; in rega^d that among the Knights of this Order, none could be admitted, but such as were Senators of the Kingdome. Each man wore about his necke a faire Collar or Chaine of Gold,None but Senators of the Kingdome admitted into the Order. at the end whereof (directly on the breast) hung an Elephant of Gold, enamelled with white; his backe couered with a Castle of Siluer, Masonned blacke, and the Elephant standing on a green Hillocke, composed of Floures of sundry colours.
The first Chapter of this Order of Denmarke, was celebrated in the Metropolitan^ Church of Lunde, the Capitall Citie of the Kingdome, and at the Mariage of Ioh^ Sonne to the said King Christierne,The reason of the first Chapters Celebration with the Daughter of Ernestus, Duke of Saxonie in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred threescore and eighteene. And since that time, this Order hath bin conferred by the Kings of Denmarke, Successor^ to Christierne the first; on diuers Princes, and Senators of the Kingdome, vpon th^ dayes of their Coronation.
We haue in a precedent Chapter, as matter ministred occasion, obserued some properties of the Elephant; as his deuotion, piety and equity, with a further remembrance that (among the Aegyptians) he was the Symbole and Hieroglyphicke of Iustice Whereto we may adde his prouidence and wisedome, because by hauing his blou^ cold and melancholly; he is held to be the very wisest of all other Beasts. Acco^ding to the ordenary Aphorisme, which affi^meth Drought and Coldneesse, to be th^ causes of a good Spirit. In the Indiaes, where Elephants goe in troupes together

they haue this discretion and prouidence, that they giue the conduct of all the rest, to the most auncient among them, and he that is the oldest next to him,Of the Elephants in India. commeth in the rere, or lagge of all, as we vse to say; to firme and close vp the whole troupe. Elephanti gregatim


ingrediuntur, ducit agmen maximus natu.
This Beast is also a Symbole of Loue whereto he is meruailously subiect:Of the Elephant addicted to Loue. witnesse the Hearbe-woman or Nosegaymaker of Alexandria; the Menandrian of Sarragossa in S^cilie; and the Perfumeresse, whereof Plinie maketh mention in the fift Chapter in the eight Booke of his Naturall Historie. It is a Creature very capable of any enstruction, and when generall wonder was made at Paris, to see the lauish expences bestowne on such as taught Horses to Dance, after the cadence of tunes distinguished by Trompets; yet I could neuer sufficiently admire the readinesse of Elephants, dauncing in the Romaine Theaters, whereof Plutarch maketh ample relation, in a Treatise which hee wrote, concerning what Creatures were the most aduised and considerate; those of the Land, or them of the Water. He is also the noate of valiantie and Militarie aptnesse, and ^herefore the Romaines prohibited the people of Greece and Asia, vnder their obedience; from making any Nauall Armies, and preparing Elephants to Warre. Na^es habere, and Elephantos alere Romani deuictis populis prohibeant: So saith the same Plinie.
Now, as concerning the Armes of the Kings of Denmarke, they haue alwayes car^ied D'Or seme de Coeurs de Gueulles a trois Leopards de Synople.The Armes of the Kings of Denmarke. Armes common to the most part of the Polarie and Septentrionall Nations. For the Normans which came out of Norway, and ioyned (in one body) a Nauall Armie with the Danes, ^o scoure the Coasts and Maritime Townes of the Gaules: they bare likewise De Gueulles a trois Leopards d'Or, Armes yet retained to this present, by the Kings of England.



^'Ordre de Suede Diet du Nom de Iesus Ou de^ Seraphins.The Order of Sweden, called of the Name of Iesus, or of the Seraphins: Instituted in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred thirty and foure; by Magnus King of Sweden, fourth of the name.
CHAP. IX. The Originall and Genealogie of the Kings of Sweden.
S^eden, in Latine called Suetia, and Suessia, but by some Swe^^^, a Kingdome seated vnder the Artict Pole, maketh part of Scandinauia,Three Kingdomes and the Armes belonging aunciently to them. and containeth three seuerall Realmes; which caused ^he Kings of this leuell continent, to take for Armes D'Azur a trois Coronnes d'Or. The first of the said Realms or Kingdoms, ^s Sweden it selfe, the auncient Armes whereof were Couppe en Bande de Gueulles, and d'Azur a vne Gerbe d Or, sur le tout, for her fertility in Corne and Graine. The second is the Kingdome of Gothia, deuided into Guestregothia, and Vuisigothia. This Kingdome carried D'Argent a trois Ondes d Azur en Bande au Lyon rempant de Sable sur le tout. And the third is that of Finlandia, whereto are ioyned Gronlandia, Laponia, with other frontiering and neighbouring Isles: as likewise are the Prouinces of Lappia, Finmarkia, Scrifinia, Pilapia, the high and low Biarmia, and other Regions, which are directly seated vnder the North Star, where the dayes and nights are of sixe Moneths durance, fiue, foure, three, two and one, according as hath bin Summarily obserued by Pedro de Mexia, in his Diuersitie of Readings, and in the Hexameron of Antonio de Torre-que mada, both of them Spanish Gentlemen, who haue abridged what was written by the Archbishops of Vpsala, in two great Volumes in Folio, and closely printed.
Stockolme the chiefe Citie of the KingdomeThe Balticke Sea, neighbouring and coasting part of the said Realme of Sweden, with the rich port of Angoua, maketh the King thereof to enrich himselfe, by strange Merchandises. The chiefe and Capitall Citie is Stockolme, where the King keepeth his ordenarie abiding, seated within the Sea, according as Venice is; and the Metropolitaine is Vpsala, the Archbishops See of the Kingdome, which embraced Christian Religion about the yeare of Grace, One thousand, in the time of the Emperour Henry, by the often Preaching of the good Bishop Ansecharus; and about the yeare One thousand one hundred, Vpsala was become a Metropolitaine Church, and the Temple of the Fayries (whereof Saxo Grammaticus, and the two Archbishops of Vpsala doe relate no meane meruailes) was dedicated and consecrated to God, in the time of King Stinkellus.
In the yeare One thousand two hundred and fiftie, Birgerus, first of the name, was King of Sweden and Gothia, Father to Valdemar, first of the name, and likewise to Magnus,(...) of Sweden and Gothia who possessed himselfe of those Kingdomes, while his Brother Valdemar was in his voyage at Ierusalem. Magnus was Father to Birgerus, second of the name, Father to Magnus, second of the name, Father to Euicus or Edricus; Father to Magnus third of the name: successiuely Kings of Sweden and Gothia. This Magnus the third, was likewise King of Norway, who dying in the yeare One thousand three hundred twentie and sixe; left these three Kingdomes to his Sonne Magnus* fourth of the name, who had a Sister called Euphemia, wife to Albert, Duke o^ Meckelbourg.
Magnus was the Father to Aquine, King of Norway, and affianced to the Sister o^ the Count of Halsatia. But this Princesse being on the way to go marrie with her Hu^band in Swede^; was taken prisoner by the King of Denmark Valdemar, last of the name^ who caused his onely Daughter and sole heire Margaret, to marrie with the sam^ Aquine. Magnus not misliking the marriage of his Sonne in Denmarke; the men o^

Sweden (instigated thereto by the Count of Halsatia) rebelled against him, calling to Commaund and Rule the Kingdome of Sweden
Albert, Sonne to Albert, Duke of Meckelbourg, Husband to Euthemia, who helde (for some time) the Kingdome of Sweden; vntill he was ouerthrowne in a foughten Battaile by Queene Margaret, wife to Aquine King of Norway, and Mother to Olaus. By this her taking of Aquine, whom shee kept as her warre prize and prisoner the space of seauen yeares, as we haue before related:King Aquine kept prisoner seuen yeares and released at last vpon strict condiditions. She held the Kingdome of Sweden all her life time. At the end of those seauen yeares, Albert and his Sonne Ericus (both prisoners) were set at liberty: conditionally, to pay for ransome within three yeeres tearme, Threescore thousand Markes of Siluer; or else to deliuer vp to the Queene, the Citty and Castell of Stockolme. But by not satisfiyng the one or other of these conditions; he should submit himselfe prisoner againe, and remaine in the power of Queene Margaret. By whose death, the Kingdome of Norwaye continued still ioyned and annexed to the Kingdome of Denmarke.
But concerning that of Sweden, it had her perticuler Kings, of whom wee will heere set downe a briefe Reporte, and how they succeeded eche after other.

Of such Kings as followed successiuely in the Kingdome of Sweden.
ENgelbert, a Lord of the Countrey, reuolted against Ericus of Pomerania, the adopted Sonne to Queene Margaret, and her Successour in the three Kingdomes of Denmarke, Norway and Sweden. After whom succeeded in the said three Kingdomes, Christopher Duke of Bauaria, and Prince Palatine. But he dying, they of Sweden elected for their King, a Lord of the same Countrey, named
Charles Canutus, who reigned but Seauen yeares, and was constrained to slye for his owne safety from the kingdome; because the Lords reuolted from him, and chose for their King, him of Denmarke and Norwaye, named
Christierne, against whom in like manner the Lords of Sweden reuolted, when he had reigned about the space of seauen yeares ouer them.
Iohn, his Sonne helde some time of rest and repose in the Kingdome of Sweden: And after him was successour his Son
Christierne, Second of the name, King of Sweden in Title only, for the Kingdome was (in effect) gouerned by a Constable, called Steuo, a Natiue of the Land, who would neuer accept the name of King. After whose death, Christierne possessed himselfe of the Royall Citty of Holme, where he caused to be executed by Iustice, the very greatest Lords of the Kingdome, Bishops, Noblemen and the wealthiest Bourgesses, fil^ng all places with blood and slaughter, ^e Citty pilde and powled, the Cittizens put to the edge of the Sword, without sparing Maides and young Infants, murdered in their Cradles, and the body of Steuo the Gouernour left vnburied, yea, throwne vpon a common dunghill or Laystall, to serue as foode for Rauens, among other dead bodies. Within a while after these barbarous cruelties committed in Sweden:
Gostauo (Sonne to Ericus, issued of the blood Royall, and giuen for Hostage to Christierne by the Inhabitants of Stockolme) found meanes to get away from Denmarke in a disguised habite, and came into Sweden: whereof hee proclaimed himselfe to be Protectour, and expelled the Danes out of the Kingdome. Wherupon, by full consent of all the Estates, he was auouched to be King of Sweden, in the yeare of Grace, 1540. he gouerned the Kingdome long time in peace and tranquility, replanting Nauigation and traffick of Merchandises. After this Gostauo, succeeeded his eldest Sonne
Henry, who being deceassed without issue, left for his Successour in the Kingdome of Sweden, his Brother
Iohn, who taking to Wife Katharine, Daughter to Sigismond, King of Poland; gouerned with great Wisedome, Loue and Honour. This Iohn died in the yeare, Fiue Hundred Fourescore and Ten, or Twelue: and then succeeded his only Sonne
Sigismond, King of Sweden by Paternall succession, and of Poland by Election: against whom his Vnckle Charles made intrusion, and possessed the greater part of the Kingdome; wherein (by force of Armes) he maintaineth himselfe to this instant.




CHAP. X. Concerning the Institution of the Order of Sweden, called Of the Cherubins.
MAgnus, King of Sweden, Fourth of the name, in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred thirty and foure; Instituted The Order of the Cherubins,The Collar or Cheine of the Order. otherwise Sirnamed Of Iesus. The Coller of this Order was composed of Cherubins (so saith Zieglius) and Patriarchall Crosses, in memory of the Siedge laid to the Metropolitane Citty of Vpsala; the Cherubins of Gold, enammelled with Red, and the Crosse of Gold without any enammelling. At the end of the Collar hung an Ouall of the same, enammelled with Azure, bearing these three Letters combined together I H S. the name of Iesus, without enammeling, and placed en Fesse, and en poincte Foure Nailes, enammelled White and black, to declare the Passion of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christe, crucified and fastened to the tree of the Crosse with foure Nailes.

 For it is a popular errour, to figure or represent this incomprehensible misterie of our Redemption, and the Triumphe of the Sonne of Man,Of the Nailes wherewith Christ was Crucified. ouer death and Hell; by a crosse without an vnderfooting, or foot-stay, and the Quaternarie number of Nailes. One of which Nailes wee haue at Saint Denys (...) France, the Mausolus or buriall place for our Monarches of the Lillies. An other of them is at Rome, in the Church of Saint Iohn Laterane, kept in the Sancta Sanctorum. Which two nailes I haue seene, that at Rome is very like to that at Saint Denys, in length aboue halfe a foote, the point flatted, filed and made hallow: the head shap^d like a vice, but more long and square. The third Naile is in the Church of Treuers in Germanie: And is the Naile of the right foote. The Fourth was throwne by the Empresse Helena, mother of Constantine the Great, into the Gulffe of Sathalia, a very dangerous passage, formerly sirnamed the Dragon or Lyon of the Sea, being betweene Ierusalem, and the Gulffe of Cyprus, where Shippes ran alwayes in perill of wracking, but since then, it hath bin more milde and calme. This we vnderstand by S. Gregorie of Tours, in the sixt Chapter of his Gloria Martyrum. Clauorum Dominicorum quod quatuor fuerint haec est ratio. Duo sunt assixi in palmis, and duo in plantis. Afterward, he yieldeth a reason of three Nailes which were kept by Saint Helena, applied to the Horses Bridle, and the Creast or Helmet of Constantine her Sonne, tha^ famous Emperour.
Now, concerning the vnderfooting stay, it is a matter without all question to the contrarie, that the Romaines obserued it as a custome,Of the Crosses on which the Romains vsed to crucifie their malefactour.. to crucifie Malefactours with foure Nailes, on Crosses made after the same manner: contayning fifteene foote in height, with a Title alofte, comprehending the names and crimes of those malefactours, fastened on the height of the Crosse, and at their feete a stay to support them, whereon their feete were seperately nailed fast: and not one foote vpon the other, as hath bin perfourmed by ignorant Caruers and Painters. The two theeues were crucified after the same manner, as the Lambe without spot or blemishe: otherwise it had bin easie for Saint Helena, to haue discerned the Crosse of the Worlds Sauiour, the Table of Innocency, from those of the Theeues. So then it may be said, that the Crosse was composed of foure pieces of different wooddes: as Saint Gregorie telleth vs in the passage before alleaged. In stipite erecto foramen factum manifestum est Pes quoque paruae tabulae in hoc foramen insertus est: super hanc vero tabulam, tanquam stantis hominis, Sacrae affixae sunt Plantae. And Pope Innocent in his first Sermon of Martyrdome. Fuerunt in Cruce Dominica ligna quatuor, stipes erectus, and lignum transuersum, truncus suppositus, and titulus superpositus.
In the Church of Paris yearelie on the first Fryday in the Moneth of August, is celebrated the Feaste for susception of the most Holy Crosse, and sollemne Procession made about the Church, and vnder a Canopy is caried the true Crosse.No man is bound to beleeue all this except he list. It was sent to the Church of Paris by Anselme, a Natiue of the Citty, and Clearke of the said Church, who bare such zeale and affection to the voyage for the Holy land, that he went along with Godfrey of Bologne, in the time of Pope Vrbane, Second of the name, and King Phillip the First. The Holy Citty being conquered by the Christians, this Anselme was made Chaunter in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, where he found this Crosse, which he sent (as a most rare and precious gifte) to the Church of Paris, where it is kept at this present in all deuout reuerence. It is written, that it is made Ex Suppedaneo Viuificae Crucis.
Concerning the Title on the Crosse of our Lord, written in three Languages:Of the inscription or title on the Crosse of Christ. I haue seene it (with other Reliques) in the Church of Sancta Croce of Ierusalem, at Rome: It was made fast with three small Nailes to the top of the Crosse, when it was exalted alofte. Saint Cyprian in his Treatise De Montibus Sina, and Sion. Pontius Pilatus impulsa mente a Deo accepit Tabulam, and Titulum scripsit tribus linguis: and in capite ligni clauis tribus Tabulam cum nomine Regis Iudaeorum confixit. In the like manner, titles were fixed to the Crosses of the two Theeues. The highest and last of the Thirteene Hermitages, which are on the Mountaine of Our Lady of Montferra^ in Catalogna: is that of the good Thiefe, called Saint Dismas. The other was named Gestas, as our Auncients haue credited by these riming verses.

Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis
Dismas and Gestas, in medio sedet ima potestas.
Gestas damnatur, Dismas ad astra leuatur.

And these verses written on a small piece of Parchment, being well dried, and scraped, bruised small in a Morter, then mingled with Wine or Aqua-uitae,I neuer knew any that made proofe of this Charme. and giuen to such men as are condemned to torture or torments, maketh them insensible of any paine, seruing them as a charme of silence.
As they crucified all malefactors with foure Nailes; so without all doubt, when they threwe lotts for his garments, they did it with foure dice, and not two or three, as ignorant Painters haue pleased to depict them.
Iace quatuor Talos.
So saith Plautus in an infinite number of places. And thus haue I caused it to be done (according to Antiquity and truth of History) in the Table of our blessed Lords Passion, on the Altar of Ierusalem in the Graye Friers at Paris, performed by the hand of a most excellent Painter (then liuing in Paris) named Ieronimo Franco, a Flemishe Gentleman by birth, whose auncient Predecessours were of the first Countes of Flanders, and gaue for their Coate of Armes: L'Escu d'Or au Lyon rempant de Sable Arme and Lampasse de Gueules, a vne des pattes de deuant couppee, et iettee en poincte a Cinq gouttes de Sang; Au Lyon naissant pour Cimier.



The Order of Cleue, Or Cleueland, Tearmed of the Swanne.
CHAP. XI. The Originall and Genealogie of the House of Cleues,L'Ordre de Cleues, dict du Cygne. or Cleue.
THis Illustrious House in Germanie, deriued Originall and Birth from a Romaine Senatour, named Curtius, the descendants of who^ were inuested with the Prouince of Cleue, aunciently called Sic^nbria in the time of Caesar,Cleue called Sicambria in Gesars time. and the auncient dwelling or abiding of the French, neere neighbours to the Menapians, whose Prouince at this present day is called Gueldres, or Guelderland.

 Now, if wee please to take for currant payment, that which some Romancers haue written, rellishing rather of a fabulous discourse, then otherwise: wee are tolde, that in the yeare of Grace, Seauen Hundred and Eleuen, according to the Authours of the Genealogie of this House of Cleue; Iustiuian, Second of the name, being Emperour; Childerick King of France, and Pepin Heristell Lord, Duke or Gouernour of Brabant,Theodorick or Thierry Gouernour of Cleue. then was Lord ouer the said Countrey of Cleue, one named Theodorick, vulgarly called Thierrie, who deceasing, left (for Heire) his onely Daughter Beatrix, that made her ordenary abyding in a Castell called Neufbourg, neere to the Bourrough or Towne of Nimegen. After the death of her Father, the great Lords that were her neighbours; sought how to possesse themselues of her lands, she being quite destitute of all humaine helpe.
While she was in this perplexitie and distresse, standing (on a day) at a window of her Castle, ful of heauines, and sadly bemoaning her many misaduentures; she espyed floating on the Riuer of Rhine, a goodly Ship, vnder full Sayle, and on the O^elop or Hatches therof a comely young Knight,Beatrix sadly g^^ing at her Castell Windowe and what sight she (...). armed at all points, a faire Helmet on his Head, shadowed with Plumes and Feathers of foure seuerall Colours, Yellow, White, Greene, and Red; and vpon the Crest of his Helmet was a white Swan, hauing her Head exalted and Crowned, with a Horne about her Necke, after hunting manner, bearing on her left Wing, Vn large Escu de Gueules, charge d'vn autre Es^^ d'Argent, ayant vn Tourteau de Synople, duquel departoient Huict Sceptres Pommette^, and fleuronnez d Or, remplissans tout l'Escu, comme en forme de raiz: And in her right Foot shee held a Sword of pure Gold.
The Ship came softly accoasting neere the Castle foot of Nimegen: which caused Beatrix instantly to descend, as well remembring, that shee had (some few dayes be^ore) beheld in a Dreame such another Knight, comming close vpon her Land, and in ^e selfe same furnishment. Hee courteously stouped and kissed her Hand, offering her his seruice against her Enemies, making himselfe knowne to her, vnder name of ^he Knight of the Swan. The Lady found the Knight to her liking,Cheualier ^^ ^ig^^. sufficient both in ^eeres and strength to right her against her Enemies; and therefore in Marriage made him her Husband.
Afterward, hee obtained of the Emperour Theodosius, the Inuestiture in the Seig^eurie of Cleue, vnder the Title of Counte, both for himselfe and his Successors. But ^t that time, and long before, the Roman Emperours had nothing more in the Gaules, but what the French had reduced vnder their obedience, as well as Cleue, Guelares,Fabulous repo^ts are not to be credited. Gu^ich, and other neighbouring Prouinces: so that the beginning of this Genealogie is ^toffe with Poeticall Fables, and Gests of Romants. Further they say, that this Knight of the Swan named himselfe Helias, originally descended from a farre remote Coun^rey, called Greala, like to a Terrestriall Paradise; the entrance in, and returning backe againe whereof, were by chance and hazard.

A Proceeding in the Lineall Descent of HELIAS, Knight of the Swan, and Madame Beatrix of Cleue, his Wife.
I. OF this Marriage, betweene the fore-named Helias, and Beatrix of Cleue (so surnamed of a Castle, which shee had caused to be built) issued three male Children: the eldest whereof, was named Thierry, to whom hee gaue the Shield of his Armes, and his Golden Sword. The second was Godfrey, to whom hee gaue the Horne (others say, it was a Trumpet) and made him Counte of Lotier: and the last was Conrade, to whom hee gaue his Ring: but by Marriage, hee had the Landsgrauiate of Hessen. Helias hauing reigned one and twentie yeeres, with Madame Beatrix his Wife (Qui portoit d'Argent a vne Teste de Boeuf de Gueules Accornee de Sable, au muffle boucle d'Argent) left for Successour his eldest Sonne.
II. Thierry, first of the Name, second Counte of Cleue, in the yeere seuen hundred thirtie and one. Hee tooke to Wife the Daughter of the Counte of Henault: Qui porto^t d'Or au Lyon rempant de Sable, qui est Flandres, Escartele d'Or au Lyon rempant de Gueules, and sur le Tout d'Argent a Trois Cheurons de Gueules. Hee reigned fiue and twentie yeeres, and left his Sonne and Successor
III. Renauld, first of the Name, in the yeere seuen hundred fiftie and eight. He espoused the Daughter to the Counte of Ardenne: Qui portoit de Gueules au Lyon rempant d'Or. Hee reigned but eleuen yeeres, and then succeeded his Sonne
IV. Loet, or Lewes, first of the Name, who reigned the space of twentie yeeres, and tooke to Wife the Daughter of Sigibert of Guienne, who was of the same Ligne as the Princes of Holland are descended of originally. The said Sigebert bare de Gueules a deux Leopards d'Or. Loet began to reigne in the yeere seuen hundred threescore and eight, leauing for Successor his Sonne
V. Iohn, first of the Name, the yeere seuen hundred fourescore and eight. Hee had married the Sister to the Emperour Michael, who was the last Emperour of the Romans in the East, before the Empire was transferred into the House of France. This Infanta of the Emperour Michael,The last Easterne Emperour. is said to beare d'Or au Loup tourne de Sable. And this Iohn, Counte of Cleue, reigned but eight yeeres: after whom, succeeded his Sonne
VI. Robert, first of the Name, in the yeere seuen hundred fourescore and sixe, who reigned but eight yeeres. Hee tooke to Wife the Daughter of the Duke of Lorraine, whom they make to beare d'Or a la Bande de Gueules, chargee de Trois Alerions d Argent. Yet it is supposed (for all this) that the Dukes or Lords of Lorraine

Portoient d'Argent au Cerf de Gueules somme d'Or. And the Sur-tout or Ouerall of Lorraine, at that time, was but the sole Deuice of Godfrey of Bologne, Lord of Mentz and Bouillon, first King of Ierusalem, in the yeere One thousand, one hundred, as wee shall declare to you elsewhere.
VII. Baldwin, first of the Name, succeeded after Counte Robert his Father, in the yeere Eight hundred and foure. Hee married the Daughter of Prince Lewes of Prouence, who is said to beare Seme de France sans nombre, escartele d'Or, contre escartele de Gueules a la bordure engreslee d'Argent. This Lewes of Prouence is made to descend of a Sonne of France, in regard, that his Father was the fourth Sonne of King Charlemaigne, and of Hildegarde, his first Wife: So that the Emperour Lewes the Debonaire was his Vnckle, and great Vnckle to this Countesse of Cleue. By whom, Baldwin her Husband begate three Sonnes: Lewes, who was Counte of Cleue after his Father: Euerard, likewise Counte of Cleue after his Brother; and Robert, who was Counte of Theysterbant, a Countrey which at this present is called Bommelrewert, and the Countrey of Huesden, and of Artenack. This Count of Theysterbant changed the ancient Armes of Cleue, Et porta d' Azur, a Huict Sceptres fleuronnez d'Or. The first Lord of Huesden had a Brother, Lord of Theysterbant, and of a Castle and Village, called Huesden, with the round neighbouring places; and nominated by the course of Time, The Seigneurie of Huesden.
The first Lord of Artenack, was Brother to him of Theysterbant, being so named of his Castle of Artenack: Which Land and Seigneurie belonged (as well as those of Huesden and Theysterbant) to the said Countes of Cleue, and which they held in Fiefe of the Bishops and Chapter of Vtrecht, two hundred yeeres before the Seigneurie of Gueldres or Ghelres was erected into a Countie. And yet notwithstanding, the Countie of Theysterbant was not of any long continuance; because in the yeere Nine hundred fourescore and foureteene, Infundus, the eighteenth Bishop of Vtrecht (who formerly had been Counte of Theysterbant) brought this Countie into Mortmaine, by the Foundations which hee had graunted to his Church, and other Monasteries, whereof hee was Founder, and Benefactor.
VIII. Lewes, second of the Name, Sonne to Count Baldwin, succeeded him in the yeere Eight hundred and twentie. Hee reigned but foure yeeres, and dyed before he was married, leauing the Countie of Cleue to his Brother
IX. Euerard, or Edward, the yeere Eight hundred twentie foure, and reigned the space of nine yeeres. Hee espoused the Daughter to the Duke of Bauaria: Qui portoit Lozengie d'Argent and d' Azur en Bande. And by her he had two Sonnes, Luthard his Successor, and Berengari^^, who was Bishop of Toul.
X. Luthard was Counte of Cleue i^ the yeere eight hundred thirtie and three, and reigned foure and fortie yeeres. Hee tooke to Wife Bertha, Daughter to the Emperour Arnoul, Qui portoit de France sans nombre, party d Or a Quatre Cheurons de Sable; because this Arnoul was descended of the House of France, both by his great Grandfather, and Grandfather Lewes of France, King of Germanie. In this Marriage, two Sonnes were borne: the first whereof, was named Baldwine; and the other, Richefordus, Bishop of Vtrecht. Luthard and his Wife founded two Canonicall Churches: the one at Vuiscel, or Wesele, in the County of Cleues; and the other at Nuisse, a Fiefe of the House of Cleue, in the yeere Eight hundred thirtie and eight.
XI. Baldwine, second of the Name, was Successor to his Father Luthard, in the yeere Eight hundred threescore and sixteene, reigning seuen and thirty yeeres. Hee espoused the Daughter to the Count of Saxonie, Qui portoit Burele d'Or and de Sable a la Coronne de Rue de Synople perit en Bande. And after him succeeded his Sonne
XII. Arnoul, first of the Name, in the yeere Nine hundred and thirteene, and reigned fiue and fortie yeeres. Hee tooke to Wife the Daughter to the Counte of Zutphen, Qui portoit d'Argent party de Deux Lyons rempants, l'vn tourne de Gueules, and l'autre de Sable, aux queues nouees en Sautour.
XIII. Vichinan, Sonne to Arnoul, was the thirteenth Counte of Cleue, in the yeere Nine hundred fiftie and eight, reigning six and thirtie yeeres. Hee married

^he Daughter to the Landsgraue of Thu^^ge, who bare d'Azur au Lyon rempant (...) Argent. After him, succeeded his Sonne
XIIII. Conrad, first of the Name, ^he yeere Nine hundred fourescore and ^oureteene. Hee reigned one and fortie yeeres: and his Wife was Daughter to the Counte Zeim; but it is to be diuined, whereof hee was Lord. Et portoit de Gueules au Lyon rempant d'Argent.
XV. Thierry, second of the Name, Sonne and Successor to Conrad, was Counte of Cleue in the yeere of Grace, One thousand, thirtie fiue. Hee reigned ^hree and fortie yeeres, and espoused the Daughter to the Counte of Scombergh, Qui portoit d'Or au C^q de Sable. His Sonne, and Successor, was
XVI. Thierry, or Dictherick, third of the Name, in the yeere One thousand, ^hreescore, and eighteene, reigning nine ^nd thirtie yeeres. His Wife was Daugh^er to the Counte of Hennenberg: Qui ^ortoit a la Bordure d' Argent endenchee au Chef, and aux Flancs de Quatre pieces. Next him, succeeded his Sonne
XVII. Arnoul, second of the Name, ^n the yeere of Grace, One thousand, one hundred and eight, and reigned seuenteene yeeres. His Wife was Daughter to the Duke of Zubanes, Qui portoit d' Azur au Leopard d'Or, a la queue passee en Sautour. Hee had for his Sonne and Successor,
XVIII. Thierry, fourth of the Name, in the yeere One thousand, one hundred, fiftie, and fiue. His Wife was Daughter to the Duke of Bauaria, who bare as before hath beene declared. After him succeeded his Sonne
XIX. Arnoul, third of the Name, in the yeere One thousand, one hundred, fourescore, and foureteene, and reigned but tenne yeeres. He married Margaret, Daughter to Florent, Counte of Holland: who bare d' Azur au Lyon rempant de Gueules, Escartele d'Argent au Lyon rempant de Sable.
XX. Arnoul the Fourth, his Sonne, succeeded him in the yeere, One thousand, two hundred, and three. He reigned thirteene yeeres, and tooke to Wife the Daughter of Adolphe, Counte of Monts: Qui portoit d' Argent a Trois Cheurons de Gueules. He had for his Sonne and Successor
XXI. Thierry the Fift, in the yeere One thousand, two hundred, and sixteene. Hee reigned eleuen yeeres; and ioyned to his Countie of Cleue the Seigneurie of Dislaquen, by meanes of his Wife, the onely Daughter to the Lord of Dislaquen: Qui portoit de Gueules a Cinq Fesses demy-viurees d'Argent. Next him succeeded his Sonne
XXII. Thierry the Sixt, the yeere One thousand, two hundred, twentie, and seuen, and reigned eighteene yeeres. His Wife was Isabel, Daughter to Henry, Duke of Brabant: Qui portoit de Braban, qui est de Sable au Lyon rempant d'Or, Escartele de France sans nombre; because her Mother was Daughter to Philip Augustus, King of France: Wherein this Chronologie deceiueth it selfe, because Madame Mary of France was but twice married: first, to Philip, Counte of Namur, Brother to the Emperour of Greece, Baldwine, Counte of Flanders: and lastly, to Henry, Duke of Lorraine; but not to Henry, Duke of Louaine, which is Brabant.
XXIII. Thierry the Seuenth was Counte of Cleue, by the death of Thierry the Sixt, his Father, in the yeere One thousand, two hundred, fortie fiue, reigning sixteene yeeres. Hee married the Daughter of Otho, the seuenth Counte of Gueldres: Qui portoit d'Azur au Lyon rempant tourne d'Or, party d'Or au Lyon rempant de Sable. By her hee had Thierry the Eight, his Successor, and Isabel, who was Wife to Gerard, Counte of Gulich: And of this Marriage issued two Sonnes, William, Counte of Gulich, and Valeran, or Wal^ran, Archbishop of Cologne.
XXIIII. Thierry the Eight began to reigne in the yeere One thousand, two hundred, threescore, and one, reigning fifteene yeeres. Hee had to Wife the Daughter of the Counte of Luxembourg: Qui portoit d'Argent, au Lyon rempant de Gueules. Hee had for Sonne and Successor
XXV. Thierry the Ninth, in the yeere One thousand, two hundred, threescore, and sixteene, reigning seuen and thirtie yeeres. Hee tooke to Wife the Daughter to the Duke of Austria, of Ha^spourg, whom they make to beare d'Argent a la Fesse de Gueules: but that is a false emblazon, in regard that the moderne Armes of

Austria are de Gueules a la Fesse d'Argent, as we haue before made apparant to you. Of this Marriage, issued three Sonnes, all Countes of Cleue, each after other: and a Daughter named Elizabeth, Wife to the Lord of Perwis: And of that Marriage descended many great Houses.
XXVI. Otho, first of the Name, succeeded after Thierry the Ninth, his Father, in the yeere of Grace One thousand three hundred and thirteene, reigning sixteene yeeres. He had to Wife Adeleida, that is, Al^x, Daughter to Engilbert, the eight Counte de la Mark: Qui portoit d'Or a la Fesse Eschecquee d'Argent and de Gueules de Trois Traicts.
Of this Marriage was borne one onely Daughter, called by the Name of her Mother, married to Iohn, Lord of Arquel, of whom came Otho, Lord of Arquel, and many Daughters which had no Issue, and one named Ioane.
Otho, Lord of Arquel, left his Sonne Iohn, Father to William, a young Gallant of Arquel: who dwelling in the Land of Gorchen, had to Wife the Daughter of the Lady of Gimonde; of whom, was borne Arnoul, Duke of Gueldres, and William de G^monde.
Of Ioane, Daughter to the Lord of Arquel, Lady of Leana (this Genealogie is in this partie much hudled, and very ill distinguished) descended the Lords of Geneppe, of Heyn^b^rg, of Brederodde, de la Vere, of Groeninge, of Drongelem, of Meruuic, of Vl^ct, of Ostende, and many other in the Netherlands, in regard that this Lady had many Daughters.
Now, because by the Inuestiture made of the Countie of Cleue to the Knight of the Swanne, this County was made a (...) of the Empire, and subiected to the Salique Law of the French; by the doing whereof, Daughters were excluded from succession in the said Countie: the onely Daughter to Counte Otho the First, could not inherite the Countie of Cleue, by the death of her Father; but after him succeeded the second Brother
XXVII. Thierry, Tenth of the Name, who reigned eighteene yeeres, and had to Wife Mary, Daughter to the Counte Regnauld of (...) Sister to the first Duke of (...) Qui portoit d'Azur, au Leopard passant d'Argent. And of this Marriage issued but their onely Daughter, named (...) who was Wife to Adolphe the Ninth, Counte de la Mark, whereby descended three Sonnes, as namely Engilbert, Counte de la Mark, who was Lord de la Mark; Adolphe, who was Bishop, Archbishop, and afterward Counte of Cleue, and de la Mark. Lastly, Thierry, a young Gentleman (as meaning a younger Brother) de la Mark, who was Lord de la Mark, and Lord of Eslaquen, not hauing any legitimate Children, no more then Engilbert his eldest Brother.
But of the second Sonne Adolphe descended many Children, as wee shall see hereafter. And Thierry the Tenth dying without heire male, his yongest Brother
XXVIII. Iohn second of the Name, was Counte of Cleue, and held the said Countie fifteene yeeres. Hee tooke to Wife Margaret, eldest Daughter to Regn^uld the first, Duke of (...) Qui portoit d Azur, au Lyon rempant d'Or. But of this Marriage came not any Issue.
Contention for the Countie of Cleue.So that by the death of this Iohn the Second, contention grew about Succession in the said Countie of Cleue, which (by right of Reuersion) returned to the Empire, whereof it was a Fiefe, according to the words of his Inuestiture, made to the Knights of the Swanne. For the Lord of Peruueis maintained, That although Elizabeth of Cleue (his Mother) was departed out of this life, yet notwithstanding, by representing his Mother (Sister to the three last Countes of Cleue) he ought to be preferred before any other. And ioyning deedes to words, by force of Armes he possessed himselfe of Cranembourg, and of other places in the Countie of Cleue.
The Answere made by the Counte de la Marke.Engilbert, Counte de la Mark, defended against him, That the Countie of Cle^e should (in right) belong to him, because his Mother liued still, who was the onely Daughter of Counte Thierry, and so (by consequent) much neerer then Elizabeth of Cleue, were she as yet liuing Moreouer, that by the Lawes of the Empire (in cases of Successions) the Sonnes of Brothers ought to precede the Sonnes of Sisters. And hereupon he imployed his best endeuour, to make himselfe Master of the Countie of Cleue, as indeed he did, by being assisted with mighty forces, which his Brother Adolphe, Archbishop o^ Cologne, brought him, beside the powers of the Bishop of Munstere.
The third pretender to the said Countie of Cleue, was Otho, Lord of Arquell, in regard

that his Mother (albeit then dead also) was the onely Daughter to Otho, Count of Cleue, Niece to Iohn the last Count. And yet notwithstanding, most part of the Nobilitie, and the best Cities in Cleueland, would not accept any one of these three Pretendents; but rather desired to haue for their Count and Lord Adolphe,All the three Pretenders refused and a fourth man chosen. Archbishop elected of Cologne, enclining all to his side, because he was not yet restrained by the Churches Orders, being yong also, and very dexterious in Armes. Hereupon, Engilbert, Count de la Mark his Brother, and the Lord of Arquel, ioyned themselues with this Adolphe, to expell thence the Lord of Peruueys, which they did, and Prince Adolphe became Lord of the Countie of Cleue: resigning his Bishopricks (with consent of the Pope and the holy Seate) to Messire Engilbert de la Mark his Vnckle, then Bishop of Luge, and to the halfe-brother of the Lord of Arquel, who tooke part with him. He caused himselfe to be Inuested in the said Countie of Cleue, by the Emperour Charles of Bohemia: And so
XXIX. Adolphe was Count of Cleue by a new Inuestiture, made in the yeare One thousand three hundred fiftie and seauen, and by Succession to his Brother Engilbert (deceasing without issue) he became likewise Lord de la Marke And thereupon he tooke De Cleues party de la Mark. He reigned the space of two twenty yeares, espousing Margaret Daughter to Gerard, Count of Monts: Qui portoit d'Argent a trois Cheurons de Gueulles; And by her hee had a plenteous linage, seauen Sonnes, and nine daughters.
The Sonnes were
Adolphe, Successour to his Father.
Gerard, Count de la Marke, third Sonne, and others.
The Daughters were
Margaret, wife to Albert Duke of Bauaria, and Count of H^lla^d, Sonne to Lewes the Emperour, and other.
XXX. Adolphe, second of the name, was the thirtieth Count of Cleue, and the twelfth de la Mark, who reigned foure and fifty yeares,Adolphe the first Duke of Cleueland. beginning in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred and seauenteene. At the Councill of Constans this Countie of Cleue was erected to be a Duchie, by the Emperour Sigismond, in the person of Adolphe the second, who was the first Duke of Cleue, An. One thousand foure hundred and seauenteene, as by the Record appeareth*
He had two wiues, the first whereof was Agnes, Daughter to Robert, Duke of Bauaria, by whom he had no issue.
The second wife was Mary, Daughter to Iohn Duke of Bourgongne: Qui portoit de Bourgongne Moderne, Escartele de la Vieille,The issue of Adolphe by his two wiues. and sur le tout de Flandre And by her he had three Sonnes and seauen Daughters. The eldest Sonne bare the name of Iohn of Bourgongne; the second carried the name of his Father, and was Lord of Rauestaine, who tooke to wife the Daughter to the Duke of Coimbre, Brother to the King of Portugall, of which marriage issued a Son and a Daughter, Phillip and Louisa de Rauestein. The third Son was Engilbert, who dyed yong.
The first of the Daughters was named Margaret, wife to William, Duke of Bauaria,The seauen Daughters, and their mariages in first mariage; and in the second, to the Lord of Wittemberg: The second was Katharine, wife to Arnoul, Duke of Gueldres. The third Isabel, wife to the Count of Zuuartonbroch: the fourth Agnes, who is said to be wife to a Prince, the eldest Sonne of Nauarre and Arragon, whereof he bare the Armes, but quartered without any specifying: The fift Helena, wife to the Duke of Brunswicke; Qui portoit ae Gueulles a Deux Leopard: d'Or: The sixt Mary, wife to Charles, Duke of Orleans, to whom the ignorant P^i^r h^th giuen De France sans Lambell. And the seauenth Daughter dyed yong, about seauen yeares of age.
Iohn, third of the name, Sonne of Adolphe, was the second Duke of Cleue,Descent of the Dukes of Cleue and Count de la Marke, who reigned fiue and thirty yeares. Hee married the Daughter to Iohn, Count de Neuers, d'Estampes and de Rethell: whom (very simply) they make to be^re De France de Trois Fleurs, and la Bordure componee d'Argent and de Gueulles. Hee had by her one Sonne, and fiue Daughters: But the eldest Sonne of Iohn the third, was
Iohn, the fourth Duke of Cleue, and Count de la Mark, who reigned forty yeares. He tooke to wife Mathilda, Daughter to the Landsgraue of Hessen: Qui portoit d'Azur au Lyon rempant d'Argent, tenant vne Hache de mesme. He had for Successour in the Seigneuries of Cleue and de la Mark, his Sonne
Iohn the fift, who espoused Mary, the onely Daughter to William, Duke of Gulich and of Monts; by meanes of which marriage, he enioyed the said Counties and Seigneuries, and charged his Armes with them. Portant de Cleues party de Iulliers, qui est d'Or au Lyon de Sable party d'Argent au Lyon de Gueulles, tranchez, ou soustenus de la Mark, and de Monts. Of this Marriage issued three Daughters, the eldest whereof was named Sibilla,The House of Saxon at this present. wife to Fredericke Duke of Saxonie; and of this marriage is descended the Duke of Saxon, reigning at this present. The other Daughters are no way materiall to this our Chronologicall discourse.
William, onely Sonne to Iohn the fift, was Successour to his Father. He had to wife Mary, Daughter to Ferdinand, King of Hungarie and Bohemia, King of the Romaines, yongest Brother to the Emperour Charles the fift. Portoit de Hongrie, Escartele de Boeme, sur le tout party d'Austriche, and de Bourgongne ancienne. This William held the forenamed Seigneuries in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and fiftie, where the Genealogie of the Counts of Cleue ceaseth, and proceedeth on no further: yet beginneth againe at Engelbert of Cleue, allied in the House of Bourgongne by Iohn, Duke of Neuers. But we will supply this defect, and finish the Ligne.
The Authors supplement whe^e the Genealogy failedThis William of Cleue and of Gul^ch, was sometimes in seruice to King Frances the first, who to make him vnited to the Crowne of France by an vndissolueable bond: did then affiance vnto him Iane d'Albret, being then Princesse, and afterward Queene of Nauarre, Grandmother to our King at this instant reigning. But this inconstant Prince, intruded himselfe into pertaking with Charles the fift, who caused him to marrie his Niece, the Daughter to his Brother Ferdinand, as we haue already said. By this marriage the Emperour Charles compelled him to part with the Duchie of Gueldres,The Duchie of Gueldres parted withal. whereof he was before possessed. And by meanes of his wife Mary of Hungarie, the Principalities of Cleue, Gulich and Berghes were left to him, with the Counties de la Mark and of Rauenspourge in Algaw: the Duchie of Gueldres remaining annexed to the Nether-Lands, by the said Emperour Charles the fift; who auouched and maintained, that Charles the last Duke of Bourgongne had possessed, and annexed it to the Nether Lands.
The issue of William Duke of Cleue.By Mary of Hungarie his wife, this William Duke of Cleue had a Sonne, bearing the names of his Grandfather and Father together; and foure Daughters beside, as namely Mary Elenora, Anne, Magdalen and Sybilla.
Iohn William, the onely heire masle by the death of his Father, he was Duke of Cleue of Gulich and of Monts, Count de la Mark, and of Rauenspourg. Hee had to wife the Daughter of Lorraine, but no issue by her, he dying of a Feuer as he returned from Hunting, the fiue and twentieth day of March, One thousand sixe hundred and nine:
For Succession (after him) happened the like contention, as did after the death of Count Iohn,Another accident of contention happening about Succession in Cleue. second of the name. For it was pretended, and laid claime to, as well by the descendants of Sybilla, Daughter to Iohn the fift, as by the Sisters to Iohn William, and others farre further off in this Succession: In regard that Charles de Gonzaga of Cleue, Duke of Niuernois and of Rethelois made his pretence; that the Countie of Cleue appertained to him, because he bare the Armes and Sirname of Cleue.
The Count of Mauleurier, his pretence was to the Countie de la Mark: because (of his owne naturall and legittimate Stocke) he carried the full Armes, and also the Sirname de la Ma^k.
The Duke of Saxonie, Son to Fredericke the Saxon Duke, and Sybilla of Cleue, eldest S^nne of Iohn the fift, pretended, that he had double right thereto, for his owne part. First of all, because he was descended of the said Sybilla, married to the Saxon Duke his Father,A ^ou^le rig^^ of (...) plead^^ by t^e Duke of Saxonie. in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred twenty and sixe, by which contract of M^ri^ge it was namely couenanted and concluded, that the said Iohn Duke of Cleue and Gul^ch, his children and descendants, happening to dye without heires masle; the said Sibilla should then be sole heire to the said Seigneuries, by exclusion of her other two Sisters, whose Mariages were endowed with Money, and not Lands.
Secondly, that although the Contract of this had not bin set downe in expresse words, and made so cleare as the Sun at midday: yet he had another right, accumulating one vpon the other, to wit; That these Principalities were acquired by grant and donation of them, made to the Duke of Saxonie Fredericke his Father, and to his Grandfather, by the Emperours, if the Lords of them should chance to dye without heires Masles.
Against these Pretendants, came much neerer Heires to the defunct Iohn William, to wit, his Sisters and their Children. Mary Elenora the eldest Sister, had maried with the Duke of Prusia, Marquesse of Brandenbourg, Electour of the Empire: And of this mariage were descended many Daughters, the eldest whereof was married to Iohn Sigismond Marquesse of Brandenbourg, Elector, who in the right of his Mother (although deceased) pretended, that by the representation of his Mother, the Succession after the dead party, belonged to him onely.
On the contrary, Anne, the second Daughter, who was yet liuing, widdow to Phillip Lodowicke, Count Palatine of Neufbourg, Father and Mother to Wolfang William,Anne the second Daughter, her interest pleded against the childrens children of her eldest Sister. Count Palatine of Neufbourg, maintained, that this succession appertained to her; as being a much neerer heire, then the Childrens Children of her elder Sister, who was not of this world. Moreouer, that the Inuestiture of the Seigneuries in question, made by the Emperour Charles the fourth, King of Bohemia, in the yeare One thousand three hundred fiftie and seauen, to Count Adolphe, first of the name; the Inuestiture was made (for perpetuitie) to him and his heires, as well Females as Masles, Ordine seruato viuentium. And therefore, she was to be preferred before the Childrens Children of her Sister; as it was by the law of Nature due to her third Sister
Magdalen, widdow to Iohn. Duke des deux Ponts Count Palatine, etc. and to her sister
Sibilla, wife to the Marquesse of Burgaw.
The Emperour Rodolphe, second of the name, he stept in to be a party also,Rodolphe the Emperour a competitor in plea likewise. and pretended; that the said Duchies and Counties belonged to him, as being masculine Fiefes of the Empire, which neuer could fall to Females, or the distaffe: And therefore inuested in them one of his owne Brethren, named Lupold, or Leopold, Bishop of Strasbourg and of Passaw (which Bishopricke, called Episcopatus Patauiensis, is seated on the Duchie of Bauaria, neere to the frontiers of Austria, the Cathedrall Towne or Citie whereof, is named Patauia inter Danubium, Rhenumque sita) who stiled himselfe Archduke of Oenipont, and taking Poastage in a disguised habite, roade secret^y from Prage to Gulich, whereof he possessed himselfe by Intelligence with the Gouernour, and so prepared with all dilligence, for gathering and leuying troupes of men, to obtaine all the rest, by vertue of his Imperiall command.
The Count Palatine of Neufbourg,Two lawfull heires ack^owledged in an open Assembly from the beginning of Aprill kept himselfe in ^ield, to make head with an Armie, and vpon the meeting of the States of Cleue and ^uli^h held at Duisseldorpe; he accorded with the Elector Marquesse of Brandenbourg, ^nd both of them were acknowledged in that meeting, to be the lawfull heires of their Vnckle William; so that they made themselues Maisters of those Seigneuries, which ^ppertained to the d^f^nct, seated beyond the Rhine.
Because on the hither side, where Gulich is placed; all that part swarmed with Ar^ed forces, belonging to the Archduke Leopolde.
And thus bec^me all Germanie moued and deuided,Brandenbourg and the Pa^atine against the Emperor. in fauouring and defending the ^^ght and quarrell of these pretending Princes. For the Emperour holding those par^kings to be the worst, which had bin done without him; stood vpon his Imperiall E^^cts and Commands, against the Elector of Brandenbourg, and the Palatine of Neuf^ourg: who likewise maintained against him, that these Estates thus standing in quar^l^ and contention, could be no Masculine Fiefes of the Empire, The Salicke Law be^g no where in force or effect (say they) but onely in the Kingdome of France.
And to speake vprightly, this was the more iust and equall side, but that of the Em^erors was the strongest; carrying along with him the whole House of Austria in gene^ll, with all their well-willers, as well in Germanie and Italie, as elsewhere. Beside all ^ese, the Princes of the House of Saxonie (though they pretended to haue a share ly^g at the maine stake) yet they tooke part with the Emperour.
Now concerning the part of the Marquesse and Palatine, in outward apparance, it

could beare no body or subsistance, against so potent a part as the Emperors, being put into the Ballance, and compromising the merit of their cause, as (indeede) good right hath neede of as good helpe. Wherefore these Princes made their recourse to the Crown of France,Succor fought for to the King of France who being the Chiefe, most potent and redoubted Monarch of Christendome (Henry of Bourbon, fourth of the name, King of France and Nauarre, the meere respect of his authority, might serue as an Adamant, to attract to him all the Iron or Steele of Germanie, and of any place else.
A great stocke of money, well spared by good Husbandrie, and strongly Coffred vp in the Bastile: An Arsenall of Armes and Artillerie, able to win passage through the best defenced places; A Thunderbolt of Warre, borne and bred vp in the very midst of Armies for fiftie and so many yeares: was more then sufficient, to shake with trembling, and to ballance the Iudgement of Europes Princes, to make them take part wheresoeuer he pretended. Because the inuincible power of France, led and conducted by her Prince, was able to beare along with it a motion, though the contrary Orbes were opposed against it.
The Electors had their recourse to the King, to maintaine the iust merit of their cause.Ambassadors sent to the King and his acceptance of their cause. He welcommed their Ambassadours, in the Moneth of September, sixe hundred and nine, promising their Maisters all assistance and fauour. But yet with such conditions, that the States of Cleue and Gulich should conserue the free exercise of Christian Religion; because some disputes and arguings were then called in question, that might grow on to greater danger. Which being faithfully promised; the King gaue them assurance of his best meanes, and to be with them in person at the Spring time following sixe hundred and ten.
Hereupon was prepared a puissant Armie of threescore thousand men, and the like number of Artillery, already gon vpon the Frontiers, awaiting onely for their Prince. But oh the misfortune of France! her sinnes, and the greedy desires of some, coueting to fish in troubled waters: caused that good King to be murdered by a damnable villaine,The businesse hindered by the Kings vntimely death. long time incited on to this tragicall act, who killed him with three stabbes of his Knife: he being in his Carroche, in the sight and armes of the greatest Lords of the Kingdome, and in the very midst of the Citie of Paris, on Friday the foureteenth day of May, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and ten, betweene three and foure of the Clocke in the after noone. And thus was the Sunne of France Eclipsed
qVo Mo Do per It glor Ia LILII.
This his disastrous death, so vnhappy to France, was yet no impediment, for sending to the said Princes the succour of twelue thousand men, conducted by Claude de la Chastre, Marshall of France, to the Siedge of Gulich, begun by the Count Maurice, about the ending of the Moneth of August. But the Towne being surprized by the Archduke of Oenipont Leopolde; was yet so narrowly engirt, beaten and vndermined; that they which held it, were enforced to yeelde vpon composition. Which was agreed on by a Treatie, containing thirteene Articles, the first whereof was in these words:
Ayant cy-deuant este promis par Messieurs les Prinoes au f^u Roy de lou^able memoire^l Inuincible Henry le Grand IIII. du nom Roy de France, and de Nauarre qu es Pais de Iulie^^* Cleues, Berg, and autres appartenants, and possedez par lesdicts Sieurs Princes, qu'il ne se feroit aucun changement en l'exercice de la Religion Chrestienne, ains que ledit exercice ser^ permis a toutes personnes esdicts Pais: Lesdicts Princes promettent le faire ainsi garder, and obseruer. Seront toutes personnes Ecclesiastiques conseruez, and maintenus en leurs Priuileges, and Immunitez, and en la iouissance de leurs biens, rentes, and reuenus.
Hauing heretofore made promise be my Lords the Princes, to the late King of famous memory, Henry the Great, fourth of the name, King of France and Nauarre, that the Courtreyes of Gulich, Cleue, Bergh, with others appartaining and possessed by the said Lords Princes, should not make any change or alteration in the exercise of Christian Religion; but th^ same exercise shall be still permitted to all persons in the said Countries: The same Prince^ doe promise to haue it still kept and conserued. And that all Ecclesiasticall persons shall b^ kept and maintained in their Priuiledges and Immunities, and in the enioying of thei^ goods, rents and reuennues.
The other Articles doe concerne and respect the perticulers of the besiedged.
The Princes issued and descended of the House of Cleue, to preserue the memorie of the Knight of the Swanne: doe beare (to this day) the Swanne for their Order, Deuise, Crest and Supporters of their Armes; as we haue declared in the Tract of Orleans, and Knights of the Holy-Ghost.



The Crosse of the Teutonicall, Allemaigne or Germaine Order, called of Prusia;Croix de L'- Ordre Theutonique, Dict de Prusse, and de la Table d'Honneur. and Of the Table of Honour: Instituted in the Holy-Land, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fourescore and eleauen, and in the Moneth of Nouember.
CHAP. XII. The Originall of the Order called of the Allemaignes Teutones or Germaines, and of Prusia, and also of the Table of Honor.
THis Order tooke beginning, during the Conquest of the Holy-Land, wherein an Allemaigne Gentleman (moued with deuotion) retired himselfe to Ierusalem, with his Wife and Familie, where he set downe his resolution, to entertaine,Teutones were people of Germanie called Allemaignes. lodge and nourish, such as were of his owne Nation. For this effect and purpose, with his owne Moneyes he caused a small Hospitall to be built, and close ioyning thereto (by permission of the Patriarch) he procured an Oratorie to be erected, dedicated to the honour of the blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother of God according to his Manhood. This worthy Allemaigne ioyned with diuers Gen^lemen more of the same Nation, who contributing their goods and persons, to such (...) godly and charitable worke; imployed their care and paines there, to nourish and ^ure such Allema^gne Souldiours, as voyaged ouer the Seas, when hauing fully re^ouered and cured them, they were conducted to Iaffa, and their passage se^ured.
In the yeare One thousand one hundred foure^core


and eleauen, the Moneth of Nouember, cer^aine good Citizens of Bresme and Lubecke in Al^aigne, very rich and abounding in goods, collect^ng a common purse together:Knights called Toutones or Allemaignes. ioyned themselues with them of this Hospitall of the Virgin Mary, ^nd builded in the Citie of Acres (possessed then ^y the Christians) a magnificent Hospitall, and all ^f them together took the title, of knights Teutones ^r Almaignes, of the Hospitall of the Virgin Mary, of ^he House of the Teutones in Ierusalem, and the ^ule of Saint Augustine, with the Roabe and Cloake white, and on the breast a plaine blacke Crosse, doubly potencee or batune. And afterward ^hey had for Armes, D'Argent ausdites deux Croix ^vne sur lautre,The habite and Armes of the Order. whereunto the good King Saint ^ewes, being then beyond the Seas, A diousta le ^hef de France, according as is obserued by Fun^rus.
They made profession, and vowed Pouertie, Obedience and Chastitie, before ^e Patriarch of Ierusalem Heraclius. They composed their Rule by the modell and ^atterne of the Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, who healed the diseased; and

likewise by the Templers, who kept the high-wayes, to fight against the Sarrazins. This Almaigne Order of the Teutones, was confirmed by Pope Celestine the third, in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred fourescore and fifteene:The Order confirmed by Pope ^elestine the third. who gaue them charge to say daily two hundred Pater nosters and Aue Mariaes, with the Symbole or Creede of the Apostles, and as many euery night. Enioyning th^m moreouer, to suffer their Beards to grow great, after the fashion of Saint Augustines Hermites: Ordaining withall, that no man might be receiued into this Order; if he were not a Gentleman of race, and a natiue of the Almaigne Nation.
The first Great M^ister of the Order.The Almaigne Knights elected for their Gouernor a Great Maister, the first whereof was Henry de Valpot, a braue and valiant Knight, vnder whom was builded the Great Hospitall of Acres. He gouerned the said Order the space of twenty yeares, and died in the yeare One thousand two hundred and ten, and had for his Successour
Otho de Kerpen, who Gouerned after him sixe and twenty yeares: and after him
The Citie of Acres wonne from the Christians.Herman Bart foure and twenty yeares. These three Great Maisters were buried in the Citie of Acres, which was taken from the Christians in the yeare One thousand two hundred fourescore and eleauen, then being the fourth Great Maister
Herman de Saltza, who Gouerned the said Order the space of eight and thirty yeares.
After the surprizall of Acres, the Great Maister and the rest of the Knights Teutones, departed thence into Almaigne or Germanie, where the Emperour Fredericke the second, returning from his voyage beyond the Seas, in the yeare One thousand two hundred twenty and nine; had brought home with him some Knights of this Order. To them he gaue the Prouince of Borussia, afterward called Prusia, the Inhabitants whereof were as yet Idolaters, and oftentimes rauaged Saxonie. Herman de Saltza practised by strong hand to conquer it.
Now we are here to obserue, that in the yeare One thousand of our Saluation. Adelbert (that is Albert) Bishop of Prage in Bohemia,Albert a Christian Bishop of Prusia martyred by the Idolatrous Prusians. a man of wonderfull holy life, resolued to conuert those poore Infidels of Prusia, to the Faith of Iesus Christ. And because he had not so much as one pennie to proceede in this intent by way of Battaile; the Prusian Idolaters gaue so many blowes with Staues to this good Bishop, as had well-neere expired his life. Yet Albert desisted not from preaching still to those Idolaters, to diuert them from worshipping the foure Elements, whereto they lent a deafened eare, and seeing him to be inuested of a place on the Sea-shoare, neere to the Towne of Feshauff: wounded his body with seauen gashes of an Azagaye, and hung him vp vpon a Tree. Boleslaus, Duke of Poland, hauing bin conuerted to the Faith by this good Bishop; bought his body of them, which he caused to be honourably buried in the Church of Gnesna. Valdemar the second, King of Denmarke, was the first that (by Sea) made warre on the Prusians, onely for their Idolatry, compelling them to promise, that they would receiue the Faith of Iesus Christ: but so soone as he had retreated his Armie from Prusia into Pomerania, the Prusians returned to their former Idolatry againe.
Herman de Saltza, to whom this Prouince of Prusia was giuen by the Emperour Fredericke the second; sent his Knights thither to make Conquest thereof. And the Croisade hauing bin published against them throughout all Germanie, a puissant Armie was leuied,Fiftie ^hous^ Prusians sl^ine in the field. conducted by the Burgraue of Meidenbourg; who meeting with the Armie of the Prusians, gaue them Battaile, and fiftie thousand Prusians were slaine in the Field. The first place which these Knights got possession of in Prusia, af^er they had passed the Riuer of Vistula, was at an old goodly branched Oake, which they did round engirt with good and strong Bulwarkes; in forme of a well fl^ncked and defended Castle, wherein they planted a powerful Garrison, by meanes whereof they became Maisters of the Riuer, and so from thence began to ouerrunne and rauage Prusia, vanquishing and subduing most part of the people, who were all vp in Armes, to Conquer the Rampierde Oake, and to ouercome their enemies.
But they being succoured by a number of Gentlemen, and very wealthy Almaigne Merchants: in short time after builded a rich and mighty Citie round about the Oake, and erected there a magnificent Church, in honour of the euer blessed Virgin Marie, whose name also they gaue to their new Citie, calling it Mariebourge,Their first b^l^ Citie called Mariebourg. which (since that time) was the chiefe place of their Order, and the principall Seate for the Great Maisters thereof, who by force of Armes conquered all Prusia, Liuonia, part of Lithuania, and the neighbouring Countries of Poland and Moscouia, where they continued warre almost the space of two hundred yeares. After Herman de Saltza the fourth Great Maister: succeeded the fift
Conrad Landgraue, Brother of Lewes, Husband to Saint Elizabeth,The Princes ioyne with the Knights of the Order. whom they buried in the Church of Martspourg, the Citie of his Order, whereunto he brought all his Fathers goods, and most great reuennues. The Princes of Germanie seconding the Knights of this Order, made a great Armie to march against the Prusians, in the yeare One thousand two hundred fiftie foure. The forces of this Armie belonged to Odoacrus, King of Bohemia, Otho, Marquesse of Brandenbourge, the Duke of Austria, the Marquesse of Morauia, the Archbishops of Cologne, and of Olmunts, all of them marching personally in this Croissade, and entring about the hart of winter into Prusia, surprized the people, whom perforce they caused to be baptized; And, to hold the stricter hand on these new compelled Christians: Odoacrus King of Bohemia, and the other Princes of the Croissade, built a strong Fortresse on the top of the Mountaine called Samogitia, and about it a faire and spacious Citie, where (at this present) is the ordenarie abiding of the Prince of Prusia. This Fortresse was by the King of Bohemia called Kunisberg, which signifieth Montreall, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred fiftie fiue; the Citie being built in the time of the sixt Great Maister of the Order.
Boppo d'Osterne, who being with his Knights at the Conquest of Curon;The Prusians rebell a^ ab^ure Christian Religion. the Prusians rebelled against him, and at a certaine appointed day, abiured the Christian Religion, burned the Churches, slew and massacred the Priests, and expelled such as were Christians out of Prusia, besiedging also the three strongest Castles of the Order, Kunisberg, Cruitzberg and Bartenstein. This Great Maister was succoured and assisted by the Princes of Germanie, the Kings of France, and the Duke of Gulich, who in the yeare Two hundred threescore and twelue, sent thither a puissant Armie, to warre vpon the Idolaters of Prusia, one while vanquished, and afterward victorious. At the length notwi^hstanding, they were enforced to giue Hostages to the Great Maister, for continuing faithfull afterward.
But the madding furious people, without care or remembrance of their Hostages, kild and massacred (closely) so many of the Knights Teutones as they entrap or betray. Which being discouered, two paire of Gallowes or Iibbets were set vp before the Castle of Kunisberg, whereon thirty of the Hostages were hanged. Which moued the Prusians to such rage and furie, that they brought an Armie into the Field, slaying as many Christians as they could finde or come by:Thirty Hostages of the Prusians hanged. forty of the Bretheren, the Great Maister, and the high Marshall of the Order, which was then in such extremitie, as the vtter ruine thereof was hourely to be expected For the Prusians had wonne the succour and assistance (both in forces and munition) of Swandepolch, Duke of Pomerania, who, although hee had bin baptized, renounced Christianitie, and fell againe to Idolatrie with the Prusians; yet notwithstanding, towards the ending of his dayes, hee became a Chri^tian againe, and one of his Sonnes, named Warteslaus, entred into the Order of the Almaigne Teutones; as taking it to his high honour and credit, to make some part of amends for his Fathers wrongs to them, notwithstanding his after conuersion. And his Brother Sumbor gaue all his goods to the same Order, that he might remain among them all his life time.
Hanno de Sangershusen was the seauenth Great Maister, who being deceased in the yeare One thousand two hundred threescore and fifteen, had for Successour
Herman de Heldringen, dying in

the yeare One thousand two hundred fourescore and two.
Burckard de Schuenden was the ninth Great Maister, who being made Knight of Rhodes, had for his Successour
Conrad de Fenschawang. In the time of this Great Maister was the strong Citie of Acres wonne from the Christians; so that the Templers withdrew themselues into France, where they had great store of goods. The Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, they went thence into Cyprus, and afterward to the Isle of Rhodes, which they conquered. And the Allemaigne Teutoned returned to Venice, where they continued for some time, and from Venice to Martsbourg.
Geofrey, Count of Holenhock, was the eleauenth Great Maister; after whom succeeded
Stgefroy de Feuctuarig, who transferred the principall Seate of the Order from Martsbourg to Mariebourg. By his death, happening in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred twentie two.
Charles Bessart of Treuers, was the thirteenth Great Maister, who caused to be built the impregnable Fortresse of Christ-mimmell, on the banke of the Riuer called Mimmell, to courbe in the ouer headstrong Lithuanians, and hinder their inroades. He had for Successour
Vernhier de Orsela, slaine with the cut of a Sword, by a Brother of his Order, and then succeeded him
Ludolphe of Brunswicke, who caused to be built the Citie of Ylembourg. By his death, happening in the yeare One thousand three hundred thirtie two
Theodoricke, Count of Aldembourg, was the sixteenth Great Maister, who built the Towne at the foote of the Castle of Bartenstein. After him succeeded
Ludolph, Sirnamed the King. And after him
Henry de Tusemer: And next to him
Winrich de Knippenrodt. I his time was vanquished (in a fought Battaile) the King of Lithuania Kinstut, sixe moneths detained prisoner at Mariebourg: from whence he escaped in the night time to Mas^uia. The twentieth Great Maister was
Conrad Zolner of Rotenstein: next him succeeded
Conrad de Wallenrod: And after him
Conrad de Iungingen, slaine in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and tenne, in the warre which he had against the King of Poland Ladislaus, Father to Cazimir, who wonne the Battaile, and the greater part of Prusia: yet notwithstanding, by the meanes of the Emperour Sigismond, the King of Poland was contented with a summe of money, to defraye the charges of his Armie, and surrendred Prusia to the Bretheren Teutones, who elected for their foure and twentieth Great Maister
Henry Count of Plaen, deposed by the generall Chapter, and kept prisoner at Gdan, and in his place was chosen
Michael Knichen: After whom succeeded
Paul of Russe^dorffe: And next to him
Conrad of Ellerichsshauson, in whose time most part of the Townes in Prusis, would needs withdraw themselues from obedience to the Allemaigne Knights Teutones, being secretly fauoured by the King of Poland Cazimir. To whom the Great Maister made his complaint, of his intruding vpon his Conquest, to the preiudice of the perpetuall peace sworne to his Predecessour. And yet notwithstanding this complaint, Cazimir entred into Prusia with a potent Armie, the Cities and Townes reuolting (to the number of fiue and fiftie) and yeelded themselues to his obedience He besiedged Mariebourg, but the Great Maister, aided with succour from the Emperour Fredericke (silently, and without making any noise) entred into the Campe of Cazimire, where he and his followers did cut the throates of three thousand Souldiours; tooke an hundred and thirty sixe Gentlemen prisoners, threw downe to the ground the Tents and Pauillions, and carried away the Horses, Bagadge and Prouision for the Campe, so that the King was constrained to saue himselfe by flight with two hundred Horse. This Victory hapned in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fiftie fiue, in the sequell whereof, the Great Maister recouered againe the Townes and Holds that had bin taken from him, and namely the foure principall Townes, to wit K^nisperg, Thorn, Elbourg and Gdan, otherwise called Dantzike.
Now, notwithstanding this worthy

Conquest, the Captaines of the Castell of Mariebourg (corruptted by money) yielded it to King Cazimire. After many losses and spoyles sustained on either ^ide, an agreement was made betweene the King of Poland and the Great Maister, whereby it was couenanted, that King Cazimire should haue for his part, the Pomerehe, with all the Townes, Castelles and Holdes, as also Elbourg and Mariebourg. And the Great Maister should haue for his share, Sannogitia, Kuuisperg, and the other places and Townes which he held; This accord or ^greement was sworne by both the parties, in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred threescore and sixe. The nine and twentieth Great Maister was
Henry Russe: next whom succeeded
Henry de R^chtenberg, who died in the yeare, One Thousand Foure Hundred Threescore and Seauenteene, and had for his Successour
Martin Truchsesse: And by his death happening in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred fourescore and nine, was chosen for Great Maister
Iohn de Tieffen, who died in the secular yeare, One thousand fiue hundred. He had for Successour
Frederick, Duke of Saxonie, and Marquesse of Misnia: But by his death, happening in the yeare, One Thousand Fiue Hundred and Tenne, was elected
Albert, Marquesse of Brandenbourg. Against which last Great Maister of Prusia, the King of Poland Sigismond, First of the name, made such mighty warre: that he was constrained to request a Truce for Foure yeares space. But that time being expired, without any further hope of resisting against the Polonians: this Great Maister Albert submitted himselfe forthwith to the Crowne of Poland, vpon these couenants and conditions.




The Articles and Couenants, which passed betweenene Sigismond, King of Poland, and Albert, the last Great Maister of Prusia.
QVe de la en auant la Grand Maistrise de Prusse ne seroit plus Electiue, mais Hereditaire en la personne dudict grand Maistre Albert, and aux Siens Masles, qui tiendroient la Prusse, en Hommage lige de la Coronne de Pologne.
Que ledict Albert, and ses Freres Georges, Casimir, and Iean seroient receus par ledit Roy Sigismond comme Vassaux, and Seigneurs hereditaires dudict Pais de Prusse, par le present acc^rd, erigee en Duche.
Que si ledict Albert, and ses Freres venoient a deceder sans Hoirs Masles, ledict Duche de Prusse, ses appartenances, and dependances viendroient a la Coronne de Pologne, and y seroit vme sans en pouuoir estre puis apres separee, a label charge toutefois que le Roy de Polog^e, lors regnant, maricroit les Filles dudict Duc de Prusse, selon la dignite Ducale, and leur ^ang, and
Que la Prusse seroit regie, and gouuernee par vn Aleman Naturel, and non par vn Polonois.
1. That from this time forward, the Great Maisters Office of Prusia shall be no longer Electiue: but remaine hereditarie in the person of the said Great Maister Albert, and to the Masles of him descending; Who were to hold Prusia in Liedge Homage, only of the Crowne of Poland.
2. That the said Albert and his Brethren, George,Prusia aduanced to be a Dukedome. Cazimire and Iohn should be receiued by King Sigismond as his Subiectes, and Lords Hereditary to the Countrey of Prusia: it being by this present agreement aduaunced to be a Dukedome.
3. Thirdly that the said Albert and his Brethren, chauncing to dye without Heires Masles, that then the Dukedome of Prusia, with the appurtenances and dependances, shall come to the Crowne of Poland, and shall be thereto vnited, without any power of separation afterward. Neuerthelesse with this condition, that the King of Poland then reigning, should marrie the Daughters to the said Duke of Prusia, according to Ducall dignity, and as their ranck required
4. And that Prusia shall be Ruled and gouerned by a naturall Allemaigne borne, and not by a Polonian.




This accorde being thus concluded on,Albert renounced his Order of Knighthood. in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred twenty fiue, Albert renounced and abiu^ed the Order of Knighthood of the Allemag^es or Teutones, with other of the same Religion. And by the meanes of this

renuntiation was inuested in the Dukedome of Prusia: And heere followeth the forme of the Inuestiture.

The Forme and Manner of Inuesting Albert in the Dukedome of Prusia.
Sigismond, King of Poland, being seated on his Throane Royall, in his chiefe City of Cracouia; Albert, cloathed in the garment, belonging to the Great Maister of the Teutonicall Order, and mounted on his Horse for Battaile, was in this equipage conducted by his Brethren and their traine before the Throane Royall, where being alighted from his Horse, and on his knees despoyled of his Knightly habites: He was attired with the Great Ducall Cloake of Crimson Veluet, Furred with Marti^^ Zublines, and in that habite he perfourmed his Liedge Homage before the King, for the Dukedome of Prusia, taking the Oathe of Allegeance and fidelitie to the said Sigismond, and to his Successours the Kings of Poland: whom he promised to honor, serue and defend,A Dukes Crowne. to and against all, without any exception. Which being done, king Sigismond placed the Ducall Floury Wreathe on the head of Albert, and in his right hand the Banner of Prusia. It being of White Taffatie, charged with the Armes, Which Sigismond gaue to the same Albert,The Banner of Prusia, and the A^^es. for him and his Successours, Dukes of Prusia, as namely Vne Aigle esployee de Symple, brizee en l'estomach d'vne Lettre S. d'Or (which designed the name of King Sigismond, Brother to the Mother of Albert and his Brethren) Coronnee, Lampassee and Armee de Gueules.
He gaue him likewise L'Escu d'Argent a la dicte Aigle esployee, and Blazonned as before is said And the prime place on his left hand, at the Tearmes and Assemblies Generall of Poland.
A testimony of hereditarie Succession in place and Office.While these Ceremonies of Inuestiture were thus performing, the Brethren to the said Albert, George Cazimire and Iohn, did set to their hands, as helping to support the Banner with their Brother Albert. Enstructing thereby (as a testemoniall noate or signe) that their Brother Albert chauncing to dye without an heire masle, they were (in right) next called to Succession in the Dukedome of Prusia. Albert espoused Dorothea, Daughter to the King of Denmarke Frederick, First of that name: And in this Mariage was borne Frederick, inuested in the Dukedome by King Sigismond Augustus, who put about his neck the Collar of the Order of Poland, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred threescore and eight.
An other Great Maister chosen of the same Order.After this Acte of Inuestiture, the Brethren Teutones or Allemaignes elected for their Great Maister, an other Allemaigne Lord, named Albert de Wolfang: who was constrained (with the Brethren of his Order) to depart out of Prusia, and withdrew themselues into Allemaigne or Germanie, where they enioyed such goods, as the Knights of the same Order doe yet possesse to this present. Maximillian of Austria, being now Great Maister of the same Order,The Great Maister at this present. bearing in Armes De l'Empire, Escartele d' Austriche, and sur le tout la double Croix dudit Ordre, With whom are admitted and receiued, the youngest Sonnes of the Princes of Germanie, into the same Order.
While the Greatnesse and Magnificence of this Teutonicall or Prusian Order continued; the Soueraignes, (that were Great Maisters therof) to acknowledge them that were of their Band and Company, who warred valiantly on their nighbouring Idolatrous enemies the Prusians, Liuonians and Tartares: established a prize of perticuler Honor and praise.(...) of (...). For they instituted A Table of Honour, which they so named, after a former president Of the Round Table in England. At this Table were seated with the Great Maister, such as had made themselues famous by deeds of Prowesse and Valour, were they Strangers, or Brethren of the Order, for the seruice of Religion. Which maketh it selfe much more apparantly knowne, by the words contained in the Chronicle of the good Duke of Bourbon Lewes,The (...). Second of the name, yet Third Duke of Bourbon, the Three and Twentieth Chapter of the same Chronicle.
Such as tooke leaue of the Duke of Bourbon, being at Chambery in Sauoye, to goe for Prusia, and to warre against the Infidelles there, were these.


Iohn de Chastelmorant.


Messire Aymar de Marcilly.



Messire Oudin de Roullat.


Messire Oudray de la Forest.


Messire Iohn de Sainct Priet.


Messire Pierre de la Bussiere.


Sainct Porque.


Perrin du Pel.

Guyon Gouffier; And

Iohn Gondelin a Breton.


These worthy Gentlemen and friendly Companions, tooke leaue of the Duke ^heir Maister, who charged them, that, as they tendred and feared his displeasure:These were Kni^hts of the Order of Bourbon. ^hey should returne againe to him soone after Easter (it being the Feaste of All Saints when they departed.) And at their going, the Countesse of Sauoye, Sister to the Duke of Bourbon, gaue to each of these Gentelmen (bound for Prusia) a Diamond, which they accepted thankfully, because Ladies gifts were welcome to them.
From Sauoye departed these Companions, passing thorowe Lorraine and Germa^^nie, and riding to Prage in Bohemia, where they saw the Queene of Bohemia,The Queene of Bohemia, Aunte to the Duke of Bourbon. who ^as Aunte to the Duke of Bourbon, and who welcommed them graciously, bestow^^g great gifts on them. And in the Citty of Prage were many Knights, belonging (...) the Court of the King of France (Charles the Fifte, called the Wise) who were ^ery ioyfull of their comming; because they iourneyed likewise to Prusia. The ^iefest of them were
Messire Hutin de Vermilles.The Borgne de la Heuze.The Bastard d'Aussy, with others
On they so long iourneyed, till they entred among the frozen Ices in the Palu^s and Marshes of Prusia. And so holding on still in the yces (as is the custome ^ere) they came at length to Mariembourg, the Grand Hostell of the knights of Prusia,Formerly called Mariebourg. ^here the High or Great Maister of the Order entertained them kindly. And there ^e Seruants to the Duke of Bourbon, met with
Messire Iohn de Roye.Messire Patrouillart de Renty.Messire Robert de Chalus.
Messire Iohn de Maingre, called Boucicault, who by his Chiualrie was afterward ^ade Marshall of France, and (for his singular vnderstanding) Gouernour of the ^tty of Genewaye.


Messire Iohn Bonnebaut


Messire Gaucher de Passach.


Messire l'Hermite de la Faye.


And many more beside, of Nations which I konw not how to name, who (...) all together there, and so conueniently, that their arriuall seemed almost ad^rable.
For the King of Letho (that was Kinstut, named King of Lithuania,The Pagan King Letho, called King of Lithuania. of whom we ^^e formerly spoken) a Sarrazin with which name of Sarrazin, they tearmed all (...) Idolaters and Paganes of Liuonia, Tartaria, Lithuania, and the Prouinces placed ^der the North-Starre) had much laboured, to vanquish and conquer the Order Prusia, and, to make his part the stronger, had ioyned himselfe with the King of ^^gales (he would haue said Norway) who towards the Seacoaste warred on the ^aister of Niffeland, defender of the Religion, and Protectour of Prusia, which ^ll one.
The High Maister of Prusia, by helpe of the Knights, and Noble Gentlemen of Nations, which were then in his companie, caried himselfe so valiantly;The Great Maister assisted with many nations. that he ^^nquered from them the Castell of Endrach, and chased them from the great ^rests of Prusia, which containe in length aboue eight dayes iourney. And ^rein are the Beasts called Hermines, Letices, Gray and Martins Zubelines, whose (...) Furres are transported throughout the World.
In such succesfull manner prospered the Christians; that the Sarrazins were ^nd and Constrained, to get them gone thence to their owne Countrey. Vpon

such Order made,Conditions betweene the Christians and Sarrazins. that the Sarrazins of Lethonna and Norgales, should robbe no more Churches in Christendome, nor burne them. In like manner, the Christian Knights of the Religion as well of Prusia, as of Niffeland in their Countrey of Letho, or the bordering Maches, should not burne or desire the Holy Woodes, for so they called the Pine Trees, where they burned their dead bodies, and made their Sacrifices.
And the High or Great Maister of Prusia, beholding that all affaires had succeeded so well, and to his no meane Honour: On the Feast day of our Lady, commonly called Candlemasse, he feasted all his braue Caualerie very triumphantly, and for greater Honor of the day, diuine Seruice was accomplished in his Hostell of Mariembourg. Where he caused the Table of Honour to be couered, and commaunded to be seated at that Table,Knights seated at the Table of Honor. Twelue Knights of sundry Kingdomes.

For the Kingdome of France were seated aboue at the Table.

Messire Hutin de Vermailles; And

Messire Tristram des Marguellers, whom they all allowed for very good Knights.


Of other Countreys Two and Two were seated, according to the Great Maisters appo^^^ment, to make compleate the number of Twelue. And they were serued according to the dignity of the Day, and as vnto their worth belonged.

Thankes being giuen to God, and the Twelue sitting deuising on the Table of Honour* and how it became established: One of the Brethren Knights of the Religion, gaue to each of them a Motto, written in Golden Letters vpon their shoulders: Honor ouercommeth all things, And on the morrow, the Knights tooke their leaue of the Great Maister returning euery man home to his Countrey.
A large fabulous History deuised on this Christian Warre in Prusia.Vpon this voyage of the French Knights, in fauour of the Order of Prusia; wa^ formed that fabulous conceit of the Romancers, by Iohn de Saintre. Yet remarkable in this, that he giueth Names and Armes to sundry Houses, Famous for valiance and Nobility, in the time of the said King Charles the Fift, all Noblemen, and (...) Three Thousand Archers: yet without naming those Lords, who (at their own^ charge) compleated aboue Two Hundred Launces, with men bearing Bowes. (...) that there was aboue Sixe Thousand Frenche at this Crosiade.
Out of Twelue Prouince and Gouernements in the Kingdomes of France, was chosen a certaine number of Lords, all of them bearing Banners, as namely.


Of the Region or Marche of the Isle of France.
THe Lord of Montmorency, Qui po^te d'Or a la Croix de Gueules, and Seize Aiglettes (Allelyons) d' Azur. And his crie of Warre, Di^u aide au Premier Chrestien.
The Lord of Trie qui porte d'Or a vne Bande d'Azur, and his warre crie Bologne.
The Lord of ^osny, d'Or a Deux Fesses de Gueules, and his warre crie Rosny.
The Lord de la Forest, de Gueules a Six Merlettes d'Argent.
The Lord of Viels pont, qui porte d'Argent seme d'Anneaux de Gueules.
The Vidame de Chartres, d'Or a Trois Faisses de Sable, a vne Orle de Six Merlettes de mesme, and his crie Merlo.
The Lord de Beaumont, Gyronne de Douze pieces d' Argent, and de Gueules.
The Lord of Sainct Brisson, d'Azur seme de fleurs de Lys d'Argent.
The Bouteiller de Senlis, Escartele d'Or and de Gueules, and his crie les Granges.
The Lord of Marolles, Bande de Six pieces d'Argent, and de Gueules.


Those of Beauuoisin, of the said March of France.
THe Count of Clermont, de Gueules Deux Bars adossez d'Or a Croise^^^ au pied fiche de mesmes, and his crie Clemont.
The Lord d'Offemont, the same (...) Clermont, au Lambeau d'Or de Trois pi^^^ and his crie Offemont.
The Lord of Gaucourt, seme d'Erm^^ a Deux Bars, adossez de Gueules, and (...) crie Gaucourt.
The Lord d'Espineuse d'Ermines, a (...) Escusson de Gueules, and many oth^^ Knights Cheuallers, and Escuyers of the s^^ Marche de Beauuoisin.


Those de la Marche de Champagne.
MOnsieur Iean de Champagne, d'A^ vne Bande d'Argent a Deu^ C^ tices potencees and contrepotencees de Tre^

^eces d'Or au Lambeau de Trois pieces de ^ueules, and his crie Passe-auant.
The Count of Rethel, De Gueules a Trois ^asteaux desmanchez de Six dents d'Or, ^nd his crie Rethel.
The Count of Brienne, d'Azur au Lyon Or, Billete de mesme.
The Vicount of Rosnay, Barre d'Or and Azur a Deux Faisses de Gueules.
The Lord of Castillon, de Gueules a ^cis Paux Vairez au Chef d'Or, and his (...) Castillon.
The Lord of Conflans, d'Azur au Lyon Or a Biletes, and vn baston de mesmes.
The Lord of Roussy de Castillon, d'Ar^^t a vn Aigle de Sable sur le Chef, and his ^e Castillon.
The Lord of Marnueil en Brie, de Gu^les a Trois Bezans d'Or, and his crie Marueil.
The Lord of Io^nuille, pale contre Pale Argent, and de Gueules, and his crie Ioin^lle. Beside many other Knights and ^quires in the said Marche de Champagne.


Those of the Marche of Flanders.
THe Lord of Gaure, qui portoit de Flandres au Lambeau de Gueules, and his ^ie Flanders.
Messire Henry de Flanders. De Flan^es au Baston componne d'Argent and de ^ueules, and his crie Flandres au Couplet.
Messire Iean du Gaure porta les plaines ^rmes du Gaure, qui estoint de Gueules a ^us Boucs d'Argent Armez d' Or, and cried Gaure.
The Lord of Rodes qui portoit d' Azur (...) Lyon d'Or langue de Gueules, and Arme (...) Argent, and his crie Rodes.
The Lord of Gistelle d'Or au Lyon Azur.
The Lord of Commines, d'Or al Escus^ de Sable Diapre a vn Orle de Roses de ^ueules, and his crie Commines.
The Lord of Haluin, d'Argent a Trois ^yons de Sable, ceronnez, languez and armez Or, and his crie Haluin. With many o^^er Knights and Esquires of Flandres.


Those of the Marche of Aquitaine.
THe Count of Perigort, qui porte d' Argent au Fer de Moulin de Synople a vne ^ande de Gueules, and his crie Perigort.
The Counte of Bigorre, qui portoit d'Or Deux Lyons passants de Gueules, coronnez (...) Argent, and his crie Bigorre.
The Count of Ventadour, qui portoit ^schicquete d'Or, and de Gueules, and his crie ^entadour.
The Vicount of Cahors, pui portoit de Sable a Trois Lyons d'Argent, and his crie Cahors.
The Vicount of Limoges, qui portoit d'Ermines a la Bordure de Gueules, and his crie Limoges.
Le Sire d'Albret, qui portoit de Gueules, and cried Labrit.
The Lord of Comborne, qui portoit d' Argent au Lyon de Gueules coronne d' Azur, langue, and arme de Sable.
The Lord of Lesparre, Lozenge d'Or, and de Gueules, and his crie Lesparre.
The Lord of Villars, Escartele d'Or, and de Gueules, and his crie Villars.
The Lord of Herpedenne de Belle-Ville, qui portoit Gyronne de Vair, and de Gueules de dix pieces.
The Lord of Cardillac, de Gueules au Lyon d'Argent, a l'Orle de Be^ans de mesmes.
The Lord of Barbazan.
The Lord of Montmiral, qui portoit Burele d'Argent and de Sable a vn Lyon de Gueules, and his crie Montmiral.
The Lord of la Trimouille, d Or a Trois Aigles d'Azur a vn Cheuron de Gueules.
The Lord of la Salle, Ondoye d'Argent and Gueules de huict pieces, and his crie Mars. And many other Knights and Esquires of Guienne, Francois.
Ceux qui y furent de ladite Marche, tenans le party des Anglois, and pour estre a ceste tres saincte Iournee vouldrent honorer, and passer sous la Banniere du Roy de France qui a l aller, and le Iour de la Battaille fut portee par le Seigneur de Chastel-Fromond Cheualier Angeuin, and au Retour pour ses blesseures par le Seigneur de Mauleurier Angeuin.
THe Lord of Bearn, qui portoit d'Or a Deux Vaches de Gueules, accolloes, accornees, and clarinees d'Azur, and his crie Bearn.
The Captall of Buch, d'Or a vne Croix de Sable, a Cinq Coquilles d'Argent.
Le Loup de Foix, qui portoit de Gueules a vn Loup d'Or Langue, Ongle, and Dente d'Argent.
The Lord of Montferrant, d'Or a quatre Paux de Gueules, a la Bordure de Sable, and his crie Montferrant.
The Lord of Duraz, qui portoit d'Or a vn Lyon d' Azur a la Bande d' Argent, and his crie Duras. With many other Knights and Esquires of the same Parte and Marches of Aquitaine.



Those of the Marche of Aniou, Touraine, and le Maine.
THe Vicount of Beaumont, qui portoit de France au Lyon naissant d'Argent Langue and Arme de Gueules, and his crie Beaumont.
Messire Hue de Craon, Lozenge d'Or, and de Gueules, a la Bordure d'Argent, and his crie Craon.
The Lord of Mauleurier, d'Or au Chef de Gueules, and his crie Maulcurier.
The Lord of Mathefelon, qui portoit de Gueules a Six Escussons d'Or, and his crie Mathefelon.
The Lord Dauoir, d'Argent au Lyon d'Azur au Lambeau de mesmes, and his crie Dauoir.
The Lord of Chastel-fromont, qui porta la Banniere de France, and portoit de Gueules a la Croix ancre d' Or.
The Lord of Bueil, d'Azur a Sept Croisettes, recroisettes au pied ficqe d'Or, and his crie Bueil.
The Lord of Monte-Iean, d'Or frette de Gueules, en Chef vn Lyon naissant de mesmes, coronne d'Azur, and his crie Monte-Iean
The Lord of Beauuau, d'Argent a Quatre Lyonceaux de Gueules coronnez d'Azur, languez and armez d'Or. And many other Knights and Esquires of Aniou.


Those which were of the Marche and of Touraine.
THe Lord d'Amboise, qui portoit Palle de Six pieces, d' Or, and de Gueules, and his crie Amboise.
The Lord of Mailly. Ondoye d'Or, and de Gueules, and his crie Mailly.
The Lord of Presigny, qui portoit Palle contre Palle a Deux Quantons Gironnez, Faisse, contre-Faisse d'Or and d'Azur a l'Escusson d'Argent, au milieu. These Armes in my corrected Manuscript are thus Emblazoned.
D' Or and d'Azur au pied partyAu Chef Palle, Faisse contre-FaisseA Deux Quantons Gyronnez, and vn Escu d'ArgentParmy, sent les Armes de Pressigny.
His Warre crie Presigny.
The Lord of L'Isle-Bouchart, de Gueules a Deux Leopards d' Argent Languez, and Armez d' Azur, and his crie L' Isle-Bouchart.
The Lord of Mont-Bazon, qui portoit de Gueules au Lyon d'Or and his crie Mont-Bazon.
The Lord of Saincte-More, qui port^^^ d' Argent a la Fesse de Gueules, and his (...) Saincte-More
The Lord of Marniande, d'Or a D^^ Fesses de Sable, and his crie Marmande.
The Lord of Saintre, qui portoit de Gueules a la Bande d'Or, au Lambeau de Tr^^^ pieces de mesme, his crie Saintre. And many other Knights and Esquires of the saith Marche and Duchie of Touraine and (...) Aniou.


That were of the Countie of Maine.
THe Lord of la Val, who was the^ made Knight, qui pertoit d'Or a (...) Croix de Gueules, a Cinq Cocquilles d' A^^ and Quatre Aiglettes (wee should say (...) heryons) de mesme sur chaque quartier, and his crie Laual.
The Lord of Tusse, qui portoit de Sa^^ a Quatre Fesses Iumelles d'Argent, and his crie Tusse.
The Lord of Sarcel. De Synople an Lyon d'Argent.
The Lord of Cormes, d'Argent a Tr^^ Fesses Iumellees de Sable.
The Lord of Eschelles, qui portoit de Gueules a Trois Fesses d'Argent.
The Lord of la Forest, qui portoit d'Argent au Chef-Endente de Sable.
The Lord of Beauchamp, qui portoit d'Or a vne Deusse de Gueules en Chef, a l'Orle de Six Merlettes de mesmes.
The Lord of Mont-fort, de Gueules (...) Deux Leopards, d^Or, Armes d'Argent. With many other Knights and Esquire of the same Countie du Maine, and March of Aniou.


Those of the Marche of Ponthieu, which some tearme of Oye.
THe Vicounte of Quesnes, qui portoit d'Argent a vne Croix de Gueules Frettee d'Or.
The Lord of Rembures, d'Or a Tr^^ Fesses de Gueules.
The Lord of Brimeu, d'Argent a Tr^^ Aigles de Gueules membrees d'Azur.
The Lord of Picquegny, qui portoit Fe^^ d'Or, and de Gueules contre-Fesse d'Argent and d' Azur, and his crie Pequigny.
The Lord of Dambronne, Fesse de Haict pieces d'Or, and de Gueules.
The Lord of Cresquy, d'Or a vn Cresquier de Gueules, and his crie Cresquy.
The Lord of Vacamie, de Gueules a Deux Bars adossez d'Or, aux Croix Recroisettes a^ pied fiche de mesmes.
The Lord of Linieres, d' Argent a la ^ande de Gueules, and his crie Linieres. With many other Knights and Squires of the same Marche.


Of the Marche of Vermandois.
THe Lord of Hangest, qui portoit d'Or a la Croix de Gueules, and his crie Hangest.
The Lord of Ieully, d' Argent a vne ^roix de Gueules chargee de Cinq Cocquil^s d'Or.
The Lord of Moi, de Gueules frette ^'Or, and his crie Cercelles.
The Lord of Flauy, d'Ermines a la ^roix de Gueules a Cinq Cocquilles d' Or, and ^is crie Flauy.
The Lord of Roye, de Gueules a la Bande (...) Argent, his crie Roye. And many other ^nights and Squires of the said Marche.


Those of the Marche of Corby that were there.
THe Lord of Saucourt, qui portoit d'Argent Frette de Gueules, and his ^ie Saucourt.
The Lord of Herily, qui porte de Gueu^^ a la Bande d'Or, and his crie Herily.
The Lord of Mailly, d'Or a Trois Mail^s de Synople, and his crie Mailly.
The Lord of Rubempre, d'Argent a ^^is Fesses Ium^llees de Gueules, and his ^^ie Rubempre.
The Lord of Miraulmont d'Argent a ^x Tourteaux de Gueules, and his crie ^^raulmont.
The Lord of Aubigny, d'Argent a (...) Fesse de Gueules, and his crie Aubigny. With diuers other Knights and Squires (...) the same Marche.


Those of the Marche of Normandie.
THe Lord of Chastel-Gontier, Sonne to the Counte du Perche, qui portoit Argent a Deux Cheurons de Gueules, and ^^s crie Perche.
The Lord of Yury, qui portoit d'Or a ^ois Cheurons de Gueules, and his crie Yury.
The Lord of Manny, de Sable a la Croix eschee d'Argent, and his crie Manny.
The Lord of Grauille, qui portoit Azur a la Fesse d'Argent, a Croisettes Or, and his crie de Grauille.
The Lord of Forges, portoit d'Azur a ^e Bezans d'Or, and his crie Forges.
The Lord of la Haye, d'Argent a Trois ^^ussons de Gueules, and his crie Haye.
The Lord of Bracquemont, de Sable a vn Cheuron d'Argent
The Lord of Trouuille, qui portoit d' Argent a Deux Bandes de Gueules, a l'Orle de Cocquilles de mesmes.
The Lord of Ferrieres de Gueules a vn Escusson d'Ermines a la Fesse de Gueules, l'Escu Orle de Fers de Cheual d' Or his crie Ferrieres.
The Lord of Gamaches, d'Argent au Chef d'Azur a vn Baston de Gueules, and his crie Gamaches. And many other Knights and Squires of Normandie.


Those of the Marches of Berry, Bourbonnis, and of Auuergne.
THe Count of Sancerre, qui portoit de Champagne a la Bordure de Gueules, and his crie Passe auant: On Afore.
The Viscounte of Villenoir, qui portoit d'Argent au Lyon d'Azur his crie la Belle. At the Fairest.
Monsieur Philip of Bourbon, qui portoit d Or au Lyon de Gueules a l'Orle de Cocquilles d'Azur (These are the Armes of the. Archambaulds Lords of Bourbon) and his crie Bourbon.
The Lord of Chastel-Morant, de Gueules a Trois Lyons d' Argent, coronnez and armez d' Or and his crie Chastel-Morant.
The Lord des Barres, d'Or a la Croix de Synople, and his crie Les Barres.
The Lord of la Tour d'Auuergne, qui portoit seme de France a vne Tour d'Argent massonnee de Sable, and his cry La Tour
The Lord of Montagu, qui portoit de Gueules a vn Lyon d'Ermines, and his crie Montagu.
The Lord of Chalenson, qui portoit de Gueules a trois Testes Arrachees de Lyons d' Or, and his crie Chalenson. And many other Knights and Squires of the said Marche.


Those of the Marche of Bretagne, and were there.
THe Counte of l' Isle, qui portoit de Gueules a la Croix yuidee, clechee, and pommettee d'Or and his crie l' Isle.
The Vicount of Lesbeliere, qui portoit Escartele d'Argent, and de Gueules, his crie La Besliere.
The Lord of Chastel-Briant, de Gueules seme de Fleurs de Lys d'Or, his crie Chasteau Briant.
The Lord de Raiz, qui portoit d' Or a vne Croix de Sable, and cried Raiz.
The Lord de Malestroict, de Gueules a Bezans d'Or, and cried Malestroict. With

many other Knights and Squires of that Marche.


Those of the March of Artois who went thither.
MEssire Lewes d Artois, qui portoit d'Artois, c'est de Gueules au Lyon d'Or, Arme d'Azur, and cried Artois.
The Count of Sainct Paul, who was made Knight before Battaile giuen to the Miscreants. Il portoit d'Argent au Lyon de Gueules passee and nouee en Soultour, coronne and arme d'Or.
The Lord of Fresnes, qui portoit d'Argent au Lyon de Sable, and cried Fresnes.
The Lord of Betunes, qui portoit d'Argent a la Fesse de Gueules, and cried Betune.
The Lord of Renty, de Gueules a Trois Dolouers d'Argent and cried Renty.
The Lord of Cresques, d Azur a Trois Fesses Iumellees d Or, and cried Bourgongne.
The Lord of Bailleul, qui portoit Trois Faisses Vairees d'Argent, and de Gueules.
The Lord d'Inchy Faisse d'Or, and de Sable de Six pieces, and cried Inchy.
The Lord of Ilumiers, qui portoit d'Argent ^rette de Sable au Lambel de Gueules. And many other Knights and Squires of the same Marche.


Of the Marche for the Duchie and Countie of Bourgongne.
THe Lord of Chastillon, qui portoit d'Azur au Lyon d'Or, and cried Chast^llon.
The Counte d'Auxerre, qui portoit de Gueules, a la Bande d'Or, and cried Auxerre.
The Lord of Montagu...........
The Lord of Vergy, de Gueules a Trois Quinte fuilles d'Or, (alias d'Argent) and cried Vergy.
The Lord of Sainct George, de Gueules a la Croix d'Or.
The Lord of Charny, de Gueules a Trois ^scussons d'Argent, and cried Charny.
The Lord of Chasseumoy, de Gueules a la Fesse d'Or.
The Lord d'Aussigny, de Sable a Deux Bars adessez d'Or, seme de Croisettes recr^^s^ttees de mesme, and cried Aussigny. And many other Knights and Squires of the same Marche.


Those of Barrois, and of Lorraine.
THe Lord of Pantamousson, qui portoit de Bar, that is to say d'Azur seme de Croix Recroisettees au pied fiche d'Or, a deux Bars adossez de mesmes, au Lamb^^^ d Argent. And cried le Pont.
The Lord of Pierrefort, portoit de B^^, a la Bordure de Gueules, and cried Pierrefort.
The Lord of Dun, qui portoit de Gueules a la Bordure d'Ermines, and cried D^^.
Messire Ferry de Vaudemont, B^rel^ d'Argent and de Sable, and cried Va^demont.
The Lord of Baufremont, qui porto^t Vaire d'Or, and de Gueules, and cried Baufremont.
The Lord d'Aspremont, de Gueules (...) la Croix d'Argent, and cried d'Asprem^nt.
The Lord of Toullon, qui portoit de Vaudemont au Baston de Gueules.
The Lord of Ruppes, qui portoit de Baufremont, au Baston d'Azur.
The Lord des Armoises, qui port^^^ Gyronne de douze pieces d'Or, and d'Azur. With many other Squires Knights and Gentlemen.


Those of Lorraine, and of Barrcis altogether.
MOnsieur Nicolas de Lorraine, qui p^rtoit de Lorraine a vne ^ordure endentee d'Azur, and cried Prigny.
The Counte of Chiny, Burele d'Or and de Gueules au Lyon de Sable, and cried Chiny.
The Count of Clermont en Bassigny qui portoit de Gueules a vn Cerf d'Argent.
The Count de Grand-pre, Burele d'Or and de Gueules.
The Lord of Grancy, qui portoit d'Argent au Chef de Gueules.
The Lord of Brey, Eschiquete d'Or and de Sable a la Bande d'Argent a deux C^ttices de m^sme. With many other Knight^ and Squires of the Marches of Germa^ which they call Ruyers.


Those which were there of Daulphi^ together.
THe Lord of Clermont, qui portoit (...) Gueules a deux Clefs d'Argent (...) Saultoir, and cried Clermont.
The Lord of Vaubonnois ...........
The Lord of Sassenaige, Burele d'Argent and d'Azur au Lyon de Gueules c^^ponne d'Or, and cried Sassenaige.
The Lord of Ma^bech, qui portoit (...) Gueules a trois Leopards d'Or, armez d'Argent, and cried Manbech.
The Lord of Chasteau neuf, d'Argent au Chef de Gueules, and cried Chasteau-neuf.
The Lord of Bellecombe, qui portoit d'Or a la Bande de Sable, and cried Bellecombe.
The Lord of M^nlor, au Lyon de Vair.
The Lord of Chasteau-vilain, Gyronne d'Argent and de Sable de huict pieces.
The Lord of Gr^re, de Vair au Chef de Gueule au Lyon missant d'Or.
And many other Knights and Squires, to serued the King vnder his Banner in the Battaile; where were more then an Hundred and threescore Banners, beside those which were caried on the day of Battaile giuen to the Sarrazins. All that serued both on Horse and Foote, were cloathed in Scrilet Coates of Armes, with White Crosses.
At this voyage to Prusia, there ioyned with the French, Eight Lords of England, as namely
The Earle of Marche: Qui portoit d'Azur a Trois Fesses d Or a l'Escusson d'Argent sur le Chef. And his crie was La Marche.
The Earle of Northampton:Eight Lords of England ioyned in the Expedition. qui portoit d'Azur a la Bande d'Argent, chargee de Trois Merlettes de Gueules.
The Earle of Suffolke: Qui portoit de Sable a la Croix d'Or; And cried Suffolke.
The Lord of Cobehurst: qui portoit de Gueules au Cheuron d'Or a trois Lyons de Sable, and crioit Haston.
The Lord of Clifford, qui portoit Eschiquete d'Or, and d'Azur a la ^ande d'Ermines, and cried Clifford.
The Lord L'Isle: qui portoit d'Or a deux Cheur^ns de Sable; And cried L'Isle.
The Lord of Moulins, qui portoit de Sable au Chef d'Argent charge de trois Lozenges de Gueules; And cried Moulins.
The Lord of Rocqueby or Rugby: qui portoit d Argent au Sautoire de Sable.
At the departure of this Royall Armie from the Citty of Paris, to set on for Prusia, thus was the appointment.


The Royall Armies Marche towards Pr^sia.
FIrst of all went the Poursuiuants of Armes, Two and Two together, carying their Coates of Armes vpon their armes, the fore-part backward.
After them followed the Herauldes, wearing the Coates of Armes belonging to their Lords, in direct manner as it ought to be, riding two and two together.
After them followed the Trumpets in great numbers, two and two together.
Next them came the Kings of Armes, of the Marches and Prouinces of France, wearing their Coates of Armes in right manner, two and two together.
Then came Montioye, King of Armes for France, ryding in his Coate Royall of Armes, and alone by himselfe.
After these followed the Lord of Chastel froumont, who bare the Banner of the King: riding in the midst betweene my Lords the Dukes of Aniou, and Berry.
Then came my Lord of Bourgongne, riding on the right hand, and Saintre, Generall of the Armie, on the left.
Next after Saintre, followed the three Chiefe Banners (and most aunciently caried) by appointment from the King, according to relations made by the auncientest Bookes of the Montioyes, Kings of Armes in France, who from all times of Antiquity, were wont to take knowledge (by their visitations in the Marches and Prouinces of the Kingdome) in such cases being accompanied with the other Kings of Armes of the Prouinces; for the keeping and maintaining Honour, as it especially behoued; to auoide also iniuries, clamours, and idle conceites, deuised by wanton Ladies and Lords.
After those three Banners, came the Lords to whom they appertained. And then
The other Banners, and the Lords of them marching in order, Three and three together, according to Antiquity, and as the said Banners were wount to be caried.
In Pr^sia, the Royall Army met with that from the Emperour; whereof the Duke of Brunsw^^k caried the Banner: Qui estoit d'Or,The meeting of the whole Army together in Prusi^. a vn Aigle esploye de ^able.
That from the King of Hungary, whereof the Duke of Morauia caried the Banner. Qui esto^t Faisse de Huict pieces de Gueules, and d'Argent.
The King of Behaigne (that is Bohemia, was there in person: Qui portoit de Gueules a vn Lyon d'Argent, la queue nouee, fourchee, and Croisee, Coronne and Arme d'Or. And with him were the Duke of Saxonie (that is Saxon himselfe) the Marquesse of Brandenbeurg, the Count Palatine, with the Grands, Lords and Prelates of Germanie, to witt, of Cologne, Treuers, Magnuce, Passaw and Liege.
When the day of Battaile was come, after Masse had beene said in the Campe by the Archbishop of Cologne,Saintre made Knight be the King of Bohemia before the Battaile. and the Benediction giuen by the Cardinall of Hostia, Legate of the Croisade against the miscreants: Saintre mounted vpon his Horse for seruice, and riding to the King of Bohemia, there drawing forth his Sword; in the name of God, our Lady, and my Lord Saint Denys, required of him the Order of Knighthood.
The good King (who affected Saintre and all the Frenche) very ioyfully gaue him the Accollade and Order: desiring God to giue him therwith ioy and honour, such as his owne heart could wish for. And so thence forward he was called by them all,An auncient Ceremony concerning Banners in Battailes. the Lord of Saintre.
At the time when hee was made Knight, hee aduanced his Banner: B^t^ his and many Banners more beside were there raised, and cut with tailes, as the Pe^^s were.
This Auncient Ceremonie, was (to good purpose) obserued by the Angeuin ^^mancer. For it is generally knowne, that the Enseigne for a company of Souldiours on Horseback, finisheth at the pointe with two tailes, as we vse to tearme them. The Gaidon likewise finisheth in Poincte, and hath but one taile only: But the Cornette is square, according as the Banner of France is, and those of the Baro^s and Knights Bannerets. And those Barons, which desire to haue the name and ranck of Knights Bannerets on dayes of Battaile: ought to present their Ensignes to the Generall of the Armie;An example made good before the Duke of Bourgongne. who cutting the ends and points of them, maketh them square, which we call Banners. Whence came the common Prouerbe, giuen (by way of mockerie) to a poore Knight Banneret. The Knight with the squared Flagge or Banner.
Oliuer de la Marche, in his History of Flanders, noateth this auncient fashion of bearing Banners, and saith: That the King of Armes presented to the Duke of Bourgongne (in a certaine expedition of warre) the Lord of Sains, who held the Penon of his plaine Armes on the end of his Launce, and said

Monseigneur Veez cy le Seigneur de Sains, qui est yssu d'Ancienne Banniere a ve^^ subiecte; la Seigneurie principale est es mains de son Aisne, la Seigneurie de Sains est terre de Banniere d'Anciennete, il vous supplie le faire Banneret, et le releuer en Banniere, il ve^^ presente son Penon, accompagne de Vingt. Cinq Hommes d'Armes. Le Roy d'Armes baille vn Coulteau au Duc, le Duc prit au tour de sa Main la queue du Penon, and de l'autre Main couppa ladicte queue auec le Coulteau, and demeura quarre en Banniere, qui auparauant esteit estendu a la poincte en queue.


My Lord, behold heere the Lord of Sains, Who is descended of an Auncient Manner subiect to you; the principall Lordship is in the hands of his Eldest Brother, the Seigneurie of Sains is Banner Land from Antiquitie. Hee humbly entreateth you to make him a Banneret, and to raise it to a Banner; he presenteth you his Penon, accompanied with fiue and Twenty men of Armes. The King of Armes deliuered a Knife to the Duke, and the Duke tooke into his hand the tayle of the Penon, and by the strength of the other hand, cut the tayle with the Knife, and it remained a square Banner, which before was extended to the pointe in taile.





The Crosse of the Order of Liuonia;Croix de L'Ordre de Liuo^e, dict de (...) ^re^es Po^te-Glaiues. called of the Bretheren Sword-Bearers: Instituted in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred and three.
CHAP. XIII. The Institution of the Order of Liuonia: Called of the Bretheren Sword-Bearers.
LIuonia is a Prouince seated very farre Northerly, shut vp on the one side with the Balthicke Sea:The scituation of Liuonia, and Paganisme of the people. And pressed on the other by them of Prusia, Russia, Lithuania, Moscouia and Tartaria. The Inhabitants thereof had long time liued in Paganisme, and yet to this present, in those parts far remote from good Townes of the Countrey: they doe liue like bruite beasts, without any apprehension or knowledge of God, some of them adoring the Sunne and the Moone, and the other any Tree, that hath his head or top highest exal^ed. Some likewise honor the glorious Starres, as they voyage and passe from one Countrey to another: Others a Serpent, or the first creature they can meete withall* after comming forth of their Cottages. In briefe, they are a very miserable and ^^biect kinde of people.
In the time of Pope Alexander the third, and of the Emperour Barbarossa, it for^uned, that the Merchants of Breme were carried by a gale of winde,The Merchants of Breme ^^sired trafick with the Liuonians* vpon the coasts of the Liuonian Sea: and there with the dwellers in the I^land,


they made a contract of amitie, for further assurance of trafficke, which they desired to haue afterward with ^hem. These Merchants had some Priests among them, who, neere to that part of the Riuer Duno, where it swallow^oweth it selfe in the maine Sea: they erected a little Orato^ie therein to celebrate Diuine Seruice, so long as they should make their abiding there. And from that time forward, there was open Trafficke betweene the Germaines and ^he Inhabitants of Liuonia.
In the yeare One thousand one hundred threescore and ^welue, the Merchants of Lubek made a voyage thither, tak^ng along with them in their company, a good and deuout Monke of the Abbey of Segeberge, named Maynard, a man of holy life, who mounted on the wings of zealous deuotion, and accompanied with one Seruant; concluded to learne ^he Countries language, to the end, that he might bestow his best endeauour, for conuerting those poore Infidels, to the diuine worship of one onely God. With Fagot-sticks they erected a poore Fielden Lodging,Maynard the first Bishop of Liuonia. and ioyned ^ikewise thereto a small Oratorie, in honour of the blessed Virgin, and there began ^o enstruct the Countrey Inhabitants. Within a while after, this good man Maynard was (by the Archbishop of Breme) Sacred the first Bishop of Liuonia.
He had for his Successour Bertholde, a Monke of Saint Paule in the Citie of Breme, ^nd of the Cisteaux Order, who willingly imployed his paines, and laboured very ^ndustriously to winne the conuersion of those Idolaters. But perceiuing that milde ^nd gentle courses sorted to no effect; he preached for a Croissade throughout Germanie against them, and marched himselfe the foremost man in the Christian Ar^ie, carrying a Crosse very highly aduanced. But his Horse happening to be

vnbridled, ran with him mainely in among the enemies, who massacred and hewed him in numberlesse pieces. This vnfortunate death of his chanced in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred fourescore and seauenteene* but proued to be the occasion of a generall Croissade. Berthold had for Successour
Albert, a Monke of Breme likewise, to whom repaired two of his Kinsmen, Engilbert and Thierrie of Tyssench, with some other rich Merchants, men of good and sanctimonious life, who being Religiously moued and incited, to fight against the Infidels of L^uenia: renounced the world, with all his bewitching vanities, taking the Oath and Vowe of Obedience and Chastitie,The beginning and forming of the Order. in presence of the Bishop Albert. He prescribed them the Rule and Cloathing of the Cisteaux, a long white Cassocke, with a blacke ^^ood, hauing on the left side (neere to the shoulder) a Red Sword, with the Crosse Black. And directly on the breast two such Swords, made en Saultoir,Le^ Freres Porte-Glaiues with the points hanging downward, whereupon they were called: The Bretheren Sword Bearers.
This Order was approued and confirmed by Pope Innocent the third: And the profession of this Military and Monasticall Order, became fully Instituted in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred and three: the first Great Maister whereof was Vinno,The first Great Maister of the Order. who was trai^erously slaine by the Russians: He had for Successour Volqu^n, in whose time of Maistership, Albert caused a Towne to be builded, named Riga, and en^ire it round with Walles. It was seated on the Riuer of Duno, in the very same place, where the good Bishop Maynard had erected his little Oratorie.
After Bishop Albert succeeded Nicholas; and after Nicholas another Albert, who was made Archbishop of Riga the Episcopall See; which had formerly acknowledged for Metropolitane,The first Archbishop of Liuonia. the Archbishop of Lunde in Denmarke. By erection of Riga into an Archbishopricke; he had giuen him for Suffraganes and Diocess^nts, Curon, C^r^ and Ozi^n.
Velqu^, second Great Maister of Liuonia, being basely slaine by them of Lit^nia; the Bretheren of the said Order (being assembled together in their Generall Chapter* perceiued apparantly, that they were not in strength sufficiently seated and enabled, to resist against so many enemies, as lay heauily vpon them; as namely; those of L^^^nia, the Lithuanians, Moscouites and Russians. Wherefore they ioyned themselues with the Alma^gns or Teutones Knights, whose Rule and habite they tooke, knitting themselues into one Body with them,Two Orders of ^nighthood ioyned in one. in the yeare One thousand two hundred thirtie and Seauen. So that by the meanes of this Vnion, the foure Bishoprickes of Prusia acknowledged for Metropolitane, the Archbishop of Riga: And the vnitie was made in the time of the Great Maister of the Teutones Herman de Saltza, who had for his Lieutenant in Prusia
Herman de Valckien, made first Maister of Liuonia of the Order of the Teut^nes, in the same yeare before obserued. This Order was thus coniointly held by the Bretheren Teut^nes,The Duke of Moscouia p^^cha^^th a tr^ce vntill the time of the Great Maister Gaultier de Pletemberg, who by his valiant carriage brought all his neighbouring enemies to tearmes of dutie: B^ more especially the Duke of Moscouia, enforced to purchase a Truce for fiftie yeares.
In his time the Great Maister of Prusia, Albert, Marquesse of Brandenbourg, embracing no longer the Romish Religion, but cleauing to that of the Reformed Church, in the very same yeare before remembred: the said Gaultier seperated the Order of Liuenia, from obedience and subiection to Albert, Duke of Prusia, paying therefore a summe of money.
By vertue of this disiunction, Gaultier was Great Maister of Liuonia, and made Prince of the Empire possessing that charge, vntill the yeare One thousand fiue hundred thirty and fiue.(...) And others after him (as is noated by Functius) haue held the Principalitie, and title of Great Maister of Liuonia, with great and full power: vntill the time of the Great Maister William de Fustemberg, vanquished in Battaile, and detained prisoner by the Duke of Moscouia, who seruing his owne turne with partialities and deuisions, moued betweene the Principals of this Order, and the Archbishoppe of Riga William of Brandenbourg, Brother to the last Great

Maister of Prusia Albert: ouer-ran and rauaged (at his owne pleasure) all Liuonia and the neighbouring Prouinces, breaking (by this meanes) the Truce concluded with Gaultier of Pletemberg.
Finally, this Order of Liuonia (euen as the rest) hath bin forced to kisse the ground,Liuonia ouerrun by the Duke of Moscouia. vnder the last Great Maister thereof Gothard de Ketler, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred threescore and one, when he became one of the reform^d Church, ^eelding himselfe Subiect and Liedgeman to the Crowne of Poland, in the presence of King Sigismond Augustus; who made him Duke of Curlandia, and other Seigneuties beside, reunited to the Crowne of Poland, according as the rights were belonging to the Archbishop of Riga.
The auncient custome of the people of Liuonia (before they were illuminated with the Faith of Iesus Christ) was, to make merry banqueting among their dead,A custome among the Liuonians before they were Christians. and drinking as well to them, as the liuing, throwing Goblets full of their Breuuage vpon the Biere. Afterward, they would put them into the Pit or Graue, furnishing them with Meate and Drinke, and a Hatchet to make his Cabane withall: as also a piece of Coyne, for paying his passage into the other World, saying thus to him. G^^, get thee into the other World, where thou maist command ouer the Teutones, as they said to thee in this World here.


The Order of the Beare, called of Saint Gall in Switzerland or Swetia: Instituted by the Emperour Fredericke, second of the name:l'Ordre de l'Ours dict de Sa^^t Gal. en Suisse. In the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred and thirteene. CHAP. XIV.
THis Order was Instituted by the Emperour Fredericke, second of the name, and in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred and thirteene, when (moued by deuotion he came on Pilgrimage to the Abbey of Saint Gall. In fauour of whom, and of his Abbot, as also the Noble men of the Countrey; he gaue thereto great Priuiledges, in acknowledgement of what kindenesse he had receiued from them, in exalting him to the Empire, by deposition of the Emperour Otho, fourth of the name. Whereupon he Instituted The Order of the Beare, giuing vnto the chiefest Lords thereof, Collers and Chaines of Gold, at the end whereof hung the Figure of a Beare of Gold, enamelled with Blacke.
It was his will and meaning, that this Order should be conferred and giuen,This Order alwayes to be giuen by the Abbot of Saint Gall. by the succeeding Abbots of Saint Gall. According to the Golden Bull of this Institution, the Knights ought to meete yearely (except some lawfull and iust excuse were the hinderance) in the Abbey of Saint Gall, at the solemnitie vsed for this Apostle of the Germaines, which is alwayes celebrated the sixteenth day of October, vpon which day, such Knights as were thereto appointed, should receiue this Order by the hands of the Abbot; as we learne by Valafridus Strabo, in his Ecclesiasticall History, and from the Monke of Saint Gall. Hoc die mos est, vt nocte praecedenti, Vigilijs factu, gladijs super maius Altare positis, and benedictis, post Vigilias, and Balneas, noui Milites ab Abbate, militari Cingulo, and Vrsi Torque Aureo decorentur, post obsequium Monasterio nostro and Abbati praestitum.
This Order of the Beare, was Instituted in the honour and memorie of Saint Vrsus, of the Legion of the Thebes, Martyred before the Temple, or Tower of the Sunne

at Soleurre; where the body resteth, vnder the high Altar of the Collegiate Church, in the same place: built by the Queene of France Bertha, with the great foote, wife to our King Charlemaigne. The Epitaphe for the Martyre hath these words
Conditur hoc Tumulo Sanctus Thebaidus Vrsus.
The reason of this Orders cessation.And this Order held long time in full estimation, throughout all the Cantons of the Switzers, before they were deliuered from obedience to the House of Austria. But after their Common-wealth grew to be free, and the Castles and strong places of the Lords and Gentlemen of the Countrey, were raced and ruined: the memory thereof became altogether lost.
How they became so named.The Switzers (called by Caesar Heluetians) one of the most powerfull people among the Gaules; did take their name of Suits, one of the very least of the thirteene Cantons. And to vnderstand summarily, the estate and condition of this commonwealth (the onely warlike people of Christendome:) it is to be obserued, that they are deuided and distinguished in three seuerall parts.
The thirteene Cantons.The first is of thirteene Cantons allied together, which are numbred and counted in this manner.

1. Zurich.
2. Berne.
3. Lucerne.
4. Vri.
5. Smits.
6. Vnderuall.
7. Zug.
8. Glaris.
9. Basile.
10. Fribourg.
11. Soleurre,
12. Schaffaushe.
13. And Appentzell.

Allies and ConfederatesThe second is of the Allies and Confederates to these thirteene Cantons. First of all. The Abbot of Saint Gall, a Prince Soueraigne: And the Citie of Saint Gall: The Grisons; The Bishop of Syon, a Prince Soueraigne, Spirituall and Temporall, of the higher and lower Valois: Mulhouse and Schaffaushe-Bienne.
Bailiwickes.The last containeth the Bailiwicks gouerned, in common by the thirteene Cantons, to wit; Turgaw, Bada, Rhintall (that is to say Mountaines washed by the Rhine, and those Mountaines are called Rhegusces) Sargans, the Free Prouince, the Inhabitants of Lugano, Locarna, Mendrisa, and the Val. Madia. To which Bailiwickes are also annexed those of Bellizona, subiects to three small Cantons.
Cities and Townes.The Cities and Townes of these three parts, are Zurich, Berne, Lucerna, Zug, Basile, Fribourg, Soleurre, Schaffouse, Sainct Gall, Cours (chiefest of the leagued Grisons) Syon, chiefest of Valois: Rotuille, Mulhouse and Bienne; the rest are big Boroughes and great Villages.
Basile is not in Swetia or Switzerland, but a Quarter apart by it selfe, the Inhabitants whereof haue bin (from all times) called Rauraques.Scituation of the Allies and Confederatos Schaffouze is in Germanie beyond the Rhine. Those of Glarys and of Vri, doe hold of Italie, gently touching the Alpes and Grisons. In like manner the other Allies (Saint Gall excepted) are out of Swetia. For the Grisons, called Retians, and their chiefe Citie Curia Retorum; and those of Valois, sometimes called Veragri, and afterward Viberini, and Sedunenses, and their Capitall dwelling Sedunum Veragrorum, are within the Alpes. Rotuille is of Germanie; and Mulhouse a March of the Franche County. They of Rhintall and of Sargans, are Grisons: As Lugano, Locarna, Mendriza. Bellizona; and the Val-Madia, are Italians, both by language and Originall. The other Allies and Bailiwickes are in Swetia.
The auncient Annales of the Switzers doe declare, that our Kings Pepin and Charlemaigne,The Switzers naturally Soldiouts and Marualists. going to exterminate the Gothes and Lombardes of Italie; did make very beneficiall vse of the seruice of this people Mountainneeres, naturally Martiall and Warriours: gouerned and conducted by a French Lord, called Guy Marquesse, that is to say, Gouernour of the Frontiers of Italie. And that in consideration of their valiancie, Lewes the Debonnaire, Sonne to the said Charlemaigne, gaue them very great Priuiledges. But most certaine it is, and the Germaines themselues doe confesse as much, that our first Christian King Clouis, had all those Prouinces vnder his obedience. And as certaine also it is, that Charlemaigne gaue the Gouernment of

^he higher and lower Walais (in the yeare eight hundred and fiue) to Saint Theodore, ^he Bishop of Syon. But those Bishops (as all else vse to doe) following the times ^ourses, of plaine Gouernors, made themselues Lords Soueraignes.
Zurich, called in Latine Turegum, and Tigurum, was an Abbey of Sisters,Concerning Zuricks originall. founded and built by our King Lewes the Debonnaire, in fauour of his Daughter Luitguarda,


who was there the first Lady Abbesse. The same King gaue in gift to the said Ab^ey, and to the Patronesse thereof Saint Foelix and Saint Regul^,The Kings bounty to the Abbey. the Village of Vry (...) sometimes the dwelling of the Antuatiques of our Geographers) with her Churches ^ppurtenances and dependances, Buildings, Innes, free Children, Masles and Fe^ales, Lands tilled and vntilled, Glades, Woods, Meadowes, Ponds and Riuers, according as is obserued by Iosias Simlerus, in his Annales of Switzerland.
Saint Gall (in Latine Sanctus Gallus) a Gentleman of Scotland,A briefe History of Saint Gall. Scholler to Saint ^olombaine, the Tutelarie Patron of Swetia, after he had crossed France and Bourg^ngne, went into Germanie, and dwelt sometime neere to the Lake of Constance.

From whence, to shunne the worlds frequencie, he made his retreate to the Des^ Mountaines; where yet (to this present) is to be seene the Abbey, and the Citie* baptized with the name of this holy man, who departed out of this life into the other, in the yeare of Grace Sixe hundred and fiftie.
Ten yeares before, our King Dagobert, (the Restorer of Saint Denys in France) in fauour of Saint Gall, and those which liued with him, sequestred from the Worlds vanities: caused a Lodging or goodly Farme House to be builded, for their liuing and maintenance, which was called Abbatis cella, and afterward (by corruption) Appenzel, now at this present one of the Cantons of the Switzers. The like was done by Sigebert, and other Princes of France, that the Hermitage of Saint Gal became changed into a rich and opulent Abbey: round about which (from the very beginning) were builded small Houses and Cottages, and so (in time) these pettie additions grew to make vp a great peopled Citie.
After the death of Saint Gall, the Religious Bretheren of this Monasterie, requested Count Bertrand, Gouernour of the Countrey, to giue them an Abbot; who sent to them a good Priest, named Audomarus, that is Omer; or Aymar, brought vp in the Colledge of Coure,The first Abbot of Saint Gall. who was the first Abbot of that place, vnder the Rule and profession of Saint Benedict, quite giuing ouer the name of Hermites. So is it auouched by the same Simlerus; who yet setteth downe confusedly, the dates of the seuerall Foundations.
Soleurre, heretofore knowne vnder the names of Salaturum, Vicus Solodori, Sol^^rum,Soleur^e, of Solis Turris. that is to say, Solis Turris; being no other heretofore, then a Tower, on the top whereof was niched The Idole of the Sunne (figured and presented, as we haue already declared in our second Booke of the first Tome) which was long time worshipp^d by the Countrey Inhabitants: and yet is to be seene that auncient Tower, in the midst of the Towne of Soleurre. Queene Bertha of France (sirnamed with the great Foote) wife to Charlemaigne, caused to be built in the same place, the great Collegiall Church, and the Castell thereof: since when, the fielden and solitarie grounds thereabout, are encreased to the greatnesse as now we behold them. Which may serue to shew, that (from all Antiquitie) this Countrey was subiect, and depending on the Crowne of France.
The first beginning of oppressing the people.But vpon the declining of the House of Charlemaigne, Iames, Duke and Gouernor of the Countrey, being become absolute Maister and Commander in his Gouernement: vsed the Inhabitants thereof ouer rudely, which caused their recourse to the neighbouring Princes, and namely to the Count of Habspourge Rodolphe, Authour of the House of Austria; to whom the dwellers in Zurich, Vr^ and Switz (by the Geographers tearmed Antuatici, and those of the Countie of A^len, Antuates) gaue some yearely engagement, as to their Protectour and defender, making Alliance, offensiue and defensiue with him, for maintaining them in their freedome and libertie. By the example of these men, the Inhabitants of Basile and of Strasbourg did the very same, and Rodolphe being established by all the Gouernours; came twise or thrice thither yearely, and surueighed all the Gouernments to render Iustice, and to terminate causes of suite, intended by the Inhabitants and against another.
Albert of Austria, Sonne to the said Rodolphe, would needes make himselfe absolute Maister of these defended Lands, and for his more mildely attaining thereto, he became Lord, as well by exchange and acquisition, as otherwise, of the Seigneuries of Glarys, Lucerne, Switz and of Vnderuald, of Murbach, the Hermitage, Interlach, Dizents and of other places, resoluing to haue all the rest by force.
He established then for Gouernour at Swits and Vri, a Knight named Grisler: and at Vnderuald another, called Pelerin Landberg, both of them remaining resident in their Gouernements, with good and strong Garrisons. Landberg sent one of his Seruants, to bring away a Yoake of Oxen, from one of the richest men of Vaderuald, called Henry de Melchtall; whose Sonne, named Arnoul (offended at the fellowes saucie behauiour) made him sure enough from any such further presumption, and sought for safety among his friends. Thorow want of answering the matter in the Court of Iustice, Landberg possessed himselfe of the Fathers person: whose

^yes he caused be pluckt out of his head, and made cofiscation of all his ^oods.
The Lieutenant or Deputie to the same Gouernour, enflamed with the beauty ^nd good graces of the wife to an Inhabitant of Alzelen, named Conrade de Bom^^rthen, and hauing found her about some Houswifely businesse in the field: commanded her to prepare a Bathe for him, which she did. And pr^ssing her earnestly, ^o come into the Bathe to him; the modest Woman shifted for her honours ^afetie, and m^t her Husband returning from the Forrest; who slew the Lieutenant with his Hatchet, iustly thereby chastising his lasciuious incontinencie.
As for the Gouernour Grisler, to cut off all duetie from the Prince; before his ^wne Castell, called Altorffe, the place of his daily abiding,An old Hat to (...) reuerence don^ to it. he caused to be erected Pole, and on the top thereof placed one of his oldest Hats: whereto he commanded that all passengers should performe the like reuerence as if himselfe had bin there ^n person, vpon cruell penalties and impositions, for such as durst denie his goodly ^ppointment.
And the same Gouernour making his iourney to Swits, saw there a House very ^^irely built, belonging to a Gentleman of worth, named Warnhei^ ^touffacher, one of ^he wealthiest men in Swits: which he threatned to pull downe and vtterly deface, because it had bin built without his permission.
At Vri dwelt a Gentleman, named William Tell,An Imposition f^r no^ (...) who passing by the Gouernours Hat on the Pale; made no great account of yeelding any reuerence to it. He was accused before the Gouernour, who knowing, that this Gentleman was one of the ve^y best Archers of the Countrey: sent for one of the yongest Sonnes of the Gentleman, that was about fiue yeares old (very dearely affected of his Father) and commanding him to be fast bound to a Tree, placed an Apple on his bare head, which he charged the Father (standing on an indifferent distance off) to cleaue in twaine with an Arrow, or otherwise to haue his head smitten off. The Father refused to draw his Bowe, offering much rather his head to the Gouernour, who with cruell threatnings enforced him thereto: whereupon, his hand being directed (doubt^esse) by power of the Omnipotent; he cleft the Apple,The (...) in England.) and touched not one haue of the Childes head, to the great contentment of all the beholders.
But the Gouernour hauing espied another Arrow, taken forth of the Quiuer, and hidden behinde vnder Tell^s doublet, pressed him very hardly to tell him, what he meant to doe with that other Arrow, whereto he boldly replyed. I meant to haue ^ierced thy heart with this Shaft, if I had wounded my Sonne with the other. Hereupon, the Gouernour caused him instantly to be fast bound and manacled, and put into a Barke or Boate, for passage ouer the Lake of Vri, and confining him a perpetuall prisoner in the Castle of Cusnach: The Gouernour with his Officers, and the manacled prisoner, being in the midst of the Lake: suddenly arose such a violent tempest, as the Gouernours people (being vtterly vnable to gouerne the Barke) and in despaire of their liues, were enforced to entreate Tel very kindely, for bringing them safely to shore by his helpe.
Tel hauing his hands at liberty, tooke charge of the Rudder, shaping his course directly towards Switz, and saued the Barke from wracking,Where hea^en (...) tyranny cannot ^^^ine. by conducting it wisely vnder the Lee, neere to the shore. He being well acquainted with all the reaches of the Lake, and hauing possession of his Bow and Quiuer of Arrowes; suddenly leapt out of the Barke vpon the side of a Rocke, which (to this day) is called The Rocke of Tell, setting his feete and strength so mainely against the Barke, that the rough windes carryed it againe into the midst of the Lake. But as all extremities must haue an ending at last, so the Gouernour and his followers got safely to the land, somewhat neere to the place where Tell had escaped from them, and couertly still watched what successe would betide them. Tell knowing all the tracks and passages which the Gouernor must take for bringing him to Cusnach, had ambushed himselfe in a place very conuenient, where directing his aime at the cruell Gouernor, he sent an Arrow from his Bow with such successe,The ty^^nnous Gouer^our slaine by Tel. that there immediately he fell downe dead; whence escaping by vnfrequentednookes and passages to Switz, he went to the abiding of Garnier Stouffacher, who likewise running the same

perill of life, was not a little ioyfull, to meete with so honest a companion in misery. There comforting and encouraging one another, they began to consider with themselues, how to get free from the insolence and oppression of these Austrian Gouernours: calling into their friendly association Arnoul de Meschtall, Sonne to Henry de Meschtall, who had his eyes pluckt out by the Gouernour.
The three Authours of the Switzers liberty.
 These three men, sending vp their solemne Vowes with sighes to Heauen, and swearing Fai^^ mutually each to other* were the first Authors of the Switzers freedome and libertie; who changing their auncient appellation of Heluetians, tooke na^^ of the Canton of Swits, in memorie of Garnier Stouffacher, the first mouer of so faire a busines. This first Alliance of the three Cantons Vry, Switz and Vndernald, was sworn at a place called Grutly, neere to Vry, the seauenteenth day of October, the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred and seauen.
Possession taken of the Gouernors CastlesIt began to be put in execution in the Moneth of Ianuary following, when the men of Vnderuald possessed themselues of the strong Fortresses of Sarne and Rotzberg: by making an outward shew of bringing New yeares gifts (the first day of that Moneth) to the Gouernours of them, according to the auncient custome at al times vsed among the Gaules. Those two Fortresses or Castles were raced downe to the ground, and the very same day Stouffacher of Switz did the like to that of Louerts, built by the Lake, and the other at Vri, erected by Grisler, all laid leuell with the ground.
Remembrance of this freedome kept to ^^tute p^^ter^ty.To continue (for euer) to posterity, the memory of so famous an enterprise, and because on the morrow after this expedition in common, the Inhabitants of the three Townes, Vry, Vnderuald and Switz made an Alliance together for ten yeares, sworn and protested by the most solemne ceremonies and oathes that could be imagined) there were Anticke Medales made for the three Cantons, whereon, vpon the one side were stamped and figured the three Authors of the Switzers liberty, truely

shaped according to life, hauing their hands plighted and ioyned together, in signe of Alliance, both with their names and the Cantons also as a Legend. And on the other side, as a noate of confederacy, were two hands vnited and closed together, and for the speaking part of this deuise, these words
Vnio Inseperabilis.
In this manner among the Romaines, were two right hands ioyned together, as be^ng the marke and Symbole of vnion and Alliance.The noate of vnitie and Alliance.
Iungantur in foedera Dextrae.
And by denying or refusing the right hand to any one, was a signe of ill will, ha^red and contempt.

.. .. .. .. .. .. .. Cur Dextrae iungere Dextram
Non datur? --

In the first and fourth Bookes of the Aeneidos.

Nec te noster Amor, nec te data Dextera quondam,
Nec moritura tene^ crudeli funere Dido.

The reproach of an inconstant and faithlesse louer. And the Romaines likewise ^ad this custome, to offer the right hand at meeting with any one;A custome obserued among the Romaines. as a testimonie of ^ood will, and true friendship without dissembling.
The Emperours, when they tooke the Oath of Allegeance of the Romaine Legi^ns, they began the Ceremonie with the Sacrifice of Beasts, whereon the Captaines ^nd chiefe Commanders laid their right hands, to the end of binding them, to keepe ^he Oathe so solemnely protested vpon the hallowed Offrings and Oblations. Which ^as begun in the time of Numa Pompilius, who ordained, that those hands which were sacrificed to Faith, should be folded or enueloped to the fingers ends. And the ^ght hand was held as the Symbole of Faith, as the left was of Iustice, as well among ^he Aegyptians as Persians, and people of the East.
The Scythians, in their Swearing, vsed a Vowe and a Sword,Custome among the S^ythians. as noates of Life and Death, contracting Alliances and confederacies, by conioyning their right hands, which they drew thorow Bloud; dipping therein a flake of Wooll, wherewith they ^athed seauen Stones, vsing inuocations vpon Oratall and Alilat, whom they ac^ounted as their Tutelarie Gods; taking them for witnesses of their Alliances, and as ^^uere Reuengers: if they failed and infringed.
Among the Medes and Persians, and (to be briefe) thorow out the East parts,Concerning the Persians and Me^es. they ^ontracted Alliances and Confederacies, by vniting and ioyning one right hand in ^nother. Iosephus in his Iewish Antiquities; Xenophon and Cornelius Tacitus, in the ^eauenth Booke of his Annales, speaking of King A King of A^menia. Tiridates (who) Viso Corbulone prior ^quo desilijt, nec non contatus Corbulo, sed pedes vterque Dexteras Miscuere.
The Gaules our Ancestors, contracting Alliance, would strip their right hand and ^rme starke naked. Their very greatest enemy Caesar, in his seauenth Booke saith. Hae^ui visi ab latere Nostris aperto, ij similitudine Armorum vehementer nostros perterrue^nt, ac tamet si Dextris Exertis animaduertebantur, Quod apud eos Insigne Pacis esse, Consuetum, tamen id ipsum, sui fallendi causa, Militesab Hostibus factum exist imabant. A passage confirmed by the Noble Writer Tacitus, speaking of them of Langres, in ^he first Booke of his Histories. Miserat Ciuitas Lingonum, Vetere Instituto dona Le^^nibus Dexteras Hospitij Insigne. And it was from thence, that the Romaine Legi^ns had borrowed their manner of marking and stamping Pieces of Money, which ^arried for Deuise Two right Hands ioyned together, and gaue them as New yeares-gifts one to another, when they renewed the Militarie Oath.
Moreouer the same Gaules that peopled Greece, left there the print of this ancient Custome. For the Greekes contracting confederacie with their enemies,The Gaules peopled Greece gaue them ^heir right arme and hand stript naked. And so did they of Lacedemon towards the Athenians, as it is obserued by Thucidides, in the fourth Booke of his Grecian Hi^torie. And the Gaules (our Auncestours) neuer fought with their enemies; but with the right hand and right arme starke naked, to shew their valiancie: And that with the same hand, which they vsed in actions of Armes, without any dread of woun^ing; they offered franckly and freely to their enemies, Alliance and Peace nakedly,

without any dissembling. And their whole intent was, to vse as much courtesie to such as they would make friendly proofe of; as rigour or extremity, to them that they did shun and auoide.
Parcere Subiectis, and debellare Superbos.
The Hebrewes contracting Alliances, Confederacies and Couenants with their Friends:Custome among the Hebewes. the Act and Instrument of this Alliance, was called Berith, deriued of the word Barath, which signifieth Deuided and Seperated in twaine. Because to answere this agreement, the parties thus contracting; offered certaine creatures, and deuided them equally in pieces, to make two distinct parts of them; leauing in the midst betweene them, a way or path, whereby the parties might passe to and fro. Ceremonies taken from the fifteenth Chapter of Genesis, where God making an eterna^ League with his Seruant Abraham; eleauen beasts were offered and deuided in two parts, a path being betweene them.
Applica coram me tres Vitulos, and tres Capras, and tres Arietes, and Turturem, and Fili^ Columbae. Abraham obtulit coram eo omnia haec, and diuisit ea aequaliter. Et posuit diuisiones vnam quamque e regione alterius. Aues vero non diuisit: Et descenderunt Aues super partes diuisas, abegitque eas Abraham. Et factum est cum Sol occumberet, somnu^ oppressit Abraham, facta est caligo, and ecce Clibanus Fumans, Et Lampas Ignis qua Transibat per Diuisiones Illas: In Die Illa Ferijt Dominus Foedus cum Abraham.
Bring before me an Heifer of three yeares old, and a shee-Goate of three yeares old, and a Ramme of three yeares old, and a Turtle Doue, and a yong Pigeon. And he tooke vnto him all these, and deuided them in the middest, and laied each piece one against another, but the Birds deuided not he. And when the Foules came downe vpon the carkeises; Abraham droue them away. And when the Sunne was going downe, a deepe sleepe fell vpon Abraham and loe an horror of great darkenesse fell vpon him. And behold a smoking Furnace, and a burning Lampe that passed betweene those pieces. In the same day the Lord made a Couenant with Abraham.
The Prophet Ieremie, in his foure and thirtieth Chapter, speaking in the name of God, saith. Dabo viros qui praeuaricantur foedus meum, and non obseruauerunt verba foederis quibus assensi sunt in conspectu meo, Vitulum quem conciderunt in duas partes, and transierunt inter diuisiones eius. Principes Iuda, and Principes Hierusalem, Eunuchi, and Sacerdotes, and omnis Populus Terrae, Qui transierunt inter Diuisiones eius, etc.
I will giue the men that haue transgressed my couenant, which haue not performed the words of the couenant, which they had made before me, when they cut the Calfe in twaine, and passed betweene the parts thereof. The Princes of Iudah, and the Princes of Ierusalem, the Eunuches and the Priests, and all the people of the Land, which passed betweene the parts of the Calfe, etc.
When the Hebrew Kings would make a Muster or meeting of their People, for Marching vnanimately in Battaile against their enemies;A custome among the Hebrew Kings. they made a deuision of certaine creatures, as was put in practise by Saul, as we reade in the first Booke of the Kings, the eleauenth Chapter. When he would goe to fight against Naash, King of the Ammonites: He tooke a yoake of Oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them thorow out all the coasts of Israel.
Another custome among the Scythians.Among the Scythians the manner was (into what parts soeuer they were retreated) wholly common, and like to that of the Iewes. Because when they sought to contract confederacie with their neighbours; they would kill an Oxe or a Bull, taking and fleying off the skinne, which they cut into thongs and slips, distributing them to such as entred Alliance with them; as Lucian hath noated in his Toxarus, or Dialogue of Friendship. Which maketh vs to iudge (and vpon some good reason) that this Custome came from the Auncient Gaules, who vsed it in the same manner; and so saith the same Lucian, in describing our Gaulish Hercules.
But concerning those Alliances, which the Hebrews contracted with their enemies, they carried themselues according to the quality of the persons. When the Patriarch Abraham gaue assurance to the King of Sodome;The Hebrewes contracting Alliance with their enemies. for passing thorow his Land, without doing him any iniurie; he did not then giue the right hand into his, being quite contrary to him in manners and beliefe. But he lifted his right hand vp to Heauen, a^

calling to his witnesse the God of truth, in Genesis the foureteenth Chapter. Leuo ego ^manum meam ad Dominum Deum Excelsum, Possessorem Coeli, and Terrae, quod a filo sub^egminis, vsque ad corrigiam caligae non accipiam de omnibus quae tua sunt, etc. I haue lift vp my hand vnto the Lord, the most high God, the Possessour of Heauen and Earth; That I will not take from a thred, euen to a shooe lachet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, etc.
Inferiour persons, seeking the good will and friendship of the worlds Grands,A custome among the meaner people to their superiors ^issed their right hand, and laid it on the Thigh of such as they sued vnto, swearing vassailage and fidelitie. Seruants sware and promised something to their Maisters, kindely kissing the right hand (yet not laying it on the Thigh) but lower, in signe of submission and humilitie. In Genesis the foure and twentieth Chapter, the Patri^rch Abraham, speaking to the most auncient and faithfull of his Seruants, said. Pone manum tuam subter femur meum, vt adiurem te per Dominum Deum Coeli, and Terrae, vt ^on accipias Vxorem Filio meo de filiabus Chananaeorum inter quos habito. Put I pray thee, ^hy hand vnder my thigh: And I will make thee sweare by the Lord the God of Heauen, and the God of Earth; that thou shalt not take a Wife vnto my Sonne, of the Daughters of the Canaanites, amongst whom I dwell. Which the Seruant hauing promised to doe, did ^ut his hand vnder the Thigh of his Maister. Posuit Seruus manum suam (in Scrip^ure this is alwayes vnderstood of the right hand, and the same Thigh) sub femore A^rahae Domini sui, and iurauit illi super sermone hoc. And the Seruant put his hand vnder the Thigh of Abraham his Maister, and sware to him concerning that matter.
Among the Greekes and Romaines was no such submission made,Courtesie of embracing the Knee neither aboue or ^eneath the Thigh; but embracing the Knee: As we reade in an infinitie of passages ^n Homer, and in Virgils Aeneidos the third Booke.

Dixerat, and Genua amplexus, Genibusque volutans
Haerebat.

In the Antiquarie Plautus. Milite glorioso.

Si pol me ducere volet Vxorem, Genua amplectar
Atque obsecrabo aliquo modo.

Returning now againe to the Alliance of the Switzers, it appeareth; that the expulsion of their Gouernours,The originall of the Switzers liberty. was the onely originall and beginning of their libertie, and of the hatred which they conceiued against the House of Austria. The Emperour Albert, Sonne to Rodolphe, was slaine in the pursuite of this quarrell. Leopold his Sonne, Duke of Austria, in the same manner terminated the honour of his conquests, by being ouerthrowne in a fought Battaile at Morgarten, the sixteene day of Nouember, An. One thousand three hundred and fifteene. And so (very aptly) ^peaketh our French Salust Phillip de Commines. That God hath giuen to euery one his opposite or contrary, to restraine him as with a Bridle, and serue as a Spur in his sides: in his hundred and eight Chapter.

De tout temps la Maison d'Austriche, and celle de Bauieres sont contraires. Celle d'Austriche en particulier a les Suysses. Et ne fut le commencement de leur diuision qu'vn Vil^age appelle SVITS qui ne scauroit faire Six Cents Hommes, dont les autres portent le Nom, qui se sont tant multipliez, que Deux des meilleures Villes qu'eut la Maison d'Austriche en sont, comme Zurich, and Fribourg, and ont gaigne de grandes Batailles, esquelles ils ^nt tue des Ducs d'Austriche.

At all times the House of Austria and that of Bauaria are contraries.Austria alwaies contrary to the Switzers. That of Austria in perticuler to the Switzers. And there was no other beginning of their deuision, but about a Village called Switz, which could not make sixe hundred men, whereof the rest beare the ^ame: who are so greatly multiplied, as two of the best Townes (belonging to the House of Austria) haue in them, as Zurich and Fribourg, and haue won great Battailes, wherein Dukes of Austria haue bin slaine.
The first of them that was seene in France, was at that time,At what time the Switzers were first seen in France. when Charles the last Duke of Bourgongne (being then Count of Charolois) ioyned himselfe with Monsieur Charles of France, and other French Princes and great Lords, armed and clouded with the faire seeming Cloake, of Louers of the weale publique, for making warre against King Lewes the eleauenth, his Liedge Lord. With this Count of Charolois, Chiefe in the faction of the reuolted Princes, was Iohn, Duke of Calabria, onely Son

to the good King Rene of Sicilie, who brought nine hundred Horse, and some foote Souldiours, among whom were fiue hundred Switzers; qui furent les Fremiers q^ veid en ce Royaume, ce dit Commines, and ont este ceux qui ont donne le bruit a ceux qui sont venus depuis: Car ils se gouuernerent tres-vaillamment en-tous les lieux, on il^ se trouuerent. Who were the first (saith Commines) that euer had bin seene in this Kingdome, and were those that gaue fame to such as came afterward: For they Gouerned themselues most valiantly, in all such places as they came to. And this was the reason, why (after that time) the iudicious King Lewes the eleauenth, admiring their valiancy, bare affection to them. And the same Charles of Bourgongne, hauing, to small purpose, awaked this warlike Nation (with whom, by reason of the Countries pouerty wherein they dwelt, nothing was to be had but blowes and wounds) lost there hi^ Riches, men and life.
The first allia^ce of the French with the Switzers.Neuerthelesse, the first of our Kings, that made league or Alliance with them, was Charles the seauenth, and it beareth date the fourth day of Aprill, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred fifty and three: made with the Communalties of Zurich, Berne, Soleurre, Lucerne, Vri, Switz, Vnderuald, Zug and Glarys.
That of Lewes the eleauenth, his Sonne and Successour, and with the same Cantons; was made in Abbeuille, the seauen and twentieth day of Nouember, One thousand foure hundred threescore and three, and the third of his Reigne. Which Alliance was renewed at Plessis lez Tours, the three and twentieth day of September, An. One thousand foure hundred threescore and ten: made perticularly against the last Duke of Bourgongne Charles, their common hated enemie.
Another Conuention and League offensiue, was made by the same King and Cantons, against the said Duke of Bourgongne (proclaimed guilty of high Treason) paying a yearely Pension of twenty thousand pounds Tournois,An annuall pension paid to the Switzers by the French. and paiable at foure tearmes in the Citie of Lyons. Conditionally, that the said King Lewes might at all times, when himselfe thought good, leuey sixe thousand Switzers, to March with him to and against all: the holy Seate, the Emperour, and the confederated Allies of those Cantons excepted. And in this Leuey, euery Switzer was to be wadged with foure Florins and an halfe, each Moneth.
This declaration beareth date the sixe and twentieth day of October, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred threescore and foureteene. Augmented with another more perticuler, which importeth* That the Agent and Consuls of Berne, in name of the said Cantons, stand obliged to certifie his Maiestie with time and place, for the succour of forces against the said Duke of Bourgongne, or others whom he would warre on. And when his Maiestie shall be diuerted or impeached elsewhere, without power of succour of men; that then in this case, he shall be bound to furnish them, with twenty thousand Florins du Rhin* quarterly in the Citie of Lyons, beside the former Pension agreed on, of twenty thousand Pounds Tournois euery yeare.
The often renewing of the Confedera^esKing Charles the eight, his Sonne and Successour, renewed this Alliance, with the same couenants and conditions before expressed, according to the declaration of the said Cantons, dated the fourth of August, One thousand foure hundred fourescore and foure, confirmed by his Maiestie at Vienna in Daulphine, the foure and twentieth day of Nouember the yeare following. He made beneficiall vse of them, in his warre with Bretaigne; And afterward in his iourney to and from Italie, namely on the day at Fornoue, the very strongest part of the van^guard for the King, consisting but of Three hundred and fiftie Horse, and three thousand Switzers, who were all the Hope of the Hoast, so saith Phillip de Commines.
There was a continuation of the said Confederacie, betweene his Maiestie and the Cantons of Zurick,Continuation of this League from time to time. Berne, Vri, Vnderuald, Zug, Glarys, Fribourg and Sole^rre; Giuen at Lyons the eight day of February One thousand foure hundred and fifteene: confirmed by an other of the same afterward, dated on the day and feast of all Saints, or else three Moneths before.
King Lewes the twelfth, Father of his people, renewed this League, sworne for ten yeares. He made good vse of the Cantons leagued seruice, for recouering his Dukedome of Millaine, after which, Pope Iulius the second (a Prince more Marshall)

and Warrelike, then Religious or Deuout) capitall enemy to the French:A Souldierlike Pope. made a breach of this vnion (by meanes of the Cardinall Bishop of Syon) to maintaine the Sforzaes, who vsu^ped the Estate of Millaine against the House of Orleans, and expelled the French out of Italie. This League of the Pope with the Switzers, was made by the said Cardinall, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and ^enne.
Vnder King Frances the first, The Father of Learning and good Letters, the Switzers renewed the auncient Alliance, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and sixteen, which continued during his Maiesties life time, and a yeare after. All ^he Cantons of the Switzers (Zurich excepted) entred into this League; whereof ^ere you may reade the principall Articles, according as they are set downe in ^he Record.




A Breuiate out of the Record, of the chiefe Articles of the League betweene King Frances the first, and Cantons of the Switzers.
QVe toutes inimitiez, dissentions, guerres, and differends generaux demeureroient esteints and assoppis, and quant aux particuliers quin ont ^ten de commun auecques les affaires ^e la Guerre, qu'ils seroient composez and terminez a l'amiable par Gens a ce deputez par sa Maieste Tres Chrestienne, and des Confederez.
Que t^us Prisonniers, en quelque lieu qu'ils sussent decenus, seroient mis promptement en ^ute Liberte, sans payer aucune ranson.
Que si quelques Gendarmes Suysses ont procez contre sa Maieste, non a cause de Guerre, ^urront pour suiure, and plaider contre icelle pour en auoir raison.
Que ceux qui apres l'Alliance renouuellee auec le f^u Roy LOVIS XII. and les Cantons ^nt alliez auec ^ux, and ont este receuz au nombre de leurs Bourgeois, seront compris en ce Traicte pour ^ouir du benefice d'iceluy, exceptez ceux qui sont hors des limites de Suysses, ne ^arlent point Alemand, and ne sont sujects ausdits Cantons.
Que tous les Priuileges, Franchises, and Libertez octroyez par les Roys de France ses Pre^ecesseurs aux Marchands and Sujects de Suysse demeureront confirmez.
A fin que les Suysses se sentent de la B^en-veillance, and Liberalite du Roy, qu'il leur fera ^eliurer vne Somme d'Argent raisonnable de Pension pour les frais du Siege de Dijon, and ^oyage d'Italie.
A fin que la Paix soit fermement entretenue de part and d'autre, and que l'Amitie encom^encee demeure perpetuelle, s'il s'esmeut different, l'vn ny l'autre Party ne prendra les Armes, a fin de pour su^ure son Droict par icelles; ains suiuant le Formulaire sus-mentionne, (...) demandera raison en Iustice.
Les vns ne donneront Passage ne Logis aux Ennemis des autres, and ne souffriront que ^urs Suiects aillent en Guerre pour les Princes, and Republiques Ennemies de France, ou de Sursse. Que ceux qui feront le contraire seront r'appellez au Pais, and chastiez selon leurs Demerites.
Tous Marchands, Pelerins, and Suiects Francois, and Suysses pourront traffiquer, voyager, ^ller, and venir librement en France, and en Suysse, sans estre outragez, ny greuez de nou^eaux subsides, and peages.
Que le Roy donnera tous les Ans a chaque Canton la Somme de Deux Mille Liures Tour^s: autant aux Valaisans; and
Aux Gris^ns ce que leur auoit accorde le Roy LOVIS XII. auec la somme de Vingt Mille Liures Tournois.
A l'Abbe de Sainct Gal, ses Suiects, and a ceux de Tokkembourg la somme de six Cents Liures Tournois.
Ala Ville de Sainct Gal Quatre Cents.
A Mulhouse quatre Cents.
A ceuz de la Comte de Gruyere six Cents Liures Tournois.
Que les Anciens Priuileges, dont les Habitans de Bellizone, Lugano, Lucarne, and de la Val. Madie auoient iouy iusques alors au Duche de Milan, seroient continuez and confirmez de nouueau.
Que le Roy donne le choix aux Suysses de declarer dans vn an, s'ils aiment mie^x ^nir les Pais and Chasteaux de Lugano, Locarne, and le Val-Madie, ou bien les l^y quitter (...) la somme de Trente Mille Escus d'Or Sol. Et s'ils prennent ladite somme, les Gris^^^, ceux de la Val-Teline, and de la Comte de Clauenne auront leur part a ceste somme, aut (...) que l vn desdicts Cantons. Et
Moyennant ce, bonne Paix, Alliance, and Amitie demeurera perpetuelle and inniolable entre le Royaume de France, and les Cantons. Demeureront compris en icelle de la part de se Maieste Tres-Chrestienne, nostre Sainct Pere le Pape Leon Dixiesme, and le Sainct Siege, and l'Empire Romain, les Roys d'Espagne, d'Angleterre, d'Escosse, de Nauarre, and de Dannemark les Ducs de Lorraine, de Sauoye, and de Gueldres, le Duc, and Republique de Venise, Laure^^ de Medicis, la Maison de Medicis, and la Republique de Florence, l'Euesque du Liege, and to^^ autres ses Alliez, and Confederez. Et de la part des Cantons, le Pape Leon, le Sainct Siege, l'Empire, l'Empereur, and la Maison d'Austriche, les Ducs de Sauoye, and de Vuittemberg, la Famille and Laurens de Medicis, la Republique de Florence, le Mareschal de Bourgongne, les Anciennes Alliances, and tous leurs Alliez, and Combourgeois. Ce fut faict, iure, and accorde en la Ville de Fribourg le Iour Sainct Andre au Mois de Nouembre, Mille Cinq Cents and Seize.
THat all enmities, dissentions, Warres and differences generally, shall remaine quenched and smothered: but concerning them in perticuler, which haue nothing in comm^^ with the affaires of Warre; they shall bee compounded and termined loouingly, by persons thereto appointed by his Moste Christian Maiestie, and likewise the Confederates.
That all Prisoners, in what place soeuer they are kept or detained; shall speedily be set at libertie, without paying any ransome.
That if any one bearing Armes, haue processe or suite against his Maiestie, not for cause of Warre: he may follow it, and plead against him, to be righted.
That such as, after the League renewed with the late King Lewes the Twelfth, and the Cantons allied with them and haue bin receiued into number of their Bourgesses: shall be comprehended within this Treatie, to enioy the benefit thereof. Only such excepted, as are without the limits of the Switzers, not speaking the Germaine language, and are not subiects to the Cantons.
That all Priueledges, Franchises and Liberties, graunted by the Kings of France and their Predecessours, to Merchantes and Subiects of the Switzers, shall remaine fully confirmed.
To the end that the Switzers, may tast the fauour and liberality of the King: he shall cause to be deliuered them a reasonable Summe of money, as Pension for the charges at the Siedge of Dijon, and voyage of Italie.
To the end, that Peace may firmely be maintained on either parte, and the Friendship begun may continue perpetually; if any difference chaunce to be mooued on either side: neither the one or other shall take Armes, as seeking to haue any right thereby: but following the example formerly mentioned, shall require right by Iustice.
No one shall graunt passage or lodging to the others enemy, nor suffer their Subiects to goe in Warre, for Princes or Common-Weales, that are enemies to France or the Switzers. But such as shall doe the contrary, must be called home to the Countrey, and punished according to their deserts.
All Merchants, Pilgrimes and Subiects French and Switzers, may voyage, traffick, goe and come freely, both in France and Switzerland: without any outrage, or greuance by any new imposed subsidies or toules.
That the King shall giue yearely to each Canton, the summe of Two Thousand Poundes Tournois: As much to the Valasians, And
To the Grisons, that which was graunted by King Lewes the Twelfth, with the summe of Twenty Thousand Poundes Tournois.
To the Abbot of Saint Gall, his Subiects, and to them of Tokkembourg, the summe of Sixe Hundred Poundes Tournois.
To the Towne of Saint Gall Foure Hundred.
To Mulhouse Foure Hundred.
To them of the Countrey of Gruyere Sixe Hundred Poundes Tournis.
That the Auncient Priueledges, which the Inhabitants of Bellizona, Lugano, Locarna, and the Val-Madia had enioyed till then in the Dukedome of Millayne, should be continued and newly confirmed: to publish within a yeares space.
The King is to giue the choyce to the Switzers, whether they had rather keepe the Countrey and Castelles of Lugano, Locarna and the Val-Madia: or else release them to him for the summe of Thirty Thousand Crownes of Golde of the Sunne. And if they doe accept the said summe; the Grisons, those of the Vale-Telina, and of the Countie of Clauenna, are to haue their shares in this summe, as much as one of the Cantons. And
In doing this, good peace, Alliance and Amitie shall continue perpetuall and inuiolable, betweene the Kingdome of France and the Cantons. Therein shall remaine comprehended, on the part of his Moste-Christian Maiestie; Our Holy Father Pope Leo the Tenth; the Holy Seate, and the Romaine Empire; the Kings of Spayne, England, Scotland, Nauarre, and of Denmarke; the Dukes of Lorraine, Sauoye and of Gueldres; the Duke and Common-wealth of Venice, Laurens de Medicis, the House of Medicis, and the Common-wealth of Florence; the Bishop of Liege, and all other his Allies and Confederates. And on the part of the Cantons, Pope Leo; the Holy Seate; the Empire, Emperour and the House of Austria; the Dukes of Sauoye and of Wittemberg; the Familie and Laurens de Medicis; the Common-wealth of Florence; the Marshall of Bourgongne; the Auncient Alliances, with all their Allies and Fellow Bourgesses. This was agreed and sworne in the Towne of Fribourg, on Saint Andrewes day in the Moneth of Nouember, One Thousand, Fiue Hundred and Sixteene.
This Alliance was renewed by the same King Frances, in the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred twenty and one, by a Second agreement passed at Lucerne: wherby all the Cantons (Zurich excepted) and all their Confederates, were vnited with his Maiestie, and concluded.
Que si quelqu'vn, tel qu'il soit, fait la Guerre dans le Royaume de France, Duche de Milan, ou autre Pais appartenant a la C^ronne de France deca and dela les Monts, sa Maieste pourra faire vne leuee de Suysses, selon, and quand bon luy semblera, a scauoir Six Mille pour le moins, and Seize Mille pour le plus, si non que les Seigneurs des Ligues le permettent
Pourra choisir de tous les Cantons, and Confederez tels Colonels, and Capitaines que bon luy semblera, pourueu qu'ils soient gens de bonne renommee.
Les Seigneurs des Ligues ne donneront aucun empeschement ausdits Colonels, Capitaines, and Soldats; ne dilayeront and ne mettront rien en aduant pour retarder leur acheminement, ains dedans Dix Iours apres la premiere iournee que le Roy aura requis secours, leur sera permis de marcher.
Demeureront au seruice du Roy, iusques a la fin de la Guerre, si bon luy semble, sans qu'ils puissent estre r' appellez par leurs Seigneurs. Le Roy aussi leur payera a tous les gages accaustumez. Et neantmoins cas aduenant que la Guerre fust en Suysse, and que pour ceste raison les Cantons ne peussent secourir le Roy, en ce cas ils seront quittes de leur promesse, and pourront soudainement contremander leurs gens, ausquels le Roy sera tenu donner conge.
Si le Roy veut faire Guerre a ses Ennemis, il pourra faire la mesme leuce de Six Mille Suysses pour le moins, and de Seize Mille pour le plus, choisissant des Colonels, and Capitaines gens de bien and de bonne renommee, qui seront Suysses, ou de leurs Alliez.
Le Roy ne pourra partir l' Armee des Suysses, ne la mettre par trouppes deuisees en Garuison en diuersees places, and ne s'en seruira sur Mer, ains sur Terre.
Pour la Solde de la Gendarmerie est accorde, que le Roy payera par Mois a chaque Soldat Saysse Quatre Florins and demy du Rhin. Que leurs gages commenceront au Iour qu'ils sortiront de leurs Maisons, and alors leur sera deu la paye de Trois Mois, encores que le Roy ne se serue si longuemente d'eux, and auant que sortir du Pais de Suysse, ils toucheront la Paye du Premier Mois, and le reste pour les Deux autres Mois, en lieux propres, selon qu'ils en aur^nt besoin.
Si apres les Trois Mois passez le Roy veut retenir les Suysses, il leur payera la mesme Solde tous les Mois, iusques au temps qu'ils se pourront commodeement retirer en leurs Maisons.
Les Colonels, Capitaines, Enseignes, Ambassadeurs, and autres ayants charge es trouppes, seront payez en la maniere accoustumee, and selon que les Predecesseurs Roys de France ont faict parcy-deuant.
Si quelqu'vn faict la Guerre aux Suysses, le Roy sera tenu de les secourir a ses despe^^, and leur enuoyer Deux Cents Hommes d'Armes, and Douze pieces d'Artillerie auec leur eq^ipage, affuts, and hault le pied, a scauoir Six pieces de batterie, and Six Canons. Fournira d^uantage aux Suysses de Trois Mois en Trois Mois en la Ville de Lyon certaine somme de Deniers pour les fraiz de la Guerre: and si les Suysses l'ayment mieux, au lieu de Deux Cents Hommes d'Armes, le Roy leur donnera tous les Trois Mois la somme de Deux Mille Escus.
S'il aduient que par le moyen de la Guerre esmeue ca ou la les Suysses ne peuuent rec^^urer du Sel, ils en pourront acheter en France, and le fair emmener en l^ur Pais.
Si l'vne des deux Parties faict Guerre contre ses Ennemis, elle ne fera Paix que l'autre n'y soit comprise, and sera en la liberte de l'autre d'y consentir, ou non; si elle refuse la Paix, non obstant ce, pourra poursuiure la negociation d'icelle.
L'Vne des Parties ne pourra receuoir en sa Protection, ny donner Bourgeoisie aux Sujects de l'autre: ny loger, secourir, ou deffendre les Bannis, ou Ennemis de l'autre, ains suiuant l^^ Articles de Paix les chassera, and empeschera.
Sa Majeste voulant faire paroistre son Amour, and Bien-veillance enuers les Suysses, outre les Vingt-Mille Francs qu'il leur promet payer par le Traicte de Paix, Promet payer (...) les Ans a chacun des Cantons, tant que ceste Alliance durera, la Somme de Mille Liures Tournois; payera pareillement aux Confederez la moitie de la Pension qu'ils auoient ^up^rauant.
That if any one (whatsoeuer he be) make warre in the Kingdome of France, Duchie of Millaine, or any other Countrey appertayning to the Crowne of France, either on this side, or beyond the Mountaines: His Maiestie may make a leueye of Switzers, according as himselfe shall thinke conuenient, to witt, Six Thousand at the least, and Sixteene Thousand at the most; except the Lords of the Leagues doe permit it.
He may also make choyce in all the Cantons and Confederates, of such Colonells and Captaines as he shall thinke meete: prouided, that they be men of honest and good fame.
The Lords of the Leagues shall be no occasion of hinderance to those Collonelles, Captaines and Soldiours, neither delay or vse any fore matters, whereby to tardy their going one: but within Tenne dayes after the first day, that the King sent warning for such succour, they shall be suffered to March away.
And they shall continue in the Kings seruice, vntill the ending of the warre if it be to his liking, without any calling home by their Lords: the King likewise paying them their accustomed wages. And yet notwithstanding, if Warres happen in Swetia, and that (in regard thereof) the Cantons cannot assist the King: in this case, they are to stand discharged of their promise, and may giue sudden countermaund to their people, and the King is bound to giue them leaue.
If the King would make Warre with his enemies; he may make the same leueye of Si^^ Thousand Switzers at the least, and of Sixeteene Thousand at the most: chusing Colonelles and Captaines, men of faire and good same, which shall be Switzers, or of their Allies.
The King may not sunder the Army of Switzers, nor place it by deuided troupes for Garrison in diuers places, and they shall not so serue, either by Sea, or on Land.
For the wages of the Gendarmerie, or Seruitours on Horseback, it is couenanted, that the King shall pay by the Moneth to eche Switz Soldiour, Foure Florins and an halfe of the ^hine. That their wadges shall begin on the day when they part out of their Houses, and then shall be due their Paye for three Moneths, although the King haue not so long bin serued by them. And before they go from the Countrey of Switzerland, they shall handle the first Moneths paye, and the rest for two other Moneths, at apte or meete places, according as they shall haue neede.
If after the Three Moneths be past, the King would still retaine the Switzers: he shall pay them the same hire euery Moneth, vntill such time as they may conueniently returne home to their Houses.
The Colonels, Captaines, Enseignes, Ambassadours and others, hauing charge in the Troupes: shall be payed in the wounted manner, and according as the Predecessours, Kings of France haue formerly payed.
If any Warre be made vpon the Switzers, the King shall stand engaged, to succour them

at his owne charges, and to send them two hundred men of Armes, and twelue pieces of Artillerie, with their furniture and carriages for quickest speede: to wit, sixe Pieces for batterie, and sixe Canons. Moreouer he shall furnish the Switzers from three moneths to three moneths in the Citie of Lyons, with a certaine summe of money, for charges of the Warre. And if the Switzers thinke it better; instead of two hundred men of Armes, the King shall giue them all the three Moneths, the summe of two thousand Crownes.
If it so happen, that by reason the Warre (moued here or there) the Switzers become destitute of Salt: they may buy it in France, and cause it to be brought into their owne Countrey.
If either of the two Parties make Warre against his enemy; there shall be no peace concluded, except the other be therein comprehended, and it shall be in the free will of the other, to consent thereto, or no: if peace be refused, yet notwithstanding, the negotiation thereof may be followed.
One of the Parties may not receiue into his protection, nor giue Bourgeship to any Sub^ects of the other: Nor lodge, succour or defend the Banished, or enemies of the other: but according to the Articles of Peace, shall expell and hinder them.
His Maiestie, desiring to make his loue and good will knowne and appeare to the Switzers; ouer and beside the twenty thousand Francs, which he promised by the Treatie of Peace to pay them: maketh a further promise, that so long as this Alliance shall en^ure, he will pay yearely to each of the Cantons, the summe of a thousand pound Tour^is. He will pay also to the Confederates, the moitie of the Pension, which they had before.




In this second League and Alliance, more strict and perticuler then the first;The latter Alliance stronger then the first. the King comprehended the same Princes, Estates and Common-weales before remembred: and the Switzers in like manner, with charge and condition, that ^f any of the Comprehendants make Warre against one of the Parties, either ^n this side or beyond the Mountaines: the other Partie shall giue succour without exception of person, according to the tenure of this Alliance, which ^ught to continue during the life time of King Frances the first, and three yeares ^fterward.
King Henry, second of the name, his Sonne and Successour, renewed this League with the Cantons, vpon the same conditions as his Father before had done, or continuance of his life, and fiue yeares after. It was couenanted at Soleurre by ^e Cantons, and their Allies (except Zurich and Berne, and their Confederates) in ^he yeare One thousand fiue hundred fortie and nine. To this Alliance were these ^rticles added.




Addition of Articles to the last League.
QVe l'Estat de Milan, and autres Terres vsurpees en Italie sur la Coronne de France du temps du Roy Francois Premier, pourroient estre recouurees par le Roy, sans que les ^ysses fussent tenuz de luy donner Secours pour ce faire. Mais s'il les reconquestoit a l'aide (...) vne autre Armee, que pour la conseruation d'icelles, lesdicts Cantons luy fourniroient Gens ^lon sa volonte.
Si le Roy se veut trouuer en personne en quelque Guerre, il pourra choisir a son plaisir des ^apitaines Suysses, and faire vne leuee de Six Mille hommes pour le moins.
Ne pourra desioindre and separer l'Armee des Suysses lors qu il faudra donner Bataille, ^is bors d'icelle, il pourra les mettre en Garnison par les Villes, and places fortes.
A ce que les Traictez d'Alliance des Annees Mil Cinq Cents Seize, and Vingt and ^n demeurent fermes and perdurables, quant aux gages non payez, y a este pourueu comme ^ensuit. Le Demandeur aduertira du faict son Magistrat, auquel si la cause semble estre ^uitable, il s'adressera aux Ambassadeurs de sa Maieste, qui lors seront en Suysse: s'ils sont sents ledict Magistrat escrira au Roy, and requerra sa Maieste qu'il satisface a la Partie. (...) le Roy se met a la raison, le Demandeur s'en deura contenter, mais s'il refusoit de payer ^n l'Equite, le Demandeur pourra lors prier qu'on commette des Iuges and Arbitres deuant ^quels il debattra sa cause.
Si le Roy ne commet des Iuges de sa part, ceux de Suysse passeront outre a la cogmis^ d^ faict, and ce quils ordonneront sera tenu pour ferme and valable par cha^^ne des (...) comme si les Iuges de part, and d'autre y auoient assiste.
Les Marchands Francois, and Suisses ne feront greuez d'aucuns Ports, ^^nges, ou P^ss^ge^ nouueaux. Sil s'es^neut Procez entre les Subiects de part, and d'autre, le Dema^deur pl^^dera deuant le Iuge du lieu, ou demeure le Deffendeur.
THat the State of Millaine, and other Lands vsurped in Italie, against the Crown of France, from the time of King Francis the first: may be recouered by the King, without the Switzers binding to giue him aide in the doing thereof. But if he shall reconq^^^ them by the helpe of another Armie: then for the conseruation of them, the Cantons are (...), furnish him with men according to his owne minde.
If the King please to be personally present in any Warre; he shall make choice (at his pleasure) of the Switzers Captaines, and make a leuy of sixe thousand men at the least.
No disioyning or seperation may be made of the Armie of Switzers when they are (...) giue Battaile: but out of it, they may plant them in Garrisons for Townes and strong places.
Because the Treaties of Alliance in the yeares One thousand fiue hundred and sixteene, and twentie one, continue firme and lasting, although wages were vnpayed: it is prouided as followeth. The Demander shall (in this case) aduertise the Magistrate, to whom if the case seeme to carrie equitie: He shall shape his course to the Ambassadours for his Maiestie, that then are in Swetia. But if they be absent, the Magistrate shall write to the King, and require his Maiestie to satisfie the partie. If the King doe yeelde to reason, the Demander is to rest contended; but if he refuse to pay according to equity: the Demander may then pray, to haue the case committed to Iudges and Arbitrators, before whom he may debate (...) cause.
If the King doe not commit his part to Iudges, the Switzers themselues may proceede to take knowledge of the fact, and that which they ordaine and appoint, shall be held for f^rmes and valuable by either of the parties, as if Iudges (on the one side and other) had giuen assistance therein.
French Merchants and Switzers, shall not be iniuried at any Ports, by new Toules or Passes. If Suite be moued in Law betweene Subiects of either side: the Plainti^^e or Demandant shall Pleade before the Iudge of the place, where the Defendant dwelleth.




King Charles the ninth renewed this League vpon the same conditions as before is expressed, for the time of his Reigne, and of his Successour King Henry the third, of happy memory.
King Henry the Great, renewed it likewise, for the time of his Reigne, and of Monsieur the Daulphine, reigning at this present, and for sixe yeares after his death. It was determined and concluded at Soleurre, on Monday being the eleauenth of September, One thousand sixe hundred and one. And to see it sworne to the said King Henry the Great of endlesse memory. Two and fortie Deputies of the Canto^^ Leagued Grisons, and other Allies, came to Paris the Moneth of October following And the twentieth day of the same Moneth, this League was there sworne by (...) Maiestie, in the Church of Paris.


CHAP. XV. Of the Names and Armes of the thirteene Cantons of Switzerland; and also of their Allies.
LVrich, in Latine Tigurum, and Turegum, first and chiefe of the Swit^^^ Cantons. Porte d'Argent taille d' Azur. These Armes are held and suppor^ed by a Lyon standing vpright, holding a Bowle or Roundure of (...) world, with his left Pawe forward, and with the other a Sword.
2. Berne, in Latine Ciuitas Vrsi, The Citie of the Beare. Porte de Gueulles a la (...)

^'Or, chargee d'vn Ours rempant de Sable. Ber in the Almaigne Language signifieth a ^eare. The Supporter is a Beare standing vpright, hauing on his Thigh a Sword ^uirded.
3. Lucerne, in Latine Luciaria, in regarde of a Pharos and high Tower, wheron a ^ire is made in the night time, for the conduct of such as sayle vpon the Lake. Por^ d' Argent, party d'Azur. The Supporter a naked Switzer, his head and naturall partes couered with Oaken branches, and holding in his right hand a Bough of the ^ame.
4. Vri, in the Allemaigne or Germaine tongue, signifieth a Wilde or Saluage Bull. And ^hat is the reason why this Canton Porte d'Or a vne Teste de Bufle de Sable, acorne and ^^fle ou emboucle de Gueules: The Inhabitants of this Canton were sometimes named ^aurisci, for the reason before related. The Supporter, a Switzer armed with a Sword and a Poniarde.
5. Switz, vnder which name are all the Cantons comprehended: Porte de Gueules a la ^roisette de Argent au Quartier Gauche. The Supporter a Switzer Armed, bearing plaine Crosse vpon the Breast-plate, and a Banner of the same.
6. Vnderuald, de Gueules, couppe d'Argent: The Supporter a Griffon.
7. Zug, D'Argent, a la Face d'Azur: The Supporter an Armed Switzer, bearing Launce in his lefte hand.
8. Glarys, in Latine Glarona: De Gueules au Sainct Iacques d'Argent a son Bourdon Or. The Supporter, an Angell.
9. Basile, tearmed the Moderne, in Latine Basilea, and Olde Augusta; Augusta Rau^corum, and the Inhabitants Rauraci, who were in former times past deuided into ^wo Leagues and partialities. The one side fauouring the Bishop of the Citty, and ^ried for their Ensigne, and for Armes, D'Argent au Perroquet de Synople. And the ^ther side maintained the parte of Rodolphe, Counte of Habspourg, and the Abbot of ^aint Gall: Port^ient de Gueules a vne Estoile de Seize Raiz d Or. Basle porte d'Argent l'Estuy de Crosse d'Euesque de Sable. The Supporter a Dragon winged, with two ^riffons Feete.
10. Freienbourg, Francorum Burgum in Latine, Bourrough of the Frenche, or Ville-^ranche: De Sable, couppe d'Argent. The Supporter, a Seruant Switzer, without any ^ther Armes then a Sword.
11. Sol^urre, in Latine Solis Turris, Solodori Vicus, Soloturum, et Soloturnum. D'Ar^^t, couppe de Gueules. The Supporter a Switzer Armed, bearing a Banner of the ^anton.
12. Schaffhause, In the Germaine tongue Schaff signifieth a Sheepe. And from ^ence it commeth, that this Canton beareth in Armes D'Or a vn B^lier Sautant de ^ble Accorne d'Argent. The Supporter a Ramme, The last is
13. Appensell, in Latine Abbatis Cella. An Abbey built by the Children of Da^bert the Great, King of France, the Restorer of Saint Denys in France. This last ^anton beareth D'Argent a l'Ours debout de Sable. The Supporter a Beare standing ^pright, with his throate fuming or smoaking.




The Allies and Confederatus of the Cantons.
THe Abbot of Saint Gall: Porte d'Argent a l'Ours tourne debout de Sable.
2. The Towne of Saint Gall. D'Or a l'Ours debout de Sable, accole Or.
3. The Leagued Grisons. D'Argent, Party d'Or an Sauuage peint en Incarnation, la Masse leuee d'Or.
4. The Valaisans, d'Argent a Cinq Estoiles de Gu^^ules, Party de Gueules a Cinq Estei^ d'Argent. 2.2.1. que l'on dit de l'vn (...) lo^^^re.
5. Rottuille, d'Argent au Bouc debo^^ (...), accorne de mesme.
6. Mulhouse, De Gueules a la Roue de (...) raiz d'Argent.
7. Bienne, D'Argent a l'Aigle de Sable.
8. Neuf-Chastell, De Gueules a deux Coignees d'Argent passees en Saultoir.




The Order of the Beare (wherewith, for the most part, the Armes of the Cantons,

as also of their Confederates are charged) Instituted by the said Emperour Frederick the Second,The most part of the Cantons Armes charged with the Beare. and in the yeare before remembred: was not composed but with one Chaine of Golde, and an Ouall at the end thereof, charged with a Beare enamelled with Black, mounted on an Hillock enamelled with Synople.
In memory and acknowledgement of those three men, who were the (...) Founders of the Switzers liberty; the Chaine was round engirte with an other Chaine,Memory of the beginners of the Switzers liberty. composed arteficially of Oaken leaues, to declare thereby* that they had* bin the Conseruers of the Honour, liues and goods of their Fellow-Cittizens. (...) successe of following times, and according to the chauncing occurrences; the other Cantons of the Switzers, and their neighbours (moued thereto by the common cause) became associated, vnited and lincked together. Lambendo, after the fashion of a Beare, who maketh her mishapen and formelesse fruite perfect, by licking and polishing it, so reducing it to right shape: if we may credit Aristotle, Aelianus and Plinie in the Eight Booke of his naturall History, the Sixe and Thirty Chapter. Hi sunt candida informisque caro, paulo Muribus Maior, sine occulis, sine pilo. Vng^es tantum prominent; hanc Lambendo paulatim figurant.
And this Beaste is so tenderly louing to her young-ones, that Plutarch, in his Treatise of the Loue of Fathers towards their Children;The Switzers acknowledged by the Beare. hath deriued thence diuers comparisons and similitudes. In a word, this warre-like Nation of the Switzers, hath bin noted and obserued by the Beare, as the Millainers by the Adder, and the Frenche by the Salamander (the deuise of King Frances) and the Imperialles by the Eagle.

Vrsus atrox, Aquilaeque leues, and tortilis Angui^
Cesserunt flammae iam Salamandra tuae.


The End of the Seauenth BOOKE.



ORDERS OF such as haue bin Instituted in the Kingdome of ITALIE. The eight Booke.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Orders Militarie, which haue bin Instituted by the Popes of Rome.
OVr purpose was not,The Pope Lord of Saint Peters Patrimoni^* to vse any discourse of Monasticall Orders, but onely such as were Militarie. Our most Holy Fathers the Popes, Soueraigne Princes Temporall, concerning the Patrimonie of Saint Peter, and the dependances thereon, to honour Princes and Lords their Subiects, in the extendure of the State, and their Ordenarie attending Officers: haue at sundry times established diuers Orders of Knights. The first whereof were them
Of Iesus Christ, Instituted in Auignion, by Pope Iohn,Order of Iesus Christ. two and ^^entieth of the name, he being a Natiue of Cahors in Cahourcy, Anno One thou^^nd three hundred and twentie, the fourth yeare of his Pontificalitie. They did ^eare a Crosse of Gold plaine, enamelled with Red, shut vp or enclosed within an^ther Crosse Pattee d'Or, of the same fashion; but the enamelling differed from that ^rder of Christus in Portugall,
Of the Holy Ghost, acknowledged at Rome vnder the name of Bretheren of the Hospi^^ll of the Holy Ghost; which was Instituted by Pope Paul, second of the name,Of the Holy Ghost. in the ^eare of Grace One thousand foure hundred threescore and eight, the fift of his Ponficalitie. And these Knights ware a Crosse formie or pattee, White.
Of Saint George,Of S. George. Instituted by Pope Alexander, sixt of the name, in the yeare One ^^ousand foure hundred fourescore and eighteene, the ninth of his Pontificalitie. ^hey did carrie a Crosse of Gold, entowred with a wreath made in forme of a Crowne, of the same
Of Saint Peter,Of S. Peter. to warre and fight against the Turkes, and to guard and defend their ^ourses on the Sea-coasts, for the State of the Church. It was Instituted by Pope ^e^, tenth of the name, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and twenty, the ^^xt of his Pontificalitie. They did weare (within an Ouale of Gold) the Image of ^aint Peter, at the end of a Tortis of Chaines of Gold. There haue bin seene foure ^undred Knights of this Order, at one and the same time.
Of Saint Paul,Of S. Paul. established by Pope Paul, third of the name, in the yeare of Grace ^ne thousand fiue hundred and fortie, the thirteenth of his Pontificalitie. He made ^wo hundred Knights during the rest of his time of keeping the State.
The Pies,Of the Pie^. ordained by Pope Pius, fourth of the name, in the yeare One thousand ^^ue hundred and threescore the first of his Pontificalitie, which continued but sixe

yeares onely. During which time, he made to the number of fiue hundred and thirtie fiue Knights. At Rome, or in any place wheresoeuer he was in person; he would haue them to goe before the Knights of the Empire, and of Malta. And they had the charge of carrying the Pope; at such time as he roade abroade in publique.
Of Lauretum, or Lauretto, Instituted by the Pope Sixtus Quintus, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and seauen, the second of his Pontificalitie; for whom he erected the Church of our Lady at Loretta, to be a Cathedrall and Bishops Church. He made (during his time of keeping the Chaire) two hundred and threescore Knights.
All which (as well as the rest) are called Cheualiers Dorez, hauing permission to beare Armes, Au Tymbre tarre de front, the Sword and guilt Spurres: Honors which the Popes conferred a well to them there of the Sword, as of the long Roabe, knowne by the name of Counts Palatines,The power and authority of these knights all being at Wadges and Pensions of the Popes, that granted their degrees of Knighthood. Giuing them also priuiledge, to create and aduance Doctors in all Faculties, of Scribes and publique Notaries, yea, and to Legitimate Bastards, as the Emperours did.
The Hospitable Knights of S. Anthony.At Rome likewise there are Knights Hospitaliers of Saint Anthony, and the most part of them French, who albeit they are of the Church; yet notwithstanding, they stile themselues Knights of Saint Ant^ony, the Chiefe of this Order is at Vienna in Daulphine. The Generall of this Order beareth the title of Abbot of Saint Anthony of Vienna, who hath vnder his obedience a great number of hospitals and Preceptories, beside great goods in France* which are in the guard and protection of our Kings, whereof I haue seene the confirmatiue Patents from King to King, from Charles, fift of the name, vnto King Lewes the thirteenth, now reigning; whose Patents bear^ date the third day of Iuly, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and eighteene, verified in Parliament in the moneth of September following, the same yeare.
By which Patents, our Kings carrie the qualitie of Daulphines of Viennois, of Valentinois and Diois.Titles giuen to the Kings o^ France by Patents. The Principals of this Order doe weare on their Gownes, Cloakes and blacke Cassockes a double Saint Anth^nies Crosse, that is to say, two letters T. T. the one vpon the other of Blew Sattin, whereby is signified Thanatos, Thanatos, Mors, Mors, the meanest persons weare onely but one. The Holy Anchorites, liuing in the Desarts of Thebes in A^gypt, and vnder the Rules of the Fathers of Hermites Saint Paul and Saint Anthony, went cloathed in Greene, that is to say, garments wouen of Palme tree leaues,The Anchorite Hermits of Aegypt. the habites of Slaues and miserable persons; wearing on the ^reast the Crosse of Saint Anthony, to declare, that they were dead to the World. The Greeke Calloyers, of the Order of Saint Basile, were cloathed after the Friers Minimes, very obscurely, and vpon their breast they wore the double Crosse of Saint Anthony, the vppermost whereof was Red* and that vnderneath wholly Blacke; as we learne in the Grecian Ecclesiasticall Histo^y, and by Niceph^rus Gregoras, in the life of the Emperour Andronicus, who was sho^ne a Monke. And heretofore, Abbots, carried no other Crosse then a Staffe, the top whereof began in shape like to Saint Anthonies Crosse.
In like manner, there are in some Cities of Italie, as at Bologna, Modena, and elsewhere, Knights of the Virgin Mary.Knights of the Virgin Mary. The learned Carolus Sigonius, in his Booke De Regno ^^liae, maketh mention of this Order of Knights, Of the Virgin Mary, in obseruing the first Founder thereof, and such as were enrouled with him. In the yeare One thousand two hundred thirty three, Brother Bartholmew, Bishop of Vicenca, of the Order of the Friers Preachers, Instituted this Order, and caused it to be confirmed by Pope Vrbane, fourth of the name, in the yeare One thousand two hundred threescore and two. The Knights of this Order followed the Rule of Saint Dominicke, wearing A White Cassocke, and vpon the breast Vne Croix pattee Rouge, a Deux Estoiles en Chef de m^sme, and ouer the Cassocke, a Cloake of Ashes Gray colour.
The matters p^^fess^d by this Order.Their profession was, to take perticular care of Widowes and Orphanes. And vnderstanding of any houshold variance, to happen betweene the Husband and his wife, about some perticular rancor or quarell: they endeauoured (so much as possibly they could to plant peace and reconcilement, which is a work of charity, and by S. Paul often commended. They had neither Conuent nor Monastery, to liue there, but each

^an dwelt in his owne house, with his wife and Familie: and therefore (by way of ^ockerie) they were called The Bretheren of Ioye. They acknowledged to haue ouer ^em a Great Maister, to whom they were obedient.


The Order of Knights of the most Glorious Virgin Mary:L'Ordre des ^re^hen reuse Vierge Marie Mere de Dieu. Instituted in the Citie of Rome in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and eighteene, in the Moneth of Iuly. CHAP. II.
ABout some fiue yeares since,The Inuenters of the Order. three Gentlemen that were Bretheren, of Spella in Italie, named Pedro, Iohn Baptista and Bernardo, sirnamed Petrignanoes, inuented a new Order Militarie of Knighthood, in the honour, and vnder the name of The most glorious Virgin Mary, called the Mother of God, and vnder the Rule of Saint Frances d' Assise. The memories ^hereof were by them presented to our Holy Father Pope Paul, fift of the name, at his present sitting in the Chaire of Saint Peter: who caused them to be seene in a full Conclaue of the ^^lustrious Cardinals, and there they were found to be very reasonable. So that in ^he Moneth of Iuly, One thousand sixe hundred and eighteene, his Holinesse ap^roued the said Order: whereof his Holinesse and his Successors in the Sacred Seate, ^re to be the Great Maisters.
This Order (then which,The Authours opinion concerning the proofe of this Order. none wil be more famous thorow out all Christendome) ^hould haue for Great Maister, some great Soueraigne Prince, that is endued with ^ower and meanes, to maintaine it. His Holinesse gaue to the said Order, the Pal^^ce of Saint Iohn de Laterano, the best built, and the most spacious, and in the swee^est ayre of all the Citie of Rome, the^e to haue their Conuent and ordenary abiding. And, to make their Arsenall of Gallies, the small Citie and Port of Ciuita Vecchia, ^unciently called Centum Cellae, seated on the Mediterranean Sea,The Popes bounty to this Order. which the Knights ^ay fortefie. But it hath this discommoditie, that Coelo subiacet iniquo, against which (...) is difficult to vse any remedy. He gaue them likewise an Island, adiacent to the Port of Ciuita Vecchia, and the Gouernment of his Gallies.
After that this Order had bin thus approued by the Pope, the Institutours thereof ^ame to the Court of France, and procured the Articles to be seene by the Most Chri^tian King Lewes, thirteenth of the name, who made them promise of his vtmost ^auour. From thence they went to the Court of the Emperour Mathias, whence ^hey made account to returne for Italie, and to hold within two yeares (at the least) ^he first Chapter of the Order, in the Citie of Rome,The first Chapter to be held in Rome. there and then to elect a Great Maister. At this instant they haue aboue two Millions of promises for new Knights, whom they haue enrouled from all the Prouinces of Christendome; name^y, from France. And here you may behold the Articles of this new Order, to the number of seauen and thirtie.

The Articles of the new Order of the Virgin Mary.
^. THis Order, called The Order of the Virgin Mary, is Instituted for defence of the Christian Faith, exaltation of the Catholique and Apostolique Church:The causes of this Orders Institution* ^nd (perticularly) to represse the audacious boldnesse of the Turkes, who run ordenarily

roauing on the coasts of the Mediterranean Sea, carrying away an vnspeakeable number of poore Christians, whom they kill cruelly, or keepe them in perpetuall slauery, and in a condition, more miserable a thousand times then death, to the disgrace and shame of Christendome.
II. There is contained in it three kindes of Knights. The first is of Knights Gentlemen Layicks,Knights of Iustice Laye-men who are called, Knights of Iustice. Because, before their admission and receiuing into the said Order, it is expedient for them, to make an exact search, and good proofe of their Nobilitie. In the second place
Knights Gentlemen Priests, and Beneficed.
Next, Knights Chaplaines. For succour and seruice of which three Orders of Knights, are

Seruants of Armes.
Seruants of Armes

III. The Knights Laye Gentlemen, are to make proofe of their Father and Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother, both Paternall and Maternall; that they are issued and descended of Noble Houses, capable and worthy to beare the charge and degree of Nobilitie:Of Nobilitie by descent. and in proceeding to the information of their life and manners, as also their extraction; to make mention, what dignities and degrees haue bin held by the Grandfathers and Fathers, as well by knowledge as authenticall Titles. Likewise, that they are bred and borne in lawfull Mariage: that they are not Bastards to Princes and Great Lords, in which case, they are to be priuiledged.
IIII. That their Predecessours haue alwayes liued Nobly, without vsing or exercising any Mechanicall Trade or Occupation, vnworthy the title of Nobilitie. And concerning such Noble men, that meddle in Trafficke and Merchandise, as doe the Gentlemen of Florence, Genewaye, Sienna and Luca: the Sonnes of such Gentlemen may be receiued among the Knights Gentlemen of Iustice; prouided, that they themselues haue not exercised the Trafficke of their Fathers, and can make publique appearance,medling in Trafa^cke and Merchandise, and Sons descended of the^. of their good life and behauiour, and that they and their Ancestours are cleare from any noate of infamie, and were neuer called in question before any Seate of Iustice.
Moreouer, to iustifie the Nobilitie of their extraction, they stand obliged to make apparant proofe, concerning the Armes of their Houses, both by Father and Mother, which they are to emblazon by their Mettals and Colours, in the Booke and Register of Genealogies, approued by Knights of the Order, to be kept and remaine in the Treasurie of the Order. Whereinto shall none be admitted, that are issued or descended of Iewes, Moores or Sarrazens. The same proues, and in the same nature, is to be made by them that are Knights Gentlemen Priests and Beneficed persons.
Knight Priests Knights Chaplains and Seruants of ArmesV. And as for Knights Gentlemen Chaplaines, and Bretheren Seruants of Armes; they are to make proofe, that their Father and Mother are Noble by extraction, and haue liued Nobly, without the least infamous taxation.
VI. The Knights of Iustice and Seruants of Armes may be admitted and receiued into the Order, at what age soeuer: alwayes before hand prouided, that they be^ actiuely able, well formed of body, for managing Armes in the defence of Religion, and haue such meanes to maintaine them, according as the dignitie of a Knight^ requireth.
The Ribard and Crosse.VII. Knights of Iustice, and Knights Priests and Beneficed, are bound to weare abo^^ their necks a Riband of Blew Silke, and a Crosse of Gold enamelled with Blew; i^ memory and respect of the Garment, worne by the most glorious Virgin Mary, which was of Blew Celestiall colour. And vpon the Cloake (on the left side) a Crosse o^ Blew Sattin, embrodered and curiously wrought with Siluer.
Varietie of wearing the Crosse.VIII. Knights Priests Chaplaines, and the Bretheren Seruants of Armes: are t^ weare the Crosse of Blew Sattin (formerly spoken of) on the left side of their Cloak^ but may not weare it about their necke.
IX. Knights of Iustice shall weare the Roabe of White double Taffatie, trayli^g along vpon the ground, with great sleeues, a long traine, Cordons, decked and garnished with Blew Silke; and on the Breast the Crosse of Blew Sattin before described.
X. Knights Priests and Beneficed, shall weare the like Roabe; onely it must b^

shorter then that of the other Knights of the great Crosse.
XI. And as for those Knights Chaplaines, and the Bretheren Seruants of Armes: they must weare Roabes of White Serge, with strait sleeues and long, hanging downe to the ground. And the Crosse on the left side, with deckings, Cordons and garnishments of Blew Silke.
XII. The Knights of Iustice, who after the proofe of their Nobilitie,Knights of Iustice their paiment at entrance. haue obtained the great Crosse: shall stand bound each man, to pay to the Religion a thousand Crownes for their entrance, and fiue and twenty Crownes for the expedition of their Letters.
XIII. Each Knight of the great Crosse, entring into the Foundation of this Order; may freely grant the habite of a Knight of Iustice (and as freely also) to such a person as he shall name: Prouided, that he be a man of such qualitie, as is ^it to enter the said Order, and can, or hath made proofe of his Nobilitie, in the manner before declared, of his foure Predecessors inclusiuely. In the doing whereof, he shall not pay any right for entrance; but onely fiue and twenty Crownes for the expedition of his Letters, and shall enioy all the Priuiledges, giuen and granted to the Order.
XIV. The Knights of Iustice, and Knights Priests Beneficed,Other payments at entrance. shall pay to the Religion for their entrance, each man two hundred Crowns, and fiue and twenty Crowns for the expedition of their Letters.
XV. Knights Priests Chaplaines, and Bretheren Seruants of Armes, shall pay each man for his entrance an hundred Crownes, and twenty Crownes for the expedition of his Letters.
XVI. All these Knights of the Order (the Priests excepted) shall stand bound to pay to the Religion, each man twelue Crownes, for buying a paire of Armes, which shall be placed in the Arsenall of the said Religion.
XVII. All Knights of the Order, hauing receiued the habite,Duties to be performed by the Knights. shall be bound to make their Carauenes, that is to say; to abide eighteene Moneths in the Gallies belonging to the Religion, and as many more in the Conuent thereof, which must be established in Rome. From which (neuerthelesse) Priests and Clearkes stand exemp^ed, by making foure Moneths residence at Rome, during which time, they shall be ^odged and maintained in the Conuent, at the expences of the Religion.
XVIII. Knights of Iustice, and Bretheren Seruants of Armes, being desirous to learne the Exercises, as managing Armes, riding great Horses, and vnderstanding the Mathematicks* shall learne them in the Conuent, at charge of the Religion,Exercises enstructed by the Religion. where (for the same purpose) shall be maintained good and skilfull Maisters. And they may continue in the Conuent, during the space of eighteene Moneths, for the apprehension of the said Exercises, being there lodged and nourished in the Conuent.
XIX. Knights Layicks of this Order, may be married men, and may likewise marrie Widdowes, as well as Maides. And by the death of their first wiues,Liberty of Marriage. may be admitted to ioyne againe in second mariage, according as the holy Church hath ordained.
XX. Which Knights, although they be married, yea, twise married; may yet haue and hold pensions on all kindes of Benefices, without being bound and restrained, from wearing the Clearkes habite, or any other, but that belonging to the Religion.
XXI. These Knights and their Seruants may weare all kindes of Armes;Wearing of Armes. as Knights and Bretheren Seruants, of other Religions and Militarie Orders doe.
XXII. All sorts of Nations may enter into the Foundation of this Order; according to the Rules and conditions, which are formerly inserted.
XXIII. Knights Layicks are to make three vowes;Of Vowes. as namely of Charitie to his neighbour, coniugall Chastity: and obedience to the Great Maister and his Successours.
XXIV. Priests shall vowe Charitie to Neighbours, and obedience to the Great Maister: And all them of the Order, shall liue conformably to the Statutes and Ordenances of the Religion.
XXV. Euery Knight shall stand obliged, to pay to the Priest Knight, that hath giuen him the habite of the Religion, two Crownes of Gold, three pounds of white Waxe, and a pound of Incense to serue in the Church.
XXVI. The election of the fi^st Great Maister, shall depend on the will of our holy Father the Pope.
XXVII. And for proceeding (afterward) to the election of the Great Maister; his Holinesse, and his Successours in the Holy Seate, shall nominate Three Knights of each Nation, whereof there are Knights in the Order, Knights of the Great Crosse, or of Iustice; and the Councell shall make choyce of one among them three.
XXVIII. All the Great Maisters, beginning with the very First, shall be bound (immediatly after their Election) to take the Oathe of Obedience, and of Fidelitie to the Holy Father then sitting, and to the Apostolike Seate.
Power and authority of the Great MaisterXXIX. The Great Maister of the said Order, priuatiuely, and before all other Iudges else, shall haue the knowledge of all causes ciuile, criminall, reall, personall and mixed, concerning all the Knights of the Order, of what nature or condition soeuer they be.
XXX. There shall be in euery Prouince, a Knight of the Great Crosse deputed, for administration of Iustice in all the foresaid cases, vpon the first instance: whose Office and Authority shall last but three yeares.
Concerning the Generall of the Army and his Title.XXXI. The Generall of the Armie of the said Religion, shall be nominated and elected by our Holy Father the Pope, and his Successours in the Holy Seate, and taken from among the number of Knights of the Great Crosse: who shall haue and beare the Title of Marshall of the Religion.
XXXII. The charges and Offices of the said Religion, and of the Gallies therto belonging, are to bee giuen and deuided to Knights of the Order, according to the rancke of their receiuing thereinto, as also their experience and capacitie in the Exercises.
XXXIII. The Obligations of such as would enter into the said Religion, for assurance of their rights of entrance,Bondes and assurances due to the Order. and Armes and Learning belonging to the Order: shall be set downe in authenticall tearmes, and according to the forme, stile and custome of the place where they are to be placed And the future Knights must be bound, by an expresse and perticuler clause, promising and couenanting on their behalfe, to make tender and payment of their dues, vpon commaund of one of the Lords Petrignanoes, Inuenters of the said Order.
XXXIV. Such summes of money, as shall arise by entrances of Knights and Seruants of the Order, shall be imployed in the acquisition of immoueable good, which shall serue in the Prouinces,Imployment of moneys for entrances. whence the monies doe come for such entrances, and not elsewhe^e, to serue as a foundation and endownment for Commanderies of the Order, whereto shall arriue Knights of the same Prouinces, according to the ranck of their reception. The Thirdes of the said Commanderies, Reuennues, reserued to the Religion.
XXXV. With the said moneys shall likewise be founded other Commaunderies, of lesser reuennues then those of the Great Crosse; for the Knights of Iustice, Priests Beneficed, Chaplaines, and Brethren Seruants of Armes, according to the ranck of their entertainement.
XXXVI. After deposte is made of the summes of money, promised by such as are nominated and retained, for entring into the said Order: the Knights shall receiue their habites at Rome,For receiuing the Orders Habite at Rome. from the hands of him, as shall be thereto deputed and allowed by our Holy Father the Pope. And in the Principall Cities of euery Prouince, shall be deputed from the Holy Seate, some person (famous for dignitie) who shall deliuer the Habites to the new Knights: and who (vpon good and lawfull excuses) shall be dispenced withall from going to Rome, paying (for the Knight) to him that deliuereth the Habite, according as before is expressed.
The first Generall Chapter to be helde at Rome.XXXVII. All which Knights, hauing receiued the habite of the Religion: the first Generall Chapter thereof shall be held in the Citty of Rome, by appointment of the Great Maister. At which Chapter, the Knights Layicks, Priests Beneficed, Chaplaines, and Brethren Seruants of Armes, shall stand bound to be personally present, vpon penalty of their Habites priuation. Except such as are vnder Eight yeares of age, or detayned by some lawfull cause or excuse; which must be made known to the Great Maister, and signed by such testimonie, as may be without reproofe.
At this First Chapter shall be made and published, all the ordinances, Rules and Statutes, concernig the said Order.
Of Knights of the Order, there shal alwaies remaine resident at Rome in the Court of the holy Father, fiue and twenty, hauing twenty Ducates by the Moneth,Number of Knights at Rome and Loretto. and the like number at our Lady of Loretto.
Our Holy Father Pa^l, fift of the name, of the Familie of the Bourgheses, Soueraigne Great Maister, and Protectour of this Order:The Popes Armes. Porte d'Azur au Dragon ou Serpent aile d'Or, au Chef d'Or, chargee d'vne Aigle, simple de Sable.
The Bretheren Petrignanoes, Institutours of this Order: Portent d'Azur au Lyon d'Argent esl^ue de dessus Trois Monts, ou Montagn^tes d'Or,The ^uenters Armes. au Mezail Tarre de front, sans Cimier, and Supposts: Et sous le Tout de ces Armes, les beuts de la Croix dudit Ordre.
Which (as we haue already said) is of 
 Blew Celestiall colored Sattin,The mo^all me^l in of the Orders Crosse according to the pert^culers described. wholly couered and embrodered with Siluer, and without a Border of Gold. In the middest is a round Circle, wherein is composed like Cyphers, the Letters M. and S. Crowned with a Chapter of Floures, and a Starre of Gold ouer the Cypher, as seeming to say Sancta Maria. Round about which is written this Deuise. In hoc Signo Vincam, and all that is releuated vpon the Sattin, is of Siluer Imbrodery. About the which Roundure, beside the foure Branches, which make the Crosse (as we will shew hereafter) are twelue Rayes or beames of Siluer, three tending to each side, as representing the twelue Apostles. Each Branch of the Crosse is composed of nine Tracts, which denoate or demonstrate the nine Orders of Angels. The finishing of the Branches* are fashioned as if they were Floures de Luces; yet not after the French, but in a strange manner, as testefying, that this Order is Instituted in the honor and inuocation on The Sacred Virgin, the true Lillie of the Vallies. At the ends of the Crosse, in Flourets are foure Starres, round engirt with beames, as figuring the foure Euangelists, who (with one hand) guided by the spirit of truth, haue d^scribed the Misteries of our Saluation, and the Genealogie of the Queene of Angels.
For our better vnderstanding the ninth Article, it is to be obserued, that the Cloaks of honor, which we call of the Order, are tied vpon one of the sholders,A further relation of the ninth Article. as we see in France, and the other befo^e, as in Italie and elsewhere. The Cordons being fastned before by diuers and sundry strings, are throwne vp afterward vpon the Knights shoulders; to the end that they may traine farre enough off behinde them, like to the Dalmaticks and Coapes of our Priests, which serue for Deacons and Subdeacons, without comparing any diuine things with humaine, Absit miscere Sacra Prophanis. And the Cordons of this Order are composed of white Silke, hauing the knots and Tassels of White and Blew Silke.




CHAP. III. Of those Orders of Knighthood, which are in diuers Cities and Common-wealths of Italie.
COncerning that of Venice, the most auncient and famous of Christendome, after that the Body of Saint Marke the Euangelist,The Order of S. Marke in the Citie of Venice. was transported from forth of Alexandria in Aegypt, into this rich Citie, the Queene of the Sea, and taken by her for her Tutelarie Angell and Guardian: was forthwith instituted, The Order of Knights of Saint Marke, figured and represented in their Armes, Banners and White Flagges, Par vn Lyon Aile de Gueulles: And for the Legend or deuise Pax tibi Marce Euangelista meus. The Duke and the Seigneurie doe neuer grant this Order, but to such a person, as hath performed some famous Seruices for the Common-wealth. And the granting thereof carieth along with it, the title of Bourgeship, and a priuiledge withall, to beare for Crest ouer his Armes, Vn Mufle de Lyon, in honour of Saint Marke. A priuiledge which they esteeme and hold in such honor: that (in former times) there were none but Princes their neighbors, that could haue the happinesse to enioy it.
Another Order for the yong Nobility of Venice.To forme and fashion their yong Noble Gentlemen the same Common-wealth established another Order, called Della Galza, hauing the same Rules and Statutes, as that of the Band in Castile. But that there was deuised for directing yong Spanish Noble men, in well managing an Horse, and other Lands exercises: whereas this of Galza, was to fashion Noble men both by Sea and Land. This Order was renewed by the Duke and the Common-wealth, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred threescore and two.
I could here set downe the names and Armes of two hundred and fiftie Lords, issued from Illustrious Families in the State of Venice, all Knights of Saint Marke: but I passe them ouer in silence, to shorten this discourse, and come
The Seigneury of Geneway hath the Order of Saint Georges Kights.To the Seigneurie of Geneway. It hath also an Order of Knighthood, called Knights of Saint George, who, with a Chaine of Gold, doe weare a plaine Crosse, enamelled with Redde: and (vpon their Cloakes) one in embroderie, but of the same colour.
This Common-wealth was highly renowned for Riches and great possessions, at such time as warres were in the Holy-Land, where it enioyed very large Seigneuries. It hath likewise (a long time) held by force vnder awfull obedience the Kingdome of Cyprus. And hath bin a fruitfull Garden-plot, for yeelding men, as dexterious in Armes, as for Nauigation on the Seas. It was so plentifully peopled with Noble men, whose blouds were high and boyling for Armes, and (consequently) the more capable, of altering and troubling a calme State: that this Seigneurie was constrained in the yeare of Grace Fiue hundred twentie and eight (according to the testimonie of Augustino Iustiniano,The enforcement of Geneway about her plenty of Nobilitie. in his Historie of Italie) to reduce all the Noble Families (for ease and quiet of the State) to eight and twentie onely, the most Illustrious of that Common-wealth. Ordaining withall, that the rest of the said Noble Families, should put themselues vnder the name and Armes of the elected, eight and twentie, so made choice of, onely for their Antiquitie. And here you may behold their proceeding in this matter.

The Order and Rancke of the eight and twentie Houses or Families of Geneway.
1. THat of Doria, he bore for his Armes, Couppee d'Or and d'Argent a vn Aigle coronne de Sable, lampasse, and arme de Gueulles.
2. Fiesca, Bande d'Azur, and d'Argent de six pieces.
3. Grimolda, Lozenge d'Argent and de Gueulles.
4. Centuriona, D'Or a la Bande Eschiq^etee d'Argent and de Gueulles de trois traicts.
5. Calua, Eschiquette de Sable, and d'Ar^ent.
6. Lomelina, Couppe en Arc de Gueulles, and d'Or.
7. Marina, d'Argent a trois Bandes On^ees and Viurees de Sable.
8. Negrona, D'Or a trois Paulx de Sa^le.
9. Negra, d'Argent a trois Fleurs de ^ys d'Azur: 2.1. au Chef endenche vers la ^incte de cinq pieces de Gueulles.
10. Franquis, De Gueulles a trois Co^onnes Royales d^Or, au Chef de Malte.
11. Gentil, D'Azur a quatre pieces d'^schiquier d'Or.
12. Imperial, d'Argent, au Pal d'Or, ^harge d'vn Aigle Coronne de Sable, Lam^asse, and Arme de Gueulles.
13. Grilla, de Gueulles a vne Bande d'Or, ^hargee d'vn Grillon de Sable.
14. Pinela, De Gueulles a trois Pommes ^e Pin d'Or. 3.2.1.
14. Spinola, d'Or a la Face Eschiquette ^'Argent, and de Gueulles de Trois traicts, and ^r icelle vne Fleur de Lys de Gueulles. I ^aue seene the Armes of the Marquesse ^pinola, wherein is a Thorne pointed ^ith Red or Gueulles, instead of a Floure ^e Luce.
16. Vzodimare, de Gueulles a Quatre ^esses ondees d'Argent.
17. Cibo, de Gueulles a la Bande Es^hiquettee d'Azur, and d'Argent de Trois traicts, au Chef de Malte.
18. Formara, Cheuronne de Gueulles and d'Argent de Six pieces.
19. Iustiniana, de Gueulles, au Chastea^ d'Argent, maconne de Sable, au Chef d'Or, charge d^vn Aigle Naissant de Sable, Coronnee, and Lampasse de Gueulles.
20. Cattagna, d'Or a l'Aigle naissante de Sable, Lampasse, and Coronne de Gueulles, Couppe d'Argent a Trois Faisses d'Azur.
21. Viualda, de Gueulles party d^Or, au Chef d'Argent a l'Aigle naissant de Sable.
22. Saluaga, d'Or, a vn Tourteau de Sable, Charge d'vn Lyon rempant d'Argent.
23. Palauicina, d^Or a Quatre pieces d'Eschiquier d'Azur, au Chef d'Or a vne Croix recroisettee par les deux costez de Sable.
24. Lercara, Face de Gueulles, and d'Or de Sept pieces.
25. Salua, d'Argent a vn Aigle de Gueules aux Pieds d'Azur.
26. Cigala, de Gueulles a vn Aigle d' Argent, Coronne d'Or.
27. Prementoria, de Gueulles couppe de Sable a la Fesse de Cinq Lozenges d'Argent. The last House is
28. Interiana. Laquelle porte de Sable, au Lyon rampant d^Argent Coronne d'Or, Arme, and Lampasse de Gueulles.

But in the yeare of my birth, which was One thousand fiue hundred threescore ^nd sixe (when the Ordenance was made by King Charles the ninth,Alteration of the yeare to begin the first day of Ianuary. for the yeares ^eginning the first day of Ianuarie, which began to be put in practise the first day ^f Ianuarie following, when they accounted threescore and seauen) the auncient ^biected Families, thorow want of meanes of ioyning themselues with those eight ^nd twentie; declared to the Seigneurie, that it was vnbeseeming, yea, very vn^easonable and against all equitie, to make them loose the honor and memory of Families, which in elder times had appeared in all Prouinces of the world and were ^llied to Emperours of Greece, Kings and Princes of Christendome. Whereupon it ^leased the Seigneurie to ordaine, that euery Family, were it poore or rich, should ^ill hold and retaine the name and Armes of their Noble Ancestors.Riches are flitting from one to another. Because ^iches and possessions passed from one House to another, and such as to day ^re poore and naked of meanes, to morrow may be wealthie and abounding in goods.

Multa renascentur quae nunc cecidere, cadentque.
One hundred yeares a Banner bearer, Another hundred yeares a Banner-driuer.

Nor doth pouertie abate courage and desire in doing well, but contrariwise we ^ee, that rich men are mounted vp to dignities, first by money, but no merit,Pouerty can be no preiudice to vertue. hauing ^lwayes a vile minde, scraping in the earth, and sauouring rightly of the place of ^heir extraction. It was then a most execrable transgression, to deface the memory ^f so great a number of Families, famous by the vertuous actions of their Noble Ancestours, such as were the Adornes, the Pi^agnos, the Zacharias and Bocanegras, Dukes of Geneway, and Princes of the Seas, of whom some tender Slips and yong Plants,

were yet to be seene in Geneway, and elsewhere. Vpon these Remonstrances the ^^^neurie appointed, that the establishment of the twentie eight Families, ordained (...) the yeare Fiue hundred twentie and eight, should continue still in force and vertue* and yet notwithstanding,The final conclusion of the Seigneurie. the other should retaine and keepe their auncient n^^^ and Armes, as making Houses of themselues, and of great Honor.
The Adornes, Portent d'Or a la Bande Eschiquetee d'Argent and de Sable, de Trois Traicts.
The Pisagnos, D'Azur a Cinq Fleurs de Lys d'Or en Saultoir, Couppe en Pointe a Trois Fesses ondees d'Azur.
The Zacharias (A Branch of the House of Fiesca, and whereof was descended Pope Innocent, fift of the name) Portoient d'Or Escartel^e de Gueulles: And
The Bocanegras D'Argent, flancque de Gueulles, au Chef d'Or a vne Croix entiere de Sable.
We haue bin the more willing to remember these Families, because mention of them is made in our Histories: And in regard that this State had our Most Christian Kings to be their Lords.


The Order of Sauoye; called, Of the Annuntiation: Instituted by Amadis, Fift of the name, Count of Sauoye: And in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred fiftie and fiue.
L'Ordre d^ Sauoye, dict de L'Annonc^^de.CHAP. IIII.
The Originall and Genealogie of the Dukes of Sauoye.
IN the sinking and declining of our Kings descended of Charlemaigne, Heires to his Goods, but not his Vertues; the great body of the French Empire was dismembred (as we haue said) yea, torne in pieces: the Gouernours whereof possessed themselues (by right of conueniencie, or as lying fittest for their turne) some of Italie, others of Germani^ and Bourgongne, and euen of those parts that were i^ France.
The Armes of the auncient Saxo Gouernours.Henry, first of the name, sirnamed the Bird-catcher (So^ to Otho, Duke of Saxonie) possessed himselfe of the Empire, about the yeare of Grace Nine hundred thirtie seauen. The auncient Gouernours of Saxonie, during the time of their Idolatrie, Portoient d'Argent au Poulaingay de Sable, and after by force and faire meanes, our King Charlemaigne had caused them to embrace Christianitie, (...) the yeare Eight hundred and twenty; they tooke De Gueulles au Poulain gay teu^^^ d'Argent. Since which time, this House being falne into diuers Families; besi^^ those auncient Armes, began to take moderne, which are Face d'Or, and de Bable de (...) pieces a la Coronne de Rue perie en Bande de Synople. This Emperour Henry had many Children by his Wife Mechtilda, as namely
Bruno, Archbishop of Cologne.Mechtilda, Lady Abbesse in Quendelimbourg.
The Armes of the Bauarians.Henry, Duke of Saxonie by the Fathers side, and of Bauaria in right of his wif^ Iutith, Daughter to Duke Arnold. The Armes of the Bauarians are Lozengees d'Argent d'Azur and en bande sans nombre.
A m^^ of Lo^^^^e.Gerberga, wife in first marriage to Gilbert, Duke of Lorraine. They of this Proui^^^ did aunciently beare D'Argent au Chef passant de Gueulles somme d'Or. After the Voyage to Ierusalem, they did take D'Or a la Bande de Gueulles chargee de (...)

^^erio^s d'Argent. In Second Mariage she espoused our King Lewes of Beyond the ^eas.
Alinda, Wife to Hugh the Great, Count of Paris; and in this mariage was borne Hugh Capet, King of France, Authour and originall of those Kings,The birth of Hugh Capet. which afterward Sixe hundred yeares space) held the most famous Crowne of the Sacred Lillies of France.
Otho, (Sirnamed the Great) First of the name, who by his first wife Editha, daugh^er to the King of England, had two Sonnes, to witt.
Lutolphe, Duke of Saxonie by his wife Iutha, Daughter to Herman; Duke of Ger^anie; And
William, Archbishop of Maguntia.
In second Mariage he had to Wife Adelaida, Daughter to Rodolphe, King of the ^igher Bourgongne: The Kings whereof Portoient d'Or au Chat effar^uche de Sable,Arme^ of Bourgongne the hig^^^. In ^his mariage were borne Foure Children.

Henry.


Bruno.

Luitgarda, Wife to Conrad, Duke of Suauba, and of ^ranconia: And
Otho Emperour, Second of the name, who had two Wiues. The first wherof was ^ixia, Daughter to the Marquesse of Austria: Qui Portoit d'Azur a Cinq Cailles d'Or, ^ut others say Six, 3.2.1. and others noate Sans nombre. His other wife was So^hia, Daughter to the Emperour of Greece. Qui portoit de Gueules a l'A^gle esploye d Or ^rise sur l'estomach de Constantinople, qui est de Gueules a la Croix d'Or Cantonnee de qua^e Fusils* ou B. tournez de mesme. Of these two mariages he had,
Otho Emperour, Third of the name, who tooke to wife Mary of Arragon: And
Hugh, Duke of Saxonie, who by Iutha of Bauaria his Wife, lefte
Frederick, Duke of Saxonie
Huldrick: And as followeth.

Heere we enter into Sauoye.

^. BErauld, or Berolde of Saxonie, made by the King of Bourgon^ne (Rodolphe his kinseman) Gouernour ^nd Vice-Roy of Arles, Sauoye, and of ^he valley Augusta, which Gouernement ^ontinued to him by the King of Bour^ongne Bozon. By Ricarda his Wife, Daughter to the Marquesse of Vithin Qui portoit d'Or a deux faces viurees, ^vne d'Azur, et l'autre de Sable. He left ^ut one Sonne,
II. Humbert, first of all Gouernour ^f his Fathers Estates, by his death hap^ening about the yeare of Grace, 1027; And afterward made Counte of Mauri^na. By his Wife Adelaida, Daughter ^o the Marquesse of Susa (Qui portoit Par^ d'Argent et de Gueules en chacun vne ^our de l'vn en l^autre) he had
Elizabeth, wife to a Counte of Mascon, who bare in Armes D'Argent a l' Aigle sploye d Azur.

Eudes.

Aymon: And for eldest Sonne
III. Ame, or Amadis, who by the ^eath of his Father, happening in the ^eare, One thousand, forty and eight, was Counte of Morienna. He had to Wife Iane, Daughter to William, Counte Bourgongne: Qui portoit d'Azur seme de Biletes d'Or au Lyon de mesme. And in this mariage was borne,
Constance, First Wife to William the Aged, Fourth Marquesse of Montferrat. The Lords of Which Marquisate Portent d'Argent au Chef de ^ueules: Armes retained by the Marquesse of Saluces: And
IV. Humbert, Second of the name, Count of Morienna, by the death of his Father, happening 1078. By his Wife Laurentia, Daughter to the Count of Carpentras (who bare D'Argent Escartele de Gueules a deux paux d'Or) he had Sixe Children. And heere the Reader may please to obserue, that to auoyde long repetitions of names, we vse to set downe the Eldest last of all.

William.


Humbert.


Renauld.

Alix, Wife to Lewes le Cros, King of France Sixt of the name.
Ioane, Wife to the Count of Flanders: And
V. Amadis, second of the name, Count

of Morienna the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, one hundred and three, who according to Pigonius, and other Germaine Writers, had two Wiues: the first, of the House of Lorraine, and the other of that of Auuergne. If she were of Lorraine, she ought to beare D'Or a la Bande de Gueules, chargee de Trois Alleryons d'Argent: And she of Auuergne should beare D'Or au Griffon de Gueules Couppe de Synople, which is of Auuergne. The Sauoyans doe giue him but one wife, whom they name Guygonia, Daughter to Albane, whom some make to be Counte de Forrests; others, Daulphine d'Auuergne; and some other Daulphine of Viennois. The Daulphines of Viennois and of Auuergne, doe beare Armes alike, D'Or au Daulphine pasme pers (that is Azur) Forrests porte de Gueules au Daulphine pasme pers d'Argent. Of this Guygonia he begate a fruitfull Ligne.
Alex, Wife to the Viscount of Mallayne; An other
Alix, Wife to a Lord of Beauieulois in France, the Lords whereof doe beare D'Or au Lyon rempant de Sable, au Lambel de Gueules.

Iohn.

Peter; And
Humbert, Count of Sauoye.
The Auncestours and Predecessors of Amadis the Second, did carry no other title then Countes of Morienna* But this man tooke title of Count of Sauoye, and Vicare of the Empire; which was giuen him by the Emperour Henry, Fift of the name: So say the Annalists of Sauoy, and that hee made one in the Croissade in the voyage ouer the Seas, with our King Lewes the younger, Seauenth of the name, and died in the Isle of Cyprus, in the Courte of Guye of Lusignan, King of Cyprus, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, forty and nine, according to the Germaine Chronicle. But they of Sauoye doe accounte his death, vnder the yeare, One Thousand, one Hundred, Fifty and Foure.
VI. Humbert, Third of the name, Second Counte of Sauoy, who by his Third wife Peronella, Daughter to the Counte of Bourgongne, had one only Sonne,
Thomas, Counte of Sauoy by the departure and death of his Father, cha^nci^g in the yeare, One thousand, two hundred and one, or according to the Germaine Chronicle, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and eighteene. And two Daughters,
Agnes, Wife to a King of England, who is not named by the Germaine Chro^^cle; And
Aelianor, who was twise maried. First to the Count of Vingte-Mille (Qui port^^ de Geueles a l' Aigle esp;loye d'Or, qui est (...) l'Empire de Grece, escartele de Tende, q^^ est de Gueules au Chef d'Or. In second mariage she espoused the Marquesse of Montferrat.
VII. Thomas had in mariage Beatri^, Daughter to Guye, Count of Gene^^^, who bare in Armes Vne Eschiquier co^pose de Cinq Poincts d'Or, equipolez a Q^^tre d'Azur. In this mariage were borne nine Sonnes, and Three Daughters.
VIII. Amadis, Third of the nam^, Counte of Sauoy, and Duke of Chabl^^* One thousand, two hundred, thirty and three.
Humbert, who was of the Church.
Thomas, Counte of Maurienna and of Flanders; And also Prience of Piedm^^^ by Alliance.

Aymon.


William.

Amadis, Bishop of Maurienna.
IX. Peter, Counte of Sauoye, Duke of Chablais and of Augusta, the yeare of Grace One thousand, two hundred, threescore and three.
Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury.
X. Phillip, Count of Sauoy and of Bourgongne, the yeare One thousand, two hundred, threescore and eight.
The Daughters were
Aelianor, Wife to the Counte of M^rania, who bare D'Azur a l'Aigle esc^quee d'Or et de Gueules, languee, membree de mesme.
Margaret, Wife to the Counte of Q^bourg, Qui portoit d'Or a Trois Faces de G^eules.
Beatrix of Sauoy, Wife to the Count of Prouence Raymond Beregarius: And of this marriage came Foure Daughter^ Queenes, as namely
Margaret, Wife to Saint Lewes, King of France, Ninth of the name.
Elianor, Wife to Henry, Third of

^he name, King of England.
Sancia, Wife to Richard of England, ^arle of Cornewall, and afterward Empe^our* And
Beatrix, Countesse of Prouence, Wife to Monsieur Charles of France Brother to Saint Lewes) Counte of An^ and du Maine, King of Naples and ^^cilie.
XI. Amadis, Third of the name, who ^ad to Wife Cecilie, Daughter to Ray^ond, Count of Prouence, These Counts ^f Prouence, in those times, Portent de ^^^ules a la moitie d'vne Croix Clechee ^Or, party de mesme a vne demye Estoile a ^ix Raiz de Gueules. In this Marriage ^as borne a Sonne
XII. Boniface, Counte of Sauoye, One ^housand, two hundred, fiftie foure. ^ee was Sirnamed Rowland, for his ^rength and valiancy: yet died priso^er to Counte Peter his Vnckle, in the ^owne of Ast, Anno, One thousand, ^wo hundred, fifty sixe, and was not ma^ed.
The Daughters were
Beatrix; Wife to the Marquesse of Mountferrat, and afterward Duke of ^uaba.
Margaret, Wife to the Marquesse of Montferrat.
Beatrix the yonger, maried to a Prince (...) Germanie.
Constance, Queene of Castille: And
Elianor, maried in Germanie.
XIII. Peter, Counte of Spayne, Duke ^f Chablais and of Augusta: By an Infanta ^f Arragon, his Wife, hee had but one Daughter.
Beatrix, Wife in First mariage to the Daulphine of Viennois. And in second marriage shee espoused the Counte of ^^r. By the death of Peter, deceasing without Heire masle, the Countie of Sa^oye fell to his Brother.
XIV. Phillip, Counte Palatine of Bourgongne, by his Wife Alix, the only Daughter to Otho. Who seeing himselfe without Linage; declared the Children of his Brother Thomas, Counte of Maurienna, and Prince of Piedmont to be his Heires. The said Thomas had espoused Beatrix of Fiesca, a Geneways (whose Armes and Familie wee haue before obserued) and by her he had three Sonnes, and one Daughter.
Thomas Prince of Piedmont, who tooke to Wife the Heire of the County of Bourgongne.
Amadis, Counte of Sauoye.
Lewes, Baron of Vaux, a Seigneurie whereof he bare the Armes, D'Argent a vne Montagne de Sable.
The Daughter was
Leonora, Wife to the Lord of Beauio^ in Beauieulois.
By the death of Counte Phillip, deceasing without issue, One thousand, two hundred, fourescore and foure, his Nephew,
XV. Amadis, Fourth of the name, called the Great, was Count of Sauoye, inuested therein by his Vnckle,The Ring of Saint Maurice and in his life time By the Ring of Saint Maurice. Hee was likewise Duke of Chablais and of Augusta: he had also three Wiues.
The first was Sybilla, Countesse of Baugey, and Lady of Br^scia, which Seigneuries (by this Alliance) fell and came to the House of Sauoye. The Armes of which Seigneuries are De Gueules au Lyon rampant d'Ermines. The Second Wife was Daughter to the Daulphin of Viennois. And the Third was of the House of Henaulte. By which Wiues he had three Sonnes, and nine Daughters.
Bonna, Wife to the Daulphine of Viennois, and afterward Counte of Bourgongne.
Beatrix, Wife to the Duke of Suaba, Qui porte d'Argent a Trois Leopards de Sable.
Aelianor, Wife to the Counte de Forests.
Margaret, Wife to the Marquesse of Mountferrat.
Agnes, Wife to the Counte de Geneuois.
Mary, Wife to the Daulphine of Viennois Prince of Maiorica.
Katharine, Wife to the Duke of Austria.
Blanche, married to the Duke of Millaine. And
Iane, Wife to one tearmed of Silesia.
The Sonnes were,
IohnAymonEdwardCountes of Sauoye.
Amadis the Great hauing assisted with his forces, purse and person the Knights

of the Rhodes, against the powers of the Turke; was entreated by those Knights, to take for his Armes those of their Religion. And this was the reason, why he he forsooke the Auncient Armes of the Countes of Sauoye,The Armes of Rhodes taken by Amadis, and his worde added. who caried (after Hugh of Saxonie) D'Argent a l'Aigle esploye de Sable charge en l'Estomach de Gueules au Cheual gay tourne d'Argent; party de faisce d'Or and de Sable de Six pieces a la Coronne de Rue de Synople, perie en Bande: And tooke the Armes of the Religion of Rhodes, which are De Gueules a la plaiue Croix d'Argent. The youngest Sonnes of Sauoye tooke (with the same Crosse) vne Bande Componnee d'Or et de Sable. With the said Crosse Amadis tooke this word, as a deuise, FERT, euery Letter supplying the place of an intire word, to say Fortitudo Eius Rhodum Tenuit: His Power Supported Rhodes. He died in Auignion, whether was then transferred the Holy Seate, in the yeare, One thousand, three hundred, twenty and three: leauing for Successour his Eldest Sonne.
XVI. Edward, Counte of Sauoye, Duke of Chablais and of Augusta. By Mary, Daughter to the Duke of Bourgongne; Qui portoit Bande d'Or and d'Azur de Six pieces a la bordure de Gueules: He left but one Daughter
Ioane or Iane, Wife to the Duke of Bretaigne.
So that by death of the said Edward, happening in the yeare, One thousand, three hundred, twenty nine, his second Brother
XVII. Aymon was Counte of Sauoye, Duke of Chablays and of Augusta: Who by his Wife Yoland of Montferrat, had two Sonnes, and as many Daughters.

Blanche, Wife to the Duke of Millayne: And

Katharine.


The Sonnes were
Iohn: And
XVIII. Amadis, Fifte of the name, called the Greene Counte of Sauoye, was Duke of Chablais and of Augusta by the death of his Father, happening in Anno, One Thousand, three Hundred, forty and three. By his First Wife Margaret of Cyprus, hee had no issue. By Bonna of Bourbon, Sister to the Duke of Bourbon, Authour of the Order of the Thistle, Lewes, he had two Sonne
Lewes: AndAmadis the Sixt.
Amadis the Fift tooke delight to (...) alwayes attired in Greene* a couller^^^ becomming amourous persons, and whereof he was sirnamed. This man was the Authour of the Order of the A^nuntiation, Whereof we shall haue occasion to speake more heereafter. He d^ed in the yeare, One thousand, th^^^ hundred, fourescore and three, le^^^^ the Succession to his Sonne
XIX. Amadis, called the Red, S^^ of the name. It was to this man, th^ the Counte of Prouente engaged the County of Nice, which the Dukes of Sauoye haue kept to this present. The Armes of the Countie of Nice are D'Argent a vne Montagne de Sable a l'Aigle (...) Gueules esleue dessus. He tooke to Wi^^ Bonna de Berry (Qui portoit de France a l^ Bordure engreslee de Gueules) Second daughter to Monseiur Iohn of France, Duke of Berry and of Auuergne, Brother to King Charles the Fift, and Iane, Daughter to the Count of Armaignack: and in this mariage was borne one Sonne and two Daughters.
Bonna, Wife to the Prince of Pied^^^ of Achaia, and of Morea, Qui portoit de Gueules a la croix plaine d'Argent a l^ B^de d'Azur: And
Iane, Wife to the Marquesse of Mo^^ferrat.
The Sonne was
Amadis; Seauenth of the name, Co^^^ of Sauoye by the death of his Father, which happened on the day of A Saints, Anno, One thousand, foure h^^dred, fourescore and thirteene. He h^^ to Wife Margaret of Bourgongne, Eld^^^ Daughter of Monsieur Phillip of Fra^^^* Duke of Bourgongne, called the H^^^^ Qui Portoit seme de France a la ^^dure de Gueules, Escartele de l'Anci^^^^ Bourgongne, qui estoit Bande d'Or (...) d'Azur de Six pieces a la Bordure de ^^eules.
Of Counte, as formerly he was, he was made the First Duke of S^^^^ by the Emperour Sigismond, w^^ would needes make this erection i^ the Citty of Lyons, and on our K^^^^ Land, who acknowledged none but G^^ only for their Soueraigne in this Kingdome: but the Officers of his Maie^^^,

constrained the said Emperour Sigis^^nd, to goe and vse his authority out of France, as we haue said elsewhere. This ^rection of the County of Sauoye into a Dukedome, was done in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, foure hundred, ^nd seauenteene.
At the age of sixe and fifty yeares, he ^ost his Wife, by whom he had foure Daughters, and fiue Sonnes.
Mary, Wife to the Duke of Millayne.
Margaret, who was not married. An ^ther
Margaret, thrise married. First to the King of Naples and Sicilie, of the House of Aniou. Secondly to the Duke of Ba^aria: And lastly to the Duke of Wir^emberg, who bare D'Or a Trois Cornes de Cerf perte en Fesses de Sable.
Bonna, maried to the Count of Mont^ort. Qui portoit plainement de Bretaigne, ^hat is to say D'Hermines.
The Sonnes were
Amadis, Prince of Piedmont.Phillip, Counte de Geneuois, Comes Ge^ennarum, without any issueAnthony the First, without issue.Anthony the Second, issue-lesse also: AndLewes, Duke.
Hauing thus lost his Wife, and seeing himselfe charged with Children, being ^ow aged sixe and fifty yeares: he resol^ed to forsake the World, and therwith^ll, to surrender his Estates and Seigneu^ies, to the Gouernement of Lewis his Eldest Sonne, in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred, thirty and nine. He made his retreate to Ripaille, a solitarie place, a Priorie of the Order of Saint Maurice, formerly founded by his Predecessours, and by him rebuilte vpon the Lake of Geneua, about halfe a mile from the Towne of Tholon. It was the same Duke Amadis the Seauenth, that tooke the habite and cloathing of an Hermite, of the Order of Saint Maurice, as we will fur^her relate, vsing the plaine wordes of Engue^ran de Monstrelet, in his History of France.
Grise Robbe, long Mantel, and Chapperon Gris, courte Cornette d'vn pied ou enuiron, and vn Bonnet Vermeil: la Robbe ceinte de Ceniture dorce, and par dessus le Mantel Vne Croix D'Or pareille a celle que portoient les Empereurs d'Alemagne. Pour le seruice de sa Personne, and de quelques Seigneurs qui s'estoient confinez auec luy, il ret^nt Vingt de ses Seruiteurs, qui le traictoient non de racines, and de claire eau de fontaine, viandes and breuuage des anciens Hermites* mais de viandes exquises, and de vins delicieux.
A Graye gowne, long Cloake, and Gray Hood or Chapperon, a short Cornet of a foote long, or thereabout and a Redd Bonnet. The Gowne was guirded with a Golden Girdle, and aboue on the Cloake was A Crosse of Golde, like to that which was worne by the Emperours of Germanie. For the seruice of his person, and of some Lords that were there confined with him, he kept twenty of his Seruants; who fed not on Rootes, and cleare water from the Fountaine, meate and drine of Auncient Hermites: but on exquisite Viandes, and delicious Wines.
Vpon the life of this Duke Hermite, our Ancestours raised a Prouerbe, very frequent and common among vs Faire Ripaille, Ripaille Fare or Diet, to speake more plaine:
Such a Life as Gluttons desire,To feede on good Fare, and haue a good fire.Vie de Goulu,Faire Gaude-chere, et beau Feu.
This Amadis was elected Pope at the Councill of Basile,The Duke of Sauoye chosen Pope. (after the deposition of Eugenius the Fourth) and named Foelix the Fift, and maintained himselfe in that title for Nine yeares, Sixe Moneths and Seauen dayes; till forced by the Princes, vnited and assembled, to stifle the Hydra of the Three and Twentieth Schisme: he quitted the Papall dignitie to Pope Nicholas the Fifte, Canonically elected for the peace of the Church, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, foure hundred, forty and seauen. And this Amadis contented himselfe with the title of Cardinall, Bishop of Sabina, and Legation during his life in Sauoye, and with this Condition, that the Cardinalles made by him, should remaine in that dignity. For this Session, was all Christendome very ioyfull, and in memorie therof was made this Antique Rithme.
Lux fulsit Mundo, cessit Foelix Nicolao.
Hee died aged Threescore and Nine yeares, and in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fifty and two.
XIX. Lewes, Second of the name, Duke of Sauoye, of Chablais and Augusta, began to Reigne in the life time of his

Father, One thousand foure hundred thirty nine. He had espoused in the Citty of Chambery (where his Father had established the Senate of Sauoye) Anne, the only Daughter to Iohn of Lusignan, King of Ierusalem, Armenia and Cyprus. And in this Mariage were borne Nine Sonnes, and Seauen Daughters, with whom we will beginne.
Anne, neuer Maried.
Charlote, Queene of France, Second Wife to King Lewes the Eleauenth: of whom the Portraites (made according to life) are to be seene in the Glasse windowe ouer the high Altar in the Church of the Sisters of Aue Maria at Paris.

Margaret, Wife to the Marquesse of Montferrat.
Bonna, Wife to the Duke of Millayne.

Agnes

Mary: And

Iane.


The Sonnes were
Amadis the Eight, Duke.Lewes, King of Cyprus, by reason of Queene Charlote his Wife.Iohn, Counte de Geneuois.Iames, Count of Rhomont and of Vaux.Phillip, Count of Brescia and of Baugis, afterward Duke: Il portoit de Sauoye, party de Baugie.Aymen.Peter, Bishop of Geneua.Iohn Lewes, Bishop of Geneua after his Brother: AndFrances, Archbishop of Auch in Gascoignie, Count of Armaignack.
The Duke of Sauoye Lewes established a Senate at Turine (in Latine Augusta Taurinorum) for the Lands of Pied-mont Anno, One Thousand, foure hundred, fifty and nine. He dyed at Lyons, he being come thither to visite King Lewes the Eleuenth his Sonne in Law, in the yeare, One Thousand, foure hundred, threescore and sixe, leauing for successour his Eldest Sonne.
XX. Amadis, called the Vertuous, Eight of the name, who tooke to Wife Yoland of France, Second Daughter to King Charles the Seauenth: And in this Mariage were borne Sixe Sonnes, and Three Daughters.

Anne, Wife to the Prince of Arragon: Qui portoit d'Arragon au Lambeau de Trois pieces d'Azur. Others say the Count of Paillars.
Mary: And
Louisa, Maried in the house of ^^f. sawe de Chalon.

The Sonnes were
CharlesPhillebert, Duke.Bernarde,Charles, Duke.Iames Lewes, Counte De Gene^: AndClaudius Galeas, or Galeazzo.
Amadis the Eight died of a Dysenterie in the Citty of Orleans, in the Moneth of Iune, One Thousand, foure hundred, threescore and eleauen: After whom succeeded his Sonne
XXI. Phillebert, Duke of Sauoye, of Chablais and of Augusta: Dux Sub^^li^, Chablasij and Augustae. By his wife Bland Maria, Daughter to Galeazzo, Duke of Millayne, he left not any Issue. So that by his death, happening at Lyons in the yeare, One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and two, the sixteenth of his Age; his Brother
XXII. Charles came to the Dukedomes of Sauoye, Chablais and Augusta. He died at Pigneroll, in the Moneth of Marche, One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and tenne, and at the age of two and twenty yeares. By his Wife Blanche, daughter to William, Marquesse Montferrat, he had and left a Sonne and a Daughter.
Louisa-Yolanda, wife to her owne Cousine, of the same name and Armes: And
XXIII. Charles, Iohn, Amadis, second of the name, Duke of Sauoye, and other estates of his Father, which were left him at the age of two yeares, vnder the Regency of Blanche, his Mother, and the Tutelage of his Vnckle by the Fathers side. He liued but eight yeares, so that by his death, chauncing in Anno, 1496, the Estates of Sauoye, Chablais and August^ fell to the great Vnckle by the Fathers side.
XXIV. Phillip, Second of the name, called the Faire, Count of Brescia and of Baugie (Brixiae, and Baugiaci Comes) Sonne of Lewes, Brother to Amadis the Vertuous, Eight of the name, Duke of Sauoye. This was a valiant and magnanimious Prince, and so good a Frenchman; that he was made Duke of Nemours, Knight of the Order of Saint Michaell, and Gouernour of Daulphine.

He married two wiues, and by the first, named Margaret of Bourbon, Daughter to Charles, Duke of Bourbon, were borne
Louisa de Sauoye, wife to Charles, Count of Engoulesme, Sirnamed of Orleans; Father and Mother to the great King Frances the first. To this Count of Engoulesme hath bin giuen for Armes: D'Orleans au Lambeau charge de Trois Croissants de Gueulles, Escartele de Millan: And
Phillebert, Duke.
In second Marriage he espoused Claudia, Daughter to the Count of Ponthieure. Qui portoit d'Azur a Trois Gerbes liees d Or, Escartele de Bretaigne. And in this second Marriage were borne Charles, Duke.

Lewes.

Phillip, Duke of Nemours, and Count de Geneuois: Dux Nemorosis, and Comes Gebennarum.
Phileberta, wife to Laurentio, or Lorenzo de Medicis, Brother to Pope Leo the tenth.
Absalon: And

Iohn Amadis.

Phillip the second had (beside) a naturall Sonne
Rene, who made his fortunes in France, where he was Great Maister, Knight of the Order of Saint Michael, Gouernour of Prouence vnder King Frances the first, Count of Beaufort and of Villars. Of this Bastard Sonne of Sauoye, are descended the Houses of the Counts of Tendes, and Marquesse de Villars. Il portoit de Sauoye (which is of Malta) Escartele de Constantinople, qui est de Gueulles a l'Aigle esploye d'Or, Contre-Escartele de Tendes, qui est de Gueulles au Chef d'Or (in regard of Anne de Lascaris his wife, Countesse of Tendes, descended from the last Christian Emperours of Constantinople) a la Bande ou Cotice d'Azur brochant sur le tout. Before him there was dwelling in France
Phillip of Sauoye, Duke de Nemours, and Prince de Geneuois: who tooke to wife Charlote of Orleans, daughter to Lewes of Orleans, Duke of Longueuille: And of this mariage issued
Iames, Duke de Geneuois, and de Nemours: And
Iane or Ioane, wife to Nicholas of Lorraine, who was Count of Vaudemont, Marquesse of Nomeny, etc.
And of this Marriage came
Louisa, Queene of France, wife to Henry the third, King of France, and of Poland of sacred memory.
Phillip Emanuel of Lorraine, Duke de Mercoeury, and of Pont-Yeure, Peere of France, Marquesse of Nomeny, Knight of the Kings two Orders, and Lord Gouernour of Bretaigne.
N. wife in first mariage to Anne, Duke de Ioyeuse, Peere and Admirall of France: And in second Nuptials to Frances of Luxembourg, Duke de Pigney, and Peere of France.
Charles of Lorraine, Cardinall de Vaudemont, Bishop of Toul.
N. Count of Chaligny, etc.
Iames of Sauoye, Duke of Nemours, of Montagut, etc. Prince de Geneuois, and Knight of the Order of Saint Michael, caused the Hostell of Nemours to be builded, and the Streete paued on the Key or Port of the Augustines at Paris: on the great Gate wherof are the Armes, which were born by the same Iames, and Phillip his Father, such as are borne by the same Dukes of Sauoye, except Sur le Tout, qui est de Malta, there is a Bordure d'Azur.

Pour Cimier il y a Deux Heaumes affrontez de Coste, chacun charge de Deux Colomnes dorees and Argentees, ou sont depeints les Quartiers des Armes de Sauoye: Sur le Heaume du mitan tarre de front, est vn muffle de Lyon Coronne d'vn Chappeau d Or.

Pour Tenants and Support Deux Lyons Argentez; which are the Supporters of Sauoye, the Order of Saint Michael round about the Shield.
Hee had to wife Anne of Ferrara, daughter to Hercules d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, Rhegium and Modena, and Madam Renea of France, Daughter to King Lewes the twelth, Father of the Pope, and of Madame Anne, Duchesse of Bretaigne, two seuerall times Queen of France. The said Anne of Ferrara, Duchesse of Montargis, Vicountesse of Chartres, etc. had espoused in her first Mariage Frances of Lorraine, Duke of Guise: And in this first marriage was born Henry, Duke of Guise, Great Maister of France; Charles, Duke de Mayenne and d'Aiguillon; and Lewes, Cardinall de Guise, and Archbishop of Rheimes.
In the second Mariage were borne Henry, Marquesse of Saint Sorlin, at

this present Duke de Nemours, Prince de Geneuois, etc. Hauing to wife Anne of Lorraine, Daughter and sole heire to Charles of Lorraine duke d'Aumale, Peere and great Huntesman of France, who beareth for Armes De Lorraine au Lambell de Gueulles, Escartele de Bourbon.
Anne of Ferrara, Mother to the said Henry, Duke de Nemours; Portoit de Ferrara, qui est de France a la Bordure endenchee d'Or, party d'Azur a vn Aigle d'Argent Arme, and Coronne d'Or: Couppe de France sans Brizure, as we see on the Portall of the Hostell de Guise (aunciently called of Clisson, and of Miserecordia or Mercie.) And on the Gates of the Hostell de Nemours. Come wee now againe to the Duke of Sauoye;
XXIV. Phillip, second of the name, who dyed at Chamberg, the seauenth day of Nouember, One thousand foure hundred fourescore and seauenteene. He had for Successour his Sonne
XXV. Phillebert, second of the name, and stiled likewise the Fayre, nourished in the Court of France, by King Charles the eight his Cousine; with whom he was at the Conquest of the Kingdome of Naples; and at that of the Dukedome of Millaine, with King Lewes the twelfth. He left no issue by Margaret of Austria his wife, Daughter to the Emperour Maximillian: And by his death, happening in September, Anno One thousand fiue hundred and foure, after him succeeded his Brother
XXVI. Charles, third of the name, called the Good, who had to wife Madam Beatrix of Portugall, Daughter to the King of Portugall Dom Emanuell. And in this Marriage were borne tenne Children, as namely, to count them by order.


Hadrian.


Iohn Emanuel.


Lewes.

Emanuel Phillebert, Duke.

Katharine.


Mary.


Isabell.

Emanuel the first.
Emanuel the second: And

Iohn Maria.


In the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and sixteene* King Frances the first began to warre in Sauoye, and the Lands of Piedmont, which he auouched to belong to him, in the right of Madame Louisa of Sauoye his Mother, who being of the first Bed, ought to succeede in the said Seigneuries, by the death of Duke Phillebert his Brother, and to precede Charles the third, who was despoyled of the most part of the pretended Lands, and dyed at Vercellis, aged threescore and seauen yeares, Anno One thousand fiue hundred fiftie and foure, leauing for Successour (by the death of his Bretheren) his eldest Sonne
XXVII. Emanuel Phillebert, nourished (during his yonger yeares) in the Court of the Emperour Charles the fift, King of Spaine.
By the vnhappie Treatie of Peace, made betweene King Henry the second, and Dom Phillip the second, King of Spain at Chasteau-Chambresis, the third day of Aprill, One thousand fiue hundred fiftie and nine, after the Feast of Easter: the King acquitted, rendered and released to the King of Spaine, these places, Townes and Castels of Thionuille (Theodonis Villa) Marienbourg; Yuoy; Danuilliers; Mommedy; Hesdin and her Bailiwicke; the Countie of Charolois in the Duchie of Bourgongne, of the Homage and Iurisdiction of the Crowne of France; the Cittie of Valentia in the Dukedome of Millayne: with all the Fortifications which our Kings had made for Millaine, at vncredible expences. And the King of Spaine rendered to vs but Saint Quentins, Le Catelet and Hames.
To the Duke of Mantua, all the Marquisate of Montferrat.
To the Duke of Florence, the Valley of Montalsin, and those places which the King held in Tuscanie, and in the Estate of Sienna.
By this miserable Treatie, hurtfull to France, the King receiued into Grace, those of Geneway, his mortall enemies, who had rebelled so oftentimes, and yet brought still vnder our Kings obedience. Surrendring also to them, all the places which he held in the Isle of Corsica, without demolishing any thing there.
Euery one well knoweth, that the Marquisate of Saluces hath alwayes relied on Daulphine, which belongeth to the Monarches of the Lillies, and is the title of their first borne Sons: and that

to Madam Louisa, Great Mother to the said King Henry the second, appertained the Dukedome of Sauoye and Piedmont, wherof King Frances the first made himselfe Maister, and the Possession still continued by the same King Henry the second. But yet, thorow bad counsell, and notwithstanding the protestations and remonstrances of the Courts of Parliament; of the very greatest Lords and Captaines of France; of the Gouernors of the places, as Montferrat, Tuscanie, Millayne, Geneway, Piedmont, Saluces: Brescia and Sauoye (which in those times then were places of Honour, where the Nobilitie of France exercised their desire of doing well, to fashion and make themselues apt for Armes) and which was then thought necessary (for the good of France) to yeelde recompence to the Duke of Sauoye, with Lands and Seigneuries seated in the midst of France. Notwithstanding all these Remonstrances and protestations, the King (in a rash and ruinating prodigalitie, and hurtfull for euer to France) surrendered to the said Duke Emanuell Phillebert, three hundred as well Townes, as Castles and strongest places in the Dukedome of Sauoye; the Counties of Brescia and of Baugie; of Morianna, Taren^aisa; the Vicariat of Barcelonetta; the Principalitie of Piedmont, and the Co^ntie of Ast, the auncient Patrimonie of the House of Orleans. Nothing remaining to the Crowne of France, of all her famous Conquests in Italie, but onely fiue poore places, as namely, the Townes and Castles of Turine, Quiers, Pigneroll, and Ville-Neufue d'Ast, with their Commands.
By which vnfortunate Treatie, the said Duke Emanuel Phillebert tooke to wise Madam Margaret of France, onely Sister to King Henry the second; to whom was giuen for maintenance (during her life) the Duchie of Berry, and three hundred thousand Crownes of ready Money at her Marriage; wherein was borne their onely Sonne
Charles Emanuel, Duke.
Phillip Emanuel dyed at Turine the thirtieth day of August, Anno One thousand fiue hundred and fourescore, leauing for Successour his onely Son
XXVIII. Charles Emanuel, fourth of the name, a Martiall Prince and a Warriour, who in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and fiue, tooke to wife the Infanta of Spaine, Katharine, Daughter to the King of Spaine Dom Phillip the second, and Madam Isabella of France, Daughter to King Henry the second. And of this marriage are issued and descended nine Children
Phillip Emanuel.Victor Amadis.Phillebert.Maurice Emanuel, Cardinall of Sauoye.Thomas.Margaret, wife to Frances Gonzaga, Prince of Mantua.Mary.Isabel. AndKatharine.
The same Duke of Sauoye, in the yeare fourescore and eight, when France (by the practises of a furious madded League) saw it selfe on all sides swarming with Souldiours, by an intelligence of the conspiring pursuers,When the troubles of the League ouerawed France. well wadged with Spanish Pistoles, possessed themselues of the Marquisate of Saluces against the Crowne of France, with purpose to proceede for conquering Prouence, and make seizure on Daulphine. The easinesse of inuading Saluces, made him stampe Moneyes of Ducates, with a new figure and Legend, on the one side his picture, and for a Legend round about, his name, titles and the yeare. On the other side was a Centaure, trampling his feete vpon a Crowne, with this word Oportune.
King Henry the third, of holy memory, and Mirrour of good Princes, sunke vn^er the burden of so bloudy a conspiracie, executed vpon his State and life,The Treatie at Veruins in Anno 1598. his Reigne full of troubles, and so was his Successour King Henry the Great: all which gaue way and time to the Duke, both to maintaine and conserue his Conquest. Vntill the Treatie of Veruines in Piccardie, made betweene his most Christian Maiestie, and the Catholique King, wherein the Duke entreated to be comprehended. Which Treatie beareth date the eight day of Iune, One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and eigh^eene, wherein was namely signified by the ninth Article.

Que pour la restitution du Marquisate de Saluces, and autres differends entre le Roy, and le Duc; ils s'en remettoient au iugement and arbitrage de nostre Sainct Pere le P^pe

Clement Huictiesme, pour les iuger and decider dans vn An.

That for the restitution of the Marquisate of Saluces, and other differences betweene the King and Duke: they should commit them to the arbitrage and iudgement of (...) Holy Father the Pope, Clement the eight, to descide and iudge them within a yeare^ space.
The Duke perswading hmselfe, that he should sooner (and better) facilitate his affaires in person; came to the Court of France the thirteenth day of December, at ending the yeare fourescore and nineteene, and was lodged in the Hostell of Nemo^ at Paris,The Duke of Sauoye his commming to Paris. where he remained vntill the first day of March, being Ashwednesday, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred. The Duke at his departure promised the King, that in exchange for the Marquisate of Saluces, he would giue him the Counties of Brescia and Baugie. Which being not executed within compasse of the time prefixed; in the Moneth of August following, the King iournied to Brescia, and into Sauoye, whereof he possessed himselfe within lesse then sixe weekes, not meeting with any to make resistance.The Kings successe in Sauoy. And perforce the Duke was constrained, by mediation of the Pope, and of his Legate in Sauoye the Cardinall Aldobrandino, to come to an agreement. And thereupon a Treatie was made betweene the King and Duke, in the Citie of Lyons the tenth day of Ianuarie, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and one; Where the Duke yeelded and transported to the most Christian King, and to his Successours the Kings of France, in manner and forme following.




A Breuiate of the Treatie at Lyons, betweene the King of France, Henry the Great, and the Duke of Sauoye.
TOus les Pais and Seigneuries de Bresse, Baugie and Veromey, and generalement tout ^e qui luy pouuoit appartenir iusques a la Riuiere du Rosne, icelle comprise; de sorte que toute ladite Riuiere du Rosne, des la sortie de Geneue, seroit du Royaume de France, and ^ppartiendroit audit Sieur Roy, and ses Successeurs. Lesdits Pais cedez, ainsi que dessus, a^ toutes leurs appartenances and despendances, tant en Souuerainete, Iustice, Seigneurie, V^ssaux, and Suiects, and tous Droicts, Noms, Raisons, and Actions quesconques, sans y rien reseruer, demolir, ny retenir.
Delaisse pareillement ledit Duc a sa Maieste, and ses Successeurs la Baronnie and Bailli^ge de Gex, auec toutes ses appartenances and dependances; and au de-la du Rosne les lieux, Terres, and Villages, Dayre, Chaussy, Pont-Darle, Seyssel, Annully, Chaua, and Pont-Chastel, auec leurs Souuerainetez, Iustice, Seigneurie, and tous Droicts qu'il peut auoir en tous les lieux cedez, and sur les Habitants d'iceux; Tous lesquels lieux cedez, seront and demeurer^ vnis and incorporez a la Coronne de France-seront reputez Domaine, and Patrimoine d'icelle, de laquelle ils ne pourront estre separez pour quelque occasion and suiect que ce soit.
Restituera ledit Duc a sa Maieste le Lieu, Valeur, and Chastelenie de Chasteau-Dauphi^, auec la Tour du Pont, and ce qui est occuppe par ledit Duc, and les Siens, dependans du Dauphine, sans y rien desmolir, affoiblir, ny endommager en aucune sorte, and delaissera tu^ l'Artillerie, Poudres, Boulets, and autres munitions de Guerre estants dedans les lieux and places cedees.
Rendra la Citadelle de Bourg en Bresse, auec toutes les pieces and munitions, sans en oster, demolir and endommager aucune chose: fera desmolir le fort de Beche-Dauphin. Et que p^^ ia commodite du passage du Pont de Grezin reserue par le Duc, ledit Duc payeroit a sa Maieste dans sa Ville de Lyon la somme de Cent Mille Escus, de trois Francs piece, monnoye de France, ou la valeur.
Moyennant cesdites Cessions and Transports, and toute l' Artillerie, Poudres, and Munitious conquises, qui demeureront entierement a sa Maieste, ledit Sieur Roy se contente pour le bien de la Paix, delaisser and transporter au Sieur Duc, luy cede and transporte a luy, ses Heritiers and Successeurs tous les Droicts, Noms, Raisons, and Actions, and generalement tout ce qui p^^^ estre pretendu par les Roys and Dauphins de France, a cause du Marquisat de Saluces, s^^ appartenances and dependances, ensemble sur les places de Cental, de Mont, and Rocque-Spar^iere,

sans en rien retenir and reseruer, Et a ledit Sieur Roy quitte and remis audit Sieur Duc toute l'Artellerie and Munitions qui furent trouuees esdites places du Marquisat de Saluces eu l Annee Mille Cinq Cents Quatre Vingts and Huict.
Sa Maieste remet parcillement audit Sieur Duc les Places and Chasteaux de Mommelian, and de Chambery, and tout ce qui a este pris sur ledit Duc, depuis ladite Annee Quatre-V^ngts and Huict, and en ce dernier Voyage par sa Maieste.
ALL the Countreyes and Seigneuries of Brescia, Baugie and Veromey, and generally all that which appertaineth to him, so farre as to the Riuer of Rosne, and it selfe therein comprised: So that all the said Riuer of Rosne, from the issuing forth of Geneua, shall be to the Kingdome of France, and belong to our Lord the King, and to his Successours. The said Countries are yeelded as aboue named, with all their appurtenances and dependances, as well in Soueraigntie, Iustice, Seigneurie, Vassailes and Subiects; as also all Rights, Names, Reasons and Actions whatsoeuer, without reseruing any thing, demolishing or retaining.
The said Duke likewise relinquished to his Maiestie, and to his Successours, the Baronnie and Bayliwicke of Gex, with all the appurtenances and dependances; and ouer and be^ond the Rosne, the places, Lands and Villages Dayrie, Chaussy, Pont-Darle, Seyssell, Annully, Chaua, and Pont-Chastell, with their Soueraignties, Iustice, Seigneurie, and all Rights which he may or might haue in all those yeelded places, and ouer the dwellers in them. All which surrendred places, shall be and remaine vnited and incorporated to the Crowne of France, they shall be reputed as Demaine and Patrimonie thereof; from which they shall not be seperated, by any occasion or suggestion whatsoeuer.
The said Duke shall restore to his Maiestie the place, Worth and Castle-wicke of Chasteau Daulphine, with the Tower duPont, and that which is vsurped by the said Duke and his people, dependants vpon Daulphine; without demollishing any thing, weakening or endamaging them in any sort: and shall relinquish all the Artillerie, Powder, Bullets, and other munitions of warre, being within the places surrendred.
He shall deliuer the Cittadell of Bourg in Brescia, with all the Pieces and munitions, without taking, demollishing and endamaging any thing: he shall cause to be demollished the Fort of Beche-Daulphine. And that for commoditie of the passage from Pont de Grezin, reserued by the Duke; the said Duke shall pay to his Maiestie within the Citie of Lyons, the summe of an hundred thousand Crownes, of three Francs a piece, money of France, or the value of them.
In mediating these grants and transports, and all the Artillerie, Powder and conquered Munitions, which shall remaine intirely to his Maiesty: the said King contenteth himselfe, for the good of Peace, to leaue and transport to the Lord Duke, he yeeldeth and transporteth to him, his heires and Successours, all the Rights, Names, Reasons and Actions, and generally all that may be pretended by the Kings and Daulphines of France, in regard of the Marquisate of Saluces, her appurtenances and dependances; together with the places of Cen^all, de Mont, and Rocque-Sparuiere, without detaining or reseruing any thing. And to our Lord the King is acquitted and released by the said Lord Duke, all the Artillerie and Munitions, which were found in the places of the Marquisate of Saluces, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred fourescore and eight.
His Maiestie also remitteth to the same Lord Duke, the places of Mommelian, and of Chambery, with all that which is taken from the Duke, since the yeare fourescore and eight, and in this last Voyage by his Maiestie.




This Treatie was ratified by the Duke at Lyons, in the beginning of the Moneth of March, in the same yeare sixe hundred and one,Confirmation of this Treaty on either side. and afterward at Turine by the the same Duke, in the Moneth of September following: And by his Maiestie in the Church of the Celestines at Paris, on Monday the second of December, in the same yeare sixe hundred and one. Since which ratification, our Kings and the Duke haue continued peaceable Lords and possessours of their enterchanges.
The King hauing in so short a while conquered Sauoye, caused Coine to be stampt of Gold and Siluer: on the one side was his Image, name, titles and yeare for the Legend. And on the other a Hercules, trampling a Centaure vnder his feete, and exalting a Crowne with one of his hands: and for the soule of this deuise Oportunius,

in exchange of that, forged and stamped by the Duke, in the yeare fourescore and eight.


CHAP. V. The Institution of the Order of the Annuntiation.
WE haue formerly made knowne to you, that Amadis, fift of the name, called the Greene,Loue-lo^ks or Loue-bands Count of Sauoye, Instituted the Millitarie Order of the Snares of Loue (afterward called of the Annuntiation) in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred fiftie and fiue. This Count hauing receiued of his Lady the fauour of a Bracelet, made of the tresses of her Haire, and knit in Loue knots: established thereon this Order of Knighthood. To celebrate the first Chapter on the Feast day of Saint Maurice (Patron of Sauoye) which fell the two and twentieth day of September, the same yeare of this Institution, and so still continually doth:
He composed it to consist of fifteene Knights, comprehending himselfe as chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maister, and his Successours the Counts of Sauoye after him. The first Knights thereof were
The first Knights of the Order.Amadis, Founder of the said Order.Amadis, Count of Geneua.Anthony, Lord of Beauj^u.Hugh de Chalon, Lord of Arlay.Amadis of Geneua.Iohn of Vienna, Admirall of France.William de Grandzon.William de Chalamon.Rowland de Veyssy a Bourbonnois.Stephen, Bastard of La Baume.Gaspard de Monmeur.Barle du Foras.Thennard de Menthon.Amadis Bennard. AndRichard Musard, an Englishman.
The e^mposure of the Collar for the Order.The Collar of this Order was composed of Roses of Gold, enamelled with Red and White, ioyned together by Ties and Knots of Loue of Haire colour Silke, all these Colours and Deuises being dedicated to Madam Venus. Within these Loue-knots were enterlaced foure Letters F. E. R. T. a deuise and noate necessary for the Champions of Mars and Venus, whom the Painters (to this effect) haue coupled together, couered with soft and delicate Loue-knots, and in that manner exposed to the view of the Gods.
The meaning of the foure ^etters.F. E R. T. Frapez, Entrez, Rompez, Tout. But more honestly, this deuise is, and may well be vnderstood, concerning the deuoire of a braue Knight, fighting in the Barriers, or in a Tournament, which our auncient French vsed to call Iousts. At the end of the Collar, vpon the Brest hung an Ouall of Gold, enamelled likewise with the Colours Redde and White; and in the Ouall, the Knight Saint Maurice on Horsebacke.
Saint Eucherius, Bishop of Lyons enstructeth vs, that Maximianus, hauing bin associated in the Empire by Dioclesian, came into the Gaules with a powerfull Armie, to reduce to tearmes of dutie and obedience the Gaules, called Bagaudes, people of the Woods,Maxim^anus (...). which had rebelled against the Romaine Empire, vnder the conduct of Amandus and Aelianus. Their principall Fortresse was in the place, which at this present is called Saint Mor des Fossez, about two miles from Paris, a Monastery built vnder the Reigne of King Clouis the second, on the auncient ruines of the Castle called Castr^m Bagaudarum.
With the Armie of Maximianus was the Legion of Thebes, a Citie in Aegypt,

constant and composed (as well as the rest) of Sixe thousand sixe hundred threescore and sixe Souldiers, ouer whom was Campe-Maister Mauritius, a braue and valiant Knight, and for Corps d' Esquadre or Corporals Exuperius, Candidus, Victor, Innocentius and Vidalius, giuen for Councellours to Mauritius. This Legion was Christian, and in that Faith confirmed by Pope Marcellus.
The Romaine Armie hauing past 
 the Citie of Lyons,M^u^itius and his ^eg^on leaue all the rest. and the Countrey of Valois, Maximianus caused a generall Muster to be made, and after that, a generall Sacrifice to his pretended gods: Which being heard by Saint Maurice, and his Legion: they withdrew themselues thence speedily, higher vpon the Marches of Gaule, to the place called Agaunum.
The Countrey of Valois is about foure daies iournie in length, from the West to the East, beginning from Mont de la Fourche, so farre as to Saint Maurice in Chablois. This generall Muster of the Roman Armie was made on the Plaines of Syon, some few miles from whe^ce, is the Bourrough Town of The Citie of Ma^ana^h in lowe^ Valois. Octodurum: whereat is a Castle with a Bridge made of Stone, vnder which runneth the Riuer of Rosne. In this place it is, where the Countrey of Valois encloseth and shutteth vp it selfe, by meanes of the Gate of the Bridge, which hath no more but one Arche onely. Without which, the high-way forketh it selfe in twaine, the one Northward, leading to the Countie of Aelen, gouerned by the Canton of Bearne, and of which Countie the Inhabitants were heretofore knowne by the name of Antuates were people of Vawd in Sauoye. Antuates. The other high-way conducteth onward on the left hand, and goeth directly into the Duchie of Chablois, the people whereof were in elder times named People of Prouence, containing Sauoy and Dauiph^nois Allobroges, whom we tearme Sauoyars.
At the descending from this small Stone Bridge, is the territorie and Lands of Agaunum, aunciently called the Bourrough of the Veragrians,In the nether Valois. Vicus Veragrorum: And about a Stones cast from thence, is the place where the Legion of Thebes endured Martyrdome, Saint Maurice and his Companions (chiefe Commanders of the Bands) being first decimated among the Tennes, and then to haue their heads smitten off, by the command of Mazimianus; who beholding their constancie in the Faith of Christ Iesus, caused the whole Legion to taste the edge of the Sword, by the grosse multitude of his Idolatrous Armie. Which Martyrdome happened in the yeare of Grace Three hundred and fiue, the fiue and twentie day of September. The Riuer of Rosne, for the length of fiue or sixe miles,The Martyrdome of Saint Mauritius and all his Legion. and the Snowes on the Alpie Mountaines, were dyed and coloured Redde, with the Crimosine Blood of those glorious Martyres: And the Songs of ioy and reioycing vsed among them, in animating one another to endure death with inuincible courage; sweetely resounding from the hollowes of the Mountaines, ascended vp as sacred Incense to heauen.

Hortantes se clade sua sic ire sub Astra.
Alter in alterius caede natauit Heros.
Audiuit rapidas Rhodani fons sanguinis vndas,
Tinxit and Alpinas ira cruenta niues.

So saith the Bishop of Poictiers Fortunatus, in his second Booke and fifteenth Poeme De Sanctis Agaunensibus. The King of Bourgongne Sigismond, caused to be cut and hewen within the Rocke, the Monasterie called Saint Maurice, since then augmented by our Kings,The Monastery of S Maurice cut in a Rocke. and the Bishops of France. But come we now to the Order of Saint Maurice. The Honor and the Statutes of this Order, were augmented and encreased by the first Duke of Sauoye Amadis, seauenth of the name, which was Pope Foelix: who instead of the name of the Order of Loue-Knots, would haue it to be called The Order of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, whose figure he fixed at the end of the Collar,How the Order came to be so called. in place of the Image of Saint Maurice. He changed likewise the Loue-Ties of Silke, into Chainets of Gold, charged with foure Letters, F.E.R.T. and gaue them the Interpretation, according to the Deuise of Amadis the Great, Viz. Fortitudo eius Rhodum tenuit. This alteration changed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred thirtie and foure.
There are two Collars belonging to this Order. This Collar is worne on high Festiuals, and dayes of Ceremonies: But the common serueth for daily wearing. I haue seene them of my Lords the Dukes of Nemours and d' Anmale, and before his returne from Sauoye, those of the Lord Iames Chabont, Count of Saint Maurice, Ambassadour of Sauoye, Knight of the said Order: Qui portoit d'Azur a Trois Fleurs de Ly^ d'Argent 2 and 1. au Chef d'Argent au Lyon naissant de Sable.
Concerning the great Chaine or Collar of the Order.The Great Collar of the Order, containeth in weight two hundred and fiftie Crownes of Gold, or thereabout, in bredth two fingers and an halfe, composed with Roses of Gold, some enamelled with Redde, and others with White. Among them are the Loue-knots of Gold, without enamelling, and all Cleched (for the Roses are full and massie) and betweene the Loue-knots are enterlaced the Deuise FERT. in olde Rubricke Capitall Letters, Cleched also, one enamelled with White, and the other Redde, as here you may behold the forme of them FERT.
At the end of the Rose, hanging directly vpon the Breast, are fastened three Chaines of Gold, carying an Ouall Cleched in Knots of Loue, enamelled with White,The description of Ouall hanging at the Collar. and within the Ouall is the Salutation of the Angell, holding a Scepter, and standing vpright; but the Virgin kneeling and leaning on her Oratorie. Aloft in the Ouall houereth a Doue, enamelled with White: but the two other Images are enamelled with all Colours.
The lesser Collar is like a Gordget or Neck-piece, containing two fingers in bredth, of pure fine Gold, of the weight of an hundred Crownes* or thereabout, whereon in small Letters (of the old fashion) neere one another, is the same word, but not in Capitall Letters fert, releuated with White enammilling, but betweene each word is the Letter S. made firme likewise with white enammell, and vpon the Breast an Ouall, like to that of the Great Collar of the Order. It is fastened about the neck with a Claspe and Pin of Gold
Now, as concerning the Armes of Sauoye, they are to be seene at Paris, on the great Gate of the Hostall of Nemours, the first and fourth whereof are altogether alike, as thus: De Gueulles au Cheual Gay tourne d'Argent, party de face d'Or and de Sable de six pieces a vne Coronne de Rue perye en Bande de Synople (which are the auncient and Moderne Armes of the Saxon Dukes) Ente en poincte d'Argent a Trois touts de fourreaux d' Espee de Gueulles 2 and 1. The second Quarter of Chablais; which is D'Argent seme de Billettes de Sable au Lyon de mesme. The third of Augusta, which is De Sable au Lyon d'Argent langue and arme de Gueulles, and sur le Tout de Malta.
I haue se^ne some other much more charged, as that of the Kingdome of Cyprus, of Piedmont, Suze and Saluces (and of Counties and Seigneuries, exchanged by the Treatie of Sixe hundred and one, for the Marquisate of Saluces) to wit

De Bresse, qui est d'Argent a la Bande d'Azur, a Deux Lyons rampants de mesme, l'^ en Chef, and l'autre en pointe.


De Baugie, qui est de Gueulles au Lyon d'Ermines Coronne and Arme d'Or.



De Veromey, pale d' Argent and d'Azur au Lyon de Gueulles Coronne, Lampasse and Arme d'Or.


Bailliage de Gex, Qui sont d'Azur a fix Morailles d'Or liees d'Argent, au Chef d'Argent (...) Lyon naissant de Gueulles.

Which foure Counties and Seigneuries, are at this present of the Crowne of France, so consequently are the Armes of them cut from the Escutcheon of Sa^^yes, the Crest and Supporters, are the same borne by the Dukes of Nemours, ^ormerly described.


The Crosses of the Orders of Saint Maurice and of Saint Lazarus in Sauoye. CHAP. VI.
The Institution of the Orders of Saint Maurice and of Saint Lazarus in Sauoye.Croix des Ordres de Sainct Mo^ice and de Sainct Lazare en Sauoye.
OVer and beside the Order of the Annuntiation, which is the Great and Principall of State in Sauoye, there hath yet bin known Knights of Saint Maurice and of Saint Lazarus, who carrie both the Crosses together; and some other beside, that weare their Crosse seperate, and distinguished by it selfe.
As for them of Saint Maurice, their beginning was in the yeare One thousand foure hundred and fortie,At what time the Order of Sa^nt Maurice began. when the first Duke of Sauoye Amadis, seauenth of the name (afterward Pope Foelix) hauing made his retreate into the Desart of Ripaille, ^eretofore obserued; Instituted The Order of Hermites of Saint Maurice, as well to pre^erue the memory of that valiant and couragious Knight (inuincible for Iesus Christ ^nd Tutelarie Patron of the Estate of Sauoye:) As of 
 ^he Lance and Ring of the same Saint, the essentiall ^oates of Knighthood; passing from hand to hand ^y the Kings of Bourgongne, in the Illustrious House ^f the Princes of Sauoye.
The Knights of this Order were habited in the manner formerly obserued.The Habite worne by these Knights of S. Maurice. A Gray Gowne and Chappe^on, a Cassocke of the same* guirded with a golden Girdle, Bonnet and Sleeues of Red Chamlet, and on the Cloake ^r Breast, a Crosse Pommettee of Taffatie or white Cloath, but the Generals was of Gold, or else in Em^roderie. Such a kinde of Habite was giuen by the ^ame Amadis to the Knights of his Court, that were retreated with him to the said place of Ripaile, dedicated to the blessed Knight Saint Maurice, vnder the Rule of the Father of Religion Saint Augustine, a famous Doctour of the Church. And from that time forward, those Hermites were acknowledged by the name, Of Knights of Saint Maurice; but the certaine number of ^hem depended on the Chiefe of the Order.
Now, concerning the Order of Saint Lazarus, it is of a very auncient Institution.Of the Order of Saint Lazarus, and antiquitie therof. And that whereof speech is vsed in Sauoye, was onely but renewed, in the yeare One ^housand fiue hundred threescore and fiue, during the Pontificality of Pope Pius, fourth of the name. For he being a Millainois, made Great Maister of this Order of Saint Lazarus, a Gentleman of Millaine (one of his kinsmen very well deriued, and endued with vertue, and of the House, honored by Pope Celestine, fourth of the name;

by two Cardinals, fiue Bishops very famous Doctors, beside Abbots, Commanders and Presidents in the Senate of Millaine. Lords of Chastillon sur Orona) of whom we shall speake hereafter. The said House is so much the more renowned, by being built in a pleasant place, and by the great and worthy Captaine Stilico, which Town hath euer since conserued the name of Castrum Stiliconis, very neerely seated to Augleria,Armes of the Family of Chastillon. renowned also by hauing Sourse and Originall from those auncient Lords of Millaine. This auncient Family of Chastillon, Porte de Gueulles a^ Lyon d'Argent portant de ses pattes de deuant vn Chasteau d'Or. Very Noble Armes, howsoeuer they speake of the Sirname. For it is not alwayes an infallible rule, that Armes should correspond with the name; as Leon, Castile, Granada, Galicia and others in Spain, which are Armes ^f Kingdomes.
Chasteau-Pers, Chasteau Roux, and a thousand others in like manner of very Noble Families, are found as well in France, Italie, Germanie and elsewhere, all Armes very Noble, and richly emblazoned.
The same Pope Pius, fourth of the name, made (as we haue said) Great Maister of the Order of Saint Lazarus in Italie:
Priuiledges granted to the Order.Iannot de Chastillon, to whom, and to the Knights of the same Order, he granted all the auncient Priuiledges, which had formerly bin granted by the holy Fathers his Predecessours, to all the Militarie Orders, as well in the Holy-Land, as in Christendome.

What Priuiledges were further granted by the Pope Pius Quartus, to the same Order.
THat all Benefices simple, being in Patronage, either by Foundation or Donation* they might make them Co^manderies, and enioy them, without leauing their Habit.
That euery Knight of the Order, although he were married, might hold (with the Habite of the Order) a Pension of fiue hundred Crownes of Gold of the Sun, or the fruites amounting to the like value. And
They were permitted, to retreate the places belonging to their Religion, into any part of Christendome where they would be, amounting to more then a thousand Hospitals, and to become Maisters of them.
That into this Order no man might be receiued, except he were Noble by the Father and Mothers side, in two Races at the least, begotten and borne in lawfull Matrimony, and descended of auncient Christians, and not of Turkes or Renegad Apostatates, nouell Christians, whose beliefe was (commonly) wauering and doubtfull.
That he should make proofe of his Nobilitie in the Country of his Birth, or of his Father and Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother Paternall and Maternall: that he is a Gentleman of name, Armes, and of honorable charge.
That he had two hundred Crownes in Rents at the least, and liued Nobly, without medling in Merchandise or Yeomanrie, and that both his Predecessors and himselfe are cleere from any noate of infamie.
That he married according to his qualitie, with a Daughter descended of a Noble House, and not a widdowed woman.
That he shall neither be in his owne house, nor walke abroad in publique; without wearing on his Breast The Ancred Crosse of Greene Taffatie or Sattin, worne with eight Points.
That he shall sweare to the Great Maister Coniugall Chastitie and Monogamie.
That he shall haue especiall care of Leaprous diseased people, the point and principall subiect of his Order.
That he shall daily say a Rosarie in Honor of the Sacred Virgin, with fiue and twentie Pater-Nosters, and as many Aue-Maries.
That he shall abstaine from eating flesh on euery Wednesday weekely: And
Shall Fast on the Friday or Saturday, as best himselfe pleaseth.
The death of the Great Maister.These Rules and Statutes were prescribed by the Pope Pius Quartus, to those Knights of Saint Lazarus, being now newly reestablished. And their Great Maister Dom Iouannot de Chastillion being deceased at Vercellis, as he was trauailing to assure and found the building of his Order, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue

hundred threescore and twelue; the same yeare presided in the Sacred Seate;
Gregorie, thirteenth of the name, who (before his election) was called Hugo Bon-Compagno, a Gentleman of Bologna, who bare in Armes De Gueulles au Drag on naissant d'Or. This Pope, being willing to maintaine this Order,The Duke of Sauoye made Great Maister by the Pope. by Instituting a Great Maister of the principall House: gaue the Maistership to the Duke of Sauoye, Phille^ert Emanuel, and to his Successours the Dukes of his Stocke and Ligne, by his Buls bearing date in September One thousand fiue hundred threescore and thirteene. In which yeare, and in the Moneth of Aprill, the said Phillebert Emanuel, Duke of Sauoye, caused all the Knights of this Order of Saint Lazarus, to appeare at one meeting in the Citie of Nice in Prouence, where he made himselfe knowne to be the Great Maister, taking the Oath of intire Obedience, and to keepe inuiolably the Rule of the Cisteaux, which Pope Gregorie the thirteenth had prescribed to this Order.
He reformed the Statutes of the same Order or Religion, whereunto he gaue two Gallies, and diuers Brigandines, for clearing the Coasts of Italie, being much pestered with Rouers and Pirates.The two chi^f Houses of the Order. The Dukes two principall Conuents and Hostels of the Order, are at Nice, and at Thurine, the Capitall Citie for the State of Piedmont, and where the Prince maketh his ordenary abiding. Hauing alwayes for seruice of his person, the Knights of Saint Lazarus, as his Pages of Honor, Gentlemen of his Chamber, Esquiers Caruers, Groomes or Quirries of his Stable, Maisters of the Houshold, Captaines, Colonels; and prime Officers of his State.
The same Duke of Sauoye obtained of Pope Gregorie the thirteenth,V^iting of the two Orders together. the vniting of the Religion of Saint Lazarus (vnder the Order of the Cisteaux) with that of Saint Maurice. So that after this Reunion, both the one and other were acknowledged vnder the name, Of Knights of Saint Maurice and of Saint Lazarus together.
And yet notwithstanding, I haue seene in Piedmont and Sauoye, yea, and at Paris, when the peace of Veruins was sworne, in Anno fourescore and eighteene, and in the Secular yeare sixe hundred, that Monsieur de Sauoye was there, and many Knights Sauoyans, who did weare on their breast and left side, the Great White Crosse Pommettee of Saint Maurice alone, but without any noate of that of Saint Lazarus, whereof they carried not the name.
As for them of Saint Lazarus, vnited with that of Saint Maurice, instead of wearing (as they were wont) the Greene Crosse, according to the fashion of Malta: after this vnion, they charged in the hart or midsts thereof, another Crosse pommettee White, to show, that they were Knights of Saint Lazarus, and of Saint Maurice together. But then it is to be vnderstood, that in Sauoye, the Greene Crosse of Saint Lazarus had an Orle Blanche, instead of that of Saint Lazarus in France (before the Institution of the Order of Mont Carnell, made by King Henry the Great of glorious memory) which was of Greene Taffatie or Sattin, in the same manner as that of Malta a vn Orle de Passement d'Or.
The Cloakes or Mantles of the Knights of Sauoye (otherwise tearmed of Saint Maurice and Saint Lazarus) are of Carnation Taffatie, lined with White Taffatie,The Habites b^ing to the Orde^. and a Cordon with the Tassell of White and Greene. And the Cassock or Coate of Armes of Carnation Damaske, or Rashe of Spaine, died of Scarlet colour, with the Crosse of the said Orders before and behinde.
They are dispenced withall, for eating flesh on Wednesdayes, and fasting on Saturdayes, and from daily saying the Chappelet of fiue and twenty Pater Nosters, and as many Aue Maries:Dispensation from Fasting. For the Duke (instead thereof) hath giuen them an abridged Psalter (like to that of the Order of Fescamp, as we say in France) to say at euery Canonicall Houre an Antiphonall or Antneme, a Psalme and a Prayer made for the purpose.
For direction and Gouernement of these Orders, there is a Counsell composed of eight auncient Knights, honored with the Titles of Greatnesse: As Lieutenant Generall to his Highnesse; High Admirall; Lord Great Chancellour of the Order; Great Conseruator; and Great Treasurer, who did all weare the great Crosse, twise farre greater then the common: And the most part of these Great Commanders,

might be Marquesses, Counts and Vicounts. In generall, all these Knights carried the title of Dom, instead of Brother, which they of Malta still retained. Vnder the Great Treasurer are those perticular persons, which keepe receipts of the Leaper and Lazar Houses,The Ordination of Pope Gregory the thirteenth. in the Estates of Italie and Spaine. For Pope Gregory the thirteenth, ordained by his Buls, that all the Commanderies of the Order of Saint Lazarus, being vnder the Estates of all Christan Princes; should be left freely by them to the said Emmanuel Phillebert, and his Successors the Dukes of Sauoye, whom he established chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maisters of this Order.
According to this Bull, the same Duke Emanuel had the Inuestiture and the Collation of the Commanderies of the same qualitie in Spaine, in the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, in the Estate of Millaine, etc. held by the King of Spaine, and the Estates and Common-wealths of Italie. But the Duke thinking to doe as much ouer them in the Kingdome of France;The Interpositio^ o^ the King of France King Henry the third, of famous memorie hindered the effecting of it. Because the Chiefe Seate of the said Order being in his Kingdome; the Great Maistership thereof (in right and equitie) appertained to him, rather then to any other Prince of Christendome, as we haue already formerly approued.
Now concerning the Vowe of Profession, which was made by the Knights of Saint Maurice and Saint Lazarus, in presence of the Great Maister, vpon the Euangelists and Canon of the Masse: Here followeth the forme in French, and afterward turned into English.




A forme of the Vowe.
IE. N. promets a vous Monseigneur le Serenissime Charles Emmanuel Duc de Sauoye, Prince de Piedmont, Grand Maistre de la Religion de Sainct Morice, and Sainct Lazare, and a vos Serenissimes Successeurs, que le plus deuotement qu'il me sera possible, ie diray tous les Iours en l'honneur de Iesus Christ nostre Redempteur, ^e la Glorieuse Vierge M^r^, de Sainct Mauriee, and de Sainct Lazare, and de toute la Cour Celeste de Paradis, le Psa^tier abrege, qui m'a este ordonne de dire; de Ieusner le Vendredy, ou Samedy, de garder Chaste^ coniugale: Charite, and Hospitalite enuers les pauures Lepreux; and tous les Statuts, and Ordonnances faictes and a faire de la Religion: que ie vous seray fidele and obeissant, and a v^sdicts Successeurs: Que ie n'alieneray aucuns biens appartenants aux Commanderies que ie possederay, tant par droict de Patronat, qu'autrement: Que ie ne les engageray, ne bar^er^ en Emphiteose, ou autre long-temps, sans l'expresse permission de vostre Altesse, ou d'autre Serenissime Grand Maistre qui pourra estre apres vous, and du Conuent. Ainsi Dieu me s^ en aide, and ses Sacrez Euangiles. Amen.
I. N. promise to you my Lord the most Noble Prince Charles Emanuell, Duke of Sauoye, Prince of Piedmont, Great Maister of the Religion of Saint Maurice, and of Saint Lazarus, and to your Gracious Successours, that the most deuoutly as is possible for me to performe: I will daily say (in honour of Iesus Christ our Redeemer; of the glorious Virgin Mary; of Saint Maurice; of Saint Lazarus; and of the whole Celestiall Court of Parad^se) the Psalter abridged, which is appointed for me to say. That I will fast on the Friday or Saturday; to keepe Coniugall Chastitie, Charitie and Hospitality for all poore Leapers; with all the Statutes and Ordenances made, and to be made of the Religion. That I will be faithfull and obedient to you, and to your Successours. That I will not alienate any goods belonging to the Commanderies which I shall possesse, as well by right of Patronage, as otherwise. That I will not engadge them, nor giue them vpon improuement, or for any long time, without the expresse permission of your Highnesse, or such Honourable Great Maister, that (...) come after you; and of the Conuent: So God be my helpe, and his Holy Euangelists. Amen.








The Order of Saint Stephen, Pope, called:L'Ordre de Sainct Est^eune, P^pe, d^ct de Florence.
The Order of Florence, Instituted in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, fiue hundred threescore and One: By Cosimo de Medicis, the first Duke of Florence. CHAP. VII.
A Briefe Discourse, concerning the Originall and Genealogie, of the Dukes of Florence.
THe Great Dukes of Tuscanie,The Armes of Florence. whereof Florence is the Capitall Citty, and which beareth for Armes D'Argent a la Fleur de Lys espanouie, and ouuerte de Gueules:Eurardo de Me^cis a French Knight of whom came the Florentines. had their birth and beginning (according to Nestor and Machiauell, with other Florentine Historians) from Eurardo de Medicis, a French, Kinght and ordenarie Chamberlaine to our Emperour Charlemaigne, whom he followed into Italie, to vn-nest the Lombardes and other Strangers, that ouermuch commaunded at Baguetta. This French Knight was entreated by the Citizens of Florence, to deliuer them from the tyranny of a fierce and proud Gaint, named Mugellus, whose bloody and cruell neighbourhood, made waste and ^eserte all the Countrey. The memorie of this Giant remaineth yet to this present,Mugellus a cruell Giant slaine by Eurard of France in single Combate. ^n a small Territorie, seated neere to Florence; where the Great Dukes haue a goodly place of pleasure, called Mugello.
This Giant caried vsually a great heauie Club of yron, whereat hung fiue or sixe ^uge Balles of the same mettall, wherewith he smote downe all passengers, without extending any pitty: vntill he was manfully defied, and slaine in a single Combate, ^y Eurard the French Knight, who, to conserue the remembrance of his good suc^esse, obtained of the Emperour Charlemaigne (by an especiall priueledge) L'Escu d'Or a Cinq Tourteaux de Gueules, 2.2.1. to signalize the Balles or Bowles of the Giants yron Club, all freshly tincturde with his Blood: And from hence it is,Some say Attila. that they are still conserued for Armes to the Illustrious House of Medicis.
Some haue written, that this citty of Florence was builded by the Emperour Charlemaigne, which is contrary to all truth. For it was ruined vtterly by Totila, King of the Hunnes and Gothes, and deserted by the Lombardes, vntill the time of Charlemaigne, who in the yeare of Grace Eight hundred and two, caused it to be engirt with Walls and Towers, and newly re peopled it. Thereto also he gaue the Armes formerly emblazoned; as yet is to bee seene in the Churches there builded by him, ^n Honour of Saint Marie, Sirnamed Del Campo, Saint Pedro del Escaragio, and others.
Stephanus Pighius, in his Hercules Prodicius, speaking of the walling, and houses of Flourence, built vpon the Riuer of Arno, saith. Eas magna ex parte deiecit Totyla Rex ^horum, Ciuibusque magnopere incommodauit, deinceps vero a Barbaris alijs, and a Fesu^a^is admodum exagitata fuit, vt eam Habitatores dereliquerint: quo in statu perman^it, vsque ad nostrae salutis annos Octoginta duos, quo tempore Karolus Magnus Alpes trans^itit, and eius ambitum cum amplificasset, nouis etiam muris eam auxit, in quibus Centum quinquaginta turres, in altitudine centum cubitorum extollebantur, iussit que vt denuo re^leretur: and exinde semper euentus rerum foeliciores experta est.
This Citty was named Fluentia,Florenza la Bella. vntill such time as Charlemaigne caused it to be re-builded and newe peopled. For then he abolished the memory of her auncient ^ppellation, and ordered, that it should be called Florence, afterward tearmed the

Fayre, by the goodly structure of the houses and Pallace. Goe we now againe to Eurard de Medicis, whose descente made their dwelling at Florence.
After the said Eurardo succeeded Alemano de Medicis, Father to Siluestro the ^^^fannoniero, that is to say, the Captaine Generall of Florence; Father to Vier^o, Father of Giacomo; Father of Bernardino; Father of Giouanni, who conquered Luca from them of Pisa; Father of Chiarissimo; Father of Eurardo de Medicis, Second of the name, called the Deuoute, Standard-Bearer of Florence in the yeare of Grace One Thousand,Gonsal^nniero de Fierenza. foure hundred, twenty and three. This man left two Sonnes, that branched this house into two seuerall Stemmes.

Cosimo; And

Lorenzo.


Cosimo was called the Great for his vertues, and deserued the title of Father of his Countrey: who gouerned the Common wealth of Florence during the space of One and thirty yeares, after he had bin repealed from banishment. He liued threescore and fifteene yeares,When the House of de Medicis began to be Great and died in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, threescore and foure, hauing laid the foundation of the Greatnesse of his house: After whom succeeded his Sonne, the true imitatour of his vertues.
Pedro de Medicis, who deceassed in the yeare One thousand, foure hundred, threescore and twelue. By Lucretia his wife of Turnabony, he left two Sonnes:
Lorenzo, Sirnamed the Magnifico; And
Iuliano, murdered in the Church of Saint Restitutus, euen in Masse time at the Eleuation, in the yeare One thousand, foure hundred, threescore and eighteene, partly contriued against him, by the factions of the Lords of Pazzy, Saluiaty and Bandi^y, the Principalles of the Estate of Florence.
This Iuliano was Father to Iulio de Medicis, Cardinall and afterward Pope, by the name of Clement the Seauenth, after the death of his Cousine Pope Leo, Tenth of the name.
Lorenzo the Magnifico, Eldest Sonne to Pedro de Medicis, by his Wife Cl^ritia de Vrsini, had three Sonnes.


Pedro.

Giouanni, Cardinall, and afterward Pope Leo, Tenth of the name; And
Iuliano de Medicis, Sirnamed the Magnifico.

A Loouer of Learning and learned men.The Father of these Sonnes was called Father of the Muses, in regard of his intimate loue to Learning, and such as made profession thereof. He collected together an vnspeakeable number of Greeke Bookes, from all the partes of Asia, to his incredible cost and expences. He died in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and twelue, leauing the Gouernement of Florence to his Eldest Sonne
Pedro, Second of the name, who followed King Charles, Eight of the name, in course of his fortunes, going with him to the Conquest of his Kingdome of Naples. After his death, he tooke part with King Lewes the Twelfth, who i^ acknowledgement of the Loue which he bare to the said Pedro, would needes haue him to beare in the Chiefe of his Shield of Armes, Vn Tourteau d'Azur, a Trois ^l^urs de Eys d'Or* 2.1.The Armes giuen to Pedro by King Lewes the Twelfth. and not one and two, as they are represented by ignorant Painters and s^^uers. He and his Brethren were so deadly hated and despighted by the Florenti^^; that their heads were set at Port-sale, their houses, Goods and Libraries robbed and spoyled, which caused them to forsake the Citty of Florence. This Pedro died at the mouth of the Riuer Garillano, in the yeare of Grace One thousand fiue hundred and three, leauing by his wife Alfoncina de Vrsini a Posthumus Sonne, who was named,
Lorenzo. And as for the Brother to this Pedro the Second, named Iulian^*
He was brought againe into Florence, by the cunning practises and pollicies of Pope Leo the Tenth, his Brother. He was called the Manifico, in regard of his Liberality,How he came to be called the Magnifico. and the Magnificent buildings which he raised in Florence. By Phileb^^^ of Sauoye, Daughter to Philebert, Duke of Sauoye, and of Nemours, he left not my issue: But had a naturall Sonne, named Hippolito de Medicis, who was made Cardinall, and Archbishop of Auiguion.
Lorenzo, the only, and Posthumus Sonne of Pedro. Second of the name, was created Duke of Vrbin by Pope Leo the Tenth, his vnckle by the Fathers side;Lorenzo duke of Vrb^n. yet it was ^ut in name only, and died in the yeare One thousand, fiue hundred and nineteene. He tooke to Wife Magdalena, Second Daughter to Iohn of Bologne, and De la Tour, Count of Auuergne and of Lauregais, and of Iane of Bourbon, Sister to the Count of ^endosme.
This House of Bologne caried the Sirname and Armes of De la Tour, which are ^eme de France a la Tour d'Argent massonnee de Sable. And the Sirname of Bologne,The Armes of De la Tour* was deriued from one of the Brothers of Godfrey (Sonne to Eustace, Count of Bo^ogne) the First King of Ierusalem. This Brother being Standard-Bearer in the Ar^y of his Brother, tooke, and his descent after him, L'Escu d'Or au Gonfanon de Gu^ules de Trois pendants ou Fanons, a la Bordure frangee de Synople. King Lewes the E^euenth bought of Bertrand de la Tour, Second of the name, the County of Bologne on the Sea in Piccardie, in sted whereof, he gaue him (by way of exchange) that of ^auregais, vnder authority of the Parliament of Tolosa. And the same King Lewes ^he Eleuenth made homage of the said Countie of Bologne to the Virgin Mary;A present giuen to the Virgin Mary. ^o whom he gaue also (as a present) a Hart of Gold, weighing two thousand Crownes.
By the Mariage of Lorenzo de Medicis, Duke of Vrbin, with Magdalena de la Torre, was borne their only Daughter
Catharina de Medicis, Heire to the Counties of Auuergne and Lauregais, with the ^eigneuries de la Tour, de la Chaire, etc. which fell to her by the death of her Aunte, Anne de la Tour (Sister to her Mother) Wife to Iohn of Scotland, the Duke of Al^anie, by whom she had no issue, Catharine had the happinesse, to be allied to the Crowne of France, and maried by Pope Clement the Seauenth,The mariage of Katharine de Medicis at Marseilles. to Monsieur Henry of France, Duke of Orleans, afterward King of France, Second of the name. The con^ract of this mariage was determined at Marseilles, at the enteruiewe of Pope Cle^ent, and King Frances the First, the seauen and twentieth day of October, Anno One thousand, fiue hundred, thirty three, in presence of the Cardinalles of ^ourbon, Lorraine, and De Medicis, and receiued by Thomas, Elect Bishop of Vaisou, in the County of Venisse, Datarie of the Popes Bulles, Iohn Le Breton and Gilbert Bayard, Notaries and Secretaries to the King. The Sacrament of Mariage was celebrated ^y the same Pope Clement, and consummated by the Duke of Orleans, then aged Sixteene yeares. And from them descended
Frances the Second,The issue of Henry of Orleans and Katharine de Medicis.Charles the Ninth,Henry the Third.Kings of France, deceasing all without any issue.
Frances, Duke of Aniou and of Brabant, dying before he was maried.
Elizabeth, Queene of Spayne, Who left two daughters, the one maried to the Duke of Sauoye, Charles Emanuell; and the other Duchesse of Brabant.
Claudia, Duchesse of Lorrayne, Mother to the Duke gouerning at this present, with other children. And
Margaret, Queene of Nauarre (forsaken) Duchesse of Valois, Countesse of Au^ergne, of Lauregais, etc. by her Mothers side Queene Katharine:The Armes of Queene Katharine de Medicis. Qui portoit au Premier and Quatriesme Quartier De Medicis; Escartele de la Tour, Contrescartele de Bo^ogne, and surle Tout d'Or a Trois Tourteaux de Gueules., Auncient Armes of the House of Bologne.
The same Duke of Vrbin, Father to Queene Katharine, left a naturall Sonne, named Alessandro de Medicis, made Prince and Lord of Florence by the Emperour Charles the Fift: by ioyning in mariage with him, his naturall Daughter Margaret of Austria. The erection of the Principalitie of Florence from a Seigneurie, was the Fift day of Iuly, One thousand, fiue hundred, thirty and one. Which Alessandro,The Seigneurie of Florence aduanced to a Principality. the First Prince of Florence, reigned but fiue yeares, being murdred by his Cousine Iuliano de Medicis (Husband to Phileberta of Sauoye) returned to Florence, the sixt day of Ianuary, One thousand, fiue hundred, thirty sixe, Iuliano becomming a fugitiue to Venice, died there without issue. And so by his death finished the Masculine Ligne (falling to the Feminine in the person of Queene Katharine de Medicis) descended

of Cosimo the Great, Eldest Sonne to Lewes the Deuoute: whereby we must returne, and take the younger
Lorenzo de Medicis (youngest Sonne to Lewes the Deuoute, Standard-Bearer of Florence) Father of
Pedro Francesco; Father of Giouanni; Father of an other Iohn, Sirnamed The Inuincible; Father of
This is the man, who^ the Emperour made Duke of Florence.Cosimo de Medicis, who liuing priuately, and without any Charge in his Pallace (...) Mugello; vpon tydings of the Assassinate, committed on the person of the Prince Alessandro: collected suddenly together friends of his auncient acquaintance, stealing them secretly into Florence, and inuested the Pallace where the Senate was assembled, to the end, that they might proceede to the election of a Lord and Prince of the Common-wealth. So that, either by loue or power, he was named Grand Gonfaloniero of Florence, the Ninth day of Ianuary, One thousand, fiue hundred, thirty and sixe. He encreased the Estate of Florence, by the taking and conquest of the Citties of Pisa, Sienna, and the Isle D'Albe, which made it mighty and much feared both by land and Sea. And heereupon it was that the Emperour gaue him the title of Duke of Florence.
He made also the mariage betweene him, and Dogna Eleanora of Toledo, Daughter to the Vice-Roy of Naples. This house of Toledo is of the Grandes, as they tearme them in Spayne,The great Priueledge of the House of Toledo. the descendants whereof (by antiquity of their Nobility) haue this prerogatiue: To stand with their heads couered in the Kings Chamber, if they be not speaking to him, The Duke of Alua could not attaine thereto, not witwstanding all his great Seruices, performed in so many places for the Crowne of Spayne, which made him deserue other things, and to out-run the Court Prouerbe: That he had good legges to keepe him vpright, and his head well furnished with larum watches; as much to say as Coughes; giuing thereby to vnderstand, that he hath a weake or sickly head, whom the King suffereth to be couered in his presence.
Dom Roderick King of the Gothes in Spayne.Since the time as Dom Roderick, King of the Gothes of Spayne, lost Tolledo, vntill it was recouered by the King Dom Alphonso the Sixt (which Interuallum and distance of time was foure hundred yeares, or therabout) the Gothes remayning at Tolledo, continued in the Christian Faith, so reporte the Histories of Spayne, and wherein they were as well maintained, as in their degrees and titles of Nobility, by the Moore Kings,Eight auncient Honorable Families of the Gothes. to whom they payed yearely certaine duties. Among the Noble Linages and Families of the Gothes continuing still at Tolledo, vnder the State of the Affricane Moores, keeping possession in Spayne; there were eight principally, the most Illustrious and renowned for their Antiquity, and of whom are issued those that beare name of Tolledo: As de Palomequa; de Puerto-Carrero; de Gudieio; de Ceruat^s; de Roelas; and des Armildes: Families which managed the reduction of this Citty (the principall of Spayne) in obedience to Alphonso the Sixt.
The Archbishop Dom Roderigo Ximenes, in his History of Spayne, the third Booke, and One and twentieth Chapter; calleth them of these Families, Mozarabes, Mixt^ Arabes,Mozarabes M^xtos Arabes to whom the Moores left in Tolledo the Churches of Saint Marke, Saint L^ke, Saint Sebastian, Saint Torquatus, Saint Iustus, and of Saint Eulalia of Merida, wherein to this day they selebrate Diuine Seruice, according to the Office of Saint Isid^re, called the Gothishe and Mozarabe Office, on the Feaste dayes of the Patrones of the said Churches, which is still continued in the great Church of Tolledo, in the Chappell of the blessed Sacrament of the Altare, builded and founded by the good Archbishop of Tolledo, Fryer Frances Ximenes of Cisneros, a Graye Fryer, and Cardinall of Spayne,The Gothishe Seruice in many Churches of Spayne. who caused the strongest Townes and places in the Kingdome of N^uarre to be dismanteled. The same Gothishe Seruice is likewise perfourmed in other Churches of Spayne.
Let it not seeme then any matter of strangenesse, that these Families should conserue themselues, during the space of foure hundred yeares in puritie of the Christian Faith, and the degree of Nobility, among the impurity and barbarisme of Infidell Moores: considering it is apparant to all Spayne, that long time after, vnder the Reigne of the King Dom Iohn the First, there passed from Affrica into Castille, Christian Families called the Farfanes, Who (by a succession of Ages) had kept their

Nobility and Christian Faith, and many times endured Martyrdome for it in the ^idst of Affrica.
The most Illustrious then of these Eight Auncient Families, is that of Tolledo,The famous Families of Tolledo. ^hich beare for Armes: Escheque d' Argent et d'Azur de Seize Poincts.
There are of this Sirname of Tolledo, of Quesada; Qui portent de Gueules a Quatre ^aulx d' Argent charges de Vingt et Quatre Ermines, surchaque Pal Six. 2.1.2.1.
The Polomeques; Portent d Azur a vne Tourterelle, and Palombe d'Argent (Armes ^^eaking, but yet good) a la bordure de Gueules, chargee de Huict Saultoirs d'Or.
There are also of this Sirname and Familie, which beare D'Azur au Lyon d'Or, a la ^ordure de Gueules, chargee de Cinq Palombes d'Argent. And of these Armes there is ^ade a Spanish Roundelaye.

De Palomegues memoria,
Lignage de San Benito,
Del Rey Alphonso Bendito,
En Toledana Victoria.
Solar insignia notoria
De los Quatro Toledanos
Palomas Cinco que a manos
Al Leon Dan leal gloria.

There is likewise of them (both in Sirname and Familie of Tolledo) who by Alli^^ce with this House; Portent d'Argent a Six Polombes d'Azur aux bec,Alliance to the House of Tolledo. et pieds de ^ueules. 2.2.2. There are also of Palomeques: Qui portent d'Argent a Deux Palom^^s, l'vne sur d'autre d'Azur, a la Bordure de Gueules, chargee de Huict Saultoirs d'Or.
They of Iliano, do beare D'Or a Trois Fesses de Gueules, a la Bordure Eschequee d'Or et (...) Azur de deux Traicts.

De Puerto. Carrero portent Escheque de Huict Poincts d'Or, Equipolez a Sept d'Azur.

De Gudielo, they are like to them of Tolledo de Guesada: likewise they are Sirna^med of Tolledo by Alliance, that is to say, by mariage.
They of Cernatos, Portent d'Azur a Deux Cerfs d'Or l'vnsuo l'autre. Some of this ^amilie haue added heereunto vne Bordure de Gueules a Huict Saultoirs d'Or.
De Roelas. De Gueules a Six Bezans d'Argent, chacun charge de Trois Faisses d'Azur. ^es Bezans Deux en Deux. This family is founded on that of Fuen-Salida, which are ^^yned to that of Ayala, the most renowned of Spayne, and which beareth D'Argent (...) Deux Loups de Sable l'vn sur l'autre, a l'Orle de Gueules, chargee de Huict Saultoirs ^^Or. And on these also is founded the great House of Salzedo: Qui portoit d'Ar^ent a vn Saule de Synople, sur lequel est eu Abysme vn Escu d'Or a Cinq Ponceles de Sy^^ple en Saultoir.
The Armildes, whose auncient Armes were Escheque de Huict Poincts d'Argent,Cosimo the First Duke of Florence. ^quipolez a Sept de Gueules. And after the Battaile of Tolosa, they caried D'Or, a la ^roix Fleurdeli see de Gueules, a la Bordure componnee d'Argent et de Gueules de Seize ^oincts. Goe we now to Cosimo, the First Duke of Florence,
By Eleanora of Tolledo his wife, he had three Sonnes, and two Daughters.
Francesco; And Ferdinando. Both Dukes.Pedro Garcia.Isabella; AndEleanora.
Cosimo could not content himselfe, to haue the bare Title of Duke of Florence, be^ause (in that quality) he had no other noat, nor any other ranck and sitting, but after Dukes of more auncient creation then he was. Whereupon he laboured the Court of Rome very seriously, to obtaine the Title of Great Duke of Tuscaine. Wherein ^he was opposed by the Duke of Ferrara, Alphonso d'Este, who maintained,Two Dukes contend for priority of Greatnesse. that his Predecessours had bin honoured with that Ducall dignity, before all the Princes and Potentates of Italie, the Dukes of Venice only excepted. For
First Dorso, Marquesse of Ferrara, was made Duke of Modena, and of Reggio (in Latine Mutina, et Regium Lepidi) and Prince of the Holy Empire by Frederick the

Third,The allegations of the Duke of Ferrara. in the Great Piazza of Ferrara, the Fifteenth day of May, One Thousand, foure hundred, fifty and One, And in the yeare following, the foureteenth of Aprill, the same Borso (being then at Rome) was proclaimed Great Duke of Ferra^ by Pope Paul, Second of the name. And the Emperour Frederick gaue for Arm^ to the said Borso, D' Azure a l'Aigle d'Argent, Coronne et Arme d'Or.
After this Borso succeeded
Hercules D'Este; Father of
Of Alphonso; Father of
Hercules the Second; Father of
The Answers of Duke Cosimo.Alphonso the Second, deceasing without issue in the yeare of Grace One thousand, fiue hundred, fourescore and seauenteene: This Alphonso debated and questioned the case of precedencie and Title, with this Great Duke Cosimo de Medicis. Who made him this Answere: That all the extendure possessed by the Dukes of Ferrara, was brought to a small footes breadth, and without Soueraignty, in regard that the Estate of Ferrara, was a meere Fiefe of the Church (by the donation of Pepin and Charlemaigne, Kings of France) and as for the Duchie of Modena and Reggio, they relied vpon the Empire.
The extendure of the Dukedome of Florence.Contrariwise, that Cosimo himselfe, was an absolute Prince of his owne estate, whose lands extended aboue Two hundred miles in length, and Fifty miles in breadth in the narrowest passages. And concerning Citties, and townes, there was Florence, the very fairest of all Italie; Pisa; Pistoya; Volterra; Arezzo; the Bourrough of Saint Sepulcher; Cortonna, Mont pulciano; Sienna; Montalcino; Grossette; Saona Pienca; Massa and Ligorne: beside many other places, Bourgades and Fortresses of no meane fame, with the Isle d'Elbe.
Vpon these differences, Pope Pius, Fift of the name, declared by his Bull, that there was difference betweene Dukes of Citties and Townes, and those of Prouinces,The Duke of Florence winneth the victorie. to whom the Precedency ought (by right) to belong. And according to this Bull, Cosimo de Medicis was published Great Duke of Tuscane, and (in that quality) Crowned by the said Pope Pius Quintus with a wreath of Gold, with Floures and precious Stones most richlie embellished, to the value of Sixescore thousand Crownes of Gold; in the yeare fiue hundred, threescore and nine. In this Ring or Roundure of this Ducall Crowne, was graued and enchased these words.

PIVS. V. PONT. MAX. OB. EXIMIAM. DILECTIONEM. ET. CATHOLICAE. RELIGIONIS. ZELVM. PRAECIPVVM. QVE. IVSTITIAE. STVDIVM. DONAVIT.

The Duke of Ferrara made his recourse to the Emperour Ferdinand, against this Bull of the Pope: by vertue whereof (neuerthelesse) Cosimo kept still the Title of Great Duke. And to strengthen him the more, within some fewe yeares after, Alliance was wrought betweene these two Dukes: Alphonso maried one of the daughters to Cosimo,Alphonso the last Duke of Ferrara. and dying (without issue) the last Duke of Ferrara; the Great Duke of Tuscane Ferdinand, is left peaceable possessour in the title of Precedencie, aboue all the Princes of Italie.
Cosimo the Great, made sure the Porte of the Isle d'Elbe, and built a goodly Citty called Cosmopolis, after his owne name, The Citty of Cosimo, guarded by two Castles thought to be impregnable. And in the Citty of Pisa he erected a magnificent ^^cenall.The death of Duke Casimo, the richest Prince of his time. He was thought to be the very richest Prince of his time, and who at the day of his death (which happened in the yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and foureteene) left in his Treasury Tenne Millions of Gold in ready Coine, and Two Millions in Precious Stones. He had for Successour his Eldest Sonne,
Frances, who by his wife Iane or Ioane, the Infanta of Austria, Daughter to the Emperour Ferdinand, Brother to the Emperour Charles the Fift, had two Daughters.
Eleanora, Wife to Vincentio, Duke of Mantua and of Montferrat: And
Mary, Queene of France, Wife to King Henry the Great; which Queene is Mother to our King now Reigning, and beareth De Florence, Escartele d'Austricke Moderne.
This Duke Frances being dead without any Heire Masle, in Anno, 1598, the Great Dukedome of Tuscanie came to his Brother,
Ferdinand, who before was a Cardinall; but released and resigned to the Pope ^ixtus Quintus, his dignity of Cardinall, by a sollemne Acte,A Cardinalle d^gnity resi^ned for a Dukedome. celebrated in the ^onclaue, the eight and twentieth day of Nouember, in the same yeare Fourescore ^nd eighteene, by his Aduocates (done and grounded on especiall procuration) ^icholas de Tournabony, Bishop of the Borough of Saint Sepulcher, and Iohn Nicholas. ^y his Wife Christina, Daughter to Charles, Duke of Lorraine, he left
Cosimo, Second of the name, Husband to Mary of Austria, who Gouerneth at this ^resent.

The Jnstitution of the Order of Saint Stephen, for the Honour of Florence.
COsimo, the first Duke of Florence, was Authour and Institutor of the Order of Saint Stephen, Pope, Ninth of the name,The time of the Orders Institution. Tutelarie and Patrone of the Citty of Florence, which he Instituted in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, ^ue hundred, threescore and one, confirmed by the Popes, both of one name Pius, ^ourth and Fift, by their Bulles, wherein were couched the Statutes, which ought to ^e kept and obserued, by the 
 ^nights of the same Order ^f Saint Stephen, vnder the ^ule of Saint Benedict. By Confirmation of those Popes, ^ey had the same Priueled^es as belonged to them of Malta.


A Breuiate of the Articles.
NO man is to be admitted, and receiued into this Order, if he haue not first made proofe of his Nobility ^y Stock by Father and Mo^her, and borne in lawfull Ma^iage, and to be of the Chri^tian Catholicke Religion, without any noate of infamy.
Blasphemers, Concubina^es or Bastards, Players, Gamesters, Bouffones and ^easters, are quite excluded ^ut of this Society. And if ^ny such happen to be enter^ained, before the discouery of ^heir vices, they shall be very ^euearely chastised.
They shall take the Oath of Charity, and Obedience ^owards their Soueraignes and Superiours, and also of coniugall chastity in the case of Mariage. Out of which estate, if they haue any issue by Concubines: they haue power to institute their Bastard Heires, both in their moueables and immouables, the Fourth part being reserued to the Order. Whereinto also may be receiued Bigamies, who (as well as they that haue bin but once maried) may hold two hundred Crownes Rent, on Benefices belonging to the State of Florence; as we haue said concerning them of Saint Lazarus in France and in Sauoye.
These Pensions are giuen and graunted to such,Of Pensions for Seruice. as haue made their three yeares of Carauell approbation: that is to say, such as haue actually so long serued in the Gallies of Florence, to cleare the Seas of Turkes and Pirates.
Each Knight is bound to say dayly an Hundred Pater Nosters, and an Hundred Aue Mariaes, but to double them on sollemne Feastiualls, and the Rosarie at the death of a Brother of the Order, and the Office for the dead.
Seruice by Land and SeaThey stand obliged to serue so long on the Land, as on the Sea, at all times, and as often as it shall please the Soueraigne Great Maister, who is the Duke of Florence. To whom they are to take the same Oath, as they of Saint Lazarus doe to the Duke of Sauoye.
The Habite and Crosse of the Order.They weare a long Gowne of White Chamblet, beautified with Red furnishment; On sollemne Feast dayes, and on the left part of the Breast, a Crosse (like to that of Malta) of Red or Crimson Sattin, and on the Orle a Pasement Lace of Gold. Priests weare the Crosse of Red Taffatie, without Orle; and the Brethren Seruants the Crosse of Saint Anthony only, not hauing any thing aloft. The same Crosse is worne by the Knights dayly on their Cloakes, and about their necks at a Black Ribband or Cordon, or at a Chaine of Gold on Feastiuall dayes. In times of warre they weare the Crosse of the Order, vpon their Coates of Armes of Damaske, or of White Chamblet.
The principall Conuent of this Order is at Pisa, a pleasant Citty, with fayre plaine Fields, ^aued with the Riuer of Arno, about Eight miles from the Sea, adorned with a famous Vniuersity, and a goodly Arsenall.



Ordre du precieux Sang de nostre Sauueur et Redemoteur I^sus Christ dict L'Ordre de Mantue.The Order of the Precious Bloud of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ: Other-wise called The Order of Mantua. Instituted by Vincentio de Gonzaga, Fourth Duke of Mantua, and Second of Montferrat: in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, Sixe Hundred and Eight.
CHAP. VIII. The Genealogie of the Dukes of Mantua; And of Montferrat.
THat Passage of Father Ieronimo Capugnano, of the Order of the Preaching Fryers at Bologna la Grassa, in his description concerning the Citty of Mantua, enstructeth vs in the knowledge and foundation of this new Military Order. In pulcherrimo templo Sancti Andreae Sanguis est Domini Nostri miraculosus,This is said to he the blinde Knight that thr^st ^s ^ance into our Sauiours side. and Longini Martyris ossa. In the fayre and magnificent Church of Saint Andrew at Mantua, there is of our Lords Bloud, which worketh miracles dayly, and of t^e Bones of Saint Longinus the Knight, Ma^tyred in the Citty of Caesarea in Cappadocia. The most part of his Bones are in the Church of Saint Augustine at Rome, and some one or two of them in Saint Andrewes at Mantua. Among the rest, in the Shrine or Reliquarie which containeth the Relicks, are three dropes of the Bloud of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, with a part or piece of the Spundge, wherewith they gaue him Vineger and Gaule to Drinke on the tree of the Crosse. And this Longinus is said by some, to be the Centurion, that pierced with his Launce the si^e of our Sauiour.
The Institution of the Order.The Duke (...) Great Maister.In Honour of his Bloud, of such inestimable price, Vincentio de Gonzaga, Fourth Duke of Mantua, and Second of Montferrat; Instituted The Order of the preci^ Bloud of our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ: Of which Order he declared himselfe the Chiefe and Soueraigne to be Great Maister, and after him, the Dukes of Mantua

and Montferrat his Successours: And this Order is confirmed by Pope Paul, Fift of ^e name, sitting in the Holy Church at this present.
The first Ceremony of this 
 ^rder,The first solemnity of the Order. was pe^fourmed on the ^ay of Pentecost, in the yeare ^f Grace, One thousand, sixe ^undred and eight, in the Dukes Chappell of the Pal^ce: where the Cardinall of Mantua Ferdinand, Second ^onne to the Duke, gi^ded ^n his Fathers Sword, and ^ut about his necke the Col^r of the Order: In the name (...) the Father, and of the Sonne, ^nd of the holy Ghost. Which ^eing done;
Vincentio, Duke of Mantua ^nd of Montferrat, Founder ^nd Soueraigne Great Mai^er of the Order; With great Ceremoni^, in the Church of ^aint Andrew in Mantua, made and created Fifteene ^night^, namely;
Franc^s, Prince of Mantua ^nd of Montferrat,The first Knight^ (...) the Order made by the (...) his Eldest ^onne, newly maried to Mar^aret of (...).Iulius C^sar de Gonzaga, Prince of the Holy Empire, ^nd of Bezz^lo, Marquesse de Gonzaga and Counte of Pamponasso.Andrea de Gonzaga, Prince of the Holy Empire.William d' Adorno, Marquesse of Pallauoysin, and Counte of Syludano.Iordano de Gonzaga, Marquesse, Prince of the Holy Empire, and Counte of Fo^igni.Alexander de Beuilaqua, CounteCharles de Rosse, Lieutenant Generall to the State of Mantua.Galeazzo, Counte de Canosso, Marquesse of Cagliano.Frederick de Gonzaga, Marquesse and Prince of the Holy Empire.Frances de Brembato, Count.Latino de V^sini, Duke.Pyrrhus Maria de Gonzaga, Marquesse and Prince of the Holy Empire.Ludeuico de Gonzaga, Marquesse of Palazzolo.
The Collar of this Order is composed of Oualles of Gold,Concerning the Collar of the Order, and description thereof. some extended in ^ength, and other in breadth, enterlaced together by cleched Annelets of the same mettall. On the Oualles in length (enterchangeably) is raised in white enamelling these two words, Domini Probasti. On the other which are, En Pyramide en Poincte, are Flames of Fire enameled with Red, and vpon a Trimet, enameled with Blacke, a C^ible or Goldsmiths melting or firing pot, enamelled Graye, full of small Rodus of Gold, without enamelling. At the end of the Collar within an Ouall, are two Angells standing vpright, wrought and enamelled according to life, holding a Challice and Pixe Crowned, on the Table whereof, are three drops of Blood enamelled with Red, and about the Ouall this Legend Nihil. Esto. Triste. Recepto.Nihil. Hec. Triste. Recepto.
The deuise of this Order, Domine Probasti, is taken out of the Hundred thirty eight Psalme, written by the Royall Prophet Dauid, which he speaketh and attributeth

perticulerly to our Redeemer, and not to wreched, fraile and mortall men, vessells full of iniquity.

And Golde, like to the flaming Fire,
Shineth aboue all other riches.

Saith Pindarus, because Gold hath this gifte as perfect, and by prerogatiue aboue the other Sixe Mettalles; that it commeth forth of the Crurible or refyning Po^t, more pure,Such as Gold Finers melte their Gold and Siluer in. neate and glittering, then when it was put into it:
Sic fuluum spectatur in Ignibus Aurum.
And the very iustest man, ought to feare the refining vessell of the wrath and Iudgement of God, which respecting; let him then boldly say the two last verses of the same Psalme. Proba me Deus, and scito cor meum: interroga me, and coynosce semita meas. Et vide si via iniquitatis in me est: and deduc me in via aeterna. Trieme O God, and seeke the ground of my heart: prooue me, and examine my thoughts. Looke well if there be any way of wickednes in me: and leade me in the way euerlasting.
Let vs now proceede on to the Genealogie of the founder of this Order: wherof (to this day) I could neuer obtaine the Statutes and perticularities.
H Citty in Cisalpina Gallia.Mantua, of immortall renowne, and the birth-place of the famous Poet Virgill, one of the goodliest Cittie in Italie; is built vpon the Lake and Marish of Benacus, from whence issueth the Riuer Mincius, which with the Po watereth the Mantu^ Countrey Inter Padum Minciumque sitam:The scituation of the Citty. And these are the two Riuers, which the Prince of Poets reporteth to be famous in all parts of the World.

Fortunate senex hic inter flumina nota
Et fontes sacros frigus captabis opacum.

And the same Poet obserueth (to very good parpose) the soyle of the Citty, Marshie on the one side and entourred with Mountainets on the other.

...............quamuis lapis omnia nudus
Limosoque palus obducat pascua iunco.

A passage which hath made Maisters of Arte to toyle and sweate, because they neuer came neere the places.
Montferrat not so well seated as Mantua.Montferrat is one way as great as Mantua; but vneuen, rugged and drie, by reason of the Mountaines.
Vnder the Empires declynation, conquered by our Charlemaigne, the most part of the Gouernours of the Citties and Prouinces, possessed themselues of their Gouernments, and became Maisters (as we haue said) of Saxonie, of Sauoye, and of the Duchy of M^llayne vnder the Order of Orleans; the selfe same fortune b^fell the Estate of Mantua. For I finde that the Emperour Otho, Second of the name, made there Gouernour (in hereditarie Fi^fe) Thetaldo, Count of Canossa, whose Ligne continued so long,Thetaldo Count of Canossa. as to the yeare One thousand, two hundred and twenty, when Ezzelino of Paduae, was expulsed by the Viscounte of ^oita, from whose race the Bonacolsy got possession of Mantua, and held it vntill the yeare One thousand, three hundred and nineteene, when Passarino Bonacolsy was despoyled of this Estate by Guido de Cenzaga, Lord of Lombardie.

And heere we will begin, and so proceede on with the Genealogie of the Lords of Mantua.
THis Guido de Gonzaga, Lord of Lombardie, had a Sonne named
1. Ludouico de Gonzaga, who tooke the Title of Lord of Mantua, in the in the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred, twentie and eight: And by his death
2. Guido his sonne was Lord of Mantua. In this Genealogie we follow Guydo Coquillus, Lord of Romenay, who forgot to obserue the Alliances or Mariages of the Princes of Mantua, one of the most essentiall perticularities belonging to an Historie: which we will labour to make amends for in our Second Impression, if God vouchsafe life and health. Guido deceassed in the yeare One thousand, three hundred, threescore and nine, leauing for successour
3. Ludouico (whom we call Lewes in Frenche) Second of the name, and who died in the yeare One thousand, three hundred, fourescore and two, leauing the Seigneury of Mantua to his Son
4. Francesco. In whose time Coquil^s speaketh of a Famous Duello or Combate, betweene Galeoto de Gonzaga, man of of Giant-like stature, and Bou^hicault, of very meane forme and ma^ing, who being vanquished, made a ^owe, neuer to weare any Cuirats in warre or fight, but to be armed only with his Coate of Armes. This is the ^me Geoffrey Bouchicault, Sirnamed the ^eane, the most wise and worthiest ^night of his time, who was Gouer^our of Geneway for the Kings Charles ^he Fift and Sixt; who had the Victory ^gaing Galeoto de Gonzaga in single Combate, so saith Iohn le Feron, who gi^eth him for Armes D'Argent a l'Aigle ^sploye de Gueules, Arme and Lampasse d A^ur, brise en l'Estomach d'vne Fleur de Lys ^'Or. He was Marshall of France, and ^n those times then, there were but two Offices, the very greatest of France, which were not giuen, but to persons ^f great Seruice, and men of honestie, ^nd not to strangers, Cowardes and Cullions. The Sirname of Leane giuen ^o the said Marshall Bouchicault, appro^eth, that he was of meane Stature, and ^ot Giant-like, and giuen him truely by Coquillus. By the death of Francesco, ^appening the eight day of March One ^housand, foure hundred and seauen; his Sonne
5. Iohn Francesco succeeded him. He was created the first hereditary Marquesse of Mantua, and perpetuall Vicare of the Holy Empire, by the Emperour Sigismond, the two and Twentieth day of September, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, thirty and three, in the Grand Piazza of Mantua, before the Cathedrall Church of Saint Peter. And for a noate of this Inuesti^ure, he abolished the auncient Armes of the Gonzagaes, Qui portiont de Sable (...) Trois Moutons d' Argent accornez and ^larinez d'Or; Et leur donna d'Argent, a la Croix patee de Gueules, Cantonnee de Quatre Aigles de Sable, Armez and Lam^assez de Gueules. They haue added thereunto Vn Escu en Abisme de Gueules a vn Lyon d'Or, a Trois Fesses de Sable. And consequently, a mixture of Armes by Mariages, in stead of Armes lesse charged, which alwayes are the best and fairest. For when Armes passe Eight Quarters, and Foure in the bottome are Twelue, and come to Sixeteene, to Thirtie two (I haue seene so farre as to Threescore and Foure) this is disorder, and foule confusion. Iohn the First Marquesse of Mantua died the Three and twentieth day of September, One thousand, foure hundred, forty and foure, leauing Foure Children,
6. Ludouico, Third of the name, Hereditarie in the Marquisate of Mantua.
Charles, Lord of Bozzolo and of Ga^zuolo.
Alexander, Lord of Canedo, and of Rondodisco; And
Iohn, Lord of Rodigo, and of Capriana.
Ludouico the Third died the twelfth day of Iune, in the yeare One thousand, foure hundred, threescore and eighteene leauing Fiue Children,
Frederico, Marquesse,
Francesco.Iohn FrancescoPartaged at one Lot, with charge to succeed one another.
Rodolpho;LudouicoAnd Portioned as the two other, and with the same conditions.
7. Frederico, Marquesse of Mantua, tooke to Wife Margaret, Daughter to the Duke of Bauaria, Qui prote de Bauieres qui est Lozange d'Argent and d'Azur en Bande, Escartele du Palatinat, qui est de Sable au Lyon d'Or Coronne, Arme and Lampassa de Gueules, and sur le Tout de Gueules a vn Monde Croise d'Or. Of this Marriage descended three Sonnes.


Francesco.

Sigismondo, Cardinall: And

Iohn.


Frederigo, Standard-Bearer for the Church against the Venetians, vnder the Pope Sixtus Quartus, deceassed the Third day of Iuly, One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and foure, and left for Successour in the Estate of Mantua, his Eldest Sonne
8. Francesco, Second of the name, who espoused Isabella, Daughter to Hercules d'Este, Second Duke of Ferrara: we haue already obserued the Armes of this Family d'Este (Atestensium Familia) by whom hee had three Sonnes and a Daughter;

Frederico.

Herculeo, Cardinall of Mantua.
Ferdinando: And
Eleanora, Wife to Francesco Maria de la Rouero, Duke of Vrbin, Lord of Pezaro, who bare in Armes D'Azur a vn Roure, ou Chesne fourche d'Or.
Francesco was elected Gonfalonniero of Venice, that is to say, Captaine Generall for the Army of Potentates in Italie, against King Charles the Eight, returning to his Kingdome of Naples: who in the Battaile at Fornoue; trode the Honour of this Leagued Armie in the dust. Afterward, he was at the seruice of King Lewes the Twelfth, who (according to the testimony of Guichardine, in the Seuenth Booke of his Historie) did him the Honour, to beare the Standard of the Order of Saint Michaell, in the yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred and seauen, which no man had caried since the Reigne of King Lewes the Eleuenth. He died the nine and twentieth day of March, One thousand, fiue hundred, and nineteene, and then succeeded his Eldest Sonne,
9. Frederico, Second of the name, who tooke to Wife Margaret, Daughter to William Paleologus, Marquesse of Montferrat. Qui portoit de Constantinople, qui est de Gueules a la Croix plaine d'Or, Cantonnee de quatre B. que nous disons Fuzils adossez de mesme, Escartele de Montferrat. And in this marriage were borne Foure Sonnes and One Daughter.Francesco.Gulielmo.Dukes.
Ludouico, Duke of Neuers, and of Rethelois, maried in France to Madame Henrietta de Cleues: And of this marriage issued Charles de Gonzaga, Duke of Neuers and of Rethelois.
Frederico: And
Isabella, Wife to Ferdinand Daualos, Marquesse of Pescara. They of the House of Daualos, are descended of an Infant of Nauarre, Lords of Saint Foelix de Daualos, who bare first Escartele d'Or, and de Gueules: And afterward D'Azur au Chasteau d'Or, a la Bordure componnee d'Or and de Gueules. After Dom Ruy Lopez Daualos, to whom the King of Castile Henry the Third, gaue the Castell of Gold for Armes, by making him Lord High Constable of Castile.
Frederico the Second, of Marquesse, was made the first Duke of Mantua, by the Emperour Charles the Fift, after his Coronation at Bologna, in the yeare One Thousand, Fiue Hundred and Forty, And after him succeeded his eldest Sonne,
10. Francesco, Third of name, Second Duke of Mantua, who by Katharina, Daughter to the Emperour Ferdinand, had not any issue, and drowned himselfe in the Riuer of Menzo, in the yeare One thousand, fiue hundred and fifty. By his death, his Brother
11. Gulielmo was third Duke of Mantua, and by the death of Margaret Pal^ologus his Mother, Marquesse of Montferrat: for which contestation was made by the Duke of Sauoye Emanuell Phillebert, who maintained before the Emperour Charles the Fift, that the Marquisate of Montferrat appertained to to him by three meanes.
First, that Charles, First of the name, Duke of Sauoye, espoused Blanche, Daughter to William Paleologus, Marquesse of Montferrat. And it was couenanted by the contract of this marriage, that if the Masculine Ligne of Paleologus, should fall to the Feminine or distaffe; that the Marquisate of Montferrat should then come to the House of Sauoye, and to the Heires of the said Blanche Paleologus.
The second meanes, that by the same contract of mariage, this clause was expressely set downe: That if the dowry of an Hundred Thousand Crownes (promised in mariage with this Blanche) were not payed to the said Duke Charles at the time appointed; in case of such defayllance, the Marquisate should be deliuered to him.
Now, the third and last, that the Marquesse being bereft of his Marquisate by the Duke of Millayne, vpon whom he made warre; the said Charles of Sauoye (his Sonne in Law) raysed an Army, by meanes whereof, he re-seated the Marquesse his Father in Law in his inheritance. And to pay the wadges of this Army, he had furnished him with great summes of money, whereof he neuer had any repayment, being alwaies fed with hope of future enioying the Marquisate of Montferrat.
Notwithstanding all these reasons, Charles the fift adiudged the Marquisate to the Duke of Mantua, in fauour of whom, he had erected the Marquisate into a Dukedome. To conclude, this Duke Gulielmo marryed Leonora, daughter to the King of Romaines Ferdinand, Brother to Charles the fift. This Ferdinand Portoit au premier et quatriesme d' Austriche Moderne, au De xi^sme de Bourgongne ancienne party de Moderne, et le Troisiesme de Boeme. And in this marriage was borne their only Son
Vincentio, Duke of Mantua and of Montferrat, who in first marriage espoused Margareta Ferneze, daughter to Alexander Ferneze, Duke of Parma. The Fernezes carryed first in Armes, D' Or a Six Fleurs de Lys d' Azur 3.2.1. And after that they of this house were made Dukes of Parma, and Placentia, and became allied to the Bastard daughter of the Emperor Charles the fift the Dukes of Parma then Porte l Escu party en Trois. Au premier d' Or a Six Fleurs de Lys (disposed as we haue already said) Couppe d' Austriche moderne, party de Bourgongne ancienne, Le Troisiesme d' Austriche moderne, Party de Bourgongne ancien, couppe de Farneze, desorte que les Premier et Tro^si^sme partis sont Escartelez. And that in the midst De Gueules a vne lance d'Or sommee d'vn Ombelle et Pauillon d' Azur frange d'Or a deux Clefts d Argent passees en Saulteir sur la Lance.
In second marriage he had Eleanora daughter to Frances the Great Duke of Tuscanie: and of this marriage are issued.
Francesco, who by Margaret of Sauoy his wife, hath left but one daughter and it was for the marriage of this Frances and Margaret, that the Duke Vincentio instituted the Order of the Blood of Iesus Christ.
Ferdinando, first Knight of Malta, Priour of Barleta, and Cardinall, and at this present Duke of Mantua, and of Montferrat, by the death of his father, and of Francesco, dying in the life time of the Duke his father: And
N. Wife to Henry, Duke of Lorraine, and de Bar, Father and mother of one onely daughter.
Let vs now come to the house of Montferrat, which hath beene one of the most Illustrious and auncient in Christendome, and which tooke Sourse and Originall in the person of:


The Originall and Genealogie of the House of Montferrat.
VIgebert, who was Duke of Saxonie in the yeare of Grace, eight hundred and fortie. Heere may the Noble minded Reader, (at one motion, without making any more) obserue, that there is a High and Low Saxonie. Those of the higher Portoient de Gueules au Cheual gay tourne d'Argent, party de Face d Or, et de ^able de Six pieces a la Coronne de Rue, p^rie en Bande de ^ynople, as we haue many time said already. And the Armes of the lower Saxonie are D'Orseme de Coeurs de Gueules au Lyou rempant d'Azur.
Vigebert had two Sonnes, as namely Luto^phe Duke of Saxonie; father to Otho Duke of Saxonie; father to Henry the Birder, Emperour; father to Otho the first Emperour; father to Otho the second, etc. as wee haue declared in the Genealogie of Sauoy. The other Sonne of Vigebert was
Valbert, Duke of Angria, father to Vindo, Duke of Angria; Father of William, Duke of Angria, Father of
1. Aledramo, made and created first Marquesse of Montferrat, of Saluees;The first Marquesse of Montferrat, of Clues; of Sauona; of Yuree; of Finall; and of Thurine by the Emperour Otho, second of the name, making marriages of Adelaida his daughter, with this Aledramo, to whom hee gaue for Armes De Gueules an Chef d'Argent which hapned in the yeare of Grace nine hundred, threescore and eighteene. Of Aledramo and Adelaida of Saxonie his wife, were borne.
II. Boniface, second Marquesse of Montferrat by the death of his father, and dying vnmarryed in the yeare, nine hundred, fourescore and fifteene, his Brother
III. William was third Marquesse of Montferrat, who tooke to wife (if wee may beleeue Coquillus) Helan, daughter to the Duke of Glocecter in England, who was brother to Richard, King of England. Whetein the good man is grossely mistaken, because William the Bastard conquered not the Realme of England, vntill the yeare of Grace, one

thousand threescore and seauen, in the time of King Philip, first of the name, as we haue before shewen vnder the Order of England, Page 40. of the second Volume, and at the time of this William, Maquesse of Montferrat, Glocester was but a Countie, and the Kings of England after Adulphe, vntill the time of William the Bastard, bare in Armes D' Azur a la Croix Fleurdelisee d'Or, Cantonnee de Quatre Merlettes, et vn en Poincte de mesme, as wee haue said in the place before alleadged. In this marriage was borne
IV. Boniface, second of the name, Marquesse of Montferrat by the death of his Father, hapning in the yeare of Grace, one thousand, fiftie and three. Coquillus giueth him to Wife, Mary, daughter to King Philip the first, wherin hee is deceiued; because that King had but two children by Queene Bertha his wife, daughter to Florent, Counte of Frieze and of Holland, to wit
King Lewes la Gros, sixt of the name: And
Madam Constance of France, twice marryed, first to Hugh, the Count of Champagne; And secondly, to Boemond, Prince of Antioch, eldest Sonne to Robert Guiscard, the Prince of Salerne, issued of the Dukes of Normandie.
The same King Philip, hauing (without any cause) diuorced his, Queene and entertained (to very euill examp^e) Bertrada, the dissolute wife of Foulques Rechin, Count of Aniou, and in this Concubinage he had by her two Sons, Phillip and Henry, who had both bad ending* and one onely daughter named Cecilie, twice marryed. First to Tancred (Nephew to Boemond, Sonne in Law to the same King Philip) Gouernour of the Principalitie, which is called in the Kingdome of Naples, and designed vnder the Order of Aniou. And in second marriage she espoused Pontius of Tripoly, Sonne to Bertrand, Count of Tripoly, issued from the Auncient Countes of Tolosa. Here are all the Children of Phillip, vnder whose Reigne was attempted that memorable Conquest of the holy-Land, by the French Princes. Without further contending, what, or who the wife of Boniface the second was; he is recorded to be the Father of three Sonnes, as namely of
William, Marquesse of Montferrat.
Arditius, Father of another Arditi^, dying without any issue; And of
Henry, Father of Bernard, decending likewise without issue.
V. William, second of the name, Marquesse of Montferrat, marryed Mary, daughter to the Emperour Lothaire, second of the name; so saith Coquillus, who is therein mistaken. Because the Emperor Lothaire had but one only daughter, named Gertrude, wife to Henry, Duke of Bauaria, to whom she brought in marriage the Duchie of Saxonie. This William deceasing in the yeare of Grace, one thousand, threescore and fourteene; left for heire and Successour in the Marquisate of Montferrat:
VI. Raynier, who by Bonna of Sua^ his wife (her Armes are before oftentimes remembred) had
VII. William, third of the name, called the Aged, to distinguish him from other childten bearing the same name: who was Marquesse of Montferrat by the death of his Father, which hapned in the yeare, one thousand, one hundred twenty and seauen. He had two wiues and no more; the first was Othinae, daughter to the Emperour Fredericke, first of the name, sirnamed Barbarossa, but by her he had no issue. The second was Iuth^, otherwise called Iudith, who was wife to the Marquesse of Austria Leopolde. She bare in Armes D'Azur seme de Cailles d' Or sans nombre: for hee had ten in the moitie of his Armes, and it is accounted and said to be Sans nombre, when they exceede 16. By this 2. marriage he had an Illustrious and goodly issue, to wit, 4. Sons, and three daughters, which were
Iourdana, who was Empresse.Agnes, wife to the Lord of Mirandola in Italie: And Alexia.
The Sonnes in order were
Conrad.William.Raynier: AndBoniface.
Conrad, King of Ierusalem, in regard that as the Marquesse William the third, was one among the Principals in the Armie of the Christian Princes, which passed in the voiage ouer the Seas, when the Emperour of Greece Emanuell, poysoned the Meale which he furnished, to make the aduenture of the Latine Christians

fruitlesse: euen so in the voyage attempted by the same Latine Christian Princes, for the holy Land, changed from Conquest of the Grecian Empire, (described at large by the Seneschall of Champaigne, Geoffrey de Villcharduin) Conrad of Montferrat and his Brethren went in the Croissade of this remarkeable voyage. This Conrad was first Duke of Ascalon in Palestine, and afterward King of Ierusalem, in the right of his wife Isabel, sister to King Bauldwine the Meazeled or Leper, Fourth of the name, as we haue noted in our first Tome, and in the Order of Aniou, Page. 509. And in this marriage was borne their onely daughter
Mary of Montferrat, wife to Iohn de Brenne, a Frenchman, the most valiant and aduenturous Knight in his time. Which Conrad bare for Armes De Ierusalem Escartele de Montferrat. H^e was murdered in the Cittie of Acres, by one of the Schollers of Le Vieil de la Montagne; Of Mary of Montferrat, and Iohn de Brenne, wee haue formerly obserued the descent of two daughters, which the curteous Readers may see in the Page fore-mentioned, and them following.
VIII. William, Fift of the name, Marquesse of Montferrat, Sirnamed Long-Sword, who performed wonders beyond the Seas: he tooke to wife Sybilla, eldest Sister to Bauldwine the meazeled, in which marriage was borne
Baldwine, King of Ierusalem, (Fift of the name) by the death of his Vncle: yet he reigned but eight Moneths, and dyed at the age of two yeares.
Raynier the third Sonne, espoused Raire Maria, daughter to Emanuell, and Sister to Alexis and Isaack, Emperors of Constantinople: Which Empire was wun by the French and Venetians, ioyned together for this common Conquest, the twelfth day of Aprill, One thousand two hundred and foure. By his wiues right he was King of Thessalie; and shee bare the Armes of the East, which are De Gueules a l' Aigle esploye d'Or, Brife sur l' Estomach de Constantinople. Hee dyed without issue.
IX. Boniface, Third of the name, and Fourth Sonne to William the third (Coquillus giueth him a fift Sonne, whom he nameth Otho the Cardinall, but I cannot finde him in the Germaine Chronicle, which mee thinkes should bee more certaine, then his iudgement) who after the Conquest of Constantinople, was made Duke of Candy, which Isle he sold to the Venetians. After the death of his Brother Raynier, hee styled himselfe King of Thessalie, and succeeded (by the death of his Father) in the Marquisate of Montferrat, and was the ninth Marquesse.
He espoused Margaret, daughter to the King of Hungary in second marriage (for by his fi^st wife, young^st Sister to the Emperours Alexis and Isaack, hee had not any child^en) but in this marriage, he had two Sons and a daughter.
1. William, Marquesse of Montferrat.
2. Demetrius, King of Thessalonia, who by the daughter to the Daulphine of Viennois his wife, had no children.
3. Alexina, wife to Mainefroy, a Bastard vsurper ouer Sicily. Their mother Margaret Portoit de Hongrie, qui est Face d'Argent et de Gueules de Huict pieces.
X William, Fift of the name, tenth Marquesse of Montferrat, tooke to wife, Mary daughter to Boniface, Marquesse of Saluces. By his wife, Qui Portoit de Gueules au Chef d' Argent, he had one Sonne.
XI. Boniface, Fourth of the name, Marquesse of Montferrat, Sirnamed the Giant, for his great stature: who by Agnes of Sauoye his wife, daughter to Amadis, Count of Sauoy, first of the name, had one Sonne and two daughters.
Beatrix, marryed foure seuerall times. The first was to the Daulphine of Viennois: The second to the Lord of Baugie: The third to the Lord of Geneua: And in fourth marriage to the Lord of Reth^lin.
Alexina, who was neuer marryed.
The Sonne was
XII. William, Sixt of the name, who had two wiues. The 1. was Isab^l, daughter to the Duke of Yorke, Qui Portoit d' Anglet^rre a la Bordure engreslee d'Argent, but by her he had no child. In seco^d marriage he espoused Beatrix, daughter to Alphonso, King of Castille, tenth of the name, called the Wise: And in this marriage was borne
Margaret, daughter to Dom Iohn de la Cerda, last Son to the Infant of Spayne, Dom Ferdinando de la Cerda, eldest Son to Alphonso, called the Wise, King of Castille and Leon,
Iohn, sirnamed the Iust, last Marquesse of Montferrat of the masculine ligne, descended of Aledramo, the first Marquesse of Montferrat.
Alexina, married in the House of the Vrsini.
Yoland, called by the Greekes, Irene, Princesse of Peace, wife to the Emperour of Greece Andronicus Paleologus, to whom she brought in marriage the title of the Kingdome of Thessalie, and of whom, the race held very long time the Marquisate of Montferrat.
XIII. Iohn, last Marquesse of Montferrat of the masculine descent, espoused Margaret, Daughter to Amadis, fourth of the name, Count of Sauoye, Duke of Chablais and of Augusta. He dyed without issue, in the yeare, one thousand foure hundred fourescore and twelue; ordaining by his will, and naming for his Herres in the Marquisate of Montferrat, and the appurtenances thereto, his Sister, the Empresse of Greece, and her Children. For whom he substituted Alexina his Sister, and the V^sini her Children. And in defect of them, he called for his Heires the Children of his Sister Margaret, wife to the Infant of Castile, and their Children. All which failing, he called to this substitution Mainfroy of Saluces, descended of Boniface, Marquesse of Saluces, his Cousine by name and Armes. To which Mainfroy hee left the Gouernment of Montferrat, in the name of the Empresse his Sister, and for her Children.
In the Mariage of Andronicus Paleologus, Emperour of Constantinople, and the Empresse Yoland of Montferrat were borne many Children, among whom was
The race of Paleologus in the Marqu^sate of Montferrat.XIIII. Theodosius Paleologus, who in the right of his Mother, was the thirteenth Marquesse of Montferrat. Porta de l' Empire d'Orient Brise de Constantinople, Escartele de Montferrat. In which House he hath left the Armes of the Empire of Greece, retained by them which are of her name and descent in the Sirname of Mantua. He passed from Greece to Montferrat, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and fiue, vnder charge and conduct of one of the principall Lords of Geneway, named Opicino Spinola, with whose Daughter Argentina hee married (the Armes of Spinola we haue before emblazoned.) And in this mariage were borne
Yoland of Montferrat, wife to Aymon, Count of Geneway. And
XV. Iohn, second of the name, Marquesse of Montferrat by the death of his Father: which was in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred thirtie and eight. By his first wife Cecilie, Countesse d'Estrac, Daughter to the Count of Commenges (Qui portoit de Gueulles a Trois Otelles d' Argent en Saultoir.) He left no issue. In second marriage he tooke to wife Dogna Isabella, Daughter to Dom Iaymes King of Arragon, sister to the King of Maiorica,, named Dom Iaymes.
And in this mariage were borne three Children, successiuely Marquesses of Montferrat.
The Armes of Maiorica are those of Arragon; A la Bande de Synople brochans sur le Tout. The first Sonne of this marriage was
XVI. Secondotus, who left no issue by Yoland, Daughter to the Vicount Galeazzo, Duke of Millaine, and Blanch of Sauoye.
XVII. Iohn, third of the name, deceasing in the yeare, One thousand three hundred threescore and eighteene: And
XVIII. Theodorus Paleologus, Marquesse of Montferrat, who was by the Emperour Sigismona (in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and one) established and ordained Vicar of the Empire. He had no issue by Margaret. Daughter to Lewes, Prince of Achaya. By his other wife Iane, daughter to Robert Duke de Bar, Qui portoit d' Azur aux Croix recroisett^es au pied fiche d'Or a deux Pars (or Barbeaux) adossez de mesme; he had
Sophia, wife to the Emperor of Greece, Iohn Paleologus: And
XIX. Iames Iohn, who by his wife Iane, Daughter to the Count of Sauoye Amadis, Sonne of Aymon, had foure Sons and two Daughters.
Iohn, Marquesse of Montferrat.William, Marquesse of Montferrat.Theodorus, created Cardinall by Pope Paul, second of the name.Boniface, Marquesse of Montferrat.
The two Daughters were
Isabel wife to Lewes, Marquesse of Saluces: AndAmadea, who married with Iohn, King of Ierusalem, Armenia, and Cyprus.
XX. Iohn Paleologus, Marquesse of

Montferrat, fourth of the name, by Margaret, Daughter to Lewes Duke of Sauoye, he had no childe: And by his death, hapning in the yeare, One thousand foure hundred threescore and foure
XXI. William, seauenth of the name, his Brother, was Marquesse of Montferrat who in first mariage had to wife Madam Mary of Nauarre, daughter to Gaston, who was Prince of Nauarre, Soueraigne of Bearn, Count of Begorre, and of Foix, etc. In this marriage was borne one onely Daughter, named
Iane Paleologus, married to the Marquesse of Saluces Lewes, and by this contract of mariage it was couenanted namely, that she and hers should succeede in the Marquisate of Montferrat, it that Boniface Paleologus, her Vnckle, deceased without issue.
In second marriage, the said William the Marquesse espoused Elizabeth, Daughter to the Duke of Millaine, Frances Sforza, and by her he had a Daughter
Blanch, married to the Duke of Sauoye, Charles, as we haue before declared.
XXII. Boniface fift of the name, was Marquesse of Montferrat by the death of his Brother William, deceasing without Heire masle. He was twise married; first to Mary, daughter to Stephen, King of Hungary, by whom he had one Sonne
William Paleologus, Marquesse of Montferrat.
In second marriage hee had Felicia, Daughter to George Castriot, called Scanderberg, King of Albania, Despot of Seruia. Qui portoit de Gueulles au Pal d' Azur (pour enquerir) charge de trois Chasteaux d'Or, Massonnees de Sable l'vn sur l'autre, le ^ic. Bal Cantonne de qua^e Pa^tes de Gr^ffou de Argent. And in this Marr^age was borne
Iohn George, Marquesse of Montferrat.
XXIII. William, eight of the name, was Marquesse of Montferrat by the death of his Father, which hapned in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourescore and thirteene. Hee had to wife Anne, Daughter to Rhene, Duke of Alanson, Qui portoit de France a la Bordure de Gueulles chargee de Huict Bezans d' Argent. And in this marriage was borne a Sonne and a Daughter
Boniface, Marquesse of Montferrat.
Margaret Paleologus, Lady Marquesse of Montferrat, wife to Fredericke, second of the name, first Duke of Mantua. By the death of William, eight of the name, succeeded in the Marquisate of Montferrat his Sonne
XXIV. Boniface, sixt of the name, who being at a Tournement, was beaten from off his Horse, and his body so grieuously buised thereby; that he died, being neuer married, and left the Marquisate to his Vnckle
XXV. Iohn George, who deceasing likewise vnmarried; the Marq^isate of Montferrat fell to his Niece, Sister to Boniface the sixt
XXVI. Margaret Paleologus, and by her the said Marquisate is melted into the Ducall House of Mantua, as we haue elsewhere said. The Capitall Citie of this Marquisate is Cassilinum a strong Towne, garnished with good Wals, and well accoasted.


The End of the Eight Booke.



A Briefe Historicall Relation, Concerning the sundry Orders of the Holy-Land: And likewise of the East and West Judiaes. The Ninth Booke.

CHAP. I. A Summarie Discourse, Reporting the seuerall Voyages made into the East parts, by the Princes and Paladines of France.
THE Martinian Chronicles, stuffed with lyes and old wiues tales (which the good honest man Nicholas Gyles, one of our Moderne Annalists,The errours and false reports of s^me French Chroniclers. hath taken for currant Siluer, and money of the best allaye) doe recount vnto vs, that our first Christian King the Great Clouis, was in Ierusalem; and that (by his example) our King Clouis, second of the name (Sonne to Dagobert, Restorer of Saint Denys in France) made the same Voyage, for conquering the Holy Land, where he remained seauen yeares; during which time, he became Maister of the Holy Citie. Of the same temper as those Martinian Chroniclers,Turpin Archbishop of Rheimes. is the fabulous Romancer Turpin, Archbishop of Rheimes, perswaded by the same Nicholas Gyles, with a false and imagined Voyage beyond the Seas, of our King and Emperour Charlemaigne, who being misse-led in a Forrest of two dayes Iourney long* was holpen and brought into the direct roade-way, by Birds which spake French, like to the Parrat of Persia, that was wont (in the Greeke language) to salute the Romaine Emperour. These are meere trifling Tales, and we haue obserued in some one place of these Noble Recherches, that a passage of Saint Gregory of Tours (i^l pointed, and worse vnderstood) yeelded subiect to all these idle bablings.
Our Kings of the first and second Lignes, were neuer in the Holy-Land. S. Gregorie of Tours, his Continuer, the Monke A^monius, and other Authours of those times,The Kings of o^ the (...) and (...) the Holy Land. would not haue failed to noate it, as being one of the most important points in an History, not to forget Voyages of Princes, forth of their Estates and Kingdomes, which they would be sure neuer to vndertake, but vpon some especiall and signale subiect. ^ghinard, who at large hath described the life of our King Charlemaigne, with all the circumstances and perticularities; maketh no mention of any such Voyage, no more then the other Historians haue done.
The Monke of Aimonius, in his fourth Booke of the History of France, the seauen and (...) Chapter, following the continuer of Saint Gregorie of Tours, saith; That the Pope Saint Gregorie, sent to Charles Martell, Prince and Duke of the French (by a sollemne Ambassadour) The Keyes of the Holy Sepulcher,The Keyes of the Holy Sepu^cher sent to Charles Martel and some Linkes of the bonds and Chaines of Saint Peter, Prince of the Apostles, which happened in the yeare

of Grace seauen hundred thirty and fiue, as in the same history is more at large discoursed.
Moreouer, that in the yeare seauen hundred, fourescore and nineteene,Thoma^ the Patria^ch of Ierus^lem. Thomas the Patriarch of Ierusalem, sent one of his Monkes to our Emperour Charlemaigne with many Reliques. And the yeare following, a little before hee was Crowned Emperour at Rome; Zachary, Chiefe Chaplaine of his Chappell, returned from the holy Land; for hee had carryed his Almes thither, as it is written in the fourth Booke of his Capitularies; among those memories which this Emperour wrote in his writing Tables, of things that he intended to doe (as well in publike as particuly) all the whole yeare.
Among which memories, is to bee seene this which followeth in the fiue and thirtieth Article. De Eleemosyne mitten da in Hierusalem, propter Ecclesias Dei restaurandaes, in Proximo Natali Domini. According to which Article,Almes sent to Ierusalem by the Empreour Charlemaigne. hee had sent the said Zachary his chiefe Almoner, who at his returne from Ierusalem, came to meete him at Rome, accompanied with two Monkes of beyond the Seas, the one named George, Abbot of Mount Cliuet in Ierusalem, an Almaine Gentleman, and called Engelband before his profession; and the other was called Felix, Abbot of Saint Sabba in Bethelem. These two men sent from the Patriarch of Ierusalem, brought with them to Charlemaigne a part of the true Crosse, the Keyes of the holy Sepulcher, pieces of the Rockes and Mountaines of Oliuet and Caluarie, with the Gousannon of Ierusalem (which was a Banner of foure square Flagge of Sendale, that is to say of white Silke, Tissue a vne Croix pattee, Cantannee de Quatre Croisettes plaines de Soye Ronge,The Gousannon of Ierusalem. pareillement Tissue, representing the fiue wounds of the worlds Sauiour) with a most ample declaration, how the Patriarch and Christians in the holy Land, both acknowledged, and tooke him to be their Prince, Protectour and Benefactor, to whom they heartily wished all honour, health and victorie.
With those Abbots came Abdella, Ambassadour and Chaous from Aaron, King of Persia (the Chronicle of Lauresheim Abbey in the Diocesse of Mentz, calleth him Amarumlus, and recordeth this to be done vnder the yeare eight hundred and one; but that of Saint Cibar in Engoulesme, speaketh of the yeare eight hundred and seauen) a Sarracen descended of the race of Homar, Nephew to the false Prophet Mahemet. This Aaron King of Persia and Ierusalem, hearing the renowne of one Charlemaigne, desired to haue his fauour and friendship, and for mediation thereof, hee sent this Chaous with diuers presents, to witte; an Elephant, which they called Abulabas, sent by Charlemaigne to be kept in his City of Aix la Chapelle, where this beast was liuing in the yeare eight hundred and tenne. He sent also costly Spices,Presents sent to the Emperour Ch^emaigne from the king of Persia. Perfumes and sweete smelling Sauours, with sundry Silkes, a rich Pauillion of Gaza, beside Tents and Cabinets of vnspeakeable value, two Candlestickes of Massie Gold, and a Clocke of admirable Arte and workemanship, because the twelue houres of the night and day, were smitten by as many Bullets of Brasse, descending vpon the Clocke-Bell before the houres were smitten, giuing passage to twelue Armed Knights out at twelue windows, which by a kind of pleasing motion (after the houre was smitten) closed the windowes againe whereat they issued forth.
With this Abdella came a Iewe, named Isaack, sent by the same Charlemaigne (foure yeares before) to the said Aaron, King of Persia, and to Abrahim,Abrahim, the Mirammolin of Affrica. the great Mirammolin of Affrica, to obtaine of them more milde and gentle vsage of the poore Christians, dwelling in the Countries vnder their obedience, to whom this great Prince had sent very liberall Almes, for repayring the Churches, hallowed places, and relieuing their necessities.
About this time, to witte, in the yeare eight hundred and two, the Empresse of Constantinople Irene, sent to the same Charlemaigne, Leo, her Grand Spatharie,Irene the Emperesse of Constantinople seeketh to warre with Charlemaigne. to confirme the peace betweene the French and Greekes, who (saith the Chronicle of ^auresheim) feared least Charlemaigne would intrude vpon those Lands in Italie, which were vnder their obedience. This Irene being a Widdow, and acquainted certainely with the death of Hildegarde, wife to Charlemaigne (who dyed and was buried at Tours, in the yeare eight hundred:) practised vnder hand (as wee vse to say) to ioyne in marriage with Charlemaigne. Hereupon she sent vnto him very rare

presents, to witte, One of the foure Nayles, wherewith the Sauiour of the world was fastened to the Tree of the Crosse. The same Smocke, which the Blessed Virgine did weare, at such time as she conceiued the fruite of Life, after the Salutation deliuered by the Angell. One of the armes of Saint Simeon, who receiued our Sauiour in his Armes on the day of his Circumcision. The Cuppe wherein King Salomon vsed to drinke,Diuers pretious Reliques sent to King Charlemaigne by the Empresse. and diuers other pretious Reliques, which Charlemaigne caused to be kept in his Chappell at Aix in Germany, from whence they were afterward taken and transported into France, by the Emperour Charles the Bauld, who hauing made choice of his buriall place at S. Denys in France (where yet it is to bee seene fairely raised of Brasse, within the Monkes Quire) there he gaue the Nayle, the Arme of S. Simeon, the drinking Cup of Salomon, and the rest of the Reliques, and there they remaine in the same Church to this day.
But concerning the Smocke of the Blessed Virgin, the said Emperour made a gift thereof to the Church of Chartres, the first that euer had beene builded in honour of the Virgin, by the wise Druides, fiue hundred yeares before the time of her birth. The second Church is that of Tontouze, at the Mount Libanus, so saith the Lord of Ioinuille, in the Life of the good King S. Lewes, and other Authours beside, who since then haue written on the obseruations in the Holy Land of Palestine.
Charlemaigne, to sweare peace with the Emperesse Irene, and to thanke her for so many rare gifts; send for his Ambassadours Iesse, Bishop of Amiens, and the Count Helgande.The gratitude of Charlemaigne to Irene. After which fore-noted time, our ancient Annalists make no mention, o^ any voyages to the holy Land, as well in regard of the troubles hapning in France, thorow the remissenes and negligence of Charlemaignes descendants; as also the war^ then made in the East, which much molested and hindered the passage.
For in the yeare of Grace, One thousand and twelue; vnder the Reigne of Hugh Capet, an accursed race of people, wilde, saluage, and cruell, knowne by the name of Turkes, issued from forth the deepes of Scythia, after they had embraced the doctrine of impious Mahomet, making their fury and barbarous nature felt in Aegypt, Syria,The fi^st knowledge of the cruell and barbarous Turkes. Palestine, and other places of Asia, where they put all to fire and Sword, no^ meeting with any one, that dared to make head against them: vntill such time as the Sarrazins, as awaked out of a deepe lethargie or sound sleepe, vnder conduct of the Caliphe of Damas, and succoured also by the Tartares: expulsed thence these vpstar^ new commers, and made them retire into a corner of Asia, as it is recorded by Haitonius the Armenian, in his description of Tartaria.
In the yeare of grace, one thousand, forty eight, Daber, Sonne to the Caliphe o^ Aegypt, hauing made a Truce with the Emperour of the Easte Argipopillus; Nicephorus,The holy Sepolcher new built by the poore Christians. Patriarch of Ierusalem, and the poore Christians, resting from the fury and crueltie of the Turkes, who had ruinated the sacred places: caused the holy S^pulcher to be newly built, as is written by the Chancellor of the kingdome of Ierusalem William, Archbishop of Tyre, in his first Booke of the warres in the holy Land, th^ fift an sixt Chapters.
Fifteene yeares after, to witte, in Anno, One thousand threescore and three, B^^ensor Calyphe of Egypt, gaue the fourth part of the holy City, to the Patriarch an^ Christians of Ierusalem, to be inhabited separately by themselues; for (before) the^ liued mingled peste meste among the Sarazins. This fourth part was afterward assigned to the Prerogatiue and Iurisdiction of the Patriarch of Ierusalem, who ha^ for Armes of his Patriarchie,The Patr^a^ches Armes of (...) Con^ (...) L' Escu d' Argent a la Croix Patriarchale de Gueules, Ca^tonce de Quatre Estoiles de mesme, et vne en Poincte: As the Armes of the Patriarchi^ of new ^ome, Constantinople, were D' Azur a vne Croix Patriarchale d' Or, a Deux Esto^les de mesme en Chef, et vn Croissant d' Argent en Poincte. By this donation of part o^ the City of Ierusalem, the Patriarches thereof came to bee acknowledged as Prince of the Christians, and from thence ensued, that the Military Orders (whereof we sha^ speake hereafter) confessed them for their Superiours from the beginning, and vntil such time, as they established Great Maisters ouer them.
Fiue yeare after, to witte, in one thousand, threescore and eight, the Turkes h^uing vndertaken new forces, by sloathfulnesse of the Easterne Emperou^ Diog^nes and Michaell Parapinacius: threw themselues vpon Asia the second time, ra^

on so farre as to the gates of Constantinople, got possession of Ierusalem and Palestine,Another cruell insulting of the Turkes. exercising vpon the poore Christians, all the most barbarous cruelties that could be imagined. Which violence they continued for the space of thirtie yeares, and vntill the first passage of our French Palladines, vnder the Reigne of Philip, first of the name, King of France. After which time, very few yeares past, but the French and other Nations, (the Spaniards excepted, who had worke enough to doe, in fighting against the Moores) made voyages still to the holy Land for conquest thereof, till at an instant it was vtterly lost.
In the Reigne then of King Philip the first, who succeeded in the Kingdome of France, by the death of King Henry, first of the name, his Father, which happened in the yeare, One thousand threescore and one, this remarkeable voyage beyond the Seas fell into deliberation: in regard of the tyranicall vsage,The voyage vndertaken for reliefe of the Christians wherewith the Turkes oppressed the Christians of Palestine, and such Pilgrimes as came to visite the holy Sepulcher.
Peter the Hermite Priest, a Gentleman and natiue of Amiens, who bare in Armes D' Azur a Trois Gerbes de Bled d'Or. 2.1. (I know not whether Tristram the Hermite, Great Prouost of the Hostell to King Lewes the eleuenth, were of the same Race: but he bare D' Azure a ces Trois Gerbes d'Or, Escartele d' Argent a vne Teste de Cerf de Sable, somme d'Or) hauing visited the holy places beyond the Seas; was entreated by the Christians dwelling in Ierusalem, Antioch, and other Cities of Asia, miserably subiected to the insupportable thraldome and slauery of those Infidels and Miscreants; to declare to the holy Father of Rome, and to the Christian Princes, the miseries and afflictions which they were constrained and enforced to endure.Peter the hermite reporteth the afflictions of the Christians. The Hermite being an eye-witnesse thereof, faithfully discharged the trust then reposed in him, he came to Rome, deliuered his Ambassage to the holy Father Vrban, 2. of the name, and at ful declared to him the iust grieuances of Simeon, who was then Patriarch of Ierusalem. The same R^monstrances he made also to the Kings and Princes of Christendome, iourneying from one Kingdome and Prouince to another.
The Pope, who, as his Predecessours in the Sacred Seate had done, thought hee should gaine no greater support in this holy enterprize, then in France; trauelled suddenly thither, and assembled a Councill at Clermont in Auuergne, published the Croissade against the Infidels and summoned there all Christian Princes,The Croissade intended for the Holy-Land, and summoned by the Pope. who were to be as quickly in the field from France, Germany, Italy, and England (onely Spaine was exempted, by being sufficiently impeached, in warring on the Africane Mores, swarming ouer plentifully in her owne bowels.) But France, among all other Christian nations, was she that had the honour of this holy enterprise, because she alone contributed thereto as many Princes and Souldiours, as all the rest together.
Matthew Paris, in his history of England enformeth vs, that the Croissade (for this subiect) was in diuers coullers, as we haue formerly said in the Tract of S. Dominick; wherwith were Crossed the Princes, Prelates, and men of Warre, going against the Albigeois heretiques of France, and Lombardie. It was called Croissade, because such as were enrouled therein, for the voyage beyond the Seas, tooke and receiued from the hands of Bishops and Prelates, a Crosse of Ierusalem, made of Cloth or of Taffatie,Varietie of the Crosses Coullers, ^ccording to the Nations. which was sowed on their Garments on the left side, right against the hart. The Fre^ch did weare it Red; the English White; the Flemings and those of the Low Countries Greene; the Germaines Blacke; and the Italians Yellow, so saith the same Paris.
Monsieur Hugh of France, called the Great (Brother to King Philip) Count of Vermandois, was the first of all the Christian Princes, that took the Croissade and Ensigne of this long Pilgrimage. He was in the Armie of this Croissade, published in the yeare of grace, One thousand, fourescore and sixteene, to bee aged one and forty yeares, Portoit Eschiquittee d'Or, et d' Azur, Mettall and Couller of France, and therewith the Armes of the Countie of Vermandois, of which hee had espoused the heire.The names the worthy men in the Croissade for recouery of the Holy-Land. Next to him Crossed himselfe.
Godfrey of Bologne (Son to Eustace, Count of Bologne on the Sea) Duke of Lorraine and of Bouillon, by adoption of Godfrey, Duke of Lorraine, deceassed without issue. Qui Portoit de Lorraine d' Argent au Cerf de Gueules, sommee d'Or sans nombre.
Eustace of Bologne; Qui portoit de Bologne d'Or a Trois Tourteaux de Gueules.
Bauldwine, of Bologne: Qni portoit Pale d'Argent and de Sable de Six pieces. But afterward hee bare De Bologne, Escartele du Gonfanon, of the Christian Army in the Holy Land, that is to say, D'Or au Gonfanon de Trois pendants de Gueules, frangez de Synople. Eustace and Bauldwine were Brethren to Godfrey of Bologne.
Robert the Frizon, Count of Flanders, the naturall Sonne to the King of England, and Duke of Normandie. This Robert bare Eschequette de Gueulles and d'Or.
Stephen de Chastillon Count of Blois and of Chartres, who bare then in this Voyage D'Or au Lyon de Gueules Arme, and Coronne d'Azur. But afterward, he and his Descendants, Sirnamed of Chastillon and Crecy, caried De Gueules a trois Paulx de Vair au Chef d'Or. The younger charged (in time) the Chiefe with Foure Martlets Gueules, with Mullets and Lyons Sable, and other Brisures according to their owne fancies.
Aymary of Poictiers, Bishop of Puy in Velay: Qui portoit de Poictiers d' Azur a Six Bezans d Argent. 3.2.1. au Chef d'Or.
William of Mascon Bishop of Orenge: Qui portoit de Mascon, d' Argent a l' Aigle de Synople.
Fiugh Aymon, Count of Tolossa Sonne to William, Third of the name, and Iane Daughter and heire to Raymond, Second of the name, Count of Tolossa, who because he would make one in this Voyage; engaged his County of Tolossa, to his Cousin Raymond Count of Saint Giles:Hugh Aymon dyed Duke and Prince of Anti^che. Portoit de Gueules au Mouton d' Argent a corne d'Or, party de Gueules a la Croix clechee and Pomettee d'Or. He was made Duke and Prince of Antioch, where hee dyed very aged, and by his death the County of Tolossa remained to the Countes of Saint Giles.
Raymond, Count of Saint Giles, and of Tolosa, Qui portoit de Gueules a Six Chasteaux ouuerts d Or. 3.2 1. Armes of the last Counts of Tolossa.
Boemond, Duke of Apuglia, Portoit de Gueules a la Bande Eschiquettee d'Argent, and d' Azur de deux Traicts.
Bauldwine, Count of Henault; who bare at ^s going in the Voyage, D' Argent a Trois Cheurons de Gueules: And at his returne from thence, he tooke De Flandres au Baston de Gueules brochant sur le Lyon de Sable: Escartele de Hollande qui est d' Argent au Lyon de Gueules.
Bauldwine, Count of Rethell; Qui portoit de Gueules a Trois Rasteaux, sans manche d'Or endentez de mesme.
Garnier, Count of Grez De Sable au Chef d' Argent.
Herpin, Count of Bourges, De Gueules au Mouton d' Argent a la Teste plumettee, and moncettee de Sable.
Yssart, Count of Die: Eschiquette d' Argent and de Gueules.
Stephen, Count d Aumale: De Gueules a deux faces d'Or.
Rambauld, Count of Orenge: De Gueules a vne Bande d'Or, Escartele d' Argent party de Gueules au Croissant del con vn l' Autre.
William Count de Forests: De Gueules au Daulphine pasme d'Or.
Hugh, Count of Saint Paul. At his going forth in this Voyage, hee bare D'Azur a vne Gerbe d' Auoyne d'Or, lice. de mesme. And afterward his Descendants carried D'Argent au Lyon de Gueules, a la queue nouee and passe en Saultoir.
Arnoull, Count of Guines: Portoit Barre d'Or and d'Azur, when he went in the Voyage: but his Descendants afterward carried Vaire, Contre Vair d'Or, and d' Azur.
^otrou, Count of Perche: Escartele d'Or and d'Azur, going in the Voyage; but his Descendants afterward carried D'Azur a Quatre Lyons d'Or, Deux en Chef, and Deu^en Poincte.
Aymary Count of Soisons, who carried in the Voyage Burele d'Argent, and d'Azur de ^ix pieces. And his Descendants tooke D'Or, au Lyon passant de Gueules a la Bordure engreslee de mesme.
Euerard of Ponthieu, D'Or, a Trois Bandes d' Azure a la Bordure de Gueules.

^obert D' Aspremont de Gueules, a la Croix plaine d' Argent.


Rauldwine de Piquigny. Face d' Argent, et d' Azure de Six pieces a la Bordure de Gueules.

Matthew de Beaumont vpon Oise. De Gueules a l'Aigle d'Argent seme de Fers de La^nced Ermines, faconne^ en Chausse Trappes, which we call properly Guette-Villes.Thomas de Coucy.Bers de Marle; AndValier de Veruyn.Brethren.
Who carryed de Senlis, otherwise of Denmarke; D'Or a Trois Leopards de Synople l vnsur l' autre.
Ordinarily in Armes, Lyons are rampant, and shew but one of their eyes Leo^ards beare their heads forward, and shew both their eyes,Instructions for such as are vnskilfull in the Noble, science of Emblazon. and ought to bee passant. If Lyons and Leopards are of any other posture; it ought to be declared, otherwise it is ignorance: as in vnskilfull Painters, that know not emblazoning by the words Lyon rempant, Leopard passant, which are the Principles in the Noble Science of Armes, and whosoeuer is ignorant in them, ought to goe to Schoole.

.......... Procul hinc este Prophani,
Totoque absist^te Luco................

For on the Frontispice of the Temple of Glory, is engrauen this goodly deuise.
Odi. Prophanum. Vulgus. Et. Arceo.
That which hath mooued vs to obserue here the changes of Armes, by these Crossed Princes in this first voyage; is an important point in the Antiquitie of our histories, for notice and knowledge of so many Illustrious Families of this most Christian kingdome: whereof some are yet on foote, and the rest plundged in the ^alfe of obliuion, being fallen to the distaffe, without any hope of reuiuing,A reason for obseruing these changes of Armes. except by titlee and contracts of marriage, which we tearme Alliance and Substitution; in which cases, the Armes and Names of famous Families conserue themselues.
And it is of this first voyage, and them following, wherein our Annalists haue set downe; that Dukes, Countes and high Barons tooke so many Lyons in Armes, of diuers Coullers and Mettalls.

Of taking the Lion in Armes at this Voyage to the Holy Land.

FLandres D'Or au Lyon de Sable Arme and Lampasse de Gueules.


Braban. De Sable au Lyon d' Or arme and lampasse de Gueules.


Hollande. D' Or au Lyon de Gueules coronne, arme, and lampasse de Sable.


Zelande. D'Or a la face ondoyce d' Argent and d' Azur de quatre traicts au Lyon naissant de Gueules.


Zutphen. D'Argent au Lyon de Gueules coronne, arme, and lampasse d'Or.


Lembourg. D'Argent au Lyon de Gueules a la queue nouee and doublee en Sautoir, coron^ arme, and lampasse d'Or.


Namur. D'Or au Lyon de Sable, brise d' vn Baston de Gueules.


Haynau. Escartele de Flandres, and de Hollande.


Gueldres. D' Azur au Lyon tourne d'Or.


Iuilliers. D' Or au Lyon de Sable, arme, and lampasse de Gueules.


Luxembourg. Face d' Argent and d' Azur de trois pieces au Lyon de Gueules rampant sur le Tout, coronne, lampasse, and arme d'Or.


Sainct Pol. D' Argent au Lyon de Gueules a la queue nouee; and fourchee en Sautoir.


Frize. D' Azur a deux Lyons passants d'Or, seme de Billettes de Argent.


Bourgongne. Comte. D' Azur au Lyon d'Or, seme de Billettes de mesme.


Beaumont sur Oise. Comte. De Gueules au Lyon d'Argent.

Charolois in the Duchie of Bourgongne. De Gueules au Lyon d'Or a la Teste tournee a ^in gauche.
M^nts or Berghes in Henault. D' Argent au Lyon de Gueules.
Malines, which is the Seate of Parliament for Flanders, and Salins, appertaining to the house of Flanders, changed not their ancient Armes.

Malines porte Pale, contrepale d' Or and de Gueules, and


Salins. De Gueules a la Bande d'Gr.

Many renowned houses in France, marching in this first voyage, did likewise take the Lyon in their Armes, as them of

Beauteuloi^. D'Or au Lyon de Sable au Lambeau de Gueules.


Bourbon. D' Or au Lyon de Gueules, a l'Orle chargee de Huict Coquilles d' Azur.



Roussy. D'Or au Lyon d' Azur arme and lampasse de Gueules, and coronne d' Argent:

And infinite other, which we let passe vnder silence.
The same was put in practise by the Princes of Germany, that marched along i^ the same voyage; who changing their first Armes, toooke Lyons of diuers colours. The first and chiefest were them of Suauba, who tooke d' Argent a trois Lyons ou Leopards passans l' vn sur l' autre de Sable.

Boeme. De Gueules au Lyon d' Argent.


Brunsuick. De Gueules a deux Lyons leopardez passants l'vn sur l'autre d'Or.


Carinthie. D' Argent a trois Lyons passants l'vn sur l'autr^ de Sable.


Limebourg. D' Argent au Lyon d' Azur, coronne, arme, and langue d' Or, seme de Coeurs d^ Gueules.


Le Palatinat du Rhin. De Sable au Lyon d'Or, coronne, lampasse, and arme d^ Gueules.


Zuimberg. D'Or au Lyon de Gueules, tenant vne Hache d'Armes de mesme, coronne, arme, and lampasse d' Argent.

And a countlesse number of Princes and Lords of Germany, whose Armes are emblazoned with greater store of Lyons, then Eagles, which are notes of the Empire.
In France, such Lords as had Lyons in their Armes at this first voyage, forsooke them for contrary, as the
Countes of Blois, and of Chartres, by the Sirname of Chastillon on Marne, and o^ Crecie in Brie,Of changing Armes and Sirnames after the first voyage. who tooke De Gueules a Trois Paulx vairez au Chef d'Or. Others o^ this Sirname in Niuernois, Portoient d'Or au Lyon de Gueules: who after the 1. voyage changed both Armes and Sirname, forsaking that of Chastillon, and taking anothe^ called Amas, of the Prouince Amasia, which they conquered at this first voyage into the East, and bare D' Or a vne Croix de Gueules. The three Princes Brethren o^ the house of
Coucy, bearing the Sirname of Baylleull, who tooke Vaire, a Trois faces de Gueules.
In Armes there are but two Skinnes or Furres, Hermines and Vaire, yet both o^ them represented in a Siluer Field;But two Furres allowed in Armes. the first of Sable, the other of Azure. If they be composed with other Mettalls and Coullers, they must be emblazoned, because they exceede the common Rule and Order. Otherwise it sufficeth to say: Il porte d'Ermines, or Il porte Vaire, ou de Vair. Returne we now againe to our Palladines of beyond the Seas.
They made vp an Armie of an hundred thousand men on horsebacke, and fiue hundred thousand foot Souldiours. To accommodate and furnish themselues at all points, according as so long a voyage required: Such a one sold his Dukedome, Countie,How men fitted themselues for so long a voiage. Viscountie or Baronnie: Such a one his Lands, Meadowes, Milles, and Forrests, or else engaged them, vpon their returning euer or neuer.
Hugh Aymon engadged the County of Tolossa, to the Count of Saint Gylles.
Godfrey of Bologne sold the Dukedome of Bouillon, to the Bishop of Liege, and the City of Mentz to the Inhabitants thereof.
Ro^ert engadged his Dukedome of Normandy, to his Brother William, King o^ England.
Herpin sold the Countie of Berry, to King Philip the First: And these were followed by an infinite number more, that made money of all they had. Which Sal^ was much more he nourable to the sellers, then to the buyers: who were counted but as home-bred sluggards, white liuered and courageles droans, and to whom such as were Crossed for the voyage, sent Distaues and Spindles, in mockerie of thei^ Cowadise.
The parting of the Christian Armie.At the departure of the Christian Armie, Pope Vrban, second of the name, gaue them his Blessing, Remission of their sinnes, and for the Watch word and Cry o^ Battaile. Dieu. Le Veult. God will haue it so.
By vniuersall consent of all the Princes and Lords, Godfrey of Bologne was chosen Generall of he whole Armie, for his experience and good carriage, and they se^ onward the first day of April, Anno, One thousand fourescore and seauenteene

setting Sayle for Constantinople, where being ariued,Their arriuall at Constantinople and great victories the Christians marched on into the lesser Asia, called Natolia, besiedged and tooke Nicomedia, and afterward Nicea of Bythinia, a very strong and powerfull Citty, which endured the Siedge the whole space of two and twenty dayes, at the end whereof, it was taken by Assault.
This exploite was seconded by the surprizall of Heraclea, Lycaonia, Cylicia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Comagena, and other famous Townes and Citties, which our Palladines conquered in three yeares space from the Sultan Soliman, then Generall of the Turkes; who at the same time also, saw himselfe despoyled of the Citty of Antioch (Seate of the Patriarchall Church, and sometime of that of the Prince of the Apostles Saint Peter, before his arriuing at Rome, where he suffered Martyrdome. Tripoly of Syria was afterward taken, with the neighbouring Citties and Townes, which plained and laide euen the way of Iudea, to make their victorious Armes shine before the holy City of Ierusalem (the maine eye and aime of this Religious enterprize) which they inuested,The Christian Armies comming before Ierusalem and surprizall thereof. with firme and constant beliefe, to vnnestle the miscreants, that had so often prophaned, and dyed it with the Crim^sine blood of poore Christians.
For the space of eight and thirty dayes, the Siedge continued, at the end whereof, the Cittie was taken the fifteenth day of Iuly, at nine of the Clocke in the Euening, Anno, One thousand fourescore and nineteene: which date is made more remarkeable, by these foure Ryming verses, formed according to those times.

Virginis a partu Domini qui claruit ortu
Anno Milleno Centeno qui minus vno
Quindecies Iulio, iam Phoebi lumine tecto,
Hierusalem Franci capiunt virtute potenti.

Now, as by common consent of the Christian Princes, Godfrey was named, and made Generall of the Armie: so in like manner, after surprizall of the holy Cittie,Godfrey crowned King of Ierusalem. he was elected King of Ierusalem, and cloathed with the Royall Ornaments; onely the Crowne of Gold excepted, which he refused to take, and place vpon his head in the same City, where the Sauiour of the w^rld had worne a Crowne of pricking thornes.
And because the Armes of the City of Ierusalem, and the Gonfanon or Banner thereof was white, and the Shield D'Argent a la Croix Potencee, accompagnee de quatre Croisettes de Gueules, the marke and Symbole of the fiue wounds of our Sauiour and Redeemer, and (as we haue already said) the Crosses were Red, which Godfrey, and all speaking French in the Christian Armie did weare: Euen so the Princes and great Lords appointed, that Godfrey and his Successours, Kings of Ierusalem, should beare the Armes of Ierusalem, but otherwise emblazoned then they were, to witte:The Armes for the succeeding Kings of Ierusalem. D'Argent a la Croix potencee d'Or, Cantonnee de Quatre Croisettes de mesme (which is Mettall vpon Mettall, and falsitie in Armes, as is Couller vpon Couller, contrary to the ordinary Rule of Blazons.) Those Armes were so deuised, altogether for Enquiry, for a signe and note of his valiancy, and greatnesse of courage. For as much, as those Armes that are for enquiry, doe mooue vs to make request and search, for some speciall Priuiledge thereto belonging, or theron depending. My Manuscript of Blazons speaking in this manner.

Generalement toutes Armes qui sont de Metal sur Metal, ou de Couleur sur Couleur sont fausses. Exceptees celles du Roy de Hierusalem qui sont de Metal sur Metal, c'est a scauoir d' Argent a vne Croix potencee, and quatre Croisettes d'Or. Et toutefois ne sont elles pas fausses. Et la raison est. Car quand Godefroy de Billon eut tres. victorieusement acquise la Terre Saincte, fut auise, and ordonne par les Vaillants, and Preux Princes qui en sa compagnie estoient, qu'en memorie, and recordation d'icelle victoire excellente, luy seroient dnonees Armes differentes du commun cours des autres, asinque quand aucun les verroit, cuidant que fussent fausses, fust esmeu a soy enquerir pourquoy vn si noble Roy porte telles Armes. Et par ainsi peust estre informe de ladite Conqueste.

Generally, all Armes which are of Mettall vpon Mettall,A reason for the King of Ierusalem^ Armesor Couller vpon Couller, are false. Except those of the King of Ierusalem, which are of Mettall vpon Mettall,

that is to say D' Argent a vne Croix potencee, and Quatre Croisettes d'Or. And yet notwithstanding they are not false: And the reason is, Because when Godfrey of Bullen had most valiantly wun the Holy-Land; it was aduised and ordained by the Valiant and Couragious Princes, which were in his company, that in recordation and memory of the same excellent victory: he should haue giuen to him Armes, differing from the common course of other. To the end, that when any should see them, thinking them to be false: they might be moued thereby to make enquirie, wherefore so Noble a King should beare those armes. And by that meanes, be further informed of the said Conquest.
But let vs say something which is not common, in Honour of these Illustrious Armes (seeing that we beare them) and the emblazoning:Somewhat in Honour of the Armes. as it it appeareth to purpose, by the thirteenth verse of the Threescore and eighth Psalme of Dauid. Si dormiatis inter medios cleros: Pennae Columbae deargentatae, and posteriora dorsi eius in pallore Auri. Though yee haue lien among the potts, yet shall yee be as the wings of a Doue, that is couered with siluer wings, and her feathers like Golde.
The Armes of Ierusalem the Armes of the Church.The Armes of Ierusalem are (to speake properly) The Armes of the Catholique Church. The Doue is the Symbole of the Church, and of her best beloued Children, as in the threescore and thirteenth Psalme, and in the Canticles of Salomon. Veni amica mea, and Columba mea, Veni coronaberis. The Doue is without spot or blemishe, and was imployed in the sacrifices of the olde Lawe, as the expiation for sinners. And afterward in the new Testament, afflicted with Torments and Martyrdomes, this Doue behelde her selfe as dead and entranced, her heart transpierced with the Sword of bitternesse, among the Scullionly potts, spits and dripping panns, of Indian and Turkish Infidels, soyled in the Furnaces of persecutions, in the Synagogues of Heretiques, smoaked and darkened with infernall doctrine. This Doue lay swouning Inter sortes Malignantium, inter medios cacabos, inter medias lebetes, inter medias ollas.
Nigrant^sque casas, and tecta mapalia fumo.
But suddenly and in an instant, you saw her come forth as white as Snowe. Her forefront and downe to the bottome of her brest, the Shield of power, and the Buckler of Strength.The glorious appearing of the Church. Scutam Fortitudinis, and Clypeus Fortium, is of fayre polished Siluer. Her passions, her woundes, and her Crosse appeares no more bloody: this Shield sets her forth with glory and magnificence, by the King of Mettalls, the perfect creature of Natures workes
Golde, like the Fire flaming,Aboue all treasure fayrlie shining.
Or and ^^sient Gueules, Azur Synople and Sable.We haue said in our first Booke, that in Armes there be but two Mettalls Gold and Siluer, as also that there are but foure Coullers, Red, Blewe, Greene and Black. It were ignorance then to make addition of a fift Couller, named Purple, Which is not any Couller, so affirmeth my Manuscripte of Blazons. For whosoeuer shall mingle an equall portion of the foure fore-named Coullers; that will be Purple, a Couller compounded, and not simple, which ought not to be in armes. And by the same Paritie of Rules in the Noble Arte of Herauldry, Couller vpon Couller are Armes for Enquirie, which appertaineth to none but Princes.
And although Couller vpon Couller in Bordure or Labell bee not so exactly reiected: yet neuerthelesse, the vse or practise thereof should be so sparingly limitted, as it ought not to be imployed in the Armes of great Princes,Concerning the vse of (...) vpon Couller. who (in regard of their qualitie) are exempte from common rule. For so we see that the first Dukes of Orleans Portoient le Lambeau de Gueules, and not D'Argent, as they haue done since. And so the Dukes of Bourbon, and them of their stocke and descent, beare, and haue borne Le Baston de Gueules: They of Berry, La bordure Engreslee de mesme: They of Valois, Aniou and Alanson, La Bordure plaine de Gueules, like them of Bourgongne. All Princes of the Bloud, whose Title is the subiect, cause and motiue for Enquiry. And Princes are not wount to graunt Priueledge to their Seruants and Subiects, to beare one Mettall vpon an other, and one Couller on an other, in Armes, or in deuise.
In this First voyage to the Holy Land, King Phillip the First had inconsiderately made a vowe, to march Armed at all points in the head of the Armie. He was disswaded, not to leaue his Kingdome depriued of his presence. And yet neuerthelesse

(to acquite himselfe of his vowe) he sent thither one of his Chamberlaines Eudes the Maire,The rash vowe of King Phillip the first. Lord of Chalo Sainct Mard (that is Medard) Castillian and Captaine of the Royall Castell D'Estampes, who perfourmed the said Voyage Arme de Pied en Cap. At his returne after the surprisall of Ierusalem, he gaue very great priueledges to the said Eudes le Maire, Lancelot his Sonne, and fiue Daughters of his, whose Children he had accepted into his Noble keeping, during the absence of their Father. And they of this Family had enioyed (very neere the space of Fiue hundred yeares) the same Priueledges, which began first to be minced piece^meale away,What cannot time and enuie doe. and afterward quite cut off by enuy. There remained no more Honour to them, but To beare Armes for Enquirie, Those of Godfrey of Belogne, Quartred with them of the said Eudes le Maire, which are De Gueules a la Bordure d Or, chargee en Abisme d'vn Escusson d'Argent a vne Fue^lle de Chesne de Synople.
During the Siedge of Ierusalem, Godfrey (afterward King) letting flye an Arrowe on the Battelments of the Tower of Dauid, at that one shoote killed three Birdes: which serued him for a deuise afterward, and for the Assaylants and defendants, his brethren (as well Masles as Females) in Armes richly emblazoned, D'Or a la Bande le Gueules, chargee de Trois Allelyons d'Argent, sole Armes for long time,The Armes of Godfrey of Bu^len, and the House of Lorraine. and afterward, Sur le Tout for them of the Illustrious House of Lorraine, enriched with their Alliances, to witt, of Foure Kingdomes, Hungarie, Sicilie, Ierusalem and Arragon; supported with Foure Dukedomes, Anion, Gueldres, Gulich and Barre.
The Second Voyage to the Holy-Land, was made by our King Lewes the younger, Seauenth of the name, who Crossed himselfe in the Generall Parliament, held at V^z^l^y in Bourgongne: And the King departed from Paris with a potent Armie,The Second Voyage to the Holy-Land. the fifteenth day of May One thousand, one hundred, forty and seauen, leauing the Regency of the Kingdome to Suggerus, Abbot of Saint Denys in France; Queene Aeli^r, Wife to the King, followed him in so long a Voyage. They tooke the way of Germanie and Hungarie, to iourney for Constantinople, where they met with the Emperour of the West Conrad, Third of the name, who trauayled also to the Holy-Land, with an Army consisting of Threescore Thousand men, Germaines and others, passing in company the Bosphorus of Greece, safely and without perill.
But the Voyage of these two Monarches of France and Germanie, brought little or no benefite at all to the Christians beyond the Seas, being constraned to discampe from the Siedges of Damas, and the Citty of Acres. Likewise they were basely betrayed by the Emperour of Greece Manuell,The trechery of Man^^ll Emperour of Greece. Brother in Law to the Emperour Conrad (for they had Married two Sisters) because they continued a yeare (or thereabout) beyond the Seas, without perfourming any great businesse, by reason of the mortality in the Christian Army, occasioned by the wickednesse of Manuell, and his Greekes (deadly enemies to the Latines) who had mingled a kind of Morter or Plaister among the Meale, wherewith they furnished the Christian Armie. So that both these Princes were enforced to returne home to their Kingdomes.
This Voyage of the French into the Easte, is amplye described by the Archbishop of Tyre, in hi^ History of the Holy-Warre: and by the Abbot of Saint Denis Sugge^s, in the Life of the said King Lewes the younger, where he maketh relation of the perticularities. Affirming, that this great Croissade was made, by the Preaching of the Great Abbot of Cl^ru^ux Saint Bernard* of Noble descent,Saint Bernard Abbot of ^le^uaux, of Noble extraction. but much more Noble in Vertue and Holinesse of life. We haue formerly obserued the place of his Birth, and the Armes of his House. And that Pontius, the Abbot of Vezelay, caused a Church to be builded (famous afterward by multiplicitie of miracles) in the same place, where the meeting was made for the Croissade, at the same Vezelay.
He further saith, that the Commons of Sens, hauing murdred Hebert, Abbot of Saint Pierre le Vif:The Iustice of the King before his going in the Croissade. the King (before his departure) caused exemplary Iustice to be executed on the Authors and Complices, being cast headlong downe from the top of an high Tower vpon the pauement, where they had perpetrated and committed the murder, and the rest beheaded at Paris. Rex ad tantes sceleris vltionem accinctus, p^rtem Homicidarum ab altitudine Turris ad Terram precipitat, and alios fecit Parisijs ^^tollare.
At the same Veze lay, King Lewes, and his Wife Queene A^lia^ of Aquitaine

Crossed themselues. Rex primus prosiliens, cum magno deuotionis ardore signum sanctae Crucis assumpsit, and post ipsum Regina Alienordis vxor sua, mouentes per exemplum, vt sic Praelati facerent, and Barones.


Of such as Crossed themselues, for the Second Voyage to Jerusalem, by example of the King and Queene.

ALphonsus, Counte of Saint Gylles.
Thierry, Counte of Flanders.
Henry de Chastillon, Sonne to Thibault, Count of Blois.
Guy Count of Neuers.
Regnaud, Count of Tonnere.

Brethren, who at that time bare of the County of Bourgongne, formerly noated.
The Count Dieu-donne, (that is to be Diuined.)
Robert, Brother to the King (for excellency he had no other Title) And yet notwithstanding, he was Counte of Dreux, as his Appennage or portion, and was not then maried. Il Portoit d'Or and d'Azur, a la Bordure de Gueules.

Yues, Count of Soissons.
William, Count of Ponthieu.
William, Count of Garance: Qui portoit de Gueules a Trois Cheurons d'Argent.
Archambauld of Bourbon.

Enguerrau de Coucy.


Geoffrey de Rancone.

Hugh of Lusignan.
William de Courtenay: Qui portoit d'Or a Trois Tourteaux de Gueules. 2.1.

Regnaud de Montargis.


Ythier de Torcy.


Euerard de Brestueill.


Dreux de Mouchy.


Manasses de Bugnell.


Lancelot du Treinell.

Guerin his Brother.

William le Bouteillier.

William at Gilons de Trie.

With many other high and mighty Lords, and Knights of great renowne, and Noble Houses. Et plures alij Nobiles, and magni nominis Milites.
Of Prelates Crossed themselues:
Symon, Bishop of Noyon.Godfrey, Bishop of Langres.Arnoull, Bishop of Lisieux.Herbert, Abbot of Saint Pierre le Vif of Sens, murdered by his Cittizens before departing.Thibault, Abbot of Saint Colombe de Sens.
With an infinite number of men of the Church, and of the Sword. Et mult (...) aliae personnae Nobiles, quorum nomina, propter confusionem, censuimus silentio perimenda* saith the Abbot of Saint Denis.
The Count of Morienna, Vnckle by the Mothers side to King Lewes, tooke the Croissade in the Citty of Mentz, and a Great number of noble Gentlemen with him, because the King should want no company. Metis similiter Crucem assumpsi^ Comes Moriennae Auunculus Ludouici Regis Franciae, multique cum eo Principes (...) Barones.
King Phi^lip Augustus vndertooke the Third Voyage to the Holy-Land.The Third Voyage beyond the Seas, was perfourmed by King Phillip Augustus* Second of the name, called the Conquerour, and Gods Gifte vpon the same subiect. Notwithstanding the serious affaires in the Holy-Land; yet a Truce was taken betweene the Christian Princes, and Saladine the Calyphe of Egypt and Syria. But it was

soone broken, because in the interim of this composition, Reynaud de Chastillon made seizure on the Mother of Saladine, as she was iourneying to Damas.A Truce taken, but quickly broken. Vpon refu^all to render her, and the furniture taken from her, by councell of the Counte of Tryp^ly: Saladine vanquished in open field the Army of the Christians Princes, which consisted of more then twenty thousand able fighting men, Salaladiue making such a fierce and cruell assault vpon them, that the most part of them were put to the edge of the Sword.
For spoyles of his victory, he had the King of Ierusalem Guye of Lusignan,The ouerthrow of the Christian Armie. who before was Count of Iaffa, Husband to the Queene of Sicilie, Sister to Bauldwine the Meazeled; with the true Crosse, which the Bishop of Ptolomais caried in this Battaile. The Christian Army was betrayed by the Counte of Tripoly, descended of the Countes of Tolosa, who (in sted of fighting) threwe the Royall Standard at his feete, and forsooke his owne side. Which ouerthrow happened the fourth and fift of the Nones of Iuly, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and seauen.
Saladine pursuing his victory, sent King Guye, the true Crosse, and all his prisoners to Damas, and tooke from the Christians the Citties of Tiberias, Ptolomais and Ierusalem the Holy Citty, wherein were Foureteene thousand persons of all sexes. These Cities were thus surprized the Second day of October, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and seauen: Afterward, he became Maister of the Citties in Galilee, and of all the Holy-Land, the Citties of Antioche, Tripolye and Tyre,The Citties conquered by Saladine. some fewe Castells and strong places excepted,
Vpon report of these sad tydings in France, King Phillip Augustus resolued on a Voyage to the Holy-Land, for the recouery thereof once more. But in regard that King Henry of England, and he wadged sterne warre each against other; an enterviewe was made of these two Princes, and they had conference together betweene Trie and Gisors: at which place (by miracle,Truce betweene the Kings of England and France and contrary to all humaine hope) the two Kings made a Truce and a cessation from warre for tenne yeares space. Moreouer, they Crossed themselues both for beyond the Seas, by the hands of William of Champaigne, Archbishop of Rheimes, Vnckle to the King, and William, afterward Archbishop of Tyre, and Chauncellour of the Kingdome of Ierusalem, Legate for the Pope in this Holy Croissade.


The Names of them that went in this Third Voyage to the Holy-Land.

FIrst the King himselfe Phillip Augustus.
Otho, Duke of Bourgongne.
Richard, Counte of Poictiers, King of England after Henry.
Phillip, Count of Flanders.
Henry, Second of the name, Count Palatine of Champaigne and Brie, afterward King of Nauarre, Second of the name.
Thibault, Count of Blois.
Stephen, Count of Sancerre.
The Count of Perche.
William des Barres, Counte of Rochefort.
Robert, Count of Dreux.
The Count of Clairmont in Beauuoysis, who caried the Oriflambe Ensigne of Saint Denys.
The Count of Beaumont vpon Oise.
The Count of Soissons.
The Count of Barre.
Bernard of Saint Valery.

Iames d'Auesnes.

The Count of Neuers.

Dreux de Mello.



Matthew de Montmorency.

William de Merlo, and a great number of Knights beside.

Of Prelates that Crossed themselues at the same place.

Gaultier, Archbishop of Rouen.
Bauldwine, Archbishop of Canterbury in England.
The Bishop of Beauuais: And
The Bishop of Chartres.

Holy-Field where the Enter-view was made.The place of this Enter-view was called Holy-Field. Sanctus Campus, where was erected a great Crosse of Wood, and the Kings gaue money to build a Chappel there, in honour of the Holy Crosse, whereon suffered the Sauiour of the world, and for foundation of Diuine Seruice, to continue as a memory to posterity. All this was done in the yeare One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and seauen.
In the yeare of Grace One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and eight, the Moneth of March, and during the Lent time, the King held his Generall Parliament in the Bishops Haull of Paris, and in that time, a wunderfull number of persons Crossed themselues: Prelates, Barons, Priests, Souldiers, Cittizens and Villagers. In this Generall assembly, the people and Clargie of France graunted, that the King should leuey and take the tenth part of their moueable goods, and immoueable fruites of such as Crossed not themselues in this voyage: except Monasteries of Orders of the Cisteaux, Chartreux, and Font-Eurauld, and Hospitalls, and Spittle Houses of France,Saladines Tenths graunted forth Voyage beyond the Seas. in regard of their proprieties. Which moneys graunted to the King, for the Voyage beyond the Seas against Saladine, were called by his name The Tenth^ for Saladine, and which were graunted for one yeare only, with conditions recorded by Rigordus, which are these that follow.




Saladines Tenthes or Titles graunted to the King for one whole yeare, to maintaine the Warres in the Holy-Land: And their Conditions.
DE Decimis hoc constitutum est, quod Omnes Crucem non habentes, quicumque sint, Decimam ad minus dabunt hoc Anno, de omnibus Mobilibus suis, and de omnibus Reditibus, exceptis illis qui sunt Cisterciensis Ordinis, Ordinis Carthusiacensis, and Ordinis Fontis-Ebrardi, and exceptis Leprosis quantum ad suum pertinet proprium.
In nullus Communias mittet aliquis manum, nisi ille Dominus, cuius ipsa Communia fuerit. Quale autem ius in aliqua Communiarum habebat prius aliquis tale habebit.
Qui alicuius Terrae magnam Iustitiam habet, eiusdem Terrae Decimas habebit.
Et sciendum est quod qui Decimas sunt daturi, de toto mobili suo, and reditibus Decimas dabunt, non acceptis inde prius debitis suis: imo, post donationem Decimae, de residuo poterunt sua debita soluere, Vniuersi Laici tam Milites, quam alij, praestito iuramento sub Anathemate: Clerici vero excommunicatione adstricti suas dabunt Decimas.
Miles Crucem non habens, Domino suo habenti eam, cuius erit Homo Ligius, dabit de suo proprio mobili Decimam, and de Feudo quem ipse tenebit. Si autem ab eo nullum tenuerit Feudum, de proprio suo mobili Decimam Domino suo Ligio dabit; Singulis vero a quibus tenebit Decimam de suis Feudis dabit: and si nullam Dominum Ligium habuerit, ei, in cu^us Feudo manserit, leuans, and cubans, dabit Decimam de suo proprio mobili.
Si Quis Terram propriam Decimans, res alterius, quam illius quam debet Decimare inuenerit in Terra sua, and ille cuius res fuerint, illas esse suas legitime monstrare poterit, Decimans non poterit eas vllomodo retinere.
Miles Crucem habens qui sit Haeres legitimus, Filius, vel Gener Militis Crucem non habentis, vel alicuius Viduae, habebit Deciman Patris, vel Matris suae.
In res Archiepiscoporum, seu Episcoporum, seu Capitulorum, seu Ecclesiarum quae ab eis mouent in Capite, non mittet aliquis manum, nisi Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Capitula, and Ecclesiae, quae ab eis mouent.
Si Episcopi inde collegerit Decimas, and eas dabunt, quibus dare debuerint.
Quicunque Crucem habens, qui dare Talliam, vel Decimam debeat, and eas dare noluerit, ab illo capiatur, cui suam debet Talliam, vel Decimam, vt inde suam faciat Voluntatem. Et qui eum coeperit propter hoc, non poterit excommunicari.
Qui deuote, and legitime, and sine coactione Decimam suam dederit, a Deo remunerationem accipiet.
COncerning Tenths or Tithes, it is decreed, that all (which haue not the Crosse, whatsoeuer they be) shall giue this yeare the Tenth at least, of all their moueables, and of all their Reuenewes; Except those which be of the Order of the Cistercians, Carthusians, and of Fonte Eurauld; Leprous persons also are excepted, so far as to their owne peculiar appertaineth.
No man shall lay hand vpon any Colledges or Communities, except the Lord, to whom the Colledge belongeth. Also what manner priuiledge any one had (before time) in any of the Colledges, the like priueledge he shall haue still.
He that hath the great Power and Authority ouer any Countrey, shall haue the Tithes of the same Countrie.
And it is to be noted, that those who are to giue Tenths or Tithes, shall giue them of their whole moueables and reuenewes, not withdrawing first from thence their debtes: But rather the whole Laitie generally, as well Knights and Souldiers, as others, after the free gift of their Tithe, shal pay their debts out of the remainder, by their oath taken vnder a Cursse. The Clergy also shall pay their Tithes, vnder the penalty of Excommunication.
A Knight and Souldier, hauing not the Crosse, shall paye Tithe to his Crossed Lord (whose Leige man he is) of the Fee which he shall hold. But if he shall hold no Fee of him, he shall giue Tithe to his Liege Lord of his owne proper Moueables: Yea he shall giue Tithe of his Fees to euery particular Lord, from whom he shall hold. And if he hath no Liege Lord, hee shall giue Tithe vnto him, in whose Fee he shall abide vprising, or downe lying.
If any man taking Tithe of his owne land, shall find in his land, as well the goods of another Mans land, as of that which he ought to take Tithe of, and he (whose goods they be) can lawfully proue them to be his; The person Tithing shall haue no power (by any meanes) to retaine them.
A Knight or Souldier, hauing the Crosse, who is lawfull Heire, Sonne, or Sonne in law to a Knight and Souldier (which hath not the Crosse) or to any Widdow, shall haue the Tithe of his Father, or Mother.
No man shall lay hands vpon the goods of Archbishops, Bishops or Chapiters, or of the Churches which hold of them in Chiefe, except they be Archbishops, Bishops, Chapiters, and the Churches which hold from them.
If the Bishops thereof shall gather the Tithes, they shall giue them to whom they ought to giue them.
Whosoeuer, hauing the Crosse, ought to giue Tallage, or Tithe, and will not giue them; let him be apprehended of him, to whom he oweth his Tallage or Tithe, that he may heere in doe what he pleaseth. And that person, who for this cause shall apprehend him, shall not be excommunicated.
He that deuoutly and lawfully, and without constraint, shall giue his Tithes, shall haue his recompence from God.




Hence it is, according as some haue written, that the impropriations of Tithes or Tenths in France, deriued their birth and originall. And of these Saladines Tenths, King Phillip made a great banck or stock of money, as well for the Holy warre;The Truce broken by King Richard of England. as that which he had afterward, vpon the Truce broken by Richard (King of England after Henry) against the same Richard: who afterward did Homage to King Phillip, for Lands which he held of the Crowne, and tooke to wife the said Kings Sister Madame Alix of France, whom he after repudiated, to marry Madame Berenguela of Nauarre, as we haue more at large declared in the Tracte speaking of the Order of England.
All they which were Crossed for this Voyage, had Letters of respite and intermission for three yeares space, for payment of their debts, paying the third part yearely at the Feast of All Saints, and to receiue the fruites and reuenues of their Lands. But if they had no Lands or reuenues: they stood bound to giue gadges or payable Cautions to their Creditours, who could not compell them to pay, but at the appointed times, vnder paine of being excommunicated by the Ordenaries and Metropolitanes, vpon complaint only. And such summes as were due, caried no payment of interest, from the day as they tooke the Croissade; but beginning on that

day,The priueledges of such as went in this Holy Croissaid. the Crossed persons could not be called before any bench of Iustice, vntill their returne from beyond the Seas, vnder paine of Excommunication, and paying th^ expences, damages and interests of such suits. In a word, such as were Crossed for the Voyage, had so many exemptions and priueledges: that it was no wonder, if the Armies for beyond the Seas, consisted of Two or three hundred thousand men.
At the same Generall Parliament also, were registred the Royall Ordenances which should be kept in those Voyages to the Holy-Land,Ordenations for those Voyages. either by Sea or Land And them I coppied out of the Parliament Register of the same yeare, as they were published in all parts of the Christian Army, at the departure of the same from Vezelay in Bourgongne, the Moneth of Iuly 1190.
Orders appointed to be obserued in the Christian Army.
Philippus. D. G. Francorum Rex semper Augustus. Nouerint Vniuersi Christo Domino nostro militaturi, etc.
1. Qui Hominem in Naui interfecerit, cum Mortuo ligatus proijciatur in Mare.
2. Si in terra quemquem interfecerit, cum Mortuo in Terram ligatus confodiatur.
3. Si quis conuictus fuerit, quod Cultellum ad alium percutiendum extraxerit, aut quo^ alium ad sanguinem percusserit, pugnum perdat.
4. Si autem palma percusserit, tribus vicibus mergatur in Mari.
5. Si quis Socio opprobrium, conuicium, aut odium Dei obiecerit, quot Vicibus ei conuiciatus fuerit, tot Vncias Argenti reddat.
6. Delato, and conuicto de Furto, Pix bulliens super Caput eius excuciatur ad cognoscendum eum, and in primam Terram cui Naues applicuerint, proijciatur.
So few as they be, yet they are seuere enough.
1. He that Killeth a man in the Shippe; shall be bound and made fast to the dead body, and so throwne into the Sea.
2. If it be done on the land, he shalbe tied, fast to the dead body, and so both buried together.
3. If any one be conuinced, of drawing his Dagger or Knife, to strike an other therewith: or haue wounded any one to the shedding of Bloud* his Hand shall be cut off.
4. If any one giue a blow on the eare to his fellow; three times he shall be duckt or dip^^ in the Sea.
5. If any one offend his fellow by outragious words and villainous behauiour, or blaspheme the name of God: as many times as he hath done so, as many ounces of Siluer shall he be condemned to paye.
6. Such as are accused and conuinced of Theft in the Army; shall haue his head couered with boyling Pitch, to the end, that he may be noated and knowne from the rest, and shall be set on shoare, at the first land the Shippe shall come to.
Augustus hauing left the Regencie of the Kingdome, to Queene Alix of Champaigne his Mother,The setting forth of the seuerall Fleets to Sea. and to his Vnckle, Brother to his Mother, William of Champaigne Archbishop of Rheims, Cardinall and Legate in France, called with the White-Hands* went to take Shipping at Geneway, and King Richard of England at Marseilles. From which Ports the seuerall Fleets set forth, sayling towards Messina in Sicilie, where they arriued at the Feast of Christmasse after their embarking, and were well entertained by Tancred, King of the Prouince.
Some Shipps and vessells there were in the Kings Fleete, that suffered wracking but to recompence the Princes and Lords of France, that had receiued damage therby,Bounty giuen by the King toward^ losses sustained. the King gaue to the Duke of Bourgongne, a Thousand Markes of Siluer: to the Counte of Neuers Sixe hundred Markes: to William des Barres Foure hundred Markes: to William de Marlo Foure hundred Ounces of Siluer: to the Bishop of Chartres Three hundred: to Mathew de Montmorency, Three hundred: to Dreux de Mello Two hundred: to diuers other Lords Two hundred, and to some other lesse, according to their qualities. And at Messina it was, that the bad intelligence began betweene the two Kings of France and England, about the diuorcement of Madame Alix of France.
From Sicilie the King went to take landing before Acres, which the Christians had besiedged the winter before: And the Citty of Acres was taken in the Moneth o^ Iuly,Sicknesse the cause of the Kings returne. One thousand, one hundred fourescore and eleauen: after which surprizall, the King fell into a grieuous Sicknesse, and was constrained to prepare for his returne.

He tooke but three Gallies, conducted by one of Geneway, called Le Rousseau de la Volte, who brought him to land in Apuglia: from whence the King went to Rome, to kisse the Foote of Pope Celestine, after whose blessing receiued, he came into France, where he kept the Feaste of Christmasse at Fontaine-blaude, in the yeare One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and eleauen. He left his Army to the Duke of Bourgongne for succour of the Christians, and his Prisoners to exchange and redeeme captiued Christians.
King Richard perceiuing that Saladine made no reckoning of satisfying the composition, which was, to render back the true Crosse, and those Christian prisoners,King Richards reuenge for Saladines periurie. which he had in the parts vnder his obedience: caused to be brought forth of the Citty Sixe thousand Sarrazins, or thereabout, whose heads were all smitten off, and drew great ransoms from some of the better Prisoners,
Now, concerning the fourth Voyage beyond the Seas, and attempted by the Palladines of France: it was in the yeare One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and eighteene, in which expedition were Crossed as followeth.


Of the Fourth Voyage to the Holy-Land.

THibault, Count Palatine of Brie and of Champaigne, Second of the name, Nephew to King Phillip Augustus.
Lewes, Count of Blois and of Chartres.
Stephen, Count of Perche.
Simon, Count Montfort l' Amaury.
The Marquesse of Montferrat.

Renauld de Montmiraill.

Regnier, Bishop of Troyes in Champaigne.
Neuelon, Bishop of Soissons.
The Count of Brienne.

Guy de Coucy.

Bauldwine, Count of Flanders and of Henaulte.
And Henry his Brother.
Thierrie of Flanders, their Nephew.

With many other Princes, Lords and Knights, perticulerly named in the Historie of this Voyage, written by the Marshall of Champaigne Geoffrey de Villehardouyn, Lord of Ioinuille and of Vaucouleurs, Gentleman of Commercys, who was one of the foremost in this Holy enterprise, According to some, he bare D'Ermines au Lyon de Gueules.
The French, ioyned their Army with that of the Venetians, and Shipped themselues at Venice, vnder conduct of the Duke of Venice Henry Dandolo.The Venetian and French Armies ioyned together. In Company together they besiedged the Citty of Constantinople, and became Maisters thereof.
By common consent of the chiefe and principall Lords of the Army, Bauldwine, Count of Flanders and of Henault was elected and Crowned Emperour of Constantinople, by the Latine name, in the great Patriarchall Church of Saint Sophia. Constantinople was Conquered on the Thurseday before Palme-Sunday, in February,Constantinople conquered by the French and Venetians.
Anno One thousand, two hundred and Foure.
As for this Bauldwine, he reigned no longer then one yeare. For some haue written, that he was taken in Battaile by Ioanniza, King of the Bulgarianes, a barbarous and most cruell Prince, who hauing kept him some few Moneths in Prison at Turnobium; this bloudy Bulgare caused his Armes and Leggs to be cut off, and threw the rest of his body in a Valley, where this great Prince remained three whole dayes liuing, to fight with death and rauenous Beasts, which rent him in pieces. But life being expired, he commaunded his head to be cut off, and of the scull or braine-pan he made a Cupp, and dranke therein dayly very sollemnely.
But the Histories of Times speake farre otherwise, for Mathew Paris in his History of England, vnder the yeare One thousand, two hundred, twenty foure, reporteth, that the said Emperour Bauldwine, after a long and tedious imprisonment, by penitence and wearisome Pilgrimage; returned into his owne Countrey of Flanders, where he was knowne (though wholly chaunged in his countenance) by many

of his Subiects and Seruants, who acknowledged him for their Lord, and did him homage,
The vnnaturall dealing of a daughter against her owne Father.But the Countesse, that had long time held the dignities of her Father, made her complaint to the King of France her Soueraigne Lord against this Bauldwine, whom she tearmed an Imposture, and not her Father. So that to be briefe, He was hanged with all shame and ignominie, in the middest betweene two olde filthie stincking Dogges. Procurauitque vt praedictus Pater suus ignominiose suspenderetur, nam hinc and inde fecit duos Canes Veteres, scilicet mirgos suspendi.
I haue seene the Interrogatories concerning this man, made to the Commissioners, deputed by the Parliament Generall of France, and part of the Articles; wherto he did not answere much amisse, though to some other ambiguously, and as it were by defect of memory. But when it came to the point, Who had made him Knight,Knighthood the maine matter of a mans life. and in what place it was done? He knew not then how to answere any thing, in such an action, the most sollemne that he had in all his life time; which made him iudged, to be but a false, and a supposed Bauldwine.
Yet notwithstandging, Mathew Paris, who liued no long distance of time, from that which concerneth this History; he maintaineth him to be the true Bauldwine, brought to this extremity of affliction, as some say that heard his owne confession (these are the words of Mathew Maris) for a most haynous sinne by him committed. For, hauing bin very long time kept in prison, he was deliuered by the pollitick meanes of a young Maide, vpon sollemne promise: that so soone as he should bee landed on any coast belonging to the Latine Christians, he would procure her to be baptized,The History according to the report of Mathew Paris and then take her as his true and lawfull wife. But being deliuered, and seeing himselfe safe in a Countrey of assurance: he caused her to be strangled before she was baptized, and thereby heaped three grieuous sinnes one vpon an other, for expiation whereof, the Pope sentenced him with an austere kinde of penance, proportionable to such notorious transgressions. Moreouer, that all such as had bin his assistants in this execrable murder, ended their liues in deserued, but most miserable manner, whereof Paris relateth the seuerall examples.
After the taking of Bauldwine, his Brother Henry was chosen the second Latine Emperour of Constantinople; He tooke to Wife Agnes, Daughter to Boniface, Marquesse of Montferrat, crowned King of Thessalonica (as we haue before said in the Genealogie of this House) One thousand, two hundred and sixe. Henry reigned but tenne yeares,The Battaile Bouuines agai^st the Flemings. and died the same day as King Phillip Augustus wunne the memorable Battaile of Bouuines, against the rebellious Flemings, the fiue and twentieth day of Iuly, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, two hundred and fifteene. By Agnes of Montferrat his wife, he left but one daughter, named
Yoland, Wife to Peter de Courtenay, Count of Auxerre, a Prince of the Blood of France, descended of Peter of France, Sonne to King Lewes le Gros, Sixt of the name, and of Alix, Daughter to the Count of Morienna, at this present called Sauoye.
Peter de Courtenay crowned Emperour of the East at Romo.Peter de Courtenay, proclaimed Third Latine Emperour of Constantinople, departed from France for iourneying thither. He first went to Rome, where he was Crowned Emperour of the East by Pope Honorius, Third of the name. From thence he came to Ottranto, where he embarked his Wife and Robert de Courtenay his Sonne, sending them before to Constantinople. But he directed his course toward Durazzo, to possesse himselfe of that strong place, whether came Theodorus Lascaris, a Prince of Greece, and deadly enemie to the Latines. He came to proffer the Emperour Peter his seruice, and promised him his assistance, for conducting him safely into Thessalie, and to Thessalonica, the chiefe Citty of the Kingdome, held by the Marquesse of Montferrat.The treachery of ^ascaris against the Emperour. Lascaris Shipt the Emperour and his people in Vessells of deepe bottome, and then guided him thorow such intricate passages; that they which followed, were diuersly dispersed. So that he made seizure on his person* and shut him vp in an obscure prison, where he kept him for the space of two whole yeares: at the end whereof, the poore Emperour left his head to his enemy, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, two hundred and seauenteene.
Robert de Courtenay his Son, was Fourth Emperour, who perceiuing his affaires in Greece in no good fashion, but holding on from bad to worse: made a voyage into Europe

for supply and succour, wherewith returning into Greece; he died in Achaia, and then succeeded his Sonne
Bauldwine, Second of the name,The last Emperour of the Latine name. Fift and last Emperour of Greece of the Latine name. He married Martha of Lusignan, youngest Daughter to Iohn de Brenne, who brought him (in mariage) the imaginarie title of King of Ierusalem. A mariage ill made for Bauldwine, hauing refused his aduancement, in marying a Wife of the Countrey.
The wicked Alexis, expelled from Constantinople by the French,A Citty of Thrace built vpon the Riuer Heb^us. had maried the Daughter to Theodorus Lascaris (who wrought the death of Peter de Courtenay) retreatreated to the Citty of Adrianopolis, retayning alwayes the Title of Emperour of Constantinople. At the same time also, an other Lascaris tooke the same title of Emperour of Constantinople, establishing his Imperiall Seate at Trebisonde, vsurping (for his part) Cappadocia and Cholcis. And thus the Empire of Greece was deuided into Europe and Asia. Theodorus (by his death) left the part of his vsurpation, to his Sonne in Law Batazis, after whom succceeded his Sonne Theodorus. He of Trebisonde, named Iohn Lascaris, had one only Daughter, whom her Father offred in mariage to Bauldwine the Second: young, and very ill aduised he was, in refusing such an aduantageable party, which would haue made him a peacefull possessour of the Empire; but he would needs marry with Martha of Lusignan.
After the mariage was consummated at Constantinople,Iohn de Brenne Exarcate of Rauenna, and Generall for the Church. Iohn de Brenne (whom Pope Gregorie the Ninth had made Exarcate of Rauenna, and Captaine Generall of the Church, against the excommunicated Emperour Fredericke the Second, and against whom, Iohn de Brenne valiantly defended Romania) gaue councell to his Sonne in Law Bauldwine, to make a step into France, aswell to renew his auncient acquaintance, and get succour thence against Lascaris: as also to visite those Lands which he possessed in France, Flanders and elsewhere. So that Bauldwine went into France, in Anno One thousand, two hundred, forty and fiue. Returne we now agayne to the Voyages of the Holy-Land.
It was an ordenary exercise of the French, to Crosse themselues euery yeare for beyond the Seas, as well for the great Pardons which they had thereby,Yearely voyages of the French beyond the Seas. honour and reputation; as for the large exemptions, that the Crossed deriued from those Voyages. And heereupon, the Officers for the King, the Lords of Fiefes, and others beside, would labour for these Croissades on the one side, and the Crossed on the other (willing to extend their franchises longer, then otherwise they could) had their Processe from the Court, and vpon these contestations of the parties, enquirie was made by the Bishops of Paris and Senlis, Councellers of the Court, and Commissioners nominated by them, for composition of the enquiry. After which, came the decree of the Iudge and Lords of the Enquest, expressing regulerly the Exemptions of the Crossed, and establishing them afterward effectually in those cases, wherefore the decree beareth in title the words, which are contained in the Court Registers, for the establishment of the Crossed: as heare you may reade the tearme of the Courts decree, giuen in the Easter Parliament, One thousand, two hundred and foureteene.




Stabilimentum Cruce-signatorum.
PHILIPPVS Dei Gratia Francorum Rex semper Augustus. Noueritis Quod nos per dilectos, and fideles nostros P. Parisiensem, and G. Syluanectensem Episcopos, ex assensu Domini Legati fecimus diligenter inquiri, qualiter sancta Ecclesia consueuit defendere Cruce-signatos, and ipsorum Cruce signatorum libertates; qui facta inquisitione, pro bono Pacis inter Regnum and Sacredotium vsque ad instans Consilium Ro^anum, ista volumus obscruari.
Primo Quod nullus Cruce-signatus Burgensis, vel Rusticus, siue Mercator fuerit, siue (...), primo Anno quo Crucem assumpsit, Tallietur; nisi Tallia fuerit imposita prius, quam Cr^cem assumet: and si primo Anno imposita fuerit, immunis erit secundo Anno, nisi aliquid

accipatur pro. Exercitu. Tunc autem Talliam esse impositam intelligimus, quando denuntiatum est alicui, vel Domui suae, quantum debeat soluere, vel ponere in Tallia.
Quia vero constat de Consuetudine hactenus obtenta in Regno Franciae quod Crucesignati debeant Exercitum, nisi per speciale Priuilegium Domini Regis sint exempti: Dicimus quod in Exercitu quilibet Cruce-signatus de praedictis dare tenetur, siue Cruce sign^tur ante Citationem, siue post, si tamen debeat Exercitum.
Si Rex viderit expedire quod Villa mittat in Exercitum Seruientes, potius quam illi qui sunt de Villa vadant; poterit Rex accipere de Exercitu de Cruce-signatis competenter: Sed habebunt de cetero Cruce-signati electionem eundi in Exercitum, si voluerint: vel ponendi portionem suam in prisia, pro redemptione Exercitus facta; and si grauati fuerint de prisia, ad Diocesanum Episcopum, vel eius Of ficialem habebunt recursum.
Si vero Cruce-signatus habeat possessiones quae debeant Talliam, reddet Talliam quasi non esset Cruce-signatus: and si neget possessiones debere Talliam, probetur coram Dioces^no Episcopo, vel eius Officiali.
De Cruce-signatis manentibus in Communijs dicimus, quod si a Communia aliqui accipiant propter Exercitam Regis, vel clausuram Villae, vel deffensionem Villae ab Inimicis obsessae, vel Communiae debitum factum and iuratum reddi, antequam Crucem assumerent, partem suam ponent in prisia, sicut and alij non Cruce-signati: De debito vero contracto a Communia, post Crucis assumptionem, immunis erit Cruce-signatus vsque ad presentem moram, and quandiu erit in Peregrinatione.
Si Bailliui Dom ni Regis aliquem Cruce-signatum deprehinderint ad praesens forefactum, pro quo debeat membris mutilari, vel Vitam amittere, secundum consuetudinem Curiae saecularis; Ecclesia non deffendet eum, vel res eius. In alijs autem leuioribus, and minoribus forefactis, pro quibus non debeat membris mutilari, vel Vitam amittere, Bailliuus non debet corpus Cruce-signati, vel res eius capere, vel captum retinere, quin reddat absolute ipsum, and res suas Ecclesiae requirenti eum pro iure faciendo.
Si autem in forefacto conuictus fuerit de tali forefacto pro quo debeat iuxta Iudicum Saecularium consuetudinem membris mutilari, vel Vitam amittere; Ecclesia nec ipsum, neque res eius amplius defendet. De alijs conuictus, in foro Ecclesiae, secundum consuetudinem Villae, emendet laeso.
Quod si Dominus Rex alicui Burgo, vel Ciuitati, vel Castello concesserit immunitatem Exercitus, si petat Rex alquid de eis pro Exercitu, Cruce-signati primo Anno nihil ponent.
De Feodis autem, and Censiuis, respondeat Cruse-signatus coram Domino Feodi, vel Censiuae, and si grauatus fuerit, retractet se ad Episcopum, vel eius Officialem.
Si vero Cruce-signatus conueniat quemcumque Christianum super debito, vel iniuria corporali sibi illata, vel a Christiano conueniatur super praemissa, electionem habeat conueniendi eum sub Iudice Saeculari, vel Ecclesiastico, sub quo maluerit.
Nullus Cruce-signatus tenetur respondere in foro Saculari, sed in Ecclesiastico, exceptis Feodis, and Censiuis, de quibus litigabunt coram Dominis Feudorum, and Censiuarum.
De possessione quam pacifice tenuerunt per Diem, and Annum, obseruentur praedicta, done^ Cruce-signati perfecerint Peregrinationem suam.
Si autem super negotio Cruce-signatorum aliquae nouae dubitationes emerserint, ad d^^^ praedictos Episcopos recurratur.
Ista pro bono Pacis per totum Domanium Domini Regis, de Cruce-signatis pro Terra Hierosolymitana, vsque ad Concilium volumus obseruari, Saluis iure, and Consuetudinibu^ Regni Francorum, and auctoritate Sacro-sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae per omnia.
Actum Parisijs in Parlamento Anno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo Decimo Quart^ Mense Martio.


An Establishment of the Crossed.
PHILLIP by the Grace of God King of France euer Augustus etc. Know ye that We^ by our beloued, and faithfull Bishops P. of Paris, and G. of Senlys* with the assent of the Lord Legate, haue caused diligent inquirie to bee made, how the holy Church hath bin accustomed to defend the Crossed, and the liberties of the Crossed; Who for the good of the Peace betweene the Kingdome and Priesthood, doe will these things to be obserued, vntill the next Romain Councell.
First, that no Crossed Burgesse or Husbandman, whether he be Merchant or no, shall bee taxed the first yeare, Wherein he hath taken the Crosse, except the Taxe be imposed before he shall take the Crosse: And if it be imposed the first yeare, he shall be free the second (except somewhat be taken for the Armie). We vnderstand a Taxe then to be imposed, when knowledge is giuen to any one, or left at his house, how much he ought to pay, or put on the tallie.
And because it is manifest according to the Custome held in the Realme of France,Debeant Exercitum. that the Crossed do owe and are engaged to the Army, except they be exempted by the speciall priuiledge of our Lord the King. We signifie that euery Crossed in the Armie is bound to giue, according to the premises, whether he be Crossed before summons or after, if so be that he oweth dutie to the Army.
If the King shall see it expedient, that a Towne or village send forth seruants into the Armie, rather then they of the Towne should goe themselues, the King may take conueniently ^f the Armie, and of the Crossed: But otherwise the Crossed shall haue their choice of going into the Army (if they will) or of putting their portion in the prisage, made for redemption of the Army; And if they be grieued about the said prisage, they shall haue recourse to the Bishop Diocesan, or to his Officiall.
But if a party Crossed hath possessions which owe Tallage, he shall pay Tallage, as if hee were not Crossed. If he deny his possessions to owe Tallage; let it be tryed before the Bishop Diocesan, or his Officiall.
Concerning those Crossed, that abide in Communities or Colledges: We say,Communit^. that if any of the Colledge, either for the Kings Army, or for the inclosing of a Towne, or for the defence of a towne besiedged by the enemy, or of a Colledge shall receiue a debt made, and sworne to be repaide, before they did assume the Crosse, they shall lay their part in the prisage, as others that are not Crossed. But concerning a debt contracted of a Colledge, after the taking of the Crosse; the Crossed shall be free for the present time of his staye, and as long as he shall be in his voyage.
If the Kings Baylieffs shall take any Crossed for a present offence, or act committed abroad, for the which he ought to haue his members maimed, ar to loose his life, according to the custome of the secular Court; The Church shall not defend him nor his goods. But in other lighter, and lesse offences, or Acts committed abroad, for the which he ought neither to bee dismembred, nor loose his life, the Bailiffe ought not to take the body, nor goods of the Crossed, nor retaine them being taken; but absolutely restore him and his goods to the Church, requiring him for the doing of Iustice.
But if in the fact, he shall be conuicted of such an offence, for the which hee ought according to the custome of secular Iudges, to be maimed in his lims, or suffer death; The Church shal no more defend him nor his goods. But being conuicted of other crimes, let him make good the hurt in the Ecclesiasticall Court, according to the custome of the Towne.
If our Lord the King haue granted to any Burrough, Citty,Castell^. or Towne Freedome of the Army: If the King demand any thing of them for the Army, the Crossed shal lay downe nothing the first yeare.
Concerning Fees and Fines, let the Crossed answer before the Lord of the Fee or Fine, and if he find himselfe too much burthened, let him repaire to the Bishop, or his Officiall.
If a man Crossed conuent any Christian, vpon a debt or corporall iniury offred vnto him: or by a Christian shall be conuented about the premises; let him choose whether hee will call him before a secular, or an Ecclesiasticall Iudge, which he will.
No man Crossed is bound to answer in a secular, but in a Court Ecclesiasticall. (Fees and Fines being excepted) concerning which, they shall commence suite before the Lords of the Fees and Fines.
Concerning possession, which they haue peaceably held for a day and a yeare; let the premises be deserued, vntill the parties Crossed haue accomplished their Pilgrimage.
But if about the affaires of the Crossed, any new doubts doe arise; let them haue recourse to the two foresaid Bishops.
Wee commaund these things to bee obserued, for the good of Peace through all the Dominion of the King, concerning those that are Crossed for the holy Land, (the rites and customes of the Realme of France, and the Authority of the Romaine Church in all things kept vnuiolated.
Made in Parliament at Paris in the yeare of our Lord. 1214.




Such were (in those times) the Franchises, Freedomes, and Exemptions of the Crossed, who after their death, if they were Crossed, that is to say, dyed after they had taken the Croissade, and had not gone in the holy Voyage, or after it carryed Palmes:The Buriall obserued for them of the Croissade. had yet the honour to be carryed to the Graue Armed, and haue Their Legges Crossed one ouer the other. In this fashion, and no otherwise were they figured on Tables, Tombes, flatte Graue Stones, or raised by Caruing; as yet is to be seene in the Cloysters of Ancient Monasteries of France, Flanders, and in diuers other places else.
In the yeare, One thousand, two hundred and sixteene, a great Croissade was made in France and Italy,The death of Saladine at Damas. for going to succour the Christians beyond the Seas. Saladine, their Potent enemy was dead at Damas, hauing left two Sonnes, the one Caliphe of Aegypt, and named Meralit, and the other of Syria and Ierusalem, whom they called Affadine, who gouerned then, when the Christian Armie (whereof wee now speake) tooke landing in Palestine.
In this Armie were present, Prelates of France; the Bishops of Paris, of Autune, and of Lysieux.
Of Italy, the Bishops of Millayne, of Rhegium, of Fauenca, and of Brescia, with other Prelates beside, and threescore thousand Souldiours.
Peace requested by Affadine of the Christian Princes.At the landing of this great Armie, which shaped her course to besiedge the City of Damieta in Aegypt; the Sultane Affadine desired peace with the Christian Princes, as well for himselfe, as the Sultane of Aegypt his Brother. In the doing whereof he promised that he would deliuer to the Princes, the holy Crosse, taken from them by his Father Saladine, and yeeld vp the City of Ierusalem into their power: Which offers the Christian Princes accepted, as the greatest aduantage that could happen to them: and now so much the better, in regard that it was so freely tendered.
Against which offer, was opposition made in a brauery, by Pelagius, a Spaniard by Nation, Legate for the businesse of the Crosse in the Armie, who was possessed with a strange opinion, as many more of his Countrey were beside; concerning a Prophesie then rumoured abroade, fondly noysed, and idlely vnderstood. That at this very time, the Lawe of Mahomet should bee quite ouerthrowne by a Spanyard, which he supposed to be himselfe, and so sent backe the Sultanes Deputies, without effecting any thing. This deniall was the cause, that the Sultane (in despight of the Christians) raced and spoyled the very godliest places in Ierusalem.
The Christians take Damieta by assault.Damieta was surprized in the assault by the Christians, in the yeare of Orace, one thousand, two hundred and nineteene, the fifteenth day of Nouember.
This surprizall did so mount the Legate Spanyards courage, that contemning Military Order and Discipline; he auanced on the Christian Armie, to besiedge Grand Cairo. The Sultane suffered this great Armie, to run it selfe in out of breath, consisting yet of more then threescore thousand men, which (euen in a very short moment of time) saw it selfe famished,A grieuous mortalitie in the Christian Armie. and afflicted with diuersitie of deadly diseases: so that more then halfe part of them being dead, and the rest very sickely languishing: he was glad to buy a Retreate, and for it to surrender to the Sultane Damieta, which had cost so much in the taking. This reddition was done in September, One thousand two hundred, twentie and three. So the Legates glory vanished into smoake, himselfe hated and detested of the Christians; whose misfortune hee had caused, and ruinated the affaires of the Holy-Land.
In the meane while, the King of Ierusalem, Iohn de Brenne, obtained of the Sultane Affadine, a Truce for the space of eight yeares, by meanes whereof he had leysure to leaue Syria, and passe into Europe, to request the succor of the Christian Princes. Going into Italie,Truce taken for eig^t years space with the Sultane. he marryed his eldest daughter Yoland to Fredericke, King of Sicilie, afterward Emperour, second of the name: who deceassing without children, the Title and Right in the Kingdome of Ierusalem, went to her Sister Martha, wife to the Emperour
Bauldwine, second of the Latine name, according as we shall now come to relate: for thus was the State of the Kings of Ierusaleem.



Concerning the Kings of Ierusalem, in their succeeding each after other.
I. Godfrey of Bologne, chosen the first King of Ierusalem, seauen dayes after the holy City was taken: he reigned but one yeare, and leauing no issue, hee had for Successour his Brother
II. Bauldwine, whose Reigne continued eighteene yeares* And after him succeeded his Cousine Germaine
III. Bauldwine, second of the name, who (before) was Count of the Isle in Flanders, and of Edessa in the Easte, Sonne to the Count of Rethell, who reigned thirteene yeares, or thereabout. He dyed in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, thirty and one, and dying, left the kingdome to his Eldest daughter Millesena, wife to
IIII. Foulques, Count of Aniou, who in regard of his wife, was the Fourth King of Ierusalem. His Reigne lasted eleauen yeares, and dying in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred forty and two, left for King his eldest Sonne
V. Bauldwine, third of the name: who dying in the yeare, One thousand, one hundred, threescore and three, left the Kingdome to his Brother
VI. Amaury, who deceassed in the yeare, One thousand, one hundred, threescore and thirteene; and left for Successour his Sonne
VII. Bauldwine, Fourth of the name, who reigned but Eight moneths onely: so that by his death, the Crowne of Ierusalem came to his Mother
IX.
Sybilla (Sister to Bauldwine the Meazeled, wife to Guy of Lusignan) Sonne ofHugh le Brun, Count of Lusignan, and de la Marche, Ninth King of Ierusalem.The Count of Tripoly denye ^his Chr^stians, Faith, and the harm^s ensuing thereon.Vnder whose reigne Raymond descended of the Auncient Countes of Tolosa,
Count of Tripoly (of whom we haue formerly spoken) denyed the Christian Faith, and was Circumcised according to the false Lawe of Mahomet, yeelding himselfe to take part with Saladine: thereby b^traying King Guy and the Christian Armie. Which wicked deede, gaue a great checke to the Christian Princes, and no meane hope to the Sultane Saladine, to chase them quite out of Palestine, and out of al which they possessed there beyond the Seas.
And thereupon, the Truce being broken, as we haue already said, by surprizing the Mother of Saladine, and the bad intelligence of Raymond of Tripoly: Saladine ouerthrew a puissant Armie, and besiedged the strong City of Acres,The City of Acres c^lled Ptolomais. otherwise named Ptolomais, then held and commanded by the Knights of the Temple, and the H^spitallers of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, to whom the King of Ierusalem Bauldwine had giuen it. The Christian Armie was vanquished in a fought Battaile (when the Count of Tripoly played the Traytour, as before you haue heard) and tooke prisoner King Guy, with the true Crosse, and a great number of spoyles, rich in value.
By this surprizall of the holy City, the Kingdome of Ierusalem ceassed, and tooke ending, when it had beene held by the Latine Christians fourescore and eight yeares. And the descendants of Saladine. Sultanes of Aegypt,The ending of the Kingdome of Ierusalem held by the ^atine Christians. held it three hundred and thirty yeares; when the Great Turke Selim (growing mightie in Armes) conquered from the Sultanes of Aegypt the City of Ierusalem, which the Turkes (in the Arabian language) call Godsbarich, and by an other name Cuzumobarech, which signifieth A Holy Cittie, and which they left in such estate, as they conquered it from the Mammelukes: not in regard of any deuotion, but for the great taxations and tributes which they had by Christian Pilgrimes, to whom for benefite they granted accesse and entrance.
Now although King Philip Augustus, and his youngest Sonne Saint Lewes King of France, King Richard of England, the Infidells terror and affright in his time, and the Emperours of Germany, made infinite voyages for recouery of the Holy Land:All the Christians ^orces haue ^i^led of recouering Ierusalem. yet notwithstanding, their attempts haue beene without vigout, for any way helping the holy City, which the Miscreants haue held euer since Saladine became Maister thereof, in the yeare, one thousand, one hundred, fourescore and seauen.
After the taking of Guy of Lusignan, last King of Ierusalem in effect: the Christians were wholly expelled out of the Holy City, and had not any more command there.

King Guy, and the Great Maister of the Templers, at the end of two yeares, by paying the price of a great ransome, were deliuered out of prison. By the death of Queene Sybilla and her children; during the Siedge of Ptolomais; the Crowne of Ierusalem fell to Isabell, who was Sister to Queene Sybilla.
IX. Isabell had fiue husbands, Emfroy, Conrad, and in third marriage shee was Wife to
X. Henry, Count Palatine of Champaigne and Brie, who was not Crowned King of Ierusalem: after whose death, she espoused in fift mariage
The Issue of Isabell Queene of Ierusalem.XI. Amaury of Lusignan, Brother to King Guy. Queene Issabell deceasing, the Crowne departed from the house of Lusignan: By her first Husband Emfroy, Count of Toron, she had not any Children: By her second Husband Conrad, Marquesse of Montferrat, she had but one Daughter named Mary, Queene of Ierusalem: By Henry of Champaigne her third Husband, she had two daughters; Alix, Queene of Cyprus, and Phillip, Wife to Ayrard de Brenne, who contended for the Countie of Champaigne, and thereupon ensued the decree which we haue obserued, speaking of the Peeres of France. By Amaury of Lusignan her fift Hu^band, she had a Sonne that died young, and two Daughters, Sybilla, Wife to Leo, First King of Armenia, and Melizena, Wife in second marriage to Boemond, third Prince of Antioche. After the death of Queene Isabell, the Crowne of Ierusalem came to her Eldest Daughter
Mary, Wife to Iohn de Brenne, and in this mariage were borne two Daughters, Yoland and Martha.
Yoland was wife to Frederick, King of Sicilie, who had no Children by his Wife; and yet notwitstanding, his Successours in the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, haue caried the title and Armes of Kings of Ierusalem, euen to this day.
The other Daughter was
Martha, Wife to Bauldwine, last Latine Emperour of Constantinople, as hath beene said already.
Iohn de Brenne was in France to craue succour, when King Phillip Augustus departed out of this life to the Kingdome of Heauen, in the Citty of Mante, the yeare of Grace,The death of King Phillip Augustus* in Anno, 1323. One thousand, three hundred twenty and three, in the Ides of Iuly. The Masse for his Obsequies and Funerall, was said and celebrated by Conrad: Bishop Du Port, Cardinall and Legate to the Sacred Seate, for the warre of the Abbigeoi^ Heretiques; with William, Archbishop of Rheimes, Cardinall of Saint Sabina, both singing together, and in one keye or noate, at two Altares one neere the other, to whom answered two Bishops, Priests and Monkes.
Missam exequialem celebrarunt simul Portuensis Episcopus, and Remensis Archiepiscopus Vna Voce ad duo Altaria propinqua, ceteris Episcopis, cum Clericis and Monachis, quo rum aderat multitudo, assistentibus, and eis respondentibus, sicut Vni. Inter quos adsuit, and Ioannes Illustris Rex Hierosolymitanus, qui in Franciam venerat, pro negotijs, and necessitatibus Terrae Sanctae, So saith Rigordus.
The said King Phillip Augustus (by his will and Testament) Legacied for the affaires in the Holy-Land,The liberall bounty of King Phillip Augustus. Three hundred thousand Parisian Poundes: To the said King Iohn de Brenne, One hundred thousand: To the Order of the Templers, One hundred thousand: And to that of the Hospitable Knights of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem the like summe of an hundred thousand Pounds of Paris.
He attempted a Voyage beyond the Seas, in the time of the King Saint Lewes, to re-obtaine the Holy-land; wherein were these Chiefe men.


An other Voyage for the Holy-Land.

THibault, King of Nauarre, First of the name, Count Palatine of Brie and Champaigne, Fift of the Name.
Peter Maucler, Duke of Bretaigne.
Henry, Count de Barre.
Amaury, Count de Montfort.

Richard de Chaumont.


Lancelot de l'Isle.


And many great Lords of France, Nauarre, Germany, and other places. The King of Nauarre, beeing chosen Chiefe, and Captaine Generall of this holy enterprise: left the Gouernment of his Kingdome to Queene Margaret of Bourbon his wife,The King of Nauarre Generall of the Armie. and to the Bishop of Pampelona Dom Pero Ximenes his Chancellour, and they vndertooke the voyage in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, two hundred, thirty and eight.
The Christian Armie desiring to Embarke at Geneway, for their more speedy passage into the East; were delayed for a time, and afterward vtterly denyed by the Genewayes. So that they were enforced to take a further way about, by Germany, Hungary and Thrace to Constantinople, and from thence to passe the Bosphorus, as also the Straite at Mountaine Taurus, where the Sarrazins were met together in huge multitudes, to hinder the passage of the Christians. And now to speake the truth of their Armie, after they had sustayned infinite annnoyances,The Christian voyage vtterly disappointed. and miserable scarsitie of victuals; it came to Antioch, but so rent and shaken, that they which were left remaining, could not performe any great act of Armes in the Holy Land. Onely through had intelligence of the Christians; diuided among themselues; by the secret practises and plottings of the second Emperour Fredericke, a deadly enemy to the French, and pertaker with the Infidells.
So that King Thibault, the Princes, Lords, and Knights which were left of the Armie, cut and squared into two parties: were compelled to take the Seas,Their returne home againe. and passe home againe into their Countries.
In the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred forty and eight, the King Saint Lewes vndertooke a voyage ouer the Seas, to recouer the Holy Land, and succor the poore Christians, ill entreated by the Sarrazins.
We haue before reported, that Bauldwine, second of the name, Fift and last Emperour of Constantinople, made a passage for France in the yeare, One thousand, two hundred and forty, onely to obtaine ayde, for better furnishing the occasions, greatly disioynted and out of frame: they of Lascaris hauing their ascendant vpon him. Bauldwine continued in France aboue three yeares, and during his voyage, hee had giuen the Gouernment of his Empire, to the King Iohn de Brenne his Father in Law.Iohn de Brenne Gouernour of the Empire in the absence of Bauldwine. For succour of the Frontiers or borders, and (in some measure) to defray the charges of his iourney; he engadged to the Venetians, all the Reliques in Constantinople, which yeelded him great summes of money.
The King Saint Lewes released their engadgement and caused them to be brought to the Chappell Royall in his Pallace at Paris, by him newly builded of admirable structure, vpon the old foundation of the Chappell Royall, belonging to King Robert, Sirnamed the Deuoute, called Our Lady of the Starre. Euery yeare, the last day of September, is celebrated the receiuing of those Reliques in the same holy Chappell, where Diuine Seruice is said on the Eeue and day by the Mendicants, and in other Monasteries of Paris, and it is reported, that S. Lewes sent part of the Crowne of Thornes, and of the true Crosse, to the Cathedrall Churches of Pampelona and Tolledo.
By the engadgement, or rather forcible carrying away of so many precious Reliques from Constantinople, hauing bin there so long time carefully kept; a great rumour arose among the Inhabitants:Murmour in Constantinople for losse of the Reliques, and troubles ensuing thereon. which was much furthered by the absence of Bauldwine, and death of Iohn de Brenne, whose wise conduct and vigilancy, held a seuere restraint vpon all insolent presumption. After his death, the Lescaris of Adrianople and of Trebisonde began to appeare, at which sad tydings, Bauldwine passed presently into Greece, where being arriued, his credit was so lost, and such a sad face set on all affaires for him: that no hope being left of any comfort in this case, he deliuered his Son (but very young in years) to certaine Merchants of Bruges, to be sent away for Flanders, with all his money and Iewells.
The Lescaris, Father and Son in Law, dying in the interim of these molestations; Michael Paleologus, Tutor to the Sons of young Theodor Lascaris, awaked all his Familiars and acquaintance; and by the death of the Children in their minority,The rising of Michael Paleolgus to the Empire. he caused himselfe to be nominated for Emperour of Greece. In a fought Battaile, he tooke William, Prince of Antioch, Prisoner, who was enforced (for his redemption) to yeeld him the strong City of Epidaurus in Achaya.
Paleologus so well managed his victory, that soone hee shewed himselfe before Constantinople, where the French, beeing vnable to hold that potent Citty by their strength,The ending of the Latine Empire in Bauldwine. and the people therein beeing their mortall enemies: Bauldwine the Emperour, Iustinian the Patriarch of Constantinople (with all the Latines) left the City, returning backe againe into Europe. So that without striking a stroake, Paleologus gaue ending to the Latine Empire, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, two hundred, Fifty and nine, the French hauing held Constantinople fiue and fifty yeares onely.
As for the Christians in Palestine, they had a litle strength and courage left them, notwithstanding their hard handling by the Sultanes of Damas and Aegypt. Wherevpon the good King Saint Lewes, seeing himselfe deliuered from all his enemies, his Kingdome in quiet, hauing a wise mother and a wife that dearely affected him, with a number of godly children, and himselfe in the prime and floure of his age; he determined to crosse the Seas.
He tooke the Croissade, Scrippe and Pilgrimes Staffe, at the hands of the Bishop of Paris, his Curate: And with him were Crossed as followeth.


Of the Croissade vndertaken by the King Saint Lewes: And of such as went in the Voyage with him. in Anno. 1248.

Brethren to the King.
ALphonsus, Count of Poictiers.
Charles, Count of Aniou.
Robert, Count of Artois.
Hugh, Duke of Bourgongne.
William, Count of Flanders.
Guy of Flaunders, his Brother; who dyed at Compeigne before the Voyage.
Hugh, Count of Saint Paul, and of Blois.
Gaultier de Castillon, his Nephewe.
Hugh le Brun de Luzignan, Count de la March; And his Sonnes.
The Count of Salebruch.
Gaubert, Count of Aspremont, and his Brethren.
Iohn, Lord of Ioinuille, and Seneschall of Champaigne, Authour of the life of S. Lewes, out of whose writings we haue gathered the particularities of this last voyage, Il portoit d'Azur, a Trois Broyes en Cheuron d^Or, liees de Annelets d Argent.
Peter, Count of Bretaigne.
Iohn his Sonne.
Gaultier, Viscount of Meaux: Qui Portoit d'Argent a vne Fesse de Gueules.

There is a man Sirnamed Giffard of Meaux, who in this voyage Portoit de Sable a vne Iumelle d'Argent: At this returne from thence he tooke D'Argent a Cinq Chapeaux d'Espines de Sable. 2.2.1.


Huguemain de Luzarches, Portoit d'Argent a vn Lyon de Gueules.

Huguemain (in Latine Hugo-magnus.)
Archambauld de Bourbon, the younger dyed in Cyprus.

Iohn de Montfort: Qui Portoit de Gueules au Lyon d'Argent.

William de Barres, called Le Barrois, who in this voyage carryed Barre d'Argent and de Sable de Six pieces. And afterward tooke D'Or a la Croix Nillee de Sable.

Stephen de Digoyne, Qui Portoit vn Eschiquier d'Argent, et de Sable.


Raoull de Coucy.


And an vnspeakeable number of Lords, Knights, and men of Armes, both on Ho^s^ and Foot.
Prelates that Crossed themselues in this Voyage.
Eudes de Chasteau Raoull (de Castro Radulphi) who was Chancellour of Paris, and afterward Bishop of Toscanelle, and Legate of this Croissade, named by Pope Innocent the fourth.

Iubell, Archbishop of Rheimes.
Philip, Archbishop of Bourges.
Robert, Bishop of Beauuais.
Garnier, Bishop of Laon.
William, Bishop of Orleans.

Gilles Gilles, a Natiue of Saumour in Aniou, and buryed in the Church of our Lady of Nant^lly, Keeper of the Seales of France (forgotten by Ferron) and afterwa^d Archbishop of Tyre. Qui Portoit d'Argent a vne Croix Ancree de Gueules, a^pied fiche dedans vn Coeur de mesme.
With a great number of Abbots, and men of the Church.
This Religious King Saint Sewes departed from the Citty of Paris, to passe away on this voyage beyond the Seas, on Fryday after Pentecoste, In the yeare of Grace,The setting on o^ the Ch^istia^ Armie.
One thousand, two hundred forty, and eight, hauing for Legate in the Christian Armie Eu^es, the venerable Bishop of Tuscula, sent by Pope Innocent the Fourth to Lyons, to which place he was withdrawne by his permission, to shun the fury of the Emperour Frederick the Second.
From Lyons, the King went to take Shipping at Marseilles, the fiue and twentieth day of the Moneth August, the same yeare, One thousand,The Army tooke Shipping at Marseilles. two hundred fortie eight. This embarking was not done at Aiguemortes, as some great Chroniclers haue written, who haue followed the words of another William of Nangis, Monke of Saint Denys, in the Life of the said King Saint Lewes. Wherefore hee is to correct his passage in the foure and twentieth Chapter. Tandem Rex ad portum Aquarum ^rtuarum perueniens, and say, Portum Massiliensium. And in the same Chapter, where he speaketh of Saint Lewes his arriuall in Cyprus. Rex a portu recedens, and duce Deo nauigans die Iouis ante festum Sancti Mathaei Apostoli de nocte in Cypro Nimothium ^pplicuit. He should say Nemosium, a Porte of the Sea, built by Guy of Luzignan, first King of Cyprus, and called at this present Lemisso.
Wee haue sayde, that in the Voyage of Phillip Augustus, at the taking of the strong Citty of Acres, there were two Admiralls Prisoners,Karacur, one of the Admiralls to the (...). the one of them beeing named Karacux, by whose councell and aduise (as they beyond the Seas were perswaded) the Sultane Saladine had conquered the great Estates which ^ee possessed. Phillip hauing commaunded, that hee should bee brought before ^im, at the first sight, despised the pouerty of his outward appearance. But hauing ^nderstood by the Latine Lords, dwelling there beyond the Seas, what excellency of spirit was in this Miscreant; he entreated and coniured him by his honour to gi^e ^im true and faithfull aduise and councell, in such matters as he would then demand of him.
The Sarrazin answered, that there was no neede of praying and supplicating, to cause and winne aduise from him by way of Councell:The Sarazins answer (...) King Phillip Augustus. because quoth ^ee) the name of Counceller carryeth along with it, an obligation of speaking ^nd Councelling the Truth, and giuing his iudgement in soundnesse of consci^nce. For the name of Counceller is so sacred of it selfe, as hee that beareth Title thereof: ought to haue his word and fayth inuiolable, and in much greater commendation, then the title of an honest or wise man. And therefore Sir, saide hee, I will freely giue you mine aduise, in such demands as you can vse to mee. Hauing thus spoken, hee caused a Basin of cleane water to bee brought: and after ^ee had therewith washed his face, hands and feete, according to the Lawe of ^is Prophet Mahomet: hee bowed his body downe towards the ground, adoring ^eauen, by exhalting his hands vp thereto. Then the King made this demaund to him.

What meanes may the Christians vse, whereby to make themselues Maisters of the Holy ^and: And to keepe and defend it against the Sarrazins?
The demand of K. Phillip.

^aracux much astonished at such a demand, first crying out aloud, returned this Answer to our Conquerer.





The Answere of Karacux to the Demaund of King Phillip Augustus: First as it is Recorded in French, and then Englished.
SCachez que ce Iour sera la cause de la ruine totale de nostre Nation; and puis qui'l est impossibile d Aller contre la Prescience Diuine, and que par icelle ie suis force d'en predir^ ce qui en aduiendra quelque I our, Ie vous Dis, que quand vous auriez acquis cette Terr^ que vous appellez Saincte, and que l'eussiez entouree d'vne forte muraille de Fer, ou de Diamant, and remplie de Soldats indomptables (comme vous en auez) pour la garde d'i^elle, (...) vous est impossibile de vous y maintenir, sans auoir au prealable acquis, and Conqueste l'Egypte. Vous autres Chrestiens estes les plus fortz sur la Mer, and abondez en Vaisseaux, and (...) Hommes experts au faict de la Marine, il v^us est fort facile de vous en rendre Maistres Toute l'Egypte depend du Nil, c'est sa Muraille, sa Barriere* and sa Mere-nourice: la Me^ la borne d'vn coste, rendez-vous en les Maistres; vous n'aurez plus de besoin de mandier le^ moyens de garder le Royaume de Hierusalem. Vos Princes les Premiers Rois d'I celuy, (...) rendirent Seigneurs, auecques peu de forces, d'Alexandrie, and de Pelouze; s'ils les eussem gardees, nostre Religion, long temps y a seroit exterminee: Priuez les Egyptiens des Commoditez du Nil, and de la Mer, and leur ostez la Nauigation, la grande Vile du Caire au^ toute l'Egypt vous tendrent les Mains. Faictes autant ou plus de'stat d'vne Armee Mar^ time, que d'vne Terrestre, c'est le plus seur Conseil que ie vous peux donner.
Know therefore, that this day will be the cause of the totall ruine of our Nation; And seeing it is impossible, to goe against the Prescience or Diuine foreknowledge, and thereby (...) am forced to foretell, that which shall one day come to passe: I tell you Sir, that when you hau^ wun this Land, which you call Holy, and shall haue engirt it with a strong wall of yron, or (...) Diamond, and filled it with vnconquerable Soldiours (as you haue done) for the guard thereof; it is impossible for you to maintaine your selfe here, vntill you haue first of all wunne an^ conquered Aegypt. You Christians are the strongest on the Seas, and abound in Shipping and men expert in the Arte of Nauig^tion: it is very easie for you to become Maisters. A^ Aegypte dependeth vpon Nilus, that is h^r Wall, her Barricadoe, and her Nursing Mother* The Sea boundeth it on the one side, and maketh you Maisters, you haue no neede to cra^ any better meanes, for keeping the Kingdome of Ierusalem. Your Princes the first King thereof, made themselues Lords (with few forces) of Alexandria, and of Pelouze: If the^ had kept them, our Religion had beene here long time since quite exterminated. Depriue t^ Aegyptians of the commodity of Nilus, and of the Sea, and take away their Nauigation: th^ great Citty of Cayro, with wholly all Aegypt, will shake hand with you. Make as much, (...) rather more account of a Nauall or Sea Armie, then of a Land; and this is the very sure) Councell that I can giue you




Saint Lewes could credite this councell giuen to his Grandfather, and departin^ from Cyprus,Babylon, the chiefe Citty of Egypt, it is now called Ragadeth* descended thence to Damieta, which the Sarrazins forsooke in fea^ and frightment. He concluded to besiedge Babylon, the Capitall Citty of Aegypt he ouerthrew his enemies in two foughten Battailes; the first at Massorre, whe^ was slaine his Brother Robert, Counte of Artois; the other at Bexill. After which the Pestilence beeing dispersed in the Christian Armie, the King resolued o^ his returne to Damieta. Vpon his retreate, the Sarrazins possessed themselues (...) the passage, and the King beeing sicke, and very soare wounded; was taken prison^ at Cazell.
The ransome of his person, was the reddition of the Cittie of Damieta to th^ Sarrazins: And for his Armies ransome, the summe of foure hundred thousan^ pounds, which was weighed by Ballances, tenne thousand pounds in the Sca^ Word was brought to the King, that tenne thousand pounds were saued in the fir^ payment,The worthy and Royall minde of the King S. Lewes. by miscounting one Ballance weight to the Sarrazins. Whereupo^ the King commaunded Phillip de Montfort (who had the charge of t^ payments) to render backe the summe miscounted, and not to depart thence, till h^ saw it payed.
Which condemneth their folly and rashnesse, who haue written, that the Ki^ gaue in pawne to the Sarrazins, the holy Sacramentall Hoast, for want of the pr^mised

payment. And the proofe of the contrary appeared, in that King Lewes (after his deliuerance) continued fiue yeares beyond the Seas, where while he soiourned; he caused to be newly engirt with walles, the Citties of Sidon, Iaffa and Caesarea, which droue the Sarrazins to no meane amazement, at the greatnes and Riches of the King, and of the Realme of France.
Saint Lewes, before his returne into France, made a Truce with the Soldane of Aegypt and of Damas for tenne yeares, and left great store of money with the Christians beyond the Seas, for repayring the Citties of Tyre, of Tripoly, of Syria,The Citty of Acres the Seat Royall of the holy Land. and the Citty of Acres, which was then the Seate Royall in the Holy Land: And wherein made their residing, the Patriarch of Ierusalem; the Great Masters of the Templars, Hospitallers of Saint Iohn, and other Orders of Religion, ordained in the East.
The Truce of tenne yeares being expired, the Soldane of Babylon besiedged Tripoly, wherinto he entred forcibly, in the yeare one thousand, two hundred, fourscore and nine. Those of Tyre, Sydon and Baruth were taken the yeare before:Tripoly and othe Citties wun from the Christians. None remained but the strong Citty of Acres, the dongeon and defence of the poore Christians, which were remaining beyond the Seas.
Mulech Sapherapes (Sonne to Helpis, Soldane of Babylon, who had conquered Tripoly) planted Siedge before this Cittie, in the yeare, One thousand, two hundred, fourescore and Eleauen, and tooke it perforce, putting to the edge of the Sword,The woefull Massacre of twelue thousand Christians.
Twelue thousand Christians, which he found therein, racing it downe quite to the ground, and transporting the ruines thereof into remote countries, and leauing desolation where it stood.
Et Seges est vbi Troia fuit.
In this manner ended the holy Warre, and Conquest of the Idumean Lands by our French Princes, who had possessed them about two stundred yeares, to wit, from the yeare, One thousand, fourescore and nineteene, vntill the taking of Acres: And the holy Citty had no more Patriarches of the Latine name.No more Patriarchs of the Latine name. At such time as Saladine became Maister thereof; he permitted all Christians to dwell there (the Latines excepted) according as yet they doe,
Phillip de Valois, King of France, Sixt and last of the name, obtayned of the Soldane of Babylon Kariatey, about the yeare of Grace, One thousand, three hundred, thirty Sixe, that the Gray Friers of the Latine Church might be lodged in Ierusalem, and preferred with the other Religions, to haue the Holy Sepulcher in perticuler keeping, which is obserued to this day. So that from three yeares to three yeares, of the same Family is sent to Ierusalem, that is to say,Gray Fryers sent euery three yeares to Ierusalem. a certaine number of Religious Graye Fryers, of the Latine tongue. The Guardian whereof hath power and Authoritie, to weare the Crosse and Miter; to absolue sins, reserued to the Holy Seate, and to create Knights of the Order of the Holy Sepulcher, as sometimes formerly did the Patriarches of the Latine Church there at Ierusalem.



The Order of Cyprus, and of Luzignan: Called, Of the Sword. Instituted in the yeare,L'Ordre de Cypre et de Luzinam, dict de L^^^pes. One thousand, one hundred, Fourescore and Fifteene, by Guye of Luzignan, King of Ierusalem, and of Cyprus.
CHAP. II. The Originall and Genealogie of the Kings of Cyprus, and of Armenia.
WEe haue heeretofore obserued, in speaking of the voyage made beyond the Seas, by Phillip Augustus, King of France, and Richard, King of England; that these two Princes beeing arriued in Sicilie, a quarrell and contention grewe betweene them, for the diuorce done by the same Richard, to Madame Alix of France,

Sister to King Philip. In stead of whom, King Richard tooke to Wife Madame Berenguela, or Berengaria of Nauarre, daughter to the King of Nauarre Sancio, Seauenth of the name,Berenguela, or Berengaria Wife to King Richard of England. called the Wise. Which repudiation (vpon no subiect) was the cause of great Warres betweene both the Kingdomes, and that the English were dispossessed of whatsoeuer they held in France.
Philip parted first from the Isle of Sicilie, and went to Ptolomais. Richard celebrated his new Nuptialls in Sicilie, where while he soiourned; there landed his Sister Ioane or Iane of England, Widdow to William, Second of the name, King of Sicilie, who was then returned from the Holy Land. She related to him, that the violent Tempest hauing throwne her on the coaste of the Isle of Cyprus, the Duke thereof named Isaacke Comnenes, laboured to make seizure of her Shippe, and to carry her away for fulfilling of his lustfull pleasure: so that she was compelled (for safetie of her honour) to aduenture on the Sea againe, notwithstanding the extremity of the Tempest. This Widdow Princesse was very beautifull and young, and in her second Marriage, she had Count Raymond of Tolosa, Father to the last Count Raymond, Father in Law to Monsieur Alphonsus of France, Count of Poictiers.
Richard of England, Sirnamed Coeur de Lyon for his valiancy, in stead of sayling towards Ptolomais, went and tooke landing in Cyprus, where he shewed such steame behauiour,King Richard his reuenge for his Sisters wrong. that spoyling and ransacking the whole Island: he lead away thence prisoners in Triumph with him, the Duke Commenes, his Wife, and their onely daughter. And as for the Isle of Cyprus, he sold it to the Knights Templers, paying the summe of fiue and twenty thousand Markes of money. This Sale was done in the yeare, One thousand, one hundred fourescore and tenne, according as Rigordus hath noated in the life of our King Philip Augustus. Richardus Iusulam Cypri quam ipse in transitu suo ceperat, Temple^ij pro viginti quinque Millibus Marcarum Argenti vendidit. Post modum vero ab ipso ablatam Guidoni quondam Regi Hierosolilymitano perpetus habendum secundo vendidit. The Templers going to take possession, and to enioy the Island as their owne:King Richard sold Cyprus to the Templers, and afterward to Guy of Lusignan. found sharpe resistance, so that after some few Battailes, and much expence of blood on either side; they would haue no more medling with the Greeks, coniured and deadly enemies to the Latins, but redeliuered the Isle of Cyprus into the power of King Richard of England, who solde it the second time to Guy of Luzignan, for the summe of an hundred thousand Crownes of God, forty thousand payed downe in ready money, and threescore thousand remaining, payable at a certaine time agreed on betweene them.
This is the same Guy of Luzignan, of whom we spake before, that had bin King of Ierusalem, by meanes of his wife Sybilla, Sister to Bauldwine the Leaper, Queene of Ierusalem after the death of his Sonne Bauldwine, Fift of the name. And this Guy of Luzignan being prisoner to Saladine,A further relation of Guy of Luzignan. was redeemed by Queene Sybilla his wife; Who dyed of a dissenterie, with foure children of hers and her husband Guy, at the Siedge of Ptolomais, taken from Saladine by the said Guy of Luzignan, being assisted by the Kings of France and England.
By meanes of the death of Queene Sybilla, the Crowne of Ierusalem fell to her Sister Isabell,Queene Isabel the Wife of fiue Husbands the wife of five Husbands. From Emfroy, Count of Thoron, she caused her selfe to be seperated vpon no occasion, by the cunning deuises of Conrad of Montferrat, who would needes be a King; whereupon he marryed her, and of this marriage ensued a daughter, obserued in our precedent discourse. Emfroy, wholly transported with rage and fury, made a bargaine with two Assassines, to murder Conrad. The busines being performed, and the promised payment deferred: the same murderers (in like manner) killed their Merchant. So by the death of Conrad, Queene Isabel marryed three other Husbands afterwards, each in their due place, according as wee haue before declared, and all of them bearing the title of Kings of Ierusalem.
Guy of Luzignan, in the yeare, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and twelue, bought the Isle of Cyprus of Richard, King of England, for the summe of money before mentioned: And the yeare following, he landed there, to take possession as Lord thereof. He established his Court in the Citty of Nicosia, which King Richard of England destroyed, and caused to be rebuilded the Olde Lemisso (the very neerest Port

of Cyprus to the Holy Land, ruined by King Richard) and he gaue it the name of Nemosia, which the Monke of Saint Denys in the life of Saint Lewes, calleth by the name of Nimothium.
At his comming to Cyprus, he brought in Company with him* thither his Brother Aimery, or Amaury of Lusignan, Constable of Ierusalem, and hee made him the first Constable of Cyprus; also he was afterward King of Ierusalem, and of Cyprus.Amaury of Luz^gnan, Constable of Ierusalem and the first of Cyprus, Brother to King Guye. He procured the said Island to be peopled with fifteen thousand persons, brought from the Citties and Townes beyond the Seas, of the Latine Tongue. Among which company were three hundred Knights, and two hundred Esquires, all Gentlemen of good fame, and of France, who had parted from their Countrey at sundry Croissades: Among whom also hee diuided the whole Island of Cyprus, giuing to the Esquires the Title of Lords, and to the Knights the honour of High Barrons. Among the rest he proportioned good Lands, where they might addict themselues to Tillage and Husbandry; by meanes wherof, the Island (which before was desart and barren) began to shew a more magnificent countenance.
In the yeare, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and fifteene, hee made the Assises of Cyprus: so saith Georgius Bustronus in his History of that Island: This he did,Lawes and Orders for gouernment of the people. for gouerning the people in times to come, according to the Customes of France; which some tearme Ordinances or Establishments, and are by the Registers of Paris called Stabilim^nta.
Godfrey, Duke of Lorraine, First 
 King of Ierusalem, ordained and established these Assises,The first Ordainer of those Assiser. and appointed, that such as were conquered people, should thence forward be ruled and ordered by Assises and Benches of Iustice, answerable to the maners of France. The City of Ierusalem was taken by the Sultan Saladine, the second day of October, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and seauen, from Guy of Luzignan, last King thereof in full effect. And hee desiring to encrease his Kingdome of Cyprus, would haue it to be pollicied and ruled by the same Ordinances, as Ierusalem was before her surprizal, which Assises were still kept in Cyprus, from the yeare, One hundred, fourescore and fifteene, vntill the yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and tenne, when the Turkes possessed themselues thereof.
In the same yeare, One thousand, one hundred,The Titles remaining to him and his Successours. fourescore and fifteene, the same Guy of Lusignan, King of Ierusalem and of Cyprus, tooke such Order: that the same Title remained to his Successours in that Kingdome, with addition also of the King of Armenia, and carrying the Armes of those Kingdomes.

The Institution of the Order.
Moreouer, the same yeare, and in remembrance of so happie a beginning, presaging

all fortunate successe to follow; He Instituted the Order of the Sword, the Collar whereof was composed of round Cordons of White Silke, wouen and twined into Loue-knots,The composition of the Collar. enterlaced with the Leters S. and R. of the finest Gold. In the middest hung a clesched Ouall of Gold, wherein was figured a Sword, the Blade all enamelled with Siluer, and the Hilt Crossed and Flouredeluced of Gold. About the Ouall was engrauen this Legend in Latine: Securitas Regni.
He gaue this Order with his owne hand to his Brother Amaury, Constable of Ierusalem and Cyprus, and to three hundred Barons, which hee had established in his new Kingdome.The first Knights made of this Order. And the day of Ceremony, was the Feast day of the Ascension, in the Church of Saint Sophia, the Cathedral of Nicosia, and there he made before them this remarkeable Oration in French.




Harangue de Guy de Luzignan, Roy de Hierusalem et de Cypre.
Que tout Estat and Royaume estoit comparage au corps humain, dont le Roy faict la Teste, la Noblesse le Bras droict; la Iustice le Gauch; e and le Tiers Estat le reste. Qu'apres Dieu il mettoit l'asseurance and conseruation de son nouuean Royaume en la Vaillance de ceste genereuse Noblesse, qui pour acquerir gloire auoit mis soubs les Pieds, le repos and plaifirs a' vne vie otieuse en leur Maison Paternelle au doux air de la France, pour courir la fortune and perils de la Mer, and viure en tout vn autre Element, parmy des Natio^s incognues. Qui il leur donnoit le Collier de l'Ordre de l'Espee, ayant telle esperance, qu'ils employeroient la leur pour la manutention del'Eglise Catholique, Apostolique and Romaine, le Seruice du Roy, Confort de la Iustice, Protection and defence des Veufues and Orphelins, and la Trauqnilite du Peuple. C'est pourquoy il les exhortoit tous d'estre vnis and ioincts ensemble en Amour and Concorde, au nom de celuy qui est la mesme Paix, la Pere, le Fils, and le Sainct Esprit.


The Oration of Guy of Luzignan, King of Ierusalem and of Cyprus.
Eurie Estate and Kingdome, is aptly compared to the Bodie of Man; Whereof the King is the head, the Nobility the right arme; Iustice the left; and the third Estate of the people, al^ the rest. And next vnder God, I place the assurance and conseruation of this my new Kingdome, in the Valiancie of you my Generous Noblemen, who to winne glorie and renowne, haue trampled vnder your feete, the ease and pleasures of a slothfull life, in the Houses of your Fathers, and the sweete ayre of France; to run the fortunes and perills of the Seas, and to liue whollie in an other Element, among vnknowne Nations. And I giue you the Collar of this Order of the Sword, as being possessed with hope, that it will be imployed for maintenance of the Catholique and Apostolique Churche, the Seruice of your King; the Comfort of Iustice, Protection and defence of Widdowes and Orphanes; as also the tranquilitie of the People. Wherefore I exhort and entreate you all, to be vnited and knit together in loue and concord; In the name of him that is the same Peace, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost.




This was the Oath of the Barons of Cyprus, Knights of the said Order, which by the appointment of the same King Guy, ought to bee giuen by the Constable of the Kingdome,How the oath of the Order should be giuen. or in his absence, by the most Auncient Baron Knight who soone after sent the same Oathe to the new made Knight, to bee Registred in the Treasure Chamber. At giuing the Oath, the same Ceremonies were obserued, as are in France.
King Guy reigned but 3. yeares in Cyprus, and dying without issue (because he was not re-marryed) in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and sixteene,The death of King Guy and succeeding of his Brother. he left for Successour in the Kingdome of Cyprus, his Brother Amaury of Luzignan, formerly Constable of Ierusalem and Cyprus. But before we enter into the List or Succession of the Kings of Cyprus, by the Sirname of Luzignan; let vs peruse somewhat concerning the Originall.


Concerning the aduancement of Aquitaine into a Kingdome, by the Emperour Charlemaigne.
We haue obserued in our sixt Booke, and in this latter Tombe. Fol. 107. What Offices Charlemaigne established, at such time as he aduanced Aquitaine to be a Kingdome, in fauour of his Sonne Lewes the Debonnaire, the yeare of Grace, seauen hundred,

threescore and eighteene, when Seguin was Count of Bourdeaux, Ythier of Auuergne, Athon of Poictou, and Tursin of Tolosa.
This Tursin was descended of the House of Bourgongne,Tursin of the House of Bourgongne. which Seigneurie was giuen to Sampson, Cousine to the said Tursin, both of them being Minnions and Fauourites of Charlemaigne: For, to say and title them his kinsemen (as indeed they were) were to commit Treason against the Maiesty of Kings, who haue none but Gods to their Kinsemen. And yet neuerthelesse, as the fauours of Princes are not made fast with Nayles of Diamonds to men whom they affect: so Tursin was depriued of his charge, giuen to William of Bourgongne, Brother to Sampson. But after his death, if we may giue credit to some:
Isaurus, Sonne of Tursin, was reseated in the Gouernement of Tolosa.Isaurus Sonne to Tursin, Gouernour of Tolosa. And yet notwithstanding, in the Registers of our Courts, where are set downe all the Genealogies of the greatest houses in France, according as Du Tillet hath brought them to light: there is not any mention made of this Isaurus, the Sonne of Tursin or Curson; but immediatly follow after William, Berengarius, and Bernard, in fauour of whom, Charles the Baulde adioyned to the County of Tolosa; Carcossonna and Rodez.
This Bernard by his Wife Dhuodania, had William, who was Counte of Tolosa, after whom succeeded Pontius, that caused to be builded the Abbey of Saint Poncede Tamieres, betweene Pezenas and Carcassonna. Pontius was Father to Amery;William Count and Duke of Tolosa. Father of Raymond; Father of William (who entitled himselfe Count and Duke of Tolosa, Albigeois, Quercy, Perigort, Carcassonna, Agenois, Astrac and Rhodez) and of Bertrand, who was Count of Saint Gilles, Father of Raymond, Count of Saint Gilles, to whom Hugh Raymond pawned the County of Tolosa, for his going to the Holy Land with Godfrey of Lorrayne. This Genealogie maketh nothing to this discourse, but only in this, that some will haue Brother to this Bertrand, Count of Saint Gilles, one named Gerard, who (they say) had bin Count of Poictou: but that is further to be questioned.
And the Chronicle of the Abbey of Monstier-neuf in Poictiers,Charlemaigne his aduancing the Brethren of Sampson. holdeth an other manner of relation, and saith: That Charlemaigne, seeking to aduance the Brethren of Sampson, Duke of Bourgongne; made Ranulphe Duke of Aquitaine.
Albane Count of Poictou, Father to Albane, Second of the name, Count of Poictou: who by Atilda (Sirnamed Mauberionna) his wife, had two Sonnes.
Girard, Count of Poictou: And
Arnauld, who espoused Ioane or Iane, the onely daughter to Rodolphe, Lord of Sanzay (at this present a County, and by making mariages, his descent tooke the Sirname and Armes of Sanzay, which is Eschecque de Gueules and d'Or. And by this mariage ensued many Children, the youngest whereof was named Thierry de Sanzay,The Noble House of Ventadour.
who tooke to wife Iosselina, Daughter and only heire to the House of Ventadour, whereof his descent tooke the Sirname, and retained L'Eschiquier for their Armes: as yet is to be seene at this present Sur le Tout of those of the Duke of Ventadour, a Peere of France, named Lewes, Knight of the Order of the Holy-Ghost, of whose Armes we haue made obseruation in the Catalogue of them.
The youngest Sonne to the same Thierry de Sanzay, hauing ioyned in mariage in Piccardie, neere to Hesdin, with Iaquelina d'Auch, or Auxi (for we pronounce the X. for ach, Aux, Auch, Auxi, Auchy, as the Spanyards doe Xerez, Cherez, and so of other words) la Castell: the aduenturers in these mariages, tooke the Sirname of Auchy, and yet kept still the Armes of Sanzay.Mathilda, Daughter to the King of Aquitaine Pepin.
Girard, Count of Poictou, tooke to Wife Mathilda, daughter to Pepin, King of Aquitaine, Brother to King Charles the Bauld: who made the said Girard Duke of Aquitaine after the death of William, Sonne to Ranulphe, Vnckle by the Mothers side to Girard: And in this mariage was borne one only Sonne, named
Ebles, but some say Eudes, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictou, who by the commaunde of King Charles the Baulde, his Vnckle, caused to be shorne Monkes (the olde Chronicle adds thereto the word guelded) his Cousins by the Mothers side, Pepin and Charles, the Sonnes to Pepin, King of Aquitaine. Ebles had in Mariage Mathilda, the eldest of the foure Daughters to Henry, Duke of Saxonie, afterward Emperour, First of the name, otherwise called the Birder. So that she bare De Gueules

au Cheual tourne d'Argent, and Mathilda, Mother to Ebles, bare of the Kings of Aquitaine,In the first Tome Chap. 11. Fol. 143. which was as we haue already said in a more conuenient place, Fuzele d'Or, and d'Azur. In this Mariage of Ebles of Poictou, and Mathilda of Saxonie, were borne three Children, Ebles, Arnoull; And
Thietberga, a Wise and vertuous Princesse, Wife to Lothaire, King of Austrasia, whom he forsooke, to entertaine Waldrada, a bold shamelesse Strumpet, and both of them dying excommunicated by the Holy-Church.
Arnoull, Castillian of Touars, tooke the title of Viscount, and in a brauery (to goe as a peere and equall with the Countes of Paris and Aniou, Predecessours of Hugh Capet) would needes beare De France, and tooke D'Or, seme de Fleurs de Lys d'Azur au Canton (droit) de Gueules,The Viscounts of Touars consumated into Trimouille. Armes retained by them of his descente, Viscountes of Touars, wasted into the House of Trimouille.
Ebles, Second of the name, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictou, had to Wife Adela de Thuringe: Qui portoit d' Azur, au Lyon, tounefesse d'Argent, and de Gueules. And in this Mariage was borne,
William Hugh, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictiers, who by Bonna his Wife, Daughter to Roollo, Duke of Normandie (whose Armes are knowne) had three Sonnes, to witt
William (Sirnamed Stufte-head, or Dull of Vnderstanding) Second of the name, Successour in the Seigneuries of his Father.
Ebles, Bishop of Limoges: And
Hugh, Lord and Count of Luzignan; the Subiect of this Genealogie.
The first Lord and Count of Luzignan.William (Stufte-head) Second of the name, had two Wiues: By the first came no issue. His second Wife was Agnes de Sanzay, Daughter to Saldebrueill de Sanzay, who was the Foundresse of the Monastery of Nostre Dame de Xainctes, and of the Priorie of Saint Nicholas in Poictiers, and left great goods to the Abbey of the Trinitie in Angiers. In this Marriage was borne Guy of Poictou, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictiers: He was father of
William Geoffery, Third of the name, who was maried twise, his first wife was Gista, Daughter to the Duke of Normandy, by whom she had a Sonne and a Daughter.
Mary of Poictou, of whom we shall speake hereafter, who (some say) ioyned in Mariage with the Count of Auuergne,The first Count of Auuergne being made by Charlemaigne. which is false. For after Ythier, made the first Count of Auuergne by our King Charlemaigne; the Counts of Auuergne are named linealy in their Genealogie, in the Registers of the Parliament Court. So that they are meere fables, to deriue Countes of Auuergne, from the race of the Countes of Poictiers, descended of Albane, Brother to Sampson, Duke of Bourgongne.
The Sonne was William, Fourth of the name, Count of Poictou, and Duke of Aquitaine, Fift of the name.
Raymond first of the name Count of Tolosa.William Geoffery had in his second mariage Constance, by others called Ioane or Iane, and they make her the only Daughter to Raymond, First of the name, Count of Tolosa: And of this mariage issued
Hugh Aymon (some doe reckon two Brothers, wherein Du Tillet is mistaken) Count of Tolosa, who engaged his County to the Count of Saint Gylles his Cousine, as we haue said in our precedent discourse. The first Counts of Tolosa bare in Armes and Banners De Gueules, au Belier, ou Agnus Dei. And yet to this present, they of the Citty of Tolosa doe beare in Armes,The Armes of the Counts of Tolosa. De Gueules au dict Agnus Dei d'Argent* portant vne Croix Clechee et Pommettee d'Or. Which are Armes borne by the las^ Countes of Tolosa, by the Sirname of Saint Gilles, in memory of Hugh Ayme^ Crossed for the Voyage to the Holy-Land: Escartele de Sainct Gilles de Gueules a Six Chasteaux d'Or Cantonne du Chastel Narbonnois d'vn coste, et del Eglis de Sainct Sernin de l'autre: le tout d'Argent, massonne de Sable, au Chef d^ France.
William, Fourth of the name, Count of Poictou, and Duke of Aquitaine, Fift o^ the name; according to the relation of some, had to Wife Iane, Daughter to the Kin^ of Scots, a milde and peaceable Prince at the beginning of his rule: but plunged him

selfe afterward, into the gulfe of all vices, as Luxury, Auarice and Rapine.A great abuser of Churches and men of the Church. But principally he tooke delight, in doing iniury to men of the Church, and to Churches themselues, which he robbed and spoyled of their Ornaments and riches. And when Saint Bernard (who liued in his time) had many times written to him, to alter him from such vicious courses: He wrote to him againe, that he should correct the abuses of Prelates and men of the Church, as he endeauoured to doe. And much better was it, to imploye the Treasures of the Church, in maintayning Souldiours and men of Armes: then to be wasted vpon Priests, prostituted to all villanies, and who triumphed in nothing more, then consuming the Churches reuennues in Luxurie, rioting, superfluity of Garments, and belly-cheare.
This Letter was the subiect of so many exhortations,Famous Saint Bernard liued in this mans time. which this worthy man of God Saint Bernard made, for correcting the riotous excesse of Prelates, and caused him to declame in these words.




The Declamation of Saint Bernard.
Miramur, and de Praelatis nostri temporis quaerimus, cuius Ordinis sint. In aggregatione Temporalium sese habent vt Laici: in apparatu vt Milites; in Vestitu vt Mulieres. Et tamen non laborant vt Laici; non militant vt Milites; non pariunt vt Mulieres. Ergo cuius Ordini^ sunt? Nullius. Et quia nullius ordinis sunt, ibunt in locum vbi nullus ordo, sed sempiternus horror inhabitat,
We w^nder, and enquire after the Prelates of our times, of what Order they ^re* In Temporall occasions they carry themselues like Laye-men: in Gallantrie like Knights, in Garments like Women. And yet notwithstanding, they labour not like Laye-men: they Warre-fare not like Knights: neither doe they trauayle like Women. Wherefore, of what Order are they? Of none. And because they are of no Order, they must goe into the place where no order is obserued; but euerlasting and continually horror dwelleth.




The learned Remonstrances of this great Prelate (in his time the Mirrour of Nobility,The Prince reclaimed by the exhortations of Saint Bernard from his former bad courses of life. for vertue and sanctity of life) brought backe this straying Prince of Aquitaine into the way of saluation. Immediatly he abandoned and forsooke the world, and went directly to Cleruaux, there to take on him the habite of a Monke. But Saint Bernard made him deniall of it, aduising him rather, to perfourme some works of true penitencie in his owne Countrey, to the end; that thereby he might giue example to his owne people, in repayring such faults as he had committed, and restoring to the Churches of God, such things as he had vniustly taken from them. This refusall made William resolue, to goe in the Croissade beyond the Seas, setting downe his will and Testament, in this manner.




The Will and Testament of William, Count of Aniou, and Duke of Aquitaine, before his going to the Holy-Land.
IN Nomine Sanctae and indiuiduae Trinitatis que est vna Deitas. Hoc est Testamentum quod ego Vuillelmus Dei gratia Comes Pictauiae, and Dux Aquitaniae, cum Domino Vuillelmo Episcopo, facio in honorem Saluatoris Mundi, and beatorum Martyrum, and omnium C^nf^ssorum, and Virginum, and maxime Virginis Mariae, cogitans de meis innumerabilibus peccatis, quae, suadente Diabolo, temere perpetraui: and timens tremendi Iudicij diem, videns b^na, quae tenere videmur, sicut fumum in aere, inter manus nostras euanescere; nos^et etiam in hac peregrinatione, sine peccato, vna hora non posse viuere, and satis paruo tempore manere, and omnia, quae putamus possidere, esse caduca, and suis possessoribus graua^^n; Commendo me Deo, quem relictis omnibus sequi volo. Filias me as in Regis Domini me^ Ludouici pretectione relinquo; Leonoram collocaturam cum Domino Ludouico ^egis filio (si Baronibus meis placuerit) cui Aquitaniam, and Pictauiam in dote relinquo. Petronillae vero filiae meae possessiones meas, quas, vt proles Gerardi Ducis Burgundiae pos^idec, relinquo. Itaque ne videar degenerare, sed imitari vestigia Parentum meorum in b^^o opere, and commendare me Deo, and Sanctis eius, and in bonis operibus, societatem Seruo^m Dei, and benedictionem accipere merear, Do omnibus Monasterijs Dominationis meae Mille Libras Terrae distribuendas, prout Baronibus meis placuerit. Et quicumque hoc nostrum Testamentum disrumpere tentauerit, Excommunicatus a Deo, and Hominibus ex^is^at: Qui vero in hoc Testamento complendo fuerit Coadiutor, sit in omnibus bonis, and precibus particeps. Amen. Signum Vuillelmi Ducis. S. Leonore. Sig. Comitis Aruerniae

S. Domini de Thoaricio. S. Richildi Baronis S. T. de Rupe-Cauardi. S. B. Comit is Sancti Pontij.


IN the name of the Holy and induuidiall Trinity, which is one Diety. This is the Testament which I William Earle of Poictou and Duke of Aquitane, together with my Lord Willam, Bishop doe make, to the Honour of the Sauiour of the World, and of blessed Martyrs, and of all Confessors, and especially of the Virgin Mary, poudering mine innumerable sinnes, which vnaduisedly (by the perswasion of the Deuill) I haue committed: and trembling at the fearefull day of Iudgement. Seeing all those goods, which we seeme to inioye, doe vanish away from betweene our hands (as it were smoake in the aire) and that we our selues are not able to liue one hower without sinne in this our Pilgrimage, that we abide heere but a short tyme, and that all things (which we thinke are in our full possession) are fading, and a great burden to the possessors of them; I commend my selfe vnto God, whom (all other things set apart) I desire to seeke. My Daughters I leaue in the tuition of my Lord the King Lewes. Leonara, who will bestowe hirselfe with my Lord Lewes the Kings Sonne (if my Barons shall thinke it conuenient) on whom I confer Aquitaine and Poictieres for hir Dowry. But to my Daughter Petronilla I leaue my possessions which I enioye, as Ofspring to Gerrard Duke of Burgondy. And also that I may not seeme to degenerate, but to imitate the footestepps of my Parents in this good worke, and to commend my selfe to God and his Saints, and that in good workes I may deserue the fellowship of the Seruants of God, and receiue his blessing: I giue to al Monasteries in my Dominion One thousand pounds land, to be distributed as it shall please my Barons. And whosoeuer shall goe about to breake this my Testament, let him be excommunicated both by God and Man. And let him that shall be an assistant in the ratifying of this my Testament, bee partaker of all good prayers. Amen.

The Seale of William Duke, and the Seale of Leonora, the Seale of the Counte of Auuergne, of the Lord of Thoarice, of Richild Baron of T. of the Rock Cauerd, of B. Count of S. Pontius.





This Testament finished, William left his two Daughters Eleanora and Peronnella at Bourdeaux, vnder the charge and custody of the Bishops and Barons of the Countrey, and the Tutelage of King Lewes le Gros. Afterward, he tooke the way to our Lady of Mont-Serrat, and thence to Saint Iames in Galicia, from whence he passed into the Holy Land: which hauing visited in an vnknowne habite: He returned backe to Rome, with three of his auncient Seruants, companions in his wearisome Pilgrimage,He becommeth an Hermit at Castillon who with their Lord and Maister, tooke the habite of Hermites neere to Castillon in Thuscanie, and in this deuout intention were followed by many worthy persons more.
Duke William (very farre aduanced into yeares) dyed at the same Hermitage, called The Inne or Lodging of Rhodes, Stabulum Rhodis, in the Territory of Sienna, afterward tearmed,The death of Duke William at Stabulum Rhod^s. Male Vaux, Mala Vallis: Where is to be seene the place of his buriall, and some part of his Reliques. The most part of his body is in the Church of Saint Iohn Baptist at Castillon, a Towne distant about three miles from Male-Vale. He deceased about the yeare of Grace One Thousand, one hundred, fifty and sixe, o^ threescore. For his Holynesse of Life and miracles, he is placed in the Catalogue of Saints, and his feast celebrated in Italie the tenth day of February, and in France the tenth of Ianuary. He was Authour of the Hermites, called Guillemins after his name,The Hermits Guillemines, or White-Cloakes. and at Paris White-Cloakes, where is to be seene the Figure of this Holy man, bearing a Standard of his Armes, which are D'Azur a six Bezans d'Argent, 3.2.1. au Chef D'Or.
According to the appoinment in the Last Will of Duke William, his eldes^ Daughter Eleanor was maried to King Lewes the younger, Seauenth of the name; And Peronella espoused Raoull, who was Count of Vermandois, youngest Sonne to Monsieur Hugh of France, called the great Count of Vermandois. In second mariage the said Peronella enioyed Stephen, King of England: We haue obserued their descente, in the Tract of the Orders of England.
By the death of Eleanor of Aquitaine, Queene of England, ended the ligne and descent

of the Counts of Poictou, with their name and Armes of Bourgongne and Poictou.End of the descent of the Counts of Poictou. She gaue for Armes to the Citty of Poictiers, L'Escu d'Or a Trois Bandes d'Azur a la Bordure de Gueules: Whereunto they of Poictiers added Vn Chef Eschiquete de Chasteaux d'Or, and de Gueules, to preserue the memorie of their first Armes, which were De Gueules a Trois Chasteaux d'Or, 2.1.
Sauary de Mauleon, Gouernour of Poictiers and Poictou during the warres of King Phillip Augustus, against the Princes of the House of England;Sauary de Manleon Gouernour of Poictiers. caused the Inhabitants of Poictiers to leaue their first Armes, and made them to take D'Argent au Lyon de Gueules, a la Bordure de Sable chargee de Huict Bezans d'Or.
Very credible it is, that in those times then, they of Poictiers caried those Armes in Honour of their Gouernour, or else to gratifie him: because they of this auncient H^se of Mauleon, descended of Poictou, and whereof there are of the same name in Gascoignie: Pertoient de Gueules au Lyon d'Or. Armes well emblazoned, howsoeuer they answere to the Sirname Mauleon, Malus Leo.
The Armes of Poictou were (as we haue elsewhere said) answerable to them of Bourgongne: a House which the last Duke William, in the expresse words of his Testament saith, to be descended from Girard of Bourgongne.
And as for them of the Duchie of Aquitaine,Peace betweene the Kings Lewes, and Henry of England. they were different from them of Poictou, and the diuersity iustifieth it selfe by the Treaty of Peace, made by our King Saint Lewes, with Henry King of England, who had giuen succour to Hugh of Luzignan, Sonne to Hugh of Luzignan, Counte of Luzignan, de la Marche, and of Engoulesme, and who refused the Homage of his Lands to the Kings Brother.
Monsieur Alphonsus of France, Count of Poictiers, by whom (as William of Nangis, in the Life of Saint Lewes, and the Registers of Parliament doe enstruct vs) the most part of the Homages of the said Duchie were annexed to the Crowne of France; and the name of Aquitaine quite extinct and abolished, with the auncient Armes thereof, which were Lozengees de Gueules, and d'Or.The Duchie of Guienne and her Armes. The name of Guienne remained in title of a Duchie, composed only of foure Seneschalships, for the Countries of Agenois, Limosine, Perigort and Quercy. And the same King Saint Lewes ordained, that the Duchie of Guienne should beare for her Armes De Gueules, au Lyon passant d'Or. The first Ligne of Poictou being thus expedited and runne thorowe; let vs come to the Second, that of Luzignan.


A Briefe Discourse concerning the Second Ligne or Race, namely of Luzignan.
WE haue before told you, that William Hugh, Count of Poictou and Duke of Aquitaine, had three Sonnes, William the Second,William Hugh Count of Poictou and his three Sonnes. called (by a nick-name) William with the Stuffed head, Count of Poictou and Duke of Aquitaine;
Ebles, Bishop of Limoges; And
Hugh of Poictou, made Count of Luzignan (about sixe Miles from Poictiers) for his portion and parte, in the yeare of Grace Nine hundred, threescore and tenne. And that in the yeare of Grace one thousand, he espoused Mary, Lady of Mesle, or Mesles in Poictou: But others say of Scotland, and auouch this Lady to be Daughter to the Earle of Albanie by Sirname, and by the Armes of Scotland. In this Mariage was borne their only Sonne
Hugh, Sirnamed Bruno, in regard that his Father caused two names to be giuen him at the Fonte of Baptisme: his owne, which had bin giuen him by Hugh the Great, Father to the King Hugh Capet: and that of Saint Bruno,Saint Bruno, Founder of the Abbey of Clugny. the Founder of Clugny. And from hence it is, that some Historians haue deceiued themselues, who, not vnderstanding the Originall of this second name of Bruno, and (by abbreuiation) Brun; haue made on Sirname of two imaginary Families, and so (consequently) haue feigned fantastick Armes for them.
Those of this Illustrious and Royall House of Luzignan, haue borne (for the most part) conioyntly together these two names Hugh-Brun. And as the Counts of Poictou, with the eldest Sonnes, did beare the Metalles of France, emblazoned with Bourgongne, as often times we haue repeated to you: Euen so Hugh the First, Count of Luzignan, to shew that he was the youngest Sonne, tooke for his Armes,

and for them of his Ligne and descent; Burele d'Argent et d'Azur de Dix pieces And the Lyon de Gueules was not added thereto, but long time after, at the Voyage^ to the Holy-Land, to be discerned from other Families, which bare the same Armes* as we haue more at large declared in the precedent discourse before this.
Hugh le Brun continued an Orphane in young yeares, during which time, he was wisely gouerned by his Mother, a very vertuous Princesse, who wun herselfe grea^ honour by his education:Of Hugh le Brun, the first Count of Luzignan and Mello. for he was thereby become a Prince (the best enstructed and the most compleate in all perfections) of his time. Of the Seign^urie of L^z^gnan, of Count Hugh, First of the name, and of that of Mello belonging to his wife* the Romancers haue formed the name of Meluzina; whereon they haue wrough^ wonders, and darkened the glory of the vertuous Princesse Mary of Albanie, with the title of a Sorceresse and Witche, yea, and haue made her a Sinck of all vncleannesse. Wherein those Romancers, and namely they that haue Romanted on Meluzina, and G^^ffrey with the great Tooth, compacted and filled with lies and fables* about the yeares One thousand,The Romancers wronging the Lady of Mello. three hundred, fourescore and eight, or nine; haue very grossely mistaken themselues, especially in the date of the yeares, as we shall shew heereafter, For the Lady of Mello and of Luzignan, Mother to Hugh Brun, deceassed in the yeare, One thousand, forty and two: And Geoffrey Count of Luzignan, Sirnamed with the great Toothe (because he had in his vpper iawe a Tooth, which was greater then the rest, and h^ng somewhat downeward) liued in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and tenne, eleauen, twelue, thirteene, foureteene, and so on.
Heereupon it was, that some Historiographers of Poictou, baptized with this name of Melusina,Errour in the Historiographers of Poictou. or Meluzina, not the Mother of Hugh le Brun (because they had no apparance for it, by the date of Time:) but Mary of Poictou, Daughter to William Geoffrey, Duke of Aquitaine, and Count of Poictou, Third of the name, and of Gist^ of Normandie his first Wife. They make this Mary to haue bin maried, not to the Count of Auuergne, because they could not iustifie it: but to a Lord of Bretaigne, named Raymondin du Troishic, or Croishic in Bretaigne, neere to the mouth of the Riuer of Loire,Raymondin de Troishic in Bretaigne. who made his abyding at the same place, called at that time then Succinio. Further they say, that this Raymondin was Count de Forest; which was the Firme Island, at this present called L'Isle de Ruys, which the said Raymondin and his Wife caused to be enclosed and engirt with walles, and ioyning thereunto this Castell of Succinio, they erected there a Monastery, in Honour of the Trinitie, wherein they were both buried after their death.
Those Historiographers doe adde heereunto, that the world (in those times then) was so ignorant and grossely conceited, that throughout the whole extendure of a very spacious Countrey, were very rarely to be found two or three men, that knew how to write their owne names:The ignorance and simplicity of elder times alleadged. So that those dayes afforded very little knowledge among men, and therefore the lesse gouernement and ciuility. Now, whereas (say they) Melusina was most beautifull, vertuously honest, very ciuille, and extraordinarily well learned, appearing (in those times) as an Oracle of the Gods: Their wisedomes and capaci^ies haue further commented thereon, concerning the greatnesse of her house and descent, as being of most Auncient and famous extraction, beside the power and authority of her Husband.
They make her to be much dreaded and feared of the people, as an admirable creature,Wounde^full reportes concerning Melusina. farre exceeding vulgar apprehension, yea, meerely wundred at; honoured and sought vnto by the Greatest Grands of those dayes; among whom she tooke delight to let her person be seene, contemning the frequency of people made of meane temper. But Raymondin her Husband, he was a man of more earthy and grosser composition, farre inferiour to the exaltation of spirit in his wife; couering his head with a Cappe of Iealousie, and complayning of his wiues too familiare priuacie. Which made him (thorowe his owne muddie imagination) to scrach his head with a Cuckoldes clawes, and to emblazon his Armes with a Coquel^chi^, releuated vpon the Creast of Acteon: for he would (though somewhat sparingly) tell his friends and familiars, that he had seene his Wife very conuersant with Serpents.
Now, the ignorant and blockishe vulgare, that neuer knew the auncient manner of Baptizing with the name of Serpents, such as caused the head-ake in a house,The vulgare imagination of Melusina in her shape. by casting in the kernells of Discorides his Apples: they forthwith imagined, that their Lady and Mistresse was halfe a woman, and halfe a Serpent. A populare errour, which serued as a copious and plentifull argument for fabulous Romancers, to feigne matters of nouelty and wunder: creating her a Fayrie, capable of infinite meruailes, farre aboue the reach of nature, like to them reported by Saxo Grammaticus, in his History of Denmark.
And so farre preuayled the credit of those Romants, that (euen to this very day) the Families issued and descended of the Illustrious house of Luzignan, doe beare for the Creast of their Armes:The Creast of the Armes belonging to the House of Luzignan. Vne Dame nue dedans vne Baignoire a la facon d'vne Sereine, qui d'vne main peigne et agence ses Cheueux esparpillez sur ses Espaules, et de lautre elle tient vn Miroir, la moitie du Corps representant celuy-la d'vne Femme d'admirable beaute, et l'autre moitie du Corps faicte en facon de Giure.
A Lady naked in a Bathing-tub, after the manner of a Sirene or Maremaide, that with one hand Kembeth and trimmeth her locks of Hayre, dispersed vpon her shoulders: And in her other hand she holdeth a Looking-glasse. Halfe of her body representing a Woman of admirable Beauty, and the other halfe of her body formed like to a Serpent. And so haue I seene it many times painted at the Castell of Partenay, where lodged Monsieur de Malicorne, Gouernour of Poictou: with whom I continued, during the rebellion of the Citty of Poictiers, on behalfe of the League.
Moreouer, they giue to this Melusina a great List or traine of Children,The Children of Melusina reputed to be Gods and Goddesses. whom they make to be all renowned for prowesse and valiancie, she hauing so fashioned and ordered them with her owne hands, and endued them with so many rare perfections: that the meaner sorte of people, verily beleeued them to be Gods and God^esses, newly descended from Heauen heere vpon earth, to worke many miracles. They auouch them to haue voyaged thorow all the Prouinces of the world, and namely to the Holy-Land, which was the walking Gallery of the French Paladines.
They present Vrian to be her eldest Sonne, who landing in the Isle of Cyprus; found the Princesse of the place to be warred on by her subiects,Her eldest Sonne Vrian King of Cyprus. who delighting to fishe in troubled waters, abused her minority in yeares. He vnder tooke her defence, and reduced them to tearmes of duty and obedience: marying the young Princesse, in the right of whom he became King of Cyprus. He ordered matters in such sort, that his Second Brother was King of Armenia: and their posterity Kings of Ierusalem, of Cyprus, Armenia, Candie, and of diuers other great Kingdomes and Prouinces beside, in painting.
They tell vs further, that her third Sonne espoused the Heire of Luxembourg: the true Ligne whereof being fayled, their descent hath held the Kingdome of Bohemia, and the Empire of Germanie.
The Fourth Sonne maried the Heire de la Marche, and because he was blacke and swarthie of complexion, he was Sirnamed Le Brun. Risum teneatis Amici.Holde on laughter, and spa^e not, my honest friends. Are not these braue discourses for our Historians?
The Fift Sonne was Lord of Luzignan, and had the Sirname, with the great Tooth.
The Sixt was Lord of Partenay, tearmed by them of the Countrey.

Where falshood is wrought;
And nothing comes thence, till first it be brought.

It is likewise built vpon a Mountaine cleft in twaine, as many other are in France.
The Seauenth was a Religious Fryer at Maillesais, at this present a Bishoprick.
The Eight was of monstrous forme, and Sirnamed the Horrible:Lea^ing off fables, we returne to our Chronicle. but he was stifled and smothered by his Mother, and buried in the little Cloister of Monstier-neuf at Poictiers. I am wearied with these old Wiues Tales: let vs take againe the thred of our History.
Hugh Brun, Second of the name, Lord of Luzignan, had to wife Adela, Daughter to the Count of Tolosa, Raymond, First of the name, and by her he had three Sonnes: we will begin with the last or youngest.
Rodolphe or Raoull of Luzignan, Baron of Ysoudon, who in the yeare of Grace one

thousand, one hundred and nine, founded a Priorie in honour of Saint Galais, Bishop of Poictiers:Saint Gelasius Bishop of Poictiers. to whom he was so much tendeared in deuotion, that he gaue the Sirname of Saint Gelaise to his eldest Sonne Hugh. Of him are descended the houses of Saint Gelais, Lords of Lanssac (whom some will haue to descend of Mahauld of Luzignan) and of Saint Seuerin at Poictiers.
Iohn of Luzignan, Baron of Couhe, who had one only Sonne named Hugh; that tooke part with the Kings of France, against the Englishmen, in the yeare one thousand, one hundred, fifty and two: And
The Great Count of Luzignan and his seruice in the Holy-Land.Hugh, called the Great, Third of the name, Count of Luzignan, and Count de la Marche in regard of his Wife: Hauing ended a difference with William, Count of Engoul^sme, who contended with him for the County de la Marche: He went in the Voyage beyond the Seas in the yeare One thousand, one hundred and two. He had at his pay and attendance, Eight hundred men on Horseback, with whom he gaue succour to Bauldwine, King of Ierusalem, and the Count of Tripoly, his kinseman by the Mothers side. He returned back, and died in France, leauing Foure Children, two Sonnes, and as many Daughters.

Beatrix, Wife to Ambrose, Lord of Viuonna.
Poncetta, who maried with Vulgrin, Second Count of Engoulesme.

The Sonnes were
Hugh le Brun; And
Henry, Count of Luzignan and de la Marche, who caused the strong Castell of Luzignan to be built, and namely the great Tower thereof. He died, being neuer maried;The great Castell and Tower of Luzignan. And by his death, his Brother
Hugh le Brun, Fourth of the name, was Count of Luzignan and de la Marche, who went in the Voyage to the Holy-Land with Geoffrey Martell, Sonne to the Count of Engoulesme William. He was long time prisoner to Noradine, King of the Sarrazins: but being deliuered, returned into France, and left Sixe Children, to witt
Doubt and question about the certainty of his name.Gylles, otherwise named Rodolphe, and (by some other) Bertrand, Count of Partenay, and of Dammartin on behalfe of his Wife. He was Constable of France vnder King Phillip Augustus, Anno One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and tenne: And Feron (very aptly) giueth him De Luzignan, Burele d'Azur et d^Argent au Lyon de Gueules, Arme, Lampasse, and Coronne d'Or sur le tout: But he forgot a Bordu^e Engrailed with Gueules, which the Constable caried for Brizure in his Armes. Of him are issued and descended the Families of Partenay; of Scubize the Archbishop, and of Saint Vallier, by the Sirname of Poictiers.
Raymond, a Monke professed in the Abbey of Malesais, of the Order of Saint Benedict.
Geoffrey, Sirnamed with the Great Tooth, vpon the occasion before alleadged, Count of Luzignan.
Amaury, King of Ierusalem and of C^prus.
Guy, King of Ierusalem, and first King of Cyprus; And
Hugh, Fift of the name, Count de la Marche (by the death of his Father) who tooke to Wife Isabell, daughter and heire to the Count of Engoulesme. She was caried away by Iohn W^thout-Land,Thi^ Isab^ll was ma^i^d to King Iohn of England. King of England (as we haue reported in the Tract of England) but after the death of King Iohn; she returned and liued with her Husband Hugh, by whom she had many Children. All her life time she bare the title of Queene, and of her it is, that the Lord of Ioinuille speaketh so often times in the Life of Saint Lewes, which was the cause of Warre made by the said King Saint Lewes, against the same Hugh Count de la Marche, who disdained to doe Homage for his Lands, to Monsieur Alphonsus of France, Count of Poictiers.
Mathew Paris in his History of England.It is of this Is^bell, Countesse of Engoulesme, and Queene of England, that the fabulous Romant of Melusina was composed: which the Monke of England Mathew Paris emblazoneth with wunderfull Coullers. The Romancers (to disguise her birth) make her Daughter to the Duke of Albania; to cloud and veile her quality of Wife to King Iohn, they tearme him King of Albion, the auncient title to the Realme of England. They haue likewise coullored the name of Hugh of Luzignan her Husband, vnder the borrowed epethite of Raymondin: who was greatly subiect to the

head sicknesse, yet more in earnest, then in ieast. As for her ligne and issue, shee had indeed as many as the Romancers gaue her, which was Nine in number, as we will set them downe in order.


The Issue of Isabell Countesse of Engoulesme, and Queene of England, according to the truth of Chronologie.

HVgh le Brun.

Guy, Baron of Coignac, of Merpin, and d'Archiac, deceassing without any issue.
Geoffery, Baron of Iarnac, and of Chasteau-Neuf.
Amaury, Baron of Couhe and of Valences: And afterward Bishop of Winchester.
William, Baron of Montignac, Balack, and of Champagnall in the County of l^ Marche, and Lord of Val^nces, Father to William; Stemme of the Houses of Valences and of Montignac.
Agatha, wife to the Baron of Chauigny.
Isabell, Wife to Godfrey, Lord of Rancen, of Paron, and of Thillebourg. Margaret; AndAlix.not Married.
Hugh le Brun, Sixt of the name (Eldest Sonne) was Count de la Marche and of Engoulesme: likewise Baron of Fougieres in Bretaigne, by meanes of his Wife Yoland, Daughter to Peter Mauclerc, Duke of Bretaigne. Hee went in the Voyage beyond the Seas with our King Saint Lewes, and died aged about Forty yeares, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, two hundred and threescore. He left Fiue Children, and these be they in Order.

Hugh.

Guy, First Baron of Coignac (by the death of his Vnckle Guy) deceassing without issue.
Guy, Second of the name, Sirnamed de la Marche, a professed Monke.
Amaury, o^ Aymar, Bishop of Winchester in England, by the resignation of Amaury his Vnckle, and his Godfather.
Ioane, Wife to the Baron Mortemer in England.
Hugh le Brun, Seauenth of the name, eldest Sonne to the Count de la Marche, of Eug^ulesme, and of Luzignan, Baron of Fougi^res, left foure Children.

Hugh le Brun.

Guy, Viscount de la Roche-Foucaud, de Rupe Fucald^; Land wunne by the Viscount of Limoges, Legatarie to his Vnckle Guy, Baron of Coignac, for an hundred and fifty Markes of Gold, to goe in the Voyage to the Holy-Land, when an Army was conducted thither.
Yoland, Wife to Godfrey, or Geoffrey, Count of Pons, And
Mary, Wife to the Count of Sancerre.
Hugh le Brun, Eight and last of the name, by the death of his Father, happening in the yeare of Grace One thousand, two hundred, fourescore and two: was Count of Luzignan, de la Marche, of Engoulesme, and Baron of Fougieres. By his Wife Beatrix of Bourgongne hee had not any issue; but died in the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred and three, and by his death, his Brother
Guy was the last Count of Luzignan, de la Marche, and of Engoulesme, which Counties he gaue by testament to King Phillip le Bell, Fourth of the name, to remaine annexed to the Crowne, and serue as Appanage or portion to the Sonnes of France at all times after. Let vs now take the descent of Hugh le Brun, Fourth of the name, Fift Count of Luzignan, who had Sixe Children: Among whom (as already we haue said) was very famous.
Geoffery, tearmed by his great Tooth, who being somewhat madly distracted, because his Brother Raymond (without any consent) was taken to be a professed Monke in the Abbey of Malesais: did set it on fire, and consumed it into Ashes, very badly abusing the Monkes: which firing is counted vnder the yeare One Thousand, two Hundred and Thirty. But most certaine it is, that Geoffery (recouering more setled sense and stability of minde) made a iourney to Rome, to craue absolution, which he obtained. Conditionally, that he should

newly build the said Monastery, whereto he left great goods. I finde also, that this Geoffery with the great Tooth had a Sonne, named Guy (whose Issue and descente I could neuer obtaine) that on the day day of his Fathers death, made a Legacie to the said Monastery of Melesais, the place of his Fathers buriall, and his Legacy was in these words.
In Nomine Domini Amen. Ego Guido de Lisignano Goffridi Filius ex Testamento Patris mei Do vobis Abbati, ceterisque in Maleasensi Monasterio Deo seruentibus, vbi corpus Patris mei sepultum est, Ducentas Libras Terrae ad Larmenum sitas, vt memoriam nostri habeatis, in supplementum Poenitentiae, ne ira Domini nos supplantet. Haec autem Carta facta est ea die, qua Pater sepultus est, praesentibus Clero, and Comitatu funebri dicti Patris Goffridi. Signum Guidonis. Sig. Monasterij.


Heere wee take the Ligne, leading to the Chronologie of the Kings of Cyprus, Ierusalem, and Amenia, beginning with Guy of Luzignan.
GEoffery before named, was long time beyond the Seas, in assistance of the Kings of Ierusalem, whether he went in company of his Brothers
I. Guy, and Amaury of Luzignan, which Princes continued there dwelling beyond the Seas, without returning any more to France. And Guy being first King of Ierusalem, and afterward of Cyprus, (as wee haue before declared) chauncing to dye without any issue; his Brother
II. Amaury was Second King of Cyprus, who by his Wife Ciue d'Iblin, Daughter to Bauldwine, Count of Rama, had three Sonnes, and three Daughters, who we will set downe Ordine praepostero.

Louisa or Aliset (they are both one) Wife to Raymond, Fourth of the name, Count of Tolossa.
Bourgongna, Wife to Gaultier of Montpelier.
Chelius, Wife to Robinnet, Prince of Antioche.
Guy deceassed without Children.
Iohn, Constable of Cyprus, Husband to his Niece Isabell, Daughter to King Hugh: And in this Mariage was borne Hugh afterward King of Cyprus, Third of the name.
Hugh, King of Cyprus.

King Amaury was the Fift and last Husband to Isabell, Queene of Ierusalem, whereof likewise he tooke the title, and moreouer had by her three Children, all Daughters.

Amarina, who died in very young yeares.
Sybilla, Wife to Leo, First King of Armenia.
Melusina, Wife to Boemond, Third of the name; And Prince of Antioche.

III. Hugh, Third King of Cyprus, tooke to Wife Alix or Louisa of Ierusalem, Daughter to her Mother in Lawe Isabell, Queene of Ierusalem, and Henry, Count Palatine of Champaigne and Brie. In this Mariage were borne three Children, to witt
Marietta, or Mariana, Wife to Gaultier, Count of Brenne.Isabell, who in her first Nuptialls espoused Henry, called the Norman Prince of Brienne, of Tarentum; and of Antioche, daughter to Airard, Count of Brenne, or Brienne, and Madame Phillip, Sister to the Queene of Cyprus Louisa of Ierusalem. In second Mariage she had her Vnckle Iohn of Luzignan, Constable of Cyprus: And in that Marriage were borne.Hugh, afterward King of Ierusalem; AndMarietta or Mariana, Wife to the Prince de Borgne, tearmed of Bourgongne. The Sonne of Hugh, and of Louisa of Ierusalem, was
IIII. Henry, Fourth King of Cyprus, Husband to Placentia d'Iblin, Sonne to the Prince of Antioche, Father and Mother of
V. Hugh, Second of the name, King of Cyprus, who died at the age of Foureteene yeares, leauing for Successour his Cousine
VI. Hugh, Third of the name, Prince of Antioche, King of Cyprus, Sonne of Iohn of Luzignan, and Isabell of Cyprus. By Anne d'Iblin his Wife, Daughter to the Prince of Baruth; he had a plentifull Ligne of Children, as here you may behold them in order.

1. Iohn, King of Cyprus and Ierusalem. dying without issue.
2. Henry King of Cyprus and Ierusalem. dying without issue.
3. Boemond, a Religious Monke, of the Order of the Preaching Fryers, who renounced his Principality of Galilee, for the seruice of God.
4. Camerino, Constable of Cyprus, died without issue.
5. Guy, Constable of Ierusalem, Husband to L^uisa de Zimblet: Father and Mother to Hugh and Isabell of Cyprus, Wife to ^udes de Dampierre, Constable of Ierusalem.
6. Amaury, Lord of Tire and Sidon, Husband to Isabell, Sister to the Kings of Armenia: Father and Mother of Hugh, King of Armenia, ^st of the Latine name.
7. Cheluis, Wife to Theodorus, King of Armenia.
8. Louisa, Wife to Baliau d'Iblim, Prince of Galilee.
9. Mary, Wife to a King of Arragon.
10. Marietta, or Mariana, Wife to Hayton, King of Armenia, Brother to Theoderus, King of Armenia.

During the Reigne of Hugh the Third, Conradine, calling himselfe King of Naples and Sicille, hauing put to death (by commaund of Monsieur Charles of France, Duke of Aniou, King of Naples) Hugh, King of Cyprus: caused himselfe to bee Crowned King of Ierusalem (in Cyprus) and ordained, that his Successours, Kings of Cyprus, at their comming to the Crowne; should first be Crowned Kings of Cyprus at Nicosia, and Kings of Ierusalem, at Famag^sta, which was afterward kept and continued. By the death of Hugh the Third, his two Sons.VII. Iohn.VIII. Henry.Were Kings of Ierusalem and Cyprus, and dying without issue succeeded their Nephew
IX. Hugh, Fourth of the Name, King of Cyprus and Ierusalem: who by his Wife Louisa, or Alix de Zimblet, had Fiue Sonnes, and Three Daughters.

1. Peter. King.
2. Iames. King.
3. Guy, Constable of Cyprus, who had had to Wife Mary, Daughter to Lewes, First Duke of Bourbon, and by her had not any Childe.
4. Thomas, who died without issue, and bare the name of Saint Thomas of Aquine, a bright splendor of the Church, and Prince in the Kingdome of Naples: allied to the House of France, and the King of Cyprus Hugh,Concerning Saint Thoma^ of Aquine. Fourth of the name, to whom he dedicated his Booke De Regimine Principum. This man, commonly called Thomas Aquinas among Schollers, was of the House of the Dukes of Atrye, in the Kingdome of Naples, and Portoit d'Or au Lyon d'Azur; Arme, ^angue, and membre de Gueules. Party d Argent au Lyon de Gueules, Coronne d'Or, brise sur l'Espaule d'vn Lambeau d' Azur seme de Fleurs de Lys d'Or sans nombre.
Iohn, Prince of Antioche, who by Anne, de Zimblet his Wife, had two Sonnes; Hugh, that died in Hostage at Geneway, and Iames, that was Count of Tripoly, who espoused his Cousine Germaine Mariana, Daughter to King Peter. In which Marriage were borne foure Children.

Peter, Count of Tripoly, who Married his Cousine Germaine Isabell, Daughter to King Iames, and died without Children: Iohn; Eleanor and Ciue.
The Daughters to Hugh the Fourth were
Isabell, dying young.Ciue, Wife to Ferdinand of Arragon, King of Maiorica* Anne Wife to the Marquesse of Montferrat Theodor Paleologus.Mariana, Wife to Gaultier de Dampierre.
X. Peter, before Counte of Tripoly, was King of Cyprus and Ierusalem after his Father: whose vertues he followed not, but for his whoredomes and cruelties, was slaine by his subiects. He was long time in Italie, Gouernour of the Churches Patrimony, as well as King Hugh his Father, and Petrino his Sonne, they all three being in Italie. He tooke to Wife A^lianora, Niece to the King of Arragon, and by her had three Children, one Sonne, and two Daughters.
XI. Petrino, King of Cyprus and Ierusalem after his Father,Or little Peter* in regarde o^ his stature. and tooke to Wife Valentina of Millaine, Daughter to Barnabie the Viscount, Duke of Millaine, and by her he had ^hese Daughters
Ciue, who was not married: And yet neuerthelesse, the Histories of Italie giue her to Husband Peter, Duke of Bourbon, Sonne to Lewes, First of the name; and say beside, that the descendants of the same House of Bourbon; Porterent Escartele au Premier de Bourbon, la Second de Hierusalem, le Troisiesme de Luzignan, and le Quatriesme de Cypre, qui est d'Argent

au Lyon de Gueules, with the title of Kings of Cyprus. Which Kingdome belonged to them, in regard of Ciue of Luzignan, their Grand-Mother, to whom, after the death of King Peter (called the Little-man) her Brother, appertained the Kingdomes of Cyprus and Ierusalem.Marietta, or Mariana, Wife to Iames, Count of Tripoly, Sonne to Iohn, Prince of Antioche. At the Sacring and Crowning of little King Petrino, the Ambassadours of Venice and Genewaye were present in assistance; and because the Precedency was giuen to the Venetians: the Genewayes entred into fury, and to reuenge themselues on Petrino, conspired against him, being fauoured therein by the Mother of Petrino. The treachery being discouered, all the Genewayes perished by the edge of the Sword.The Geneways perished in (...) conspiracy for precedency. And yet notwithstanding this reuendge, the Mother to King Petrino, made the Genewayes Maisters of the Citty of Famagosta, which they ouerawed for the space of Threescore and tenne yeares. And with this Capitall Citty of the Kingdome of Cyprus, they had for Hostages the Vnckle by the Mother side to Petrino, named Iames, afterward King of Cyprus, and the Sonnes to Iohn, Prince of Antioch, the eldest whereof died at Genewaye. By the death of Petrino, deceassing without issue, and by the Fauour and Forces of the Genewayes*
XII. Iames of Luzignan (their Hostage) was made King of Cyprus and of Ierusalem: He was likewise King of Armenia, by the death of his Nephewe Leo of Luzignan, King of Armenia. By Ciue de Zimblet (Daughter to the Prince of Baruth) his wife, he had a copious linage.
Ianus of Geneway (so named, because he was borne in the Citty of Geneway in Lombardie, his Father and Mother being prisoners there.)
Hugh, Cardinall of Saint Andrewe, Archbishop of Cyprus, who died in Sauoye.Phillip, Constable of Cyprus.Eudes, Seneschall of Cyprus.Guy, Constable of Ierusalem.dying without issue.
Henry, Prince of Galilee, Husband to Louisa de Zimblet, Lady of Cerines, Father and Mother to many Children the most part of them being slaine at the taking of Cyprus by the Turke, yet some of them dwelling at Venice.
The Daughters were
Agnes, who was not maried, although some doe report, that she was Wife to Lewes, he being Count Palatine of the Rhine.Mariana, Wife to Lancelot, King of Naples, and also of Hungaria.Isabell, Wife to Peter, Prince of Tripoly, who deceassed without any issue.Ciue, neuer maried.
XIII. Ianus of Geneway, so named (as we haue tolde you) by reason of his birth in Geneway; succeeded after King Iames his Father, Sacred in Nicosi^ King of Ierusalem and Armenia, and likewise of Cyprus, in one and the same day, and same Ceremony: because the Genewayes helde Famagosta* the chiefe Citty of Cyprus, where the Luzignans were wont to be Crowned Kings of Ierusalem. Hee had to Wife Charlote of Bourbon, Daughter to Iames of Bourbon, Count de la Marche, by whom he had two Sonnes, and as many Daughters.

Anne, Wife to Lewes, Duke of Sauoye, in which Marriage was borne Charlote of Sauoye, Second Wife to King Lewes the Eleauenth, and Mother to King Charles the Eight. This was the man, that made good expression of his true Valour: For hee conquered the Kingdome of Naples at twenty yeares of age, and wunne also the memorable Battaile of Fornoue* or Forca-Noua, in Hetruria.
Iames, Seneschall of Cyprus, dying without issue.
Mary, Wife to Lewes of Bourbon Sonne to Charles of Bourbon And
XIIII. Iohn, Second of the name who (after the death of his Father was King of Cyprus, Ierusalem and Armenia; of which Kingdome th^ Armes were d'Or au Lyon de Gueules brize d'vne Croisette d'Or sur l'Espau^gauche. He was twise maried: in his firs^ Nuptialls. He espoused Isabell of Montferrat, Daughter to Iohn Iames Pale^logus,

Marquesse of Montferrat, and the Sister of Amadis, First Duke of Sauoy, but by her he had no children.

In second estate of Wedlocke, hee had Helena Paleologus, Cousin to his first Wife, and daughter to Theodorus Paleologus, Despote de la Morea, that is to say, Lord of Pel^ponesus; who was Brother to Constantine, the last Emperour of Constantinople. And in this Marriage were borne two daughters:
Charlote, Queene; AndCleopatra, who dyed young.
He had likewise a naturall Sonne, named
Iames, Bishop of Nicosia, who vsurped the Kingdome of Cyprus against Queene Charlote.
XV. Charlote, after the death of King Iohn her Father, was Queene of Cyprus, Ierusalem, and of Armenia in the life time of her Father. She was marryed to Iohn the Infant of Fortugall (Sonne to Dom Pedro, Duke of Coimbre, Sonne to the King of Portugall, First of the name) Prince of Antioche, who deceassed in Cyprus without any Children, in the life time of King Iohn, his Father in Law.
In second Marriage shee was matched with her Cousine Lewes, Count de Geneuois, Sonne to Lewes, Duke of Sauoye, and Anne of Luzignan. Charlote was Crowned (at Nicosia) Queene of Cyprus and Ierusalem, and on the same day of her Coronation, returning from the Cathedrall Church of Saint Sophia; the white Palfraye whereon she was mounted, suddenly starting and rising: the Crowne fell from off the Queenes head; which the Cypriots tooke for an ominous presage, and signe of some euill towards their Queene. And indeede, within a very short while after, both shee and her husband were expulsed from Cyprus, by her Bastard Brother.
XVI. Iames, Second of the name, Subdeacon, and afterward Bishop of Nicosia, who vsurped the Kingdome of Cyprus, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, foure hundred, threescore and two: beeing assisted in this vsurpation, by the Venetians, and the Sultane of Cayro, to whom he yeelded himselfe Tributary. He tooke to wife Katharine Cornari daughter to Marino Cornari, a Gentleman of Venice, and in this marriage hee had a Sonne that was a Posthumus.
XVII. Iames, Third of the name, who dyed when he was two yeares old, and his Mother Queen Katharine retreated her selfe to Venice, there to spend the remainder of her life: hauing (before hand) put the Venetians in possession of the goodly Isle of Cyprus, which freely she gaue them, not taking any recompence for it, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and nine.
Pope Pius, Second of the name, gaue a dispensation to Iames the Bastard, that he might be marryed: howbeit before, at the earnest poursuite and request of Queene Charlote, he had thundered Ecclesiasticall censures against him, and proclaimed him to be both a Tyrant, and vsurper of the Kingdome of Cyprus. Queene Charlote beeing refuged at Rome (where she continued the rest of her life time, and at the Popes pension) adoptd for her Sonne the Prince of Sauoye Amadis, her Cousine; and Sonne to Charles, Duke of Sauoye, First of the name; to whom she gaue, granted and transported, the right which she had in the Kingdome of Cyprus, and dyed in the yeare, One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and fiue.
And so tooke ending the Kingdome of Cyprus,The ending of the Kingdome of Cyprus* held by the most Illustrious Family of the Luzignans three hundred yeares intirely. The Great Turke Selim, Second of the name, wanne possession of this Island from the Venetians, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, fiue hundred threescore and ten; and the Turkes haue held the possession of it euer since. Now in this traine falleth a very conuenient place, to obserue the Kings of Armenia, which were of the same name and Armes of Luzignan.


The Kings of Armenia, that carryed the Armes and name of Luzignan, from the beginning.
1. Armenia beeing diuided into the Greater and Lesser, the first King thereof was named Liuonius, otherwise called Leonus, who receiued the Crowne Royall from the Emperour of the West, Henry, Sixt of the name, by the hands of his Chancellour Henry d'Hyperbolee, about the yeare One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and seauenteene. This

Liuonius, and his Successours Kings of Armenia (vntill such time as the Kingdome fell to the Luzignans) Portoient d' Azure a Trois ^estes de Roynes d' Argent, Coronnees d'Or. Liuonius had to wife Sybilla, daughter to Amaury of Luzignan, Second King of Cyprus, and to the Queene of Ierusalem, Isabell his Wife, by her he had two daughters.

Isabell, Wife to Iohn de Brenne, King of Ierusalem, deceassing immediately after the King her Father. And
Mary, Wife to

II. Costus (that is to say Constantius) Baron of Armenia, and King, in regard of his wife: By whom he had foure Sons and two daughters.

Haitonus, King.
BrabatusCostus. These two reuolted from their eldest Brother, who ouercame them in a fought Battaile, made them his his prisoners, caused their eyes to be pluckt forth, and then sent them in exile to Constantinople.
Sinebaldus, Constable of Armenia.

The daughters were
Sybilla, Wife to Andronicus Comnenes, afterward Emperour of Constantinople, who kept his two Brethren prisoners so long as they liued: AndIsabell, Wife to Amaury of Luzignan, Lord of Tyre and Sidon Sonne to
Hugh, Third of the name, King of Cyprus and of Ierusalem, Father and Mother of
Hugh, King of Armenia, First of the Latine name.
III. Haitonus, eldest Sonne to Costus and Mary, King and Queene of Armenia, tooke to Wife Mariana of Luzignan Daughter to Hugh, Third of the name, King of Cyprus and Ierusalem. In this Marriage were borne
Liuonius, that is Leo, King.Sinebauldus, slaine in fighting against the Soldane of Aegypte, in the yeare One thousand, two hundred, threescore and sixe.Thoros, that is Theodorus, King.Haitenus, Baron of Armenia, who renounced the world,An Order of ^r^e^ (...) White Habit^s. and yeelded himselfe a Monke of the Order of Premonstre: of which Order we haue spoken in the History of Tartaria, Imprinted with Nouus Orbis; but mine is of the Impression at Basile, in the yeare, One thousand fiue hundred, thirty seauen. His worke was written in French, in the Cittie of Poictiers, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred and seauen (according as the same Haitonus, Prince of Armenia hath dictated) and by him offered and presented to Pope Clement the Fift, and to the King of France and Nauarre Phillip le Bell, Fourth of the name, beeing in the Citry of Vienna in Daulphine, and afterward it was turned into Latine.
IV. Leo, 2. of the name, fourth Christian King of Armenia, and of a strange language, was Successour to King Ha^tonus his Father, in the yeare One thousand, two hundred, threescore and foure. This man, by the exhortations of his Maternall Vncle Boemond of Luzignan, being (when he was of the world) Prince of Galilee, and afterward of the Order of the Preaching Fryers: became a Monke of the Order of Saint Basile, and was named Macharius; for the seruice of God, hee left his Kingdome to his Brother.
V. Theodorus, Fift King of Armenia, who had two wiues. The first was Erokaton, Daughter to Cassanus, the Great Cham of Tartaria, by whom hee had no issue. The Great Chams of Tartaria carried in Armes L'Escu d'Or, a vn Hibou de Sable. In memory of their first Emperor Cangis Cham, saued by the meanes of an Owle, as it is reported by the Monke Haitonus the Armeni^n, in his Chronicle, which hee entitleth his Tartaria, the sixt Chapter.
In second Marriage he espoused Cheluis, Sister to Henry, King of Cyprus. Theodorus dying in the yeare One thousand three hundred; left the Kingdome to his onely Sonne
VI. Leo, Third of the name, who by his Cousine Agnes (Daughter to Amaury of Luzignan, and Isabell, Sister to his Father Theodor) had three Children, slaine with their Father and Mother by the Grand Cham of the Tartares. So that by his death in this manner, the Kingdome of Armenia came to his neerest heire and Cousine
VII. Hugh of Luzignan, Sonne to Amaury, Lord of Tyre and Sidon, Brother to the King of Cyprus Henry, who was he First Latine King in the Realme of Armenia. He had three Sonnes.


Iohn, King.
Amaury, Constable of Armenia, Father to Leo, King of Armenia: And
Leo, King.

VIII. Iohn of Luzignan, Second Latine King of Armenia, hauing held the Royall Authority sometime: abandoned the world to become a Gray Fryer, resigning his Kingdome to his Nephewe, the Sonne of his Brother Amaury.
IX. Leo, Fourth of the name, Third Latine King, who maintained his Kingdome valiantly: which (by his death) fell to his Vncle.
X. Leo, Fift of the name, and fourth Latine King, who gouerning with ouermuch sloth and negligence; his Brother King Iohn the Gray Fryer, came foorth of his Monastery, and raysed a powerfull Army, which he conducted with King Leo his Brother against the Tartares (who hauing before beene Christians, became plundged againe in the depth of impious Mahomets false doctrine) that vanquished the Christians, and slew both the Kings. So that by their death
XI. Leo, Sixt and last of the name (beeing the Fift Latine King) succeeded in the Realme of Armenia. He was Son to Leo the Fift, and Irene, Daughter to Phillip, Prince of Tarentum, Brother to Robert, King of Naples, and Charles, King of Hungary. He reigned but a short time in Armenia, which was soone inuested with Tartares and Sarrazins, who expulsed or martyred all the Christians of Armenia, as well in the Greater, as Lesse. So that King Leo was enforced to flye into Cyprus, to procure succour from the little King Petrino his Kinseman: who had worke enough to do, to defend himselfe against the Genewayes, that greatly troubled his Kingdome of Cyprus.
From thence hee iourneyed to Rome, to England, and then into France to King Charles, sixt of the name, who entertained him humainely as his Kinseman, and kept his Court then in the City of Paris. There hee dyed with conceit of griefe, hauing made so many iourneyes to and fro, to reconcile the Christian Princes: in hope of recouering his Kingdome, lost in a moment, with his wife and children. Soone after he made his Will and Testament, in the yeare One thousand, three hundred, fourscore and ten, wherby he elected his buriall place in the Quire of the Celestines at Paris, to whom he left a certaine summe of money, for the maintenance of three small Celles of Religious persons, that they might there pray to God for his Soule, and his Princely Predecessours of the House of Luzignan. He had Pensions from the Kings of England, France, Nauarre, Arragon and Castille.
His Monument is yet to bee seene of White Marble, on the right hand of the Celestines Quire in Paris, with his picture lying along vpon it, of very faire White Marble. In his right hand hee helde a Scepter, which is n^w broken, and his Gloues in the other hand. Round about the Tombe is engrauen this Epitaphe.
Cygist tresnoble and excellent Prince Lyon de Luzignan, Quint Roy Latin du Royaume d'Armenie, qui rendit l'Ame a Dieu a Paris le Vingt-neufuiesme Iour de Nouembre, l'an de grace Mille trois Cents Quatre vingts treize. Priez Dieu pour luy.

Here lieth the most Noble and excellent Prince Lyon of Luzignan, Fift Latine King of the Kingdome of Armenia; who rendered his Soule to God at Paris the Nine and twentieth day of Nouember, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, three hundred, fourescore and fourteene. Praye to God for him.

Aloft on the vpholding Arch of this Tombe, are the Armes of the said King of Armenia, deuided in three parts. Le Premier d'Armenie; Party de Hierusalem, et Tierce de Luzignan de Chasteau Neuf.


Yeares and Reignes of the Kings of Cyprus.

1. GVy, First King of Cyprus, Reigned three yeare in Cyprus.
2. Amaury his Brother, Reigned thirteene yeares.
3. Hugh, thirteene yeares.
4. Henry, that receiued the King Saint Lewes into Cyprus; Reigned three and thirty yeares.
5. Hugh the Second, tenne yeares.
6. Hugh the Third, seauenteene yeares.
7. Iohn, one yeare.
8. Henry three and thirty yeares.
9. Hugh the Fourth, sixe and thirty yeares.
10. Peter, called the Great, Reigned eighteene yeares, and was slaine by his owne people for his cruelties.
11. Petrino, called the Little fat man, eleauen yeares.
12. Iames, twenty yeares.
13. Iames of Geneway, so called, because he was borne at Geneway, during the imprisonment of his Father, Reigned thirty yeares.
14. Iohn the Second, eight and twenty yeares.
15. Charlote, Reigned alone one yeare, and with
16. Lewes of Sauoye her Husband two yeares.
17. Iames the Second, a Bastard, Reigned two yeares in warre against his Sister; and tenne yeares peaceably, after the expulsion of Queene Charlote.
18. Iames the Third, two yeares.
19. Katharine, Reigned alone fourteene yeares.




Names and Armes of the Families issued and descended of the most Illustrious House of Luzignan. CHAP. III.
THe first Countes of Poictiers, Portoient de Gueules, a Cinq Tours d'Or en Saultoir, a la Porte de Sable.
The first Countes of Luzignan, and de la Marche; Portoient Burele d'Azur et d'Argent de Dix pieces.

De la Roche-Foucauld, Burele de Luzignan, sur le Tout Trois Cheurons de Gueules.

Of Saint Gelais is Quartered. The first and fourth De Cinq points d'Azur, equip^lez a quatre d Argent (this is no Crosse, as ignorant Painters make it.) The second and third D'Argent, au Lyon de Gueules Coronne d'Or.
De Lansac. Idem.
De Sainct Seuerin de Poictiers. Idem.
Partenay, Burele d'Azur et d'Argent de Dix pieces, a la Bande de Gueules Brochant sur le Tout. In sted of an Helmet, the Lords of Partenay beare a Miter, and the Sirname of Archbishop. Because that one of this house, being Archbishop of Tou^s, was dispenced withall to be marryed: with this charge and condition, that he and his descent should beare the Sirname of Archbishop, and a Miter ouer their Armes.
Of Soubise. Idem.
Of Saint Valier of Poictiers, D'Azur a Cinq Besants d'Argent. 2.2.1. au Chef d'Or.
Of the Luzignans, Countes of Angoulesme. Burele d'Azur, et d'Argent de Dix pieces, Party d'Or a Neuf Lozenges de Gueules. 3.3.3.
Of the Luzignans of Coignac Burele de Luzignan, au Lambell de Gueules,
Of the Luzignans of Chasteau-Neuf. De Luzignan, Burele au Lyon de Gueules, Coronne d'Or sur le Tout.
Of the Luzignans of Valencia, and of Couhe, Burele de Luzignan. Les faces d'Argent, chargees de Dix Faulcons de Gueules. 3.3.3.1.
Of the Luzignans that were Kings of Ierusalem, of Armenia, and of Cyprus. Quartered. Au Premier de Hierusalem: Le Seconde Luzignan de Chasteau-Neuf: Le Troifiesme d'Armenie, et le Quatriesme de Cypre.



The Crosse of the Order of the Knights of the Holy Sepulcher of Ierusalem. Instituted in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred and three: By Baldwine, First of the name,Croix de L'Ord^e du Sainct Sepulchre de Hierusalem. Second King of Jerusalem, and Brother to the famous Prince Godfrey of Bullen. CHAP. IIII.
THE Order of the Holy Sepulcher, is the first and most Auncient of all them in Palestine and the Holy-Land. For the Citty of Ierusalem, hauing beene conquered from the Emperours of Greece by the Sarrazins:The keeping of the Sepulcher and the Mount of Caluarie. the keeping of the Holy Sepulcher, and the Mount of Caluarie, were left by the same Sarrazins, to a certaine number of Chanons Reguler, of the Order and Cloathing of Saint Augustine, gouerned by the Patriarch; Bishop of the same place.
Godfrey of Bologne, First King of Ierusalem of the French Nation, gaue great goods to those Chanons Reguler, and to their Patriarche;Buriall for the Kings of Ierusalem. especially by his last Will and Testament, whereby he ordained and appointed: That both himselfe and his Successours Kings of Ierusalem, should bee buryed in their Cathedrall Church, which was ioyning to the Holy Sepulcher. And that the Patriarche should be the m^n, by whom his Successours the Kings of Ierusalem, must bee Sacred and Crowned.
Bauldwine, First of the name, Successour to his 
 Brother Godfrey, made those Chanons Reguler (of beeing Monkes before) Men of Armes, and Knights of the Holy Sepulcher. Ordayning withall,Knights of the Holy Sepulcher and their Crosse. that they should still retaine their White Habite, wheron they must weare vpon the breast (fastened with a Gordon and Blacke Riband) Vne Croix potencee, et Cantonnee de Cr^isettes de mesme, sans aucun esmaill. Such as the Kings of Ierusalem bare in their Armes, as a noate of excellency and prerogatiue. And a like Crosse of yellow embroderie, sowed or made fast on the left ^ide of their White Roabe or Cloake.The Patriarch Great Maister He appointed for their Chiefe and Great Maister, the Patriarch of ^erusalem, to whom hee granted power, for confer^ing the said Order, and receiuing the Vowe made ^y the Knights; which was of Obedience, Chastity, ^nd Pouerty, not hauing any thing in proper or perticuler, but liuing in common.
He gaue also perticulerly to the Patriarch, Priuiledge to seale all Expeditions and Letters of the said Order, and with White Waxe, as King Godfrey, Bauldwine and ^heir Successours had done, and did.Prerogatiue for Sealing. For the Knights Templers sealed with Red Waxe: The Hospitallers of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, with Blacke Waxe: They of the Order of Saint Mary of the Teutones, in the same manner: Those of Saint Lazarus with Green^ Waxe: Of Saint Thomas the Apostle, with Blew Waxe. And those of Saint Katharine of Mount Sinay, with Red Waxe.
Is it not then any matter of meruayle, that those Monkes should manage Armes, ^n stead of their Breuiarie; because in that season, and so long as the Voyages beyond

the Seas continued;The valiant disposition of the Churchmen in those times. men of the Church which trauayled thither, of what degree or dignity soeuer they were, mooued and prouoked with zealous deuotion, to warre vpon those wicked Miscreants: enstructed and tutoured their owne hands, in as actiue manner, as they that made profession of Armes. As is to bee seene in the Histories of the Holy-Lands Warres, written by Guillaume de Saumur, Archbishop of Tyre; Iohn de Villehardouin, Lord of Ioinuille, in the Life of Laint Lewes, and other Historians.
These Knights of the Holy Sepulcher encreased (in an instant) both in Number, Honour and Wealth, as well as any of the other Orders: vntill such time as by the Conquest of the Holy-Land, and namely of the Holy Citty, by the Caliphe and Saltane Saladine,The forced departure fro^ the holy Land. in the yeare before remembred; thy were enforced to leaue Palestine, and passe into Italy, where they made choice of their dwelling (for some time) at Perugia, enriched with great store of booties, not only in Italy, but likewise in France, in Spayne and in Sicilie,
Pope Innocent, Eight of the name, by his Bull bearing Date, Anno, One thousand foure hundred, fourescore and foure, the first of his Pontificalitie, vnited and incorporated these Knights of the Holy Sepulcher, with the Knights and Hospitallers of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem,Two Societies of Knights vnited into one, but soone disioynted. remaining then in the Isle of Rhodes, as being of one and the same Vowe and Rule; he gaue them the goods also of the Knights of the Holy Sepulcher, by consent of the Christian Princes. But this vnion was not of any long continuance, because the Knights hauing breathed a while on liberty, changed their vowes, to a Wife and her traine, which are Children and House-keeping.
Whereupon Pope Alexander, Sixt of the name, in the fourth yeare of his Pontificalitie, and of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and sixteene, transported to the Holy Seate and himselfe, all power of conferring this Order of the Holy Sepulcher, publishing himselfe and his Successours Popes, to bee Chiefe and Soueraigne Great Maisters thereof. Giuing power to his Vicar Generall, the Guardian of the Holy Sepulcher (who is alwayes of the Rule of Saint Frances de Assise) to conferre this Order vpon Pilgrimes and voyagers to the Holy-Land, marryed o^ vnmarryed: prouided, that they take their Oath vpon the Holy Sepulcher, to be Noble by extraction, or vocation, and to haue sufficiency of goods for their maintenance,The Guardians power that keepeth the Holy Sepulcher. without dealing or medling in traffique and merchandise, for the raysing o^ shamefull and dishonest gaine. Likewise, to goe in Armes to the Holy-Land, o^ wadge a man sufficient for it at their expences, when the Christian Princes shal^ bring an Armie into the Field, for their recouery of the Holy-Land.
But it hath come to passe, through the necessitie of the Family of Gray Fryers, belonging to the Holy Sepulcher, that the Guardian conferreth and bestowesh this Order, on whomsoeuer doth require it; without any exact enquest, or authenticall testimony of Nobility in him then present, paying thirty Sequins of Gold, which is giuen to the Conuent. So that the most part of these Knights of the Holy Sepulcher now are Yeomen and Merchants,The Knights of the Sepulcher in these times. which begin their Knighthood with a false Oath through lacke of vnderstanding Latine, and that the Guardian maketh not their Enquest in French; for I speake of none, but such as are made Knights thus of out Nation.
And here I thought good to set downe the Ceremonies, which are there obserue^ to this present day, and obserued in the writings and voyages of our French Pilgrim^ Bartholmewe de Salignac, of Lorraine; Anthony Regnault, a Parisian, and Iames de Vil^mont, a Gentleman Breton. If the Pilgrime which presenteth himselfe to be made (...) Knight, haue a Sword (which happeneth very rarely; because the Turkes pe^mit not any Christian Trauailer to carry any Sword, in the Lands vnder their obedience) then the Guardian blesseth it in this following manner, vpon the Holy Sepu^cher of our Lord.

Hallowing or blessing the Sworde vpon the Holy Sepulcher, and Creation of a Knight.

Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.



Qui fecit Coelum and terram.


Oremus.


EXaudi quaesumus Domine preces nostras, and hunc Ensem, quo se Famulus tuus hic cingi desiderat, Maiestatis tuae dextra dignare benedicere, quatenus possit esse defensor Ecclesi^rum, Viduarum, Orphanorum, omniumque Deo seruientium, contra saeuitiam Paganorum, ^lusque sibi insiidantibus sitterror, atque formide, praestans ei equae persecutionis, and iustae desensionis effectum. Per Christum Dominum nostrum Amen.


Oremus.

BEnedic Domine Sancte, Pater Omnipotens, aeterne Deus, per inuocationem Nominis tui and per Aduentum Christi Filij tui Domini nostri, and per donum Spiritus-Sancti hunc Ensem, vt hic Famulus tuus qui Hodierna die, tua concedente pietate praecingitur, visibiles, and inuisibiles inimicos posternat, and conculcet, Victoriaque potitus maneat semper illaes^s. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
Then is sung very low and softly (because the Turkes will not suffer the Christians to sing Psalmes with loud voyces, as they do in our Churches) the whole Psalme following, presented heere in part.
BEnedictus Dominus Deus meus, qui docet manus meas ad praelium, and digitos meos ad bellum, etc.

Gloria Patri and Filio, and Spiritui sancto.


Sicut erat in principio; and nunc, etc.


Saluum fac seruum tuum Domine.


Deus meus sperantem in te.


Esto ei Domine Turris Fortitudinis.


A facie mimici.


Domine exaudi orationem means.


Et clamor meus ad te veniat.


Dominus vobiscum, and cum Spiritu tuo.


Oremus.

DOmine sancte, Pater Omnipotens, Aeterne Deus, qui cunct^ solus ordinas, and recte disponis, qui ad coercenda^ malitiam and malorum improbitatem, and tuendam Iustitiam, ^sum Gladij in Terris Hominibus tua salubri dispositione permisisti, and Militarem Ordinem ad Populi protectionem institui voluisti, quique per beatum Ioannem Militibus ad se ^n Deserto venientibus, vt neminem concuterent, sed proprij contenti essent stipendiis, dici f^cisti: Clementiam tuam suppliciter exoramus, vt sicut Dauid puero tuo, Goliath superandi ^argitus es facultatem, and Iudam Machabaeum deferitate Gentium nomen tuum non inuocantium triumphare fecisti ^ita and huic famulo tuo N. qui nouiter iugo Militiae colla suppo^it, pietate coelesti vires and robur ad Fidei, Spei, and Charitatis augmentum, and tui timorem pariter, and amorem, humilitatem, perseuerantiam, obedientiam, and patientiam, cun^ctaque in eo rect^ disponas, vt Neminem cum gladio isto, vel alio iniuste laedat, and omnia cum eo iusta, and recta defendat, and sicut ipse de minori gradu, ad nouum Militatem prouehitur honorem, ita veterem Hominem deponens cum actibus suis, nouum induat Hominem, vt te timeat, and recte colat, per fidorum consortia vitet, and suam in Proximum Charitatem extendat, Praeposito suo in omnibus recte obediat, and suum in cunctis iuste officium exequatur. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
This is the last Acte of these Ceremonies,The manner of the Guardians making a Knight of the Sepulcher. sauing to guirde on the Sword about the Knight, after the Guardian hath giuen him three stroakes with the Sword on the shoulders flat long. And this is the beginning thereof.
After Procession is performed in all the places of deuotion, within the Holy Sepulcher at midnight, and High Masse celebrated vpon the Sepulcher of our Sauiour (capable of receiuing fiue or sixe persons at the most) the future Knights, or they that are to be made, after receiuing the Holy Communion, enter into the Sepulcher, and present themselues to the Father Guardian, Vicar Generall to our holy Father the Pope, who (for the performance of this Ceremonie) is cloathed

in his Bishops habits, inuoking the grace and assistance of the blessed Spirit, and singeth this Hymne.

VEni Creator Spiritus. out at length.
Emit te Spiritum tuum, and creabuntur.
Et renouabis faciem Terrae.
Domine exaudi orationem meam.
Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
Dominus vobiscum, and cum Spiritu tuo.


Oremus.

DEus qui corda Fidelium Sancti Spiritus illustratione docuisti, etc.
And the Guardian (questioning the future Knight) demandeth thus of him. Quid quaeris? What seekest thou?
He answereth, humbly being on his knees before the Holy Sepulcher.

Quaero effici Miles Sanctissimi Sepulchri Domini nostri Iesu Christi. I desire and seeke to be made a Knight of the most Holy Sepulcher of our Lord Iesus Christ.

To other demaunds the future Knight ought to make answer, according to the forme following.
I. Cuius conditionis es? He ought to answer without lying.
R. Nobilis Genere, and Parentibus generosis natus.
I. Habesne vnde honeste manu-tenere possis statum, and Militarem dignitatem, absque mercimoniis, and arte mechanica?
I. Habeo Deigratia bonorum sufficientem copiam.
R. Es ne paratus corde, and ore iurare pro virili, Militaria Sacramenta, eaque seruare que sequuntur?

Primo. Miles Sanctissimi Sepulchri omni die, opportunitate habita, Missam audire debet.
Secundo. Cum necesse fuerit bona temporalia, and Vitam exponere debebit, scilicet, quando est bellum vniuersale contra Infideles, and venire in propria persona, vel mittere personam idoneam.
Tertio. Est obligatus Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam, and eius Fideles Ministros, ab eorum persecutoribus defendere, and pro viribus liberare.
Quarto. Debet iniusta bella, turpia stipendia, and lucra, Hastil^dia, Duella, and huiusmodi (nisi Militaris exercitij gratia) omnino vitare.
Quinto. Debet Pacem, and Concordiam inter Christi Fideles procurare: Rempublicam exornare, and augere: Viduas, and Orphanos protegere: Iuramenta execrabilia, Periuria, Blasphemias, Rapinas, Vsuras, Sacrilegia: Homicidia, Adulteria, Ebrietatem, Loca suspecta, Personas infames, caeteraque Carnis vitiae vitare, and tanquam Pestem cauere: and se apud Deum, and Homines irreprehensibilem exhibere, ac etiam verbo, ac facto dignum Honore Militiae se demonstrare, Ecclesias frequentando, and cultum diuinum augmentando.

I. Of what condition art thou?
The Guardians questions and the Knights answers.R. Of Noble race or descent, and borne of Gentlemanly parentage.
I. Hast thou wherewithall to maintaine honestly the degree and dignity of a Knight; without medling in buying and selling and mechanicall arts?
R. I haue (God be thanked for it) store of goods sufficient.
I. Art thou prepared in heart, and with thy mouth manly to sweare Sacramentall Warrefare, and to obserue these matters that follow?

The future Knight is taught and enstructed.


The Articles of the Knights Oath and charge.First; To heare Masse dayly, except he shall be hindered by some lawfull let or excuse.
Secondly; to expose his meanes, and his owne person, at all times, and so often as any vniuersall warre shall be made against the Infidels and Sarrazins: Or else to wadge and pay a capable and sufficient person, for the doing thereof.
Thirdly; To defend the Church, and Ministers thereof, with all his might and power: And to set them at safe deliuerance, from all such as afflict and persecute them.
Fourthly; To detest and abhorre all vniust Warres; all sordid and dishonest Gaines, Traffiques or Merchandises, vnworthy and vnfitting Noble mindes: All Duelloes, Io^stes, Tourneys and Tournaments: If they bee not Exercises Worthy and becomming a Noble

nature, and free from offending his Neighbour.
Fiftly; to procure and worke peace and concord among faithfull Christians, being at harsh or vnbefitting intelligence one with another: To contribute for the adorning and encreasing the State: To sustaine and defend the Widdowe and Orphane: To shunne and detest (as a Plague or Leprosie) all excrable Oathes and Swearing, against the Diuine and Sacred name of God, and the blessed Virgin Mother: To hate all Periuries, Blasphemies, Rapines, Vsuries, Sacrileges, Murders, Adulteries, keeping Concubines, and Drunkennesse: To auoide all suspected places, infamous Persons, as are Panders, Bawdes, Drunkards, Tiplers, Tauerners, and Swaggerers, (now tearmed and Sirnamed Academistes) Counterfeites of the Hostell of Bourgongne, and people of the like deplorable liues: To shunne and flye from all such vices, as darken, disgrace and soyle the soule. And (in bri^fe) to be such a one in effect (and not in outward appearance) towards God and men, as a Christian ought to be, honoured with this title of Hon^ur, of being a Knight of Iesus Christ, aduancing his Seruice to your vttermost power.

The future Knight hauing promised to keepe and performe all these things, hee sweareth vpon the Holy Sepulcher, in this forme and manner.His Oath vpon the Sepulcher.
Ego N. profiteor, and promitto Deo Iesu Christo and, Beatae Virgini Mariae haec omnia pro ^irili obseruaturum.
I. N. Professe and promise to God, Iesus Christ, and the blessed Virgin Mary, all these things faithfully to obserue.

The Oath done, the Father Guardian layeth his hand on the head of the future Knight, saying.

Et tu N. esto fidelis strenuus, bonus, and robustus Miles Domini nostri Iesu Christi, and Sanctissimi eius^e^ Sepulchri, qui te cum Electis suis in gloria sua collocare dignetur. Amen.
And thou N be a faithfull, couragious, good and strong Knight of our Lord Iesus Christ, and of his most Holy Sepulcher, that among his elect, he may worthily call thee into his eternall Glory. Amen.

Afterward, the Guardian causeth his Golden Spurres to be put on his heeles,
The putting on of his Spurs.
and deliuereth him the naked Sword into his hand, saying.

Accipe N. Sanctum gladium in nomine Patris @ and Filii @ and Spiritus Sancti @ Ament: and vtaris eo ad defensionem tuam, and sancti Dei Ecclesiae, ad confusionem Inimicorum Crucis Christi, and Fidei Christianae: Et quantum imbecillitas humana permiserit, eo neminem iniuste laedas. Quod ipse praestare dignetur qui cum Patre, and Spiritu Sancto regnat Deus, per omnia saecula saeculorum, Amen.
Receiue N. this Holy Sword, in the name of @ the Father, and of the @ Sonne,Deliuery of the Sword. and of the @ Holy Ghost @ Amen. And vse it in thine owne defence, and for the Holy Church of God: to the confusion of the enemies to the Crosse of Christ, and of the Christian Faith. And in as much as humaine Weaknes will permit; hurt nor wound any man therewith vniustly. which hee vouchsafe to grant, who with the Father and the Blessed Spirit reigneth God, World without end. Amen.
And then the Sword is guirded about him by the Guardian, who pronounceth these verses of the Prophet Dauid.
Accingere gladio tuo N super femur tuum potentissime, in nomine Domini nostri Iesu Christi: and attende quod Sancti non in gladio, sed per Fidem vicerunt Regna.
Guird thee N. with thy Sword vpon thy thigh, O thou most mighty, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ: And learne to know, that the Saints, not by the Sword,The guirding it on by the Guardian. but by Faith doe ^inne the kingdome.

The Knight boweth downe his body, and layeth his head vpon the Sepulcher, and then the Guardian giueth him three stroaks flatlong with the Sword vpon his shoulders, saying.

Ego constituo, and ordino te N. Militem sanctissimi Sepulchri Domini nostri Iesu Christi in nomine Patris @ et Filii @ and Spiritus sancti @ Amen.
I constitute and ordaine thee N. a Knight of the most Holy Sepulcher of our Lord Iesus Christ: In the name of the @ Father, and of the @ Sonne, and of the @ Holy Ghost, Amen.The maner of his Knighting. Making three times the signe of the Crosse. He kisseth him afterward, and putteth on the Chaine and Crosse of Gold about his neck. Which being done, the Knight, and they with him (if there be any more created) do sing Te Deum landamus, in making a

Procession; And the Guardian singeth the Hymne of reioycing, which being ended, the Prayers follow.
I. Speciose forma prae filiis Hominum.
R. Accingere gladio tuo super femur tuum potentissime.
I. Domine exaudi orationem meam.
R. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
I. Dominus vobiscum. R. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Oremus.


DA Ecclesiae tuae miscricors Deus, vt Sancto Spiritu congregata, Hostili nullatenus incursione turbetur:

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus super hunc N. famulum tuum (vel famulos tuos, if there be many to be Knighted) qui eminenti mucrone Militiae circumcingi desiderat, gratiam tuae benedictionis infunde, @ eumque Dexterae tuae virtute munitum, fac cuncta aduersantia coelestibus armari praesidiis, quibus in hoc seculo nullis bellorum tempestatibus exturbetur Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum qui, tecum viuit and regnat Deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.
I. Thou art fairer then the children of men.
R. Guird thee with thy Sword vpon thy thigh, O thou most mightie.
I. O Lord heare our prayer.
R. And let our cry come vnto thee.
I. The Lord be with you.
R. And with thy Spirit.
The Ceremonies being finished, the Guardian, the Religious Brethren, and the Voyagers thither, doe kisse and embrace the new made Knights.
Conclusion of the Ceremonies.It is reported, that Sa^nt Lewes gaue great Exemptions and Priuiledges to the French voyagers beyond the Seas, for defence of the Holy-Land, which are more at large related by the forenamed French Authours. But because I haue found nothing in the Court Registers, nor in the Chamber of Accompts, and haue seene the great Seale denied, concerning the expeditions for the voyages of Sens, and of other places in France: I let them passe vnder silence. And to referre the Originall of those Priuiledges to our Kings Charlemaigne, Lewes the Seauenth, and Philip Augustus: I should take it to bee an abuse.The Authors care for auoiding vntruths. Because (without all question to the contrary) they would be found in the Registers of Court, or in the Requests of the Kings House, or those of the Franchise of Chalo S. Mara, where such Commission causes and Charters are Registred effectually.
Dom Phillip, Second of the name, King of Spayne, in the Lands vnder his obedience,Seeking to taile vp the Order againe and namely in Flanders, laboured to set on foot againe this Order of Knights of the Hol^ S^pulcher of Ierusalem, declaring himselfe to be Great Maister thereof. And (indeed) I haue seene his Panca^te, dated in the yeare One thousand, fiue hundred, fiftie and eight: but it prooued to no effect, for some reasons which we shall shew hereafter.
In the yeare, One thousand, sixe hundred and fifteene, Charles de Gonzaga of Cleue, Duke of Neuers, and of Retelois, Soueraigne of Charle-Ville, descended of the most famous house of Mantua, would haue giuen life againe to the said Order of Knights of the Holy Sepulcher of Ierusalem, with a new Collar of the Order, whereof I haue seene the shape or portraite: which I haue not set downe in this Booke: because his inten^ sorted to no effect, no more then the purpose which hee had in the life time of the late King Henry the Great (who is with God) for reestablishing the Order of the Swan^ proper and perticuler to the house of Cleue.The O^d^r of the Swanne tought to bee reuiued.
As this Prince pursued these dispatches at Rome, and to our Holy Father the Pope Paulus Quintus, sitting at this present in the Holy Chayre Apostolicall; the Great Maister of Malta Alof de Vignacourt (of the French language and a Piccard by Nation) sent to the most Christian King Lewes the Thirteenth for Ambassadour extraordinary, Dom Louis Mendez de Vasconcellos (of the Spanish Language Bailiffe d'Acre. Hee had audience in the Castell of the Louure at Paris, in the

Moneth of Iune, One thousand, sixe hundred and sixteene, where he declared, that the Great Maistership of the Order of the Holy Sepulcher at Ierusalem, with al the goods belonging to the said Order, in what place soeuer they were in Christendome,Knights of the Sepulcher ioyned with them of Malta had bin, and was reduced and ioyned to that of Malta, by the Bull of Pope Innocent the eight (as wee haue already formerly obserued) dated the eight and twentieth day of March, in the yeare One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and foure.
And that the late King of Spayne, Dom Phillip the Second, hauing purposed to make himselfe knowne, for Great Maister of the said Order of the Holy Sepulcher of Ierusalem: the Great Maister which then was in authority, made it euident to his Catholique Maiestie, that the vnion was past of this Ordrr, with the other of Malta, and so it was then forborne.
By these and other remonstrances to his most Christian Maiesty, it plainely appeared, that as at the request of the said Catholicke King, Pope Pius,The vniting of the two O^ders confirmed by the Popes Bulles. Fourth of the name, had giuen his Bull confirmatiue, for annexing the Order to that of Malta: euen so he entreated in the name of the Great Maister, and of the Ord^r of Malta, to doe the like for the Commanderies and goods, being in the Lands vnder his obedience. Which was g^anted, and the Bull obtayned of the Pope Paulus Quintus, at the pursuite of the Marquesse de Trainell des Vrsins, Knight of the Kings Orders, and Ambassadour at Rome for his most Christian Maiestie.



The Crosse of the Order of Malta, called, Of the Brethren Hospitallers of Saint Iohn Baptist of Ierusalem. Instituted in the yeare of Grace, One thousand,Creix de L'Ordre de Malte, dict des Fre^es Hospitaliers de Sainct Iean Baptist de Hierusalem. one hundred and foure: By Baldwine, First of the name, King of Jerusalem. CHAP. V.
SOme fewe yeares before the Voyage of our French Paladines beyond the Seas, for conquest of the Holy Land; there were Italian Merchants of Malphi or Melphi, in the Kingdome of Naples, who visiting the places of the Holy Citty,Merchants of Malphi first b^ginn^rs of this Brotherhood. honoured with the Sacred Misteries of our Redemption; obtained of the Caliphe of Aegypt, paying a yearely Tribute (as the Turkes make the Christians to doe, for raising their Cafares, which they augment (as themselues thinke good) by infinity of Vanies, 
 that is to say calomnies and vile speeches, which dayly they impose vpon the poore Christians) a little Cote or Lodging, to haue some shelter in the Holy Citty, as well for themselues, as those of their Nation which aduentured in the Holy Voyage.
According to this permission, they lodged themselues directly before the Patriarchall Church of the Holy Sepulcher, by erecting there a small house, and as small an Oratory, vnder inuocation on the Sacred Virgin, there to celebrate Diuine Seruice in the Latine tongue. Moreouer, they caused to come from their Countrey of Naples, Religious Hermites, of the Order of Saint Augustine, conducted thither by an Abbot, who after compassing more time, caused to be built there a much greater Oratorie, dedicated in honour of the blessed penitent

woman, Saint Mary Magdalen.
The extent of deuotion in this Abbot, and his Religious Brethren, prooued to be the cause, that numberlesse troupes of Pilgrimes of their Nation passed ouer the Seas;The great resort of charitable Pilgrims by whose Almes and charitable reliefe, they encreased both in multitude of men, and store of wealth. When the Pilgrimes perceiued, what good entertainement was extended to them by these Monkes; such as had liberty and disposition to doe it, tooke the habite of their Religion, offering their willing paines and diligence; to helpe and cure diseased Pilgrimes, so that in regard of their louing Hospitality:The reason why they had such a name giuen them. they were named and called Brethren Hospitallers of Saint Iohn Baptist of Ierusalem. For they had procured a Church to bee builded, in honour of the Precursor or fore-runner of the Sauiour of the World, with an Hospitall close ioyning thereto. Now, ouer and beside their bounteous Hospitalitie, they conducted the Pilgrimes, to keepe and defend the wayes and passages, against the Sarrazins.
When the Holy Citty was conquered by our French Princes, King Bauldwine, First of the name, confirmed these Brethren Hospitallers in so Holy an Office, and gaue them great goods.Their Institution in Knighthood, and the Vowes they made. Especially he permitted them to manage Armes, according as the Chanous Reguler did, that were Gardians of the Holy Sepulcher. Whereupon he Instituted them, to be Knights of Saint Iohn, to entertaine, lodge, and comfort Pilgrimes that came to the Holy Land, of what Countrey or Nation soeuer they were, to cure and heale them, in all causes of sicknes and distresse: which was the fourth Article of the Vowe they made, beside them of Obedience, Pouerty and Chastity. The Institution of this Order was in the yeare of Grace One thousand, one hundred and foure, in which yeare they made the forenamed Vows, in presence of the Patriarch of Ierusalem, whom they acknowledged (at the first) to be their chief Commander and Great Maister.
For their better distinguishing, from them that were Knights of the Holy Sepulcher; they tooke the Blacke Habite of the Hermites of Saint Augustine, and aboue on the left side of the Breast,The manner of their Habit and Crosse in Warre and otherwise. wore a Crosse of the White Cloath, made as Ankred, and with eight points, for representation of eight heauenly Beatitudes. In warre, for appearing the more dreadfull to the Miscreants, they wore a Crimosine or Redde Coate of Armes, with the White Crosse vpon it, as you see it here presented: but in their Monasteries, and on the day of their Profession, they did weare the Blacke Garment onely.
Being multiplyed both in men and reuennues, they elected and chose a Great Maister of their owne Body, and the first was a French Gentleman, named Gerard de Sainct Didier, a Piccard by Nation: which Gerard, beeing of the House and Sirname of Sainct Didier,The first great Maister and his Armes. Portoit d'Azur au Lyon d'Argent. And his Successors, for their good and faithfull seruices yeelded to the Crowne of France; added thereto La Bordure de Gueules, chargee de huict Fleurs de Lys d'Or, which is the Quarter of Ioyeuse, allied in the Royall House of Luzignan, and afterward into that of Bourbon, which now ruleth and commandeth.
After Gerard de Sainct Didier, succeeded Brother Raymond, of the House of Poulignac in Auuergne, at this present a Viscountie: the Lords whereof Portent Fesse d' Argent,Raymond of Poulignac second Great Maister. et de Guueles de huict Pieces. Of this Illustrious and Ancient House, was the Lord Sidonius Apollinaris, the learned Bishop of Auuergne, a Romaine Senatour, and Sonne in Lawe to the Emperour Auitus. And of this house (the chiefest in Auueergne) was issued and descended Armentaria, Wife to Florentius, Father and Mother to Saint Gregory, Bishop of Tours, the most Auncient Annalist of France: the Armes of which house were De Gueules a vn Mouton d'Argent, and so I thinke they are still.
After the Conquest of Ierusalem, performed by Saladine (as we haue already declared) vnder the King Iohn de Brenne, who was the last Crowned King thereof; the Knights Hospitallers, as well as they of the Holy Sepulcher, and other, retreated themselues to the strong Cittie of Acres,Ptolomais o^ Acres diuided among the Christians. called Ptolomais, which was partitioned and deuided among the Christians. For each Prince and Order of Knights, had their Quarter separate by it selfe, where they had their Iustice, Weight, Measure,

and taxations, without subiection one to another. And by the multitude of Courts, and Iurisdictions of so many seuerall people, as would not obey one another: in this great Citty were committed infinite murders, thefts and adultries. For when any one had offended in wicked and abusiue manner in one Iurisdiction, he would flye and shelter himselfe in another, by meanes whereof, many great and grieuous delicts escaped and vnpunished.

The seuerall Courts and Jurisdictions, which were in the Great Citty of Acres.

THe First Court was that of the Kings of Ierusalem, who were Crowned in this Citty (after the surprizall of Ierusalem) held by the Kings of Cyprus.
The Second was that of the Kings of Naples and Sicilie, who bare the name and Armes of Kings of Ierusalem, and contested against them of Cyprus.
The Third belonged to the Prince of Antioche: who bare for Armes D'Or a vne Croix plaine de Gueules escartele de France, so saith the Lord of Ioinuille.
The Fourth belonged to the Count of Iaffa: Qui portoit d'Or a la Croix pattee de Gueules, so saith the same Lord of Ioinuille.
The Fift appertained to the Patriarch of Ierusalem, with his Knights of the Holy Sepulcher, of whose Armes we haue before made declaration.
The Sixt was the Court of the Legate for the Pope in the Holy-Land: Qui portoit de Gueules a deux Chefs d'Or en Saultoir.
The Seauenth was the Court of the Counts of Tripoly, bearing Sirname of Tolossa: Qui portoient de Gueules a la Croix Clechee, et Pommette d'Or.
The Eight appertained to the Princes of Galilee: Qui portoient de Luzignan, Escartele de France a la Bande de Gueules.
The Ninth belonged to the Great Maister of the Templers.
The Tenth belonged to the Great Maister of the Hospitallers.
The Eleauenth belonged to the Great Maister of the Brethren of the Virgin Mary, of the Order of the Teutons.
The Twelfth belonged to the Great Maister of Saint Lazarus.
The Thirteenth was the Court of the Common wealth of Venice: Qui porte d'Argent au Lyon de Gueules.
The Foureteenth was for the Common-wealth of Geneway.
The Fifteenth was for the Common wealth of Pisa.
The Sixteenth was for the Common-wealth of Florence: D'Argent a vne Fleur de Lys espanouie de Gueules.
The Seauenteenth was the Court for the King of Armenia.
The Eighteenth was the Court for the Prince of Tarentum in Sicilie: Qui portoit de France sans nombre, Escartele de Gueules a la Croix plaine d'Or, Cantonne de Quatre Besans d'Argent, chacun charge d'vne Croix de Synople, Sur le Tout vne Cottice d'Argent.
And the last was that which belonged to the Duke of Athens: Qui portoit Cinq poincts de Gueules, equipolez a Quatre d'Ermines.

We haue obserued in our former discourse,The Citty of Acres the olde Bulwarke of Christendome how this Olde Bulwarke of Christendome, was taken and rescued by Assault from the Sarrazins; by the Kings of France and England, Phillip Augustus and Richard Coeur de Lyon: noate now heere the reprisall of it againe, by the Sarrazins.
In the yeare One thousand, two hundred and tenne, the Soldane of Egypt hauing raised on foote a puissant Army; got into his possession the Citty and County of Tripoly, and tooke also from the Christians the Citties of Sidon, or Sidonia, Tyre, Baruth, and the whole Principality of Antioche, except the strong Citty of Ptolomais. Hauing thus swept all the way before him, he concluded a Truce for Fiue yeares with the Christians of Ptolomais. This Citty being filled with so many people,A Truce taken for fiue yeares with the Christians. the Horsemen of all the fore-remembred Courts, and Foureteene Hundred Horse beside, which Pope Nicholas maintained there: dearth and scarsity of Victualls constrained the most part of them to issue forth, to seeke for prouision elsewhere. And

namely the Soldiours for the Pope, who came forth of the Citty, to liue in the open Field. The Soldane of Egypt named Helpy, tooke this for a breach of the Truce, and therefore denounced warre against them of Ptolomais: which he besiedged soone after with his Army, commaunded by his Lieutenant Generall, the Ammirant Melesat.
Soone after, most part of the people forsooke the Citty, so that there remained in it but Foure Courts only,But foure Courts remaining in the Citty. to witt; that for the King of Cyprus; that for the Patriarch; that for the Great Maister of the Templers; and that for the Great Maister of the Knights Hospitallers, yet all of them at deuision one with an other, such rancour and spleene was among the Christians.
The King of Cyprus immediatly left the Citty, to goe for the defence and keeping of his owne Island, which Helpy threatned to take from him. The Patriarch (within a few dayes after) did as much, and made his retreate to Cyprus: so that there remained now none for the defence thereof, but the Knights Templers and Hospitallers, with Twelue thousand men, the most part of them soare wounded with Arrowes, and languishing with extremity of famine. Whereof the Soldane hauing intelligence, and that the Great Maister of the Templers was mortally wounded by an impoysoned Arrowe: he made a generall assault vpon the Citty, whereinto he forcibly entred,Ptolomais taken and ^ll the people slaine. and put all the people to the edge of the Sword, vtterly racing all downe to the ground, as elsewhere hath bin related to you.
As for the Templers, they withdrew themselues thence into Italie, Spayne and France, where they had great store of goods. But the Knights Hospitallers, they were long time shut vp in their Wodden Townes, that is to say, their vessells and Shipps,Rhodes taken by the Knights Hospitallers, by a si^gular stratagem. floating on the Seas of Egypt and Greece, Vntill in the yeare One thousand, three hundred and eight, they surprized the Porte and Citty of Rhodes (the most famous of the East) by an admirable Stratagem of Warre.
............ Et olim meminisse iuuabit.
The chiefe Leaders of this selected Squadron, garmented and disguised like Sheepheards, shewed themselues at the Porte on the Land-side, with ten or twelue flocks of Sheepe, among which were a number of vndauntable Souldiers, creeping vpon their hands and teere, and couered with the skinnes of Sheepe. Proceeding on, they first got possession of the porte; and afterward of the Citty from the Sarrazins, who hoping to secure themselues at their Porte: were inuested with the Sea Army of the Hospitallers, who had seized the Porte, and a g^eat number of Shipps ryding therein. In this manner they became Maisters of that goodly and rich Citty, and soone after of the whole Isle of Rhodes, with the fiue little Ilands which enguirte it.
Dolus, an Virtus quis in Hoste requirat?
Rhodes one of the most famous Citties of Greece.It was (in elder times) one of the most famous Townes and Citties in Greece, wherein was an excellent Accademie of Learning and good Letters, and namely of Philosophie, where Cicero, Caesar and the greatest persons of Rome had made their studies, as Cicero himselfe writeth in many passages. It was likewise much renowned, in regard of an admirable Colossus (reckoned among the Seauen Wunders of the World) erected on the Porte of the same Citty of Rhodes, in honour of the Sunne, who was held for the Tutelary God and Guardian thereof, as we learne of Petronius Arbiter;
Est tutela Rhodos beatae Solis.
The huge Coloss^^ (...) Rhodes.This Colossus was of very great and dreadfull stature. One of his feete stood fixed on the shoare of the Hauen, and the other vpon the further side of the Peere, so that the very greatest Shipps (with their Sayles openly displayed) sayled and passed betweene his leggs, to enter into the Roade and Porte. His height consisted of threescore and tenne Cubites,A famous Car^er, Scholler to Lysippus. being the workemanship of Chares the Lydian, an excellent Image-maker and Caruer, who in the space of twelue yeares fully effected it: hauing payed vnto him the price of Three hundred Talents, for the making of it, which amounteth to an Hundred and Fourescore thousand Crownes of our money.
In one hand he held a Pike or Iaueline, and in the other a Sword; vpon his Breast

was fixed a great Mirrour or Looking-Glasse, wherein such as inhabited the Island, were able to discouer (a farre off) what Shipps came to arriue in the Porte. By reason of the huge massinesse and weight of his structure,The C^l^ss^s broken in p^eces by an earthquake. he continued standing but Fiue and Fifty yeares, being broken to pieces by a sudden trembling and shaking of the earth. The greatest and mightiest man of these times, was not able to embrace the Tombe of this Statue, whose fingers exceeded the height and bignesse of any naturall man.
Some yet are of opinion, that he stood firmely One thousand, three hundred and threescore yeares, and vntill such time as the Persians and Sarrazins,Other opinions of this Colossus. vnder conduct of their Grand Mirammolin Azoman, became Maisters of part of Affrica, Europe, Rhodes and the adiacent Isles. And then they brake into morsells and pieces this Colossus, and with the Copper and Brasse, which was imployed to cimment and knit the ioynts and parts thereof together, they loaded Nine Hundred Cammells.
In this Citty of Rhodes, they did beate and stampe money of Siluer, in bignesse somewhat neere to an halfe Teston of France,The Testoni is in value XV^^^. d. but yet much thicker, and the figures thereon more embossed then ours are. These pieces of Siluer, are like to the halfe Sickle of the Iewes, or the Didrachma of the Romaines; but they be more worth. There is a Tradition, that the Thirtie Pence, for which the Sauiour of the world was sold, and deliuered to the Iewes by the traytour Iudas; were of this kind^. And in very deede, in the Church of the Holy-Crosse of Ierusalem at Rome, is to be seene one of those Thirtie Pence,One of th^ P^n^^ that Christ (...) ^^ld fo^ which is wholly like to that in the Church of the Temple in the Citty of Paris. It is enchased in a Shrine, and is to be seene but thorow a Christall Glasse, and on the side which may be noated, appeareth nothing but a head.
The learned Gulielmus Budeus, the Honour of our Citty of Paris, and of all France (whose descendants both by name and Armes, Portent d'Argent a trois Grappes de Raisin d'Azur. 2.1. au Cheuron de Gueules) in the remarkable Tract which he wrote De Asse, affirmeth, that he had seene the Pennie of Siluer in the Temple at Paris, ^nd that on it was represented a head, as in truth there is. But concerning the other side, neither the learned Cardinall Baronius, nor Budeus doe speake any thing else, then of the weight of those Siluer Pence, which the Euangelists tearme Argenteos. One of those Siluer Pence of Rhodes, I haue, and both the sides thereof, in this manner I shew to you.




I Haue confronted and compared it, with the sight of that Pennie at Rome,The Authours comparing all the three Pence together. and the other in the Temple at Paris, and they are all three alike, both in the visage, and in the Circumfernce. Mine is in weight two Groates, a halfe pennie lesse of Siluer, which commeth to twelue Sols and one Liard. On the one side it hath the visage of the Sunne, like to the fashion of a young mans face, without a Beard,The Pennie of Rhodes in shape and proportion. with long locks of h^yre, as heere it is figured, and as Poets haue feigned. On the other side is a Blowne Rose, higher and greater then ours are, and which commeth somewhat neere in resemblance to the Rose which we tearme of Iericho, and which are brought from the Holy-land. Vpon this Pennie, the Rose hath on eche side a Button, the one wherof beginneth to blome, but not the other. Aboue the Rose, on the ring of the piece, is formed in Capitall Greeke Letters PODION, Rhodion, which signifieth,In stead of a Legend about it. and would say, (if it could) A Rose: At the foote whereof is this Sillable Ey. It is generally knowne, that the Citty of Rhodes Portoit d'Argent a cette Rose, accompagnee de ses Boutons de Gueules, a la tige de Synople, and these were the Armes of Rhodes.
So that Thirty Pence of this Money, amounteth not altogether, but to the summe of Eighteene Poundes, Seauen Shillings and Sixe Pence of our money, and seemeth a

very small summe, for buying a piece of Ground or Land, which the Euangelists call Acheldemach,Acheldemach the Potters Field. The Potters Field, so neere to Ierusalem, peopled with more then a Million of men, solde for an offence, and with condition, that it should neuer be redeemed; in regard it was destenied for the buriall place of Pilgrimes, which came to Ierusalem at the Solemne Feasts there held.
And euery one well knoweth, that (amongst the Iewes) inheritances were sold more or lesse,In what maner the Iewes made sale of their inheritances. according as the venditions were made, either neere, or further off from the yeare of Iubilie, which they feasted from fifty yeares to fifty yeares; a feast so sollemnely obserued among them, that the sellers did then reenter into their sold inheritances which they possessed againe freely, and without any charge, or paying any arrerages according as it was ordained by their Law, in the fiue and twentieth Chapter of Leuiticus.
But it may be, that this Potters Field was (in pa^te) bought with those Thirty pence, and the other part, might be the Almes and gifts of the Proprietaries or owners,The Tribe of Leui assigned to the deuotion of the Iewes. both in the Temple of Ierusalem, and publikely, for so good a subiect, as the buriall of Pilgrimes and poore Strangers. For ouer and beside the Offerings and Tribute money, which the Iews offered and payed to the Treasurers in the Temple, for maintaining the Tribe of Leui (the deser^ing Ministers thereof, who at the distribution and diuision of the Land of Promise to the I^wish people, had not any lot or partage, but were assigned to the Iewes deuotion) Inheritances might be legacied to them, which falling into Mortmaine: could not be redeemed by any custome of kinred, whatsoeuer Iubilie might be alleadged, or selling, or alienating, as it is written in the Seauen and twentieth of Leuiticus. And such an enheritance was called Ager Anathematis; A Fielde wholly dedicated and consecrated to God: And which from thence forward, might fall no more into any secular or prophane hand.
After that this Isle of Rhodes was thus in the power of the Knights Hospitallers; they tooke the Sirname and title of Knights of the Rhodes,The Knights Hospitallers become Knights of the Rhodes. and ba^e (as yet they doe to this present) for Armes De Gueules a la Croix plaine d'Argent. And this is a matter very remarkeable, that (after this time) such of the Nobilitie of France, as were accused and attained of any capitall crime, which deserued death: they were relegated and banished (for time, or perpetuitie) to this Isle of Rhodes, according to the weightinesse of the offence; to the end, that they might finish their dayes there in the seruice of God, against the Infidells for the support of Religion. In this manner Anthony de Chabanes, a worthy and famous Lord, by decree of the Court of Parliament at Paris, Anno, One thousand, foure hundred, threescore and three, the twentieth day of August, Signed H. Aligret: all his mooueables and immooueables were taken and confiscated to the King,A matter deseruing obseruation. and himselfe (for euer) banished to the Citty of Rhodes. This house hath produced Marshals of France, Qui portoient de Gueules* au Lyon d'Ermines, Arme, Lampasse, et Coronne d'Or, Escartele ac face d'Argent, et d'Azur de Six pieces, a la Bordure de Gueules.
And these Knights Hospitallers possessed the said Isle of Rhodes, vntill in the yeare of Grace One thousand, fiue hundred, twenty and three: when the Great Turke Soliman tooke it by force, through want of succour from the Christian Princes: For a time they retreated themselues in Sicilie. The besiedging of the Citty of Rhodes was admirable,The Isle of Rhodes wun by the Turkes from the Knights. hindered by a smal handfull of inuincible Christian Knights, encouraged and conducted by their Great Maister Phillip de Villiers, of the Isle Adam, a French Gentleman: against Soliman in person, engirt with an Armie of two hundred thousand men. This famous house of Villiers, Lords of the Isle Adam, betweene Paris and Rouen: Portoit d' Azur au Ches d'Or, charge d'vn Dextrochere (that is to say a right arme and hand) reuestus et habillez d'Ermines, au fanon de mesmes descendant sur le Tout frange d'Argent: Escartele de Clermont (afterward called De Neelle, et d'Offemont, Houses moulten into that of Montmorency, as wel as that of tho Isle Adam) qui est de Gueules a deux Bars adossez d'Or seme de Trefles de mesme.
After the losse of this Isle of Rhodes, and in this manner wun from the Knights; the Emperour Charles the Fift, gaue them that Island of Malta for their abiding, which in Latine is called Melita by the writings of Saint Paul, the Doctour of the

Gentiles, in describing his voyage of Rome, seated vpon the Mediterranean Sea, contayning Thirty miles in all, or thereabout, to witt, Two and twenty in longitude, and about Twelue in latitude. At that time it was barren, and almost vn-inhabited; but at this present fruitfull and husbanded, adorned with strong and beautifull places, and furnished with couragious and valiant men. So that at this day, it is the Rampiar of Europe, to shelter Sicilie, and guard the coasts of Italie, the dreaded terrour of the Turkishe Empire.
It was immediatly besiedged by the Emperour Soliman,M^lta besiedged by Soloman, and valiantly defended by the Knights to his foyle and o^erthrowe. in the moneth of May 1563. with a Nauall Armie, consisting of an hundred and threescore Gallies of Turkish Souldiours, and an hundred other Vessells, carying Victualles and Munitions. The Siedge was brauely sustained for the space of Foure whole Moneths together, by the force and valiancy of the Knights of the Order, and the discreete conduct of the Great Maister Iohn de Valete Gentleman. Whereby the enemy was compelled to discampe, and leaue (for recompence) Thirty thousand of his people behind him, as also the most part of his Artillery, the Eight day of September in the same yeare, One thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and three: vpon which day, is yearely made a generall Procession at Malta, in thankfull acknowledgement for this deliuerance. The Great Maister by the Sirname of Valete, called Parisot, of the language of Prouence, in the yeare One thousand, fiue hundred, threescore and Sixe, caused to be built the new Citty of Malta, called by his owne name Malta Valete:New Malta built by the Great Maister Valete. Qui portoit de Gueules, au Perroquet, a la Patte droict leuee d'Argent.
This Order was composed of eight Nations, tearmed so many seuerall Tongues (...) Languages.
The first was that of Prouence, the prime or Chiefe whereof was called the Great Commandatory: And in this language are accounted the Great Priories of Saint Gylles, and of Tolossa.
Auuergne is the second Language:Marshall of the Order. the Chiefe whereof hath the title of Marshall of the Order, who hath the Great Priory of Auuergne.
France is the third, and the Chiefe hath the title of Grand-Hospitaller of the Order.Oreat Hospitaller. In and vnder him are the Great Priories of France, Aquitaine and Champaigne: The Bayliffe Capitularie of Morea, and the Bayliffe Capitulary, Generall Treasurer of the Order.
Italie is the fourth, the Chiefe whereof is Admirall of the Order, which containeth the Great Priories of Rome; of Lombardie, of Venice, Pisa, Barletta,Admirall of the Order. Messina and Capua.
Arragon is the fift Language, comprehending the Kingdomes of Nauarre,Great Conseruator of the Order. Arragon, and the Counties of Cathalogna, Roussilli^n and Cerdagnia: The head or Chiefe man whereof hath the title, of Great Conseruatour of the Order. And in that Language is the Great Castillian of Ampuesta.
England is the sixt Language, the Chiefe whereof is named Le Grand Tutcopolier de l'Ordre, that is to say, Great Colonell of the Caualerie.Great Colonel of the Horse. In him is comprehended the Great Priories of England, Scotland and Ireland.
Germanie is the seauenth, the Chiefe whereof is named High Bayliffe of the Order:High Bayliffe of the Order. And vnder this Language are comprised the Kingdomes of Hungarie, Bohemia, Poland, Denmarke, Sweden, and all the Estates of Germanie.
Castille is the last, and the head thereof is tearmed High Chauncellour of the Order.High Chauncellour o^ the Order. And this Language comprehendeth the Kingdomes of Leon, Castille, Portugall, the Algarues, Granada, Tolledo, Gallicia, and that beside of Andalousia.
The meanes of admittance and receiuing into this Order, is,Admittance and receiuing into this order by making proofe of Nobility by foure Races, as well by the Fathers Parentage, as the Mothers likewise. To be eighteene yeares of age, and borne in lawfull Mariage; except the Bastards of Kings, Princes, and other Great Lords of Christendome, who for the splendour of their house, and of whence they be auouched, are not subiected to make those proofes. Likewise, they may be receiued as Knights, at eight or nine yeares of age, if they be descended of Princes, or Pages to the Great Maister: who hath the Title of Prince of Malta and of Gaza, and weareth the Crowne belonging to a Prince. And those Great Maisters may be made Cardinalles of the Holy Romaine Church,

holding the same dignity conioyntly with their Great Maistership.
And this is to be sufficiently proued, that this Order, from the first Institution thereof, hath bin conserued in renowne and honour; being as a fruitfull Garden or seed-plot,The Great Maister of the Order at this present. for yielding plenty of braue Captaines and valiant Souldiers, Knights for the seruice of Iesus Christ. Of which Order, at this present, the Prince Soueraigne and Great Maister is Alof de Vignacourt, a Gentleman Piccard, formerly Bayliffe Capitulary and Generall Treasurer of the same Order: Qui porte d'Argent a Troi^ Fleurs de Lys au pied uourry de Gueules, au Lambeau de mesmes. And it is generally to be knowne, that the Armes of the Great Maisters are those of the Religion, Quartered with them of their house, Vne Coronne a poincte, and le Chapellet de Patenostres, and d Aue Maria, d'Argent au lieu d'Ordre.



Of those Ceremonies kept and obserued, in the giuing of this Order. CHAP. VI.
The manner of presenting at the Altar.AFter the proofes of Nobility are made, he which presenteth himselfe to be admitted into the Order, and to make profession thereof; commeth before the Altar, clothed with a Cassock of black Serge, without any Girdle, holding in his hand a weighty Taper of White Waxe, and such a piece of Gold or Siluer as himselfe pleaseth, fastened to the said Candle, receiuing their Holy water, and vsing the accustomed prayers. Hauing drawne forth his Sword first, he layeth it vpon the Altar: where it is blest and hallowed, in such forme and manner as we haue formerly elsewhre obserued.
The Professours appearing before the Receiuer.The Receiuant (I meane the man appointed, to make acceptation of this nouell Professour) sitteth in a Chayre, within the enclosure of the Altare, and after sollemne Benediction made; he causeth the Profest to come before him, to vnderstand what he is to demaund, As, whether he hath receiued the Order of any other Prince, or such person as might giue it him? Vpon the answere No; the Receiuant sheweth him, what a good and wholesome action it is, to be helpfull to the Poore of Iesus Christ; to exercise the workes of Mercy; to vowe his person to Gods diuine Seruice, for the maintenance of the Christian Catholique Faith, and the protection of Widdowes and Orphanes.
How the Order of Knighthood ought to be giuen.Further he declareth, that the Order of Knighthood hath bin wished, requested and demaunded many times, by men of quite opposite disposition, and farre vnfit for so great a grace. Because it is not to be graunted or giuen* but to such as are famous by Nobility of extraction, or such as haue deserued it by their owne merit, vertues and signale Seruices. Wherefore, whosoeuer presented himselfe to that end and intent, hauing made vndoubted proofe of his extraction, his willing inclination to doe well, and to encrease in vertue: should receiue the Order, vnder condition of promising and perfourming these Clauses following.
The Articles are in diuers of the precedent Orders.To auoyde prolixity, and because the Articles haue in other Tracts bin formerly repeated: we make spare of them in this place, and after they haue bin presented to the Profest and he making promise to performe them; the Receiuant causing him to rise, speaketh thus to him.

Other Ceremonies passing betweene the Receiuant and Profest, in giuing the Order of Knighthood.
The char^ at deli^ering the Sword.TAke this Sword into your hand. By the cleere and bright glittering Blade, it enstructeth you to shine in Faith, and to enflame you with constant embracing

it, according to the deuise of our Order; Qui porte vne Espee nue flamboyant, entouree de flambes de feu, cas trois mots pour legende: Pour La Foy: The Point denoateth Hope, and the Crossed Hilt Charitie. You are to vse and serue your selfe therewith, first, for your owne defence, next for the Christian Catholique Religion, and lastly for poore Widdowes and Orphanes: for you neede not feare, to expose your life to all perils and dangers, vpon so good and solid subiects. Because the famous Order of Knighthood receiued her prime Institution, onely to recompence vertue;The reason of the Order of Knighthoods institution. to preserue publique Societie in vnion and concord; to maintaine the Church and Iustice; to defend the Orphane and Widdow from all oppression; and for exercising the workes of Mercie to all people indifferently. It is that which rectifieth the soule to God, and the body to hazards and perils of this world: thorow the zeale of most perfect Charitie, wholly tending to the seruice of God. Afterward, he commanded the Profest, to rub the Sword vpon his arme, for more cleanely putting it vp into the Scabbard, and then said.
Like as you returne that Sword neat and cleane into the Sheath; euen so haue you an especiall care, for soyling and polluting it, by drawing it forth vniustly,At putting vp the ^word into the Scabbard. to offend or strike any one therewith. But onely imploy it for the seruice of God; for defence and augmentation of the Christian Catholique Faith; and protecting of Widdowes and Orphanes from wrong. God giue you the grace to doe what is enioyned you. Amen.
The Profest being all this while vpon his knees, holding the Sword in the Scabbard; the Receiuant guirdeth it to his side, saying. I guird you with this Sword,At guirding it vpon his side. and place it on your side, in the name of God All mightie, of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of the glorious Saint George, the Patron of Knights: in honour of whom, I will giue you the Order of Knighthood, to the end, that as by his patience and true faith, he was victorious against his enemies; euen so you may imitate him in all your actions, that he may obtaine for you the grace of well doing.
Afterward, the Receiuant commandeth the Profest,Of three stroak^s smitten in the ayre. to draw the Sword forth againe out of the Scabbard, and to make offer of striking three stroakes aloft in the ayre, as if it were to threaten the enemies of the Faith: And then he speaketh these words to him.
You haue shaken your Sword aloft three seuerall times, in the name of the blessed Trinitie, thereby defying all the enemies of the Faith; God grant you hope of victory, Amen. Then he wipeth it vpon his arme, and the Profest putteth it vp againe in the Sheath, which being done, the Receiuant deliuereth to him these Enstructions.


Concerning those perfections which ought to be in a Knight.
THe first perfection which ought to be in any Knight, is to be Honest, for vpon Honestie dependeth foure principall vertues: As namely Prudence,Honestie begetteth Prudence. whereby you shall know all things, and preseruing them in memory, which are past; you will the better prouide for them present, and those that are to come.
The second is Iustice, who is the Princesse and Queene of all the other Vertues:Iustice. It is shee that conserueth all things, in the equall Ballance of Reason and Equitie.
The third is Fortitude, who will make you wholly animated with Courage and valiancie, against all your enemies whatsoeuer.Fortitude. And
The fourth is Temperance, who will moderate all your actions. You must be cloathed with all these foure Vertues, to haue them walke alwayes along with you;Temperance. if you desire to win the renowne of a braue Knight indeede.
When these words are thus spoken, the Receiuant taketh the drawne Sword from the Profest, and giueth him three stroakes therewith vpon the Shoulder, in speaking of these words.
I make you a Knight, in the name of God, of the Virgin Mary,The auncient manner of Knighting.and of my Lord Saint Iohn Baptist, and in the honour of my Lord S. George; vigilant and peacefull for the seruice of God, and the honor of Knighthood. Which being said, the Receiuant putteth

vp the Sword, and looking stedfastly vpon the Profest, he giueth him gently a blow on the cheeke, and then saith to him.

Rouse vp your spirits, and dreame no longer on the Worldes affayres; but be watchfull in the Faith of Iesus Christ. And dispose of your selfe so, as if you were euen at the last affront, and the very latest iniury you were to receiue, in marching vnder the Crosse of our Lord.

The Receiuant proceedeth on, taking the guilded Spurres, and vseth these words to the Profest.

Concerning the G^ilded Spur^es.
You see these Spurres are Guilded, whereby you are to vnderstand, that as the Horse is fearefull of them, because he is Prickt with them, for his better direction on the way: In like manner be you fearefull, for going forth of your rancke, and breaking the rules of your Vow, by committing any dishonest action, or vnfitting for a Knight. And they are also (thus guilded) fastened to your feete, to the end, that you should preserue Honour before Gold, or all the Riches of the World.

Then are the Spurrs put on the Heeles of the Profest, when the Receiuant (raysing him from his knees) sendeth him to his place, to heare the Gospell and the rest of the Masse, still holding the lighted Taper in his hand. But when he goeth to receiue the Sacrament of the Altar, his Spurres and Sword are taken from him.
What is done after the masse is ended.Masse being finished, the Profest commeth againe, to present himselfe vpon his knees before the Receiuant, alwaies keeping the Taper lighted in his hand, and when he hath put on his long Robe, to whom the Receiuant saith.

What demaund you?

The Profest answereth.

I desire to be admitted and receiued, into the Company of the Religious Brethren, of the Order of Saint Iohn Baptist of Ierusalem.

Then saith the Receiuant.
You desire that which hath bin denyed to a great many of men, because they were not worthy to be receiued into our Company. But hauing confidence in your Noblenesse, as also your sufficiencie and courage: they are motiues to vs for graunting your request. For our hope is firmely perswaded, that you will exercise the workes of mercy with zealous Charity, and that you will wholly imploye your selfe,The meanes of grau^ting the Knights request. acceptable to the seruice of this Religion, and not only to the Holy Seat Apostolique; but likewise to all the Kings and Princes of Christendome, with all other vertuous persons beside.
Our Order hath encreased, and bin enriched in goods, Wealth, Honors, Exemptions, Liberties and Great titles, to the end, that all of vs (seruing for the Warrefare and Hospitality of the Order) should be enflamed with the true fire of Loue, and perfect Charity in our Lord Iesus Christ.The meaning of carying the lighted Taper And as this burning Taper hath bin deliuered into your hand; you are thereby to learne and vnderstand, that you ought to be ardently kindled with the Diuine Fire of Charity, which is the true perfection of this wretched and transitory life. And this I dare assure you, that if you will exercise a Zealous Spirit, for defence of the Faith of Iesus Christ against his enemies; he will call you the more easily into his Kingdome.
And to the end, that you shall not excuse your selfe thorow ignorance: I stand bound to signifie vnto you before this Noble Assistance, that if you haue a perfect and setled will to follow our rule; these are your Iniunctions.


Iniunctions deliuered by the Receiuant to the Profest.
FIrst of all, you must prepare your selfe from this instant houre, to enter into the paines and troubles, which you are to vndergoe in the seruice of our Religion.Depriua^on of W^ll. You must depriue your selfe of your owne will, to resigne and submit it (this very day) into the hands and power of your Superiours, whosoeuer they be thereto elected: Commaunding you to obey them, in any fashion and manner whatsoeuer it be, in regard that you are contented, to rob your selfe of your liberty.
And as this Waxe-Candle suffereth it selfe to be handled, and made into forme, euen so must you doe.
Moreouer let me tell you, that you will be constrained to Fast, when you haue the greatest appetite to Feede; to watch, when you would gladly Sleepe; suffering and enduring many other paines, contrary to your pleasures and liberties.Fasting and watching. Wherefore I doe aduise you, that if you haue a full setled will, to dispossesse your selfe thereof, and to resigne it into the power of the Superiours of our Religion: that you speake it boldly and freely. Whereunto the Profest ought to answere thus.
Sir, I haue depriued my selfe thereof,Pleasures and Liberties. and doe resigne it wholly into the hands of my Superiours: I renounce all my pleasures and liberties, deuesting and despoyling my selfe of them, with all my heart.
Whereunto the Receiuant presently thus replieth.
Seeing you haue so freely dispossest your selfe of your liberty and will, heere in my presence, and before all these Noble Assistants: I giue you to know and vnderstand, that being thus heere so freely dispossessed, I summon you to tell me, and freely to confesse the trueth, in all such questions as I shall propound to you, vpon paine of being reputed culpable, and punishment inflicted according to your deseruing in this case.The receiuants demands.
First I demaund of thee, if thou hast made vow of any other Religion?
If thou hast not consummated Mariage, or bin affianced to any woman?
If thou standest not bound, to pay some such summe of mony, as exceedeth thy power, and more th^n thy best faculties can support to satisfie?
If thou art not of seruile condition, and of the quality of vulgare Rusticity?
If thou hast not bin preuented by Iustice?
Whereto the Profest ought to answere. In all these things which you demaund of me. I am not any way faulty. The Receiuant then saith.The receiuants final and dre^df^ll position.
Because thou maist not be deceiued and abused, I doe now declare vnto thee, that at all times, and so often as it shall be discouered, that thou art attainted with any of the fornamed matters: thou wilt be instantly depriued of our Comp^ny, with great shame and all ignominie; yea, thou shalt be deliuered into the hands of them, who haue power to chastise thee most seuerely. Aduise thy selfe therefore well, that thou art so cleane and free, as thou saist: Whereunto the Profest must answere.
Well Sir, I am so: then the Receiuant proceedeth.
Seeing thou saist and confessest thy selfe to be so, and art determined, prouided and resolued, to be a defender of the Church of Iesus Christ, to serue the poore of the Hospitall, receiued in by our Religion: we entertaine thee withall our hearts,His receiuing into the Ord^r according to the forme of our establishment and Custome, but not otherwise. And we will promise thee nothing else, but onely a pittance of Bread, Water and Salt, poore simple Garments, paine and trauaile. Then the receiuant commandeth the Missale to be brought, and causing the Profest to lay his hand vpon the Canon, willeth him to pronounce these words.

I make my Vowe and promise to Almightie God, to the glorious Virgin Mary,
The forme of his Vowe and promise.
and to my Lord Saint Iohn Baptist our Patron, that by assistance of his grace, I vowe and promise to obserue true Obedience, to him that shall be commanded me by God and my Religion. I promise likewise to liue henceforth in paine and trauaile, and to obserue Ghastitie, as it behooueth all Catholique and Religious persons to doe.

After the swearing of these Vowes, the Receiuant (beholding the Profest mildely and louingly in the face) saith:
Now we acknowledge and confesse thee, to be one of the Defenders of the Catholique Church, and a Seruant to the Poore of the Hospitall of Saint Iohn. And to the end that thou maist begin with Obedience: I command thee to bring hither the Missale, to lay it vpon the Altar, to kisse the Altar, and then to carrie away the Missale. Which the Profest hauing accomplished, the Receiuant sheweth him the habite, and first of all the Crosse of White Cloath, hauing eight points; saying,The manner of deliuering the Crosse and Habite.
This Crosse was thus ordained White to vs, in signification of Puritie, which we ought alwayes to haue both within the Heart, and without; free from any spot or blemish whatsoeuer.
The eight points wherewith this Crosse is composed doe signifie; and are

thus made; in remembrance of Eight Beatitudes, which we ought alwayes to haue within vs.Eight Beatitudes.Whereof the First is, Spirituall Contentation.The Second is, to liue simply, without maliciousnes.The Third, to liue in all humility.The Fourth, to mourne for thy sinnes and transgressions.The Fift, to loue Iustice and true dealing.The Sixt, to be mercifull.The Seauenth, to be pure and cleane in heart and minde.And the Eight, to suffer and endure afflictions and persecutions for righteousnes sake.
All which vertues thou must striue to engraue and fixe in thy heart, for the conseruation of thy Soule.
And therefore I commaund thee to weare this Crosse, openly made fast to thy Garment, right against thy heart vpon the left side; to the end that thou mayest be memoratiue, and thy heart alwayes remember the former Eight Beatitudes, and neuer to forsake them. The Receiuant must afterward cause the Profest to kisse that Crosse, and then to put the Cloake vpon his shoulders, saying.

Putting on of the Habite.
Take this Habite, in the name of the Blessed Trinity, in whom thou shalt finde saluation for thy Soule: if thou labour for the augmentation of the Christian Faith, and defence of all Christians; dedicating thy selfe wholly, to the seruice of the Poore of Iesus Christ. And that thou maist doe this:

I place this Crosse heere on the left side, neere to thy heart, that thou maist loue it to thy vtmost power, and defend it with thy right hand: commanding thee neuer to leaue or forsake it, because it is the true Ensigne and Banner of our Religion; and neuer to wander from the ass^ciation of thy Brethren which beare thee company, whatsoeuer perill or daunger may ensue thereon. Otherwise, thou must be debouted from our Society, with great shame and reproch, cast off as putrified member, and a transgressour of thy vowes and promises, conformably to our establishment.
The signification of the Habite.This Cloake wherewith we haue cloathed thee, is in remembrance of the Cammells Skinne, wherewith our Patron Saint Iohn Baptist was cloathed in the Wildernesse. And because in taking this Garment, thou renouncest all the pleasures, pompes and vanities of this World; I commaund thee, to weare it at all requisite times; and thou must procure and enioyne, that after thy death, thy body may be buried therein, that so thou maist the better rem^mber, to imitate and follow o^r Patrone Saint Iohn Baptist. And thou must fixe all thy hope, to haue remission of thy sinnes, by the death and passion of our Lord and Redeemer Iesus Christ.
Who is figured by this Corde thy Girdle, wherewith he was fast bound by the Iewes.
The seuerall attributes of fitting him in his Habites.This is the Crowne of Thornes.
This is the Lance, wherewith his side was pierced.
This is the Spundge, wherewith they gaue him Gaule and Vineger to drinke.
These are the Buffettings, wherewith he was smitten.
This is the Crosse, whereon he was Crucified.
And I lay it vpon thy shoulder, in remembrance of his Passion, vnder which thou shalt finde rest for thy Soule, because his yoake is very pleasant and sweete. Wherefore, I put this Bond and Cord about thy neck, to make thee remember the seruitude, which thou hast vowed and promised. And in the vertue of all these, I make thee pertaker of all the spirituall blessings that are, and belong to the name of our Religion throughout the world, desiring God to comfort and assist thee therein.
His dayly ini^nctions, and other seruices beside.Thou standest obliged, to say dayly an Hundred and Fifty Pater Nosters; or else the Houres of our Lady, or the Vigiles of the dead.
Thou art likewise bound, to say for euery one of thy deceased Brethren, one of the three Seruices thereto especially appointed.
Thou must be alwayes bare-headed, vntill such time as the Great Maister, or his Lieutenant shall commaund thee to put on.
Thou shalt salute and embrace familiarely, all such as thou meetest, wearing the Crosse of our Religion; in token of loue and Brotherly dilection.
If thou wert at Malta, thou must fetch thy Bread, Salte and water at thine Inne: Insted whereof, I commaund thee to doe so heere: whatsoeuer commeth beside, thou must accept, because our Order doth promise there nothing else.
And now that thou art receiued into our Company, I will shew thee the Coate of Armes or vpper Garment, which thou art to weare ouer thine Armour, at all such times as thou Marchest in Warre against the enemies to our Faith: to the end, that thou maist neuer abandon thy Brethren, or the Enseignes of our Order, which beare the same noates. And what accident soeuer shall happen, thou must neuer turne thy back vpon thine enemie.
These things being thus ended, were said the wounted Prayers required in such cases, according to the Statutes and Customes of the Order,The Statutes of the Order lately imprinted. newly imprinted at Paris, and put forth by a Knight of the Order, Iacques Fumee, Commaunder of Castro, an Auncient Family at Paris, that beare in Armes D'Azur, a deux Faces d'Or, et Six Besans d'Argent. 3.2.1.
Such are the Ceremonies, which I saw perfourmed in the Church of the Temple, heere in our Citty of Paris, on the day of Profession made by Monsieur, Knight of Vendosme, Naturall Sonne to King Henry the Great of Famous memory; who beareth for his Armes D'Azur, a Six Besants d'Argent. 3.2.1. au Chef de Malte.




The Crosse of the Order of the Knights of the Temple: more vsually called Knights Templers: VVhich had beginning about the yeare of Grace,Croix de L'Ordre des Cheualiers du Temple. One Thousand, One Hundred and Nineteene: Vnder the Reigne of Bauldwine, Second of the name, Third King of Jerusalem. CHAP. VII.
THE Order of the Templers tooke beginning vnder the Reigne of Bauldwine, Second of the name, Third King of Ierusalem, about the yeare of Grace One thousand, one hundred and nineteene.The first men that began the Order. In which yeare nine Gentlemen, conducted by Hugues des Payens, and Godfrey de Saint Omer (whose Armes it is impossible for me to discouer, but such as knowe them, shall doe me a great pleasure to enstruct me in them, for the Second Impression, if God will vouchsafe to let me liue so long) vrged thereto by zealous deuotion, passed beyond the Seas, and presented themselues before the Patriarch of Ierusalem, named Guarimond: in whose presence they made sollemne vowes, to liue Religiously, in forme and manner as did the Chanons Reguler, of the Order of Saint Augustine. Nine whole yeares they liued together in that number, without encreasing to any more, and King Bauldwine gaue them permission, to build a Lodging, wi^hin the circuit and enclosure of the Temple of Salomon in Ierusalem: whereby they became to be acknowledged, and called by the name of Templers.
In the yeare One thousand, one hundred, twenty and eight, they began to encrease,The first imployment of the Templers, by fauour of the Patriarche of Ierusalem. by the affluent resorte of Pilgrimes from beyond the Seas; so that by consent of the Patriarche of Ierusalem (whom they acknowledged to be their Superiour) they imployed their paines, in guarding the high wayes and most daungerous passages, as being guydes and safe conducts for Pilgrimes to the Holy-Land. By these charitable actions, they grew acceptable to the Kings of Ierusalem, and to the Princes and Lords of Europe, who were very bountefull in Almes-deedes towardes them: because they caried the Title Of Poore Soldiours of Iesus Christ, and of the Temple of Salomon. Pauperes Commilitones Christi, and Templi Salomonis appellabantur.
In the same yeare One thousand, one hundred, twenty eight, there was held a Generall Councill in the Kingdome of France, at the Citty of Troyes in Champaigne (as I haue read in William of Tyre, in his Twelfth Booke and Seuenth Chapter of the Holy warres, where it is called Concilium Cretense, thorow the fault of Printers, for it should be read Concilium Trecense) wherein were present
A Generall Councill at Troyes in Champaigne, Concilium Trecense.Mathew, Bishop of Albania, Cardinall and Legate to the Holy Apostolicall Seate, and to Pope Honorius, Second of the name.

Regnaud, Archbishop of Rheimes; And
Henry, Archbishop of Sens.

The Bishops were.

Ranckedus of Chartres.
Gosselinus, Bishop of Soissons.
N. Bishop of Paris.
N. Bishop of Troyes.
N. Bishop of Orleans.
N. Bishop of Auxerre.
N. Bishop of Meaux.
N. Bishop of Chaalons.
N. Bishop of Laon.
N. Bishop of Beauuais:

The Abbots were.

N. Abbot of Vezelay, who aftewards was Archbishop of Lyons, and Legate the Holy-Seate.
N. Abbot of Cisteaux.
N. Abbot of Pontigny.
N. Abbot of Trois-Fontaines.
N. Abbot of Saint Denys of Rheims.
N. Abbot of Saint Stephen at Dijon.
N. Abbot of Molesme: And
Saint Bernard, Abbot of Cleruaux, the most Learned and deuoute Prelate of all them which that Age affoorded.

With a great number of Princes and Great Lords of France, then present at this Council. Among whom were the Count of Champaigne Thibault, and the Count of Neuers.
At this Council it was, where the first Great Maister Hugh presented himselfe, being attended on by some Brethren of this Order, among whom were by name,The first great Maister of the Templers present at this Councill. Brother Godfry; Brother Payen de Montdidier, Brother Gorall; Brother Geoffrey Bisoll; and Archambauld of Saint Amand: who brought to the Councill the Letters of Pope Honorius, and of Steuen Patriarch of Ierusalem, with some Articles and memories of Vowes, concerning the Rules, which were propounded to them to obserue and follow.
The Fathers in this Holy Councill at Troyes, gaue commaund to the Reuerend Abbot Saint Bernard, to haue the perusing of those Rules and Vowes; granting to write them (vnder him) the Scribe of the Councill, named Ioannes Michaelensis.Ioannes Michealensis Clearke or Scribe of the Councill. Saint Bernard did set downe the Rules of this Order in Latine, answerable to his owne elegant stile, with an exhortation to the said Hugh, Knight and Great Maister of this Order, which is to be read in the Workes of that worthy man Now, concerning the Rules belonging to the Templers, because they were rare and neuer found heretofore Imprinted: I haue set them downe at large in the end of this discourse, though not by the due Folios of Pages, or Signature, which should follow in the forme of Printing, yet sufficiently enough for all men of vnderhanding.
In presence of the Patriarch of Ierusalem,The Templers of S Benedicts Order. they made profession of the Order of Saint Benedict, and sware their vowes of Obedience, Pouertie and Chasti^y, acknowledging him to be their Superiour, and al the Patriarches after him. He granted their habite to be White, and thereupon Vne Croix Patriarchale, in the same forme as you behold it to be here Figured.
They encreased in numbers of men, and great Riches, because 
 they were so couragious as possibly men could be; for a small troupe of them, could kill and ouercome an Army of Sarrazins. Here you may obserue what is written by William the Archbishop of Tyre, Iacques de Vitry, and all them that haue written concerning the Holy-Warre.
Erant Templarii Commilitones ita formidabiles Fidei Christi aduersariis, quod vnus persequebatur Mille and Duodecim, Millia Duodecim: Non quot essent, sed magis Vbi essent, dum ad Arma clamaretur, interrogantes. Leones in bello; Agni mansueti in D^mo, in Expeditione Milites asperi; in Ecclesia velut Heremitae, and Mona^hi; inimicis Christi duri, and feroces, Christianis autem benigni, and mites Vexillum bipartitum ex Albo, and Nigro, quod nominant Beau-Seant quasi Gallica lingua Bien seant praeuium habent eo quod Christi amicis candidi sunt, and benigni, inimicis vero terribiles: atque nigri.
These Knights of the Temple were so dreadfull and terrible, against the aduersaries of the Faith of Christ, the Sarrazins and Miscreants; that one man alone of them, would fight with a Thousand, and Twelue would vanquish Twelue Thousand. So that at the instant when they marched to the Field; where they purposed to fight; the Scoutes and Spies

of the Sarrazins,These are the very words of the Authors themselues. would lurke in corners vpon the wayes (as surprized with feare and very pangs of death) not coueting to know what number they were, but to what place they marched. For being Lambes in the Conuent, they were As so many angry Lyons in the Warre: Inuincible Souldiours in the Fielde affayres, but in the Church Nouices and Hermites: Cruell and Terrible to the enemies of the Faith, but softe, milde and benigne to Christians. They carryed to Warre their Banner, halfe White, and halfe Blacke, which they called Beau-Seant,Fayre-seeming. Well-becomming. which we in French tearme Bien-Seant: because they were and shewed themselues wholly White and fayre towards Christians, but Blacke and Terrible to them that were Miscreants.
Fifty yeares after the establishment of their Order by the Learned Saint Bernard; they met in a Chapter of their Order, to the number of three hundred Gentlemen, and as many Brethren Seruants, most part of them belonging to the Kingdome of France. At this Chapter, they began to elect a Great Maister among themselues, by example of the Knights Hospitalers of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, and the first Great Maister of the Order, and chosen at this Chapter held in the Holy-Land,The first great Maister of the Order chosen among themselues. and in the Sacred Citie it selfe, about the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and two; was one named Richard de Rilefort, who was slaine at the Siedge of Acres, by the Sultane Saladine, after that he had gotten possession of Ierusalem. By this meanes, they exempted themselues from obedience to the Patriarch of the Holy Citty, and made a Band by themselues. Namely, they changed their Crosse, reiecting the Patriarchall, and taking one Blacke with eight Points; like to that of the Hospitallers of Saint Iohn, with an Vrle and Bordure White.
As Time proceeded on, so these Templers grew to be so powerfull and Rich, that they became insupportable,The Pride and insolence of the Templers. and ouer-arrogant towards the Christians, which resorted thither from beyond the Seas. And as William, the Archbishop of Tyre writeth: Conuersi sunt in arcum prauum, et neglecta humilitate, Patriarchae Hierosolymitanose substraxerunt, Obedientiam ei, quam Praedecessores eidem exhibuerant, denegantes. Sed et Ecclesiis Dei Decimas, et Primitias subtrahentes, vt eorum indebite possessiones turbando, facti sunt valde molesti. All things were lawfull to them; they commanded at Bagueta against Kings and Princes beyond the Seas, by meanes of their Pride and Ambition: And they onely were the cause, that the Christians lost the Holy-Land, hauing ouer-much correspondency with the Sarrazins.
Obseruations of the Templers abuses.The Lord of Ioiuuille obserueth their behauiour, in describing the Voyage of our King Saint Lewes, to whom (saith hee) they shewed very bad offices. They hindered (saith the same Authour) the Conuersion of Le Viel de la Montaigne, who would haue embraced (with all his people) the Faith of Iesus Christ, if hee might haue beene eased of the Taxes and Tributes, which hee payed to to this Order. Suspected they were, of imploying the Subiects of the same Olde Wizzard, treacherously to reuenge their passions and spleenes, by quarrelling with the Christian Princes abiding in the Easte. Facti sunt in arcum prauum. They made themselues by their riots, superfluities, arrogancy and pride) shamefull and contemptible to all creatures.Belike the Templers, wee l^stie Drinkers. Notoriously were they addicted to drunkennes, for there is a Prouerbe of them, remaining yet fresh among vs; He drinkes like a Templer. Sodomie and blacke Magick were their frequent exercises: their Euen-songs and Meditations, were nocturnall Sacrifices to the diuell, whom they adored as their Matster, and sacrificed to him young Infants, borne of their owne seed, and begotten in the incestuous embracings of their very neerest kinred. Like to the Magi of the Persians, reported by Catullus and Lucane.
Cui fas implere Parentem, quid rear esse nefas?
The Generall Councell at Vienna against the Templers.And this was the reason, that beeing attainted and conuinced of so many enormous crimes, and foule offences, they were (iustly and deseruedly) wipte out of the Booke of the liuing, at the fifteenth Generall Councill, assembled at Vienna in Daulphine, the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred and Eleauen, by Pope Clement, Fift of the name (a Natiue of the Cittie of Poictiers, so report our Great Chronicles) who Presided there, where also were present in person.

Philip le Bell, King of France, and of Nauarre.
Edward. King of England: And
Ferdinand, King of Arragon.

The two Patriarches of Antioch and Alexandria.
Three hundred as well Archbishops, as Bishops, and a great number of Abbots and Doctours, from all the Prouinces of Christendome. In this Counc^ll,The Templers publiquely executed and burnt. the Religion of the Templers was vtterly ouerthrowne and abolished, and the Knights and Brethren thereof executed, yea, burned publikely. Such is the report of our great Chronicles, out of which I coppied this with mine own hand, because I would relate nothing by hart, or heare-say. And so much the rather, in regard there are diuers ignorant writers, who haue blamed the Pope for this condemnation; done (say they) at the inciting of the King of France, Philip le Bell, only to haue the wealth and goods, which this Order possessed in the Kingdome.
In the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred and seauen, Lewes, eldest Sonne to the King of France Philip le Bell, as King of Nauarre was Crowned at Pompelona. And this yeare likewise, all the Templers in the Kingdome of France, by command of the same King Philip le Bell,All the Templers in France imprisoned. with grant and consent of the Soueraigne Bishop Pope Clement, vpon Fryday after the Feast day of Saint Denys (euen at the instant of one houre) in regard of their horrible, infamous and damnable crimes; were all taken throughout the Kingdome of France, and shut vp close in sundry prisons.
And in the forenamed yeare, the King of France departed, to ride towards Poictiers, to conferre with the Pope and Cardinalls, where were many things consulted and agreed on by the Pope and King: but (aboue all else) the apprehension of the Templers. And the King sent to the Maisters of the Hospitall and of the Temple,The chiefe great Maisters of the Hospitall and Temple summoned to their appearance. who were Soueraignes beyond the Seas: that (expressely) they should make their personall appearance before him, at a certaine time appointed at Poictiers. Which command the Maister of the Temple perfourmed: but the Maister of the Hospitall was hindered therein, by reason of the Sarra^ins in the Isle of Rhodes, so that he could not come at the time appointed: but he sent diuers messengers to pleade in his excuse: yet it came so to passe, that at l^ngth, the Isle of Rhodes was recouered: and then the Maister of the Hospitall went to Poictiers, to speake with the Pope.
And in the yeare of Grace following, One thousand, three hundred and eight, the King determined his iourny to Poictiers, chiefly, About the busines concerning the Templers; for there the Pope kept his Court, and there the King sent a summons throughout his Kingdome, that Noblemen, and such as were not Noble, should be present at Easter at Tours, whither he brought also a great multitude with him. But when the king was with the Pope, matter of great importance passed betweene them. Afterward, by the Popes command, The Great Master General of the whole Order of the Templers, came thither, and with him diuers other, who seemed to bee men of greatest noate in the Templers Order.
In the end, it was concluded and fully determined, that each man (by himselfe) should instantly be imprisoned. And then, in name of the Church,The Great Maister and his atten^ants imprisoned. and power from the See of Rome, it was resolued; that there should be no further proceeding, eyther for their enlarging, deliuerance or punishment in any manner; without th^ command and appointment of the Apostolicall Seate. But concerning their goods, whereof the King (in right) ought to haue the disposition; they were left to him: yet to supply their necessities competently, vntill the Generall Councill.
Also in the same yeare Pope Clement, being then at Poictiers, by councell and aduise of his Cardinalls, for affaires of the Holy-Land;Repealing of the Generall Councill intend^d at Poictiers to a further time. for reformation of the whole Church, and namely for The offences of the Templers, which were very enormous and ab^ominable: the Councill which should haue beene Generall in the Calends of Octob^r at Poictiers; was repealed, and from the last of the Calends of December, vntill two yeares precisely ordained. And throughout the Realme of France, by his Letters Parentes to Archbishops, Bishops and Inquisitours for heretiques, commaund was straitely giuen, to send their opinion and meaning speedily, how farre and neerely their persons might be touched, wherein they should require the aduise of the most learned and iudicious, that these matters might the better bee brought to end by the said Councill. Notwithstanding all these proceedings, the Generall Great Maister of

the Order, and some other of the Greatest; were reserued to further time of correction, and examination by the Seate of Rome, vpon certaine knowledge in euery point.
In the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and nine, fiftie and nine Templers, and diuers other beside, as well at Paris, towards Moulin a Vent Sainct Antoine, as also at Senlis and other places (after the Prouinciall Councils for these occasions,Execution performed on diuers of the Templers. there celebrated and performed) were burned, and their fl^sh and boanes consumed into ashes. Fiftie foure of the said Templers, vpon the Tuesday after the holy feast day of Saint Nicholas, were burned together at the said place of Moulin a Vent. But although so many of them were to suffer that punishment; yet in their destruction, they would not acknowledge or confesse any thing: for which, their soules (by generall opinion of the people) were cast into perpetuall damnation, for they drew the meaner people into most great and grieuous errors.
After this exemplarie worke of Iustice; vpon the Eeue of the Ascension of o^ Lord Iesus Christ, the rest of the Templers condemned, were burnt in the same place, and their flesh and bones consumed to ashes: whereof one of them was Almoner to the King of France, that had so high an honor in this world, yet would he make no acknowledgement of his grieuous transgressions.A learned Nun a woman Templer burned. And on the Monday following, was burned in the same place, a woman Templer, a learned Nunne, named Margaret Poree, who had (thorow her too much ouer-weening opinion of her owne iudgement and sufficiencie) wrested and peruerted the diuine Scriptures, and the Articles of the Faith, speaking dangerous and preiudiciall words against the Sacrament of the Altar: for which, by learned and expert Doctors in Diuinitie, she was condemned to that death.
And because the offences of the Templers (for which they were condemned vpon good proofes made against them, and confessed by some in the time of their imprisonment) ought not to be hid from the world; these are they that follow.

The Articles confessed and approued by the Templers, for which they suffered death in diuers places.
Making of a new Templer.THe first Article was, that they did not stedfastly beleeue in God, and when they made a new Templer, it must not be knowne to any, in what manner they sacred and sanctified him; but it might be seene, when his garments were giuen him.
The second Article, when the new Templer was apparelled in the cloathing of the Order; soone after he was led into a darke Chamber, where the new Templer (by his hard fortune) denyed God, and trampled vpon the Crosse, spitting vpon the figure hanging thereon.
Worshiping an Idole.The third. After this was done, he went presently to adore a false Idole, which Idole was in a skinne sweetely embalmed, and daintily polished. On this vile thing must the Templer fasten his beliefe, constantly beleeuing in him. In the hollow cauernes of his eyes, were two shining Carbuncles, shewing so cleare as Heauen. And that he might stedfastly beleeue in him; he must tearme him his Soueraigne God, adoring him with all his heart. And this Idole was very monstrously mishapen, hauing halfe a beard on his face, and the other halfe in his backe parts: yet must the new Templer honor him as his God, and all this was done in the despight of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ.
The fourth. It appeared plainely, that they were acquainted with the Treason against the King Saint Lewes in the Holy Land,Guiltie of Treason. when he was taken and put in prison. And the great Citie of Acres was betrayed thorow their misprision.
The fift. That when Christian people came neighbourly and louingly into those parts beyond the Seas:Buying and selling the Christians. they made such couenants and contracts with the Soldane of Babylon, that the Christians were meerely bought and sold, thorow their perfidious dealing.
A busing the Kings Treasure.The sixt. That such riches and treasure as the King had giuen to some perticularly, were by them in quite contrary manner disposed and bestowed; which proued very hurtfull and damageable to the kingdome of France.
The seauenth. They acknowledged the sinnes of Heresie and Hypocrisie:Heresie, Hypocrisie and Sodomie. They dealt with one another carnally. So that it was thought wonderfull, that God permitted such horrible and shamefull sinnes, to escape so long vnpunished, who (in meere compassion) suffereth much euill to be done.
The eight. If a Templer chanced to dye in their maintained Idolatrie;Dying in their Idolatrie. they caused his body to be burnt, and the powder of him was giuen in fo^de to the new Nouiced Templ^rs, to confirme them the more strongly in their lewde beliefe and Idolatrie. And vtterly they contemned the true Body of our Lord Iesus Christ.
The ninth. Not any Templer, but must be guirt with a strong Belt of Leather,Addicted to Mahomatisme after the order obserued in Mahome^trie: whereby it was the meanes of knowing their heathenish disposition, and that their Faith was wholly affected and enclined that way.
The tenth. Moreouer, they sinned more grieuously, for an Infant new borne,Roasting of Infants. begotten by a Templer on any Dam^ell or Strumpet; it was boyled and roasted with fire, that the Fat thereof might be gathered, and that Fat being hallowed by them, their Idole was annointed therewith.
The eleauenth. That none of their Order ought to baptize an Infant,No Baptizin^ of Infants. nor suffer it be brought to the Font of Baptisme; so long as by any meanes they could withstand it But what else they might doe to a woman lying in childebed, is too detestable and shamefull to be spoken, and therefore thought fit to be buried in silence.
For these, and diuers other horrible crimes and offences, whereof all the world (well nee^e) cried shame: they were by the Soueraigne Bishop Pope Clement, and many other Bishops, Archbishops and Cardinals condemned.
And the same yeare, the boanes of a Templer, that a great while before had bin buried, he being named Iohn de Tur, and found by the Inquisitors,The boane^ of a long buried Templer burned. that the said Iohn had bin an Heretique in his life time: his boanes (I say) were for that cause burnt into ashes. The same Iohn had bin Commander of the Temple, and in his life time he caused to be built the Tower of the Temple at Paris.
In the yeare One thousand three hundred and eleauen, a generall Councill was held in the Citie of Vienna, and there were assembled an hundred and foureteene Mitred Prelates, beside the rest that were not Mitred,A Generall Councill held at Vienna. and beside such as made excuse by Procuration. There were two Patriarchs, that is to say, he of Antioche, and he of Alexandria, for which two Patriarches, were two seuerall Seates made in the midst of all the rest, and before the prime or chiefe Seate, sate the Pope, who, before any of the rest sat downe, enioyned them to say priuate Masses, and to fast three dayes. It began the first of the Octaues of my Lord Saint Denys, and the Pope began (as vsually he was wont to doe) with Veni Creator Spiritus, and afterward tooke his Theame. In consilio Iustorum and Congregatione, that is to say: In the Counsell and assembly of the Iust, the workes of the Lord are great. Afterward the Pope propounded three causes, for which he had commanded that Generall Councill.Three causes of the generall Councils meeting. The first was, for the cause of the horrible offences committed by the Templers. The second was, for succouring of the Holy-Land. And the third was, for reformation of the vniuersall Church. Then he gaue his blessing to the people, and euery one returned to his place.
In the yeare One thousand, three hundred and Twelue, on the Munday after Lowe Sunday, or next Sunday after Easter was the second sitting of the Council, in the great Citty of Vienna celebrated.The second sitting of the Councill. And thither came King Philip le Bell with his Brethren and Sonne about mid-Lent, attended with a great company of Barons and Noble-men. He sate on the right hand of the Pope, higher then any of the rest, but yet he was much lower then the Pope. And the Pope took his Theame: Non resurgunt impii in Iuditio, that is to say: The wicked shall neuer arise in Iudgement. Then Pope Clement, with the the Generall Councill, the Order of the Templers, not by way of definitie sentence, as already fully controuled: but by way of prouision and purueyance from the Sea Apostolicall, for euer altogether disanulled there, The Order of the Temple.
And in the yeare One thousand, three hundred and thirteene, in the Moneth of

March or Lent time, the Maister after him in the Order, as one would say the Visitour:The Great Maister of the Templers and the Visitour burned. at Paris, in the Isle before the Augustines, were burned, and their bones consumed into ashes; but would make no acknowledgement of their offences.
You behold here, what is recorded in our great Chronicles, concerning the behauiour of the Templers, executed at Paris (and not at Vienna, before Pope Clement, and King Phillip le Bell: whom they summoned before God the same yeare, and throwe downe their Gloue before the King and his Sonne, as gage of Battaile, to maintaine their innocency) a most fabulous and lying discourse, to blemish the memory of the said Pope Clement, the vniuersall Councill, and King Phillip, a very good and generous Prince, and who was endued with many of the vertues of the Holy King S^ant Lewes his Grandfather. And our great Chronicles are much more exact and certain, concerning matters among vs: then can be the Histories of Italy, Spayne, and England, which touch the businesse of the Templers, in speaking nothing but after others, and meerely by heare-say; whereas our Chronicles are written de Visu, and the eye-witnesses.
The last Great Maister of the Templers, executed at Paris, was of the Duchie of B^rgongne,Iaques de la Maule, last Great Maister of the Templers. named Iaques de la Maule, whose portraiture is yet to be seene in many places at Paris. But he hath no other Armes, Que la Croix Noir Octogone de son Ordre, d l Orle et Porfi d'Argent And as for the Maister Visitor, which bare him company in death, he is named by some, Brother Daulphine, without any other addition.
Here now followeth the Rules, which the Learned Saint Bernard prescribed to the said Templers, and other Military Orders (instituted in his life time) and long while after him, in Italy, Spayne, and other places.
For the Binders better direction, here place those sheetes which are marke^ with a Starre.









REGVLA PAVPERVM COMMILITONVM TEMPLI IN Sancta Ciuitate.
CAP. I. Qualiter Diuinum Officium audiant.
VOS quidem proprijs voluptatibus abrenuntiantes; atque alij, pro Animarum salute vobiscum ad terminum cum Equis, and Armis Summo Regi militantes, Matutinas, and omne seruitiuin intergrum, secundum Canonicam institutionem, ac Regularium Doctorum Sanctae Ciuitatis consuctudinem, pio, ac puro affectu audire vniuersaliter studeatis. Idcirco vobis (Venerabiles Fratres) maxime debetur, quia praesentis Vitae luce despecta, contemptoqu^, Vestrorum Corporum cruciatu, saeuientem Mundum pro Dei amore vilescere perenniter promisistis, Diuino cibo refecti, ac satiati, and Dominicis praeceptis eruditi, and firmati, post mysterij Diuini consummationem, Nullus pauescat ad Pugnam, sed paratus sit ad Coronam.


CAP. II. Quod Orationes Dominicas, si audire nequiuerint, dicant.
CAeterum si aliquis Frater negotio Orientalis Christianitatis forte remotus, quod saepius euenisse non dubitamus, and pro tali absentia, Dei seruitium non audierit, pro Matutinis, Tredecim Orationes Dominicas, ac pro singulis horis Septem, sed pro Vesperis, Nouem dicere collaudamus, ac libera Voce vnanimiter affirmamus. Isti enim in salutifero labore ita directi non possunt accurrere hora competenti ad Diuinum Officium; sed si fieri potest, horae constitutae non praetereantur ante institutum debitum.


CAP. III. Quid agendum pro Fratribus defunctis.
QVando vero quilibet Fratrum remanentium, Morti (quae nulli parcit) impendet, quod est impossibile auferri, Capellanus, ac Clericus vobiscum ad terminum charitatiue Summo Sacerdoti seruientibus, creditum Officium, and Missam solemniter pro eius Anima, Christo animi puritate iubemus offerre. Fratres autem ibi ad^tantes, and in orationibus pro Fratris defuncti salute pernoctantes, Centum Orationes Dominicas, vsque ad diem Septimum, pro Fratre defuncto persoluant; Ab illo die, quo eis obitus Fratris denuntiatus fuerit, vsque ad diem praedictum, Centenarius numerus perfectionis integritatem, cum Fraterna obseruatione habeat. Adhuc nempe diuina, ac misericordissima charitate deprecamur, atque Pastorali auctoirtate iubemus, vt quotidie, sicuti Fratri in Viuis agenti dabatur, and debetur: ita quod est necessarium sustentationi huius Vitae in cibo, and potu tantum, cuidam Pauperi ad Quadrage simum diem impendatur. Omnes enim alias oblationes, quas in morte Fratru^, and in Paschali solemnitate, caeterisque solemnitatibus Domino pauperum commilitonum Christi spontanea paupertas indiscrete reddere consueuerat, omnino prohibemus.


CAP. IV. Capellani Victum, and Vestitum tantum habeant.
ALias vero oblationes. and omnia Eleemosynarum genera, quomodo fiant, Capellanis, velaliis ad tempus manentibus, Vnitati communis Capituli reddere peruigili cura praecipimus. Seruitores itaque Ecclesiae Victum, and Vestitum secundum auctoritatem tantum habeant, and nihil amplius habere praesumant, nisi Magistri sponte, and charitatiue dederint.


CAP. V. De Militibus Defunctis qui suntad terminum.
SVnt namque Milites in domo Dei, Templique Salomonis, ad terminum misericorditer Vobiscum degentes; vnde ineffabili miseratione vos rogamus, deprecamur, and ad vltimum obnixe inbemus, vt interim tremenda potestas ad vltimum diem aliquem perduxerit, diuino amore, ac fraterna pietate, Septem dies sustentationis pro Anima eius, quidam Pauper habeat.


CAP. VI. Vt nullus Frater remanens, oblationem faciat.
DEcreuimus, vt superne dictu^ est, quod nullus Fratrum remanentium aliam oblationem agere praesumat; sed Diu, Noctuque mundo corde, in sua professione maneat, vt Sapientissimo

Prophetarum in hoc aequipollere valeat. Calicem salutaris accipiam, and in morte mea mortem Domini imitabor. Quia sicut Christus pro me Animam suam posuit: ita, and ego pro Fratribus Animam ponere sum paratus. Ecce competentem oblationem, ecce Hostiam viuentem, Deoque placentem.


CAP. VII. De immoderata statione.
QVod autem auribus nostris verissimus testis insonuit, videlicet immoderata statione, and sine mensura stando, Diuinum Officium vos audire, ita fieri non praecipimus, imo vituperamus; sed finito Psalmo Venite exultemus Domino, cum Inuitatorio, and Hymno, omnes sedere tam Fortes, quam Debiles, propter scandalum euitandum, nos iubemus. Vobis vero residentibus vnoquoque Psalmo finito, in recitatione Gloria Patri de sedibus vestris ad Altare se humiliando, ob reuerentiam Sanctae Trinitatis. Sic etiam in recitatione Euangelij, and ad Te Deum laudamus, and per totas Laudes, donec finito Benedicamus Domino stare ads^ribimus; Et eandem regula^ in Matutinis Sanctae Mariae teneri iubemus.


CAP. VIII. De Refectione Conuentus.
IN vno quidem Palatio, sed melius dicitur Refectorio communiter vos cibum accipere credimus: Vbi, quando aliquid necessarium fuerit, pro Signorum ignorantia, leniter, ac priuatim quaerere oportet. Si omni tempore, quae vobis necessaria sunt, desunt; quaerenda sunt, cum omni humanitate, and subiectione reuerentiae potius ad Mensam, cum Apostolus dicat Panem tuum cum silentio manduca, and Psalmisto vos animare debet, dicens, Posui ori meo custodiam; id est, Apud me deliberaui, vt non delinquerem; id est, Lingua; id est, custodiuios meum, ne male loquerer.


CAP. IX. De Lectione.
IN Prandio, and Coena semper sit sancta Lectio recitata. Si Dominum diligimus, salutifera eius verba, atque praecepta, aure intentissima desiderare, and audire debemus. Lector autem Lectionum, vobis indicat Silentium.


CAP. X. De Carnis refectione.
IN Hebdemada namque, nisi Natalis dies Domini, vel Pascha, vel festum Sanctae Mariae, aut Omnium Sanctorum euenerit, Vobis ter refectio Carnis sufficiat, quoniam assueta Carnis refectio, intelligitur henorosa Corporum corruptio. Si vero in die Martis tale ieiunium euenerit, vt esus Carnium retrahatur, in Crastino vobis abundanter impendatur. Die autem Dominico, omnibus Militibus remanentibus, necnon Capellanis, Duo fercula in honorem Sanctae Resurrectionis impendi bonum, and idoneum indubitanter videtur. Alij autem, videlicet Armigeri, and Clientes, vno contenti, cum gratiarum actione permaneant.


CAP. XI. Qualiter manducare Milites debeant.
DVos and Duos manducare generaliter oportet, vt solerter Vnus de Altero prouideat, ne asperitas Vitae, vel furtiua abstinentia in omni Prandio intermisceatur. Hoc autem iustum iudicamus, vt Vnusquisque Miles, aut Frater aequalem, and aequipollentem Vini mensuram pro se solu^ habeat.


CAP. XII. Vt alijs diebus Duo, aut Tria Leguminum fercula sufficiant.
ALijs diebus, videlicet Secunda, and Quart^ Feria, ne^non and Sabbatho, Duo, aut Tria Leguminum, aut aliorum ciborum fercula, aut, vt ita dicam, cocta Pulmentaria, Omnibus sufficere credimus, and ita teneri iubemus; vt forte, qui ex vno non poterit edere, ex alio reficiatur.


CAP. XIII. Quo cibo Sexta feria reficere oportet.
SExta autem feria cibum Quadragesimalem, ob reuerentiam Passionis, omni Congregationi, remota Infirmorum imbecillitate, femel sufficere a festo Omnium Sanctorum, vsque in Pascha: nisi Natalis dies Domini, vel festum Sanctae Mariae, aut Apostolorum euenerit, collaudamus. Alio vero tempore, nisi generale Ieiunium euenerit, Bis reficiatur.


CAP. XIV. Post Refectionem semper Gratias referant.
POst Prandium vero, and Coenam, semper in Ecclesia, si prope est; vel si ita non est, in eodem loco, Summo Procuratori nostro, qui Christus est, gratias, vt decet, cum humiliato corde, referre stricte praecipimus. Famulis, aut Pauperibu^ fragmenta (Panibus tamen integris reseruatis) distribuere fraterna charitate debent, and iubetur.


CAP. XV. Vt Decimus panis semper Eleemosy nario detur.
LIcet Paupertatis praemium, quod est Regnum Coelorum, Pauperibus procul dubio debeatur; Vobis tamen, quod Christiana Fides de illis indubitanter fatetur, Decimum totius panis quotidi^ Eleemosynario vestro dare iubemus.



CAP. XVI. Vt Collatio sit in arbitrio Magistri.
CVm vero Sol Orientalem Regionem deserit, and ad Hibernam descendit, audito Signo, vt est eiusdem Regionis consuetudo, omnes ad Completas oportet incedere vos, ac prius generalem Collationem sumere peroptamus. Hanc autem Collationem in dispositione, and arbitrio Magistri ponimus, vt quando voluerit de Aqua, and quando iubebit, misericorditer ex vino temperato competenter recipiatur. Verum, hoc non ad nimiam sati^tatem oportet fieri; sed parcius, quia Vino apostatare etiam Sapientes videmus.


CAP. XVII. Vt finitis Completis Silentium teneatur.
FInitis itaque Completis ad Stratum ire oportet. Fratribus igitur a Completerijs exeuntibus, nulla sit denuo licentia data loqui in Publico, nisi necessitate cogente; Armigero autem suo, quae dicturus est, leniter dicat. Est vero forsitan, vt in tali interuallo Vobis de Completorijs exeuntibus, maxima necessitate cogente, de Militari negotio, vel de statu domus v^strae, quia dies ad hoc Vobis sufficere non creditur, cum quadam Fratrum parte, Magistrum, vel Illum, cui domus dominium, post Magistrum est debitum, oporteat loqui. Hoc autem ita fieri iubemus; and ideo quia scriptum est, In multiloquio non effugies peccatum, and alibi mors, et vita in manibus linguae. In eo colloquio scurrilitatem, and verba otiosa ad risum mouentia omnino prohibemus; and Vobis ad Lectulos euntibus, Dominicam Orationem, si aliquis quid stultum est locutus, cum humilitate, and puritatis deuotione dicere iubemus.


CAP. XVIII. Vt Fatigati ad Matutinas non surgant.
FAtigatos nempe Milites, non ita, vt Vobis est manifestum, surgere ad Matutinas conlaudamus: sed assensu Magistri, vel Illius, cui creditum fuerit a Magistro, eos quiescere, and Tredecim orationes constitutas sic cantare, vt mens ipsorum voci concordet, iuxta illud Prophetae, Psallite Domino sapienter: and Illud. In conspectu Angelorum Psallam tibi; Vos vnanimes collaudamus. Hoc autem in arbitrio Magistri semper consistere debet.


CAP. XIX. Vt Communitas Victus inter Fratres seruetur.
LEgitur in Diuina pagina Diuidebatur singulis, prout cuique opus erat. Ideo non dicimus vt s^t Personarum acceptio, sed Infirmitatum debet esse co^sideratio. Vbi autem, qui minus indiget, agat Deo gratias, and non contristetur. Qui vero indiget, humiliter, pro Infirmitate, non extollatur pro Misericordia, and ita omnia membra erunt in pace. Hoc autem prohibemus, vt null^ immoderatam abstinentiam amplecti liceat, sed communem vitam instanter tencant.


CAP. XX. De qualitate, and modo Vestimenti.
VEstimenta autem vnius coloris semper esse iubemus, Verbi gratia, Alba, vel Nigra, vel vt ita dicam Burella. Omnibus autem Militibus professis in Hieme, and in Aestate, si fieri potest, Alba vestimenta concedimus: vt, qui tenebrosam vitam postposuerint, per limpidam, and Albam suo Conditori se conciliari cognoscant. Quid enim Albedo, nisi Castitas integra? Castitas, and Mentis securitas, and Corporis sanitas. Et nisi Mil^s vnusquisque castus perseuerauerit, ad perpetuam requiem venire, and Deum videre non poterit, testante Paule Apostolo: Pacem sectamini cum omnibus: and castimoniam, sine qua nemo videbit dominum. Sed quia huiusmodi indumentum Arrogantiae, ac Superstuitatis aestimatione carere debet, talia habere omnibus iubemus, vt solus leniter per se vestire, and exuere, calciare, and discalceare valeat. Precurator huius ministerij, peruigili cura, hoc vitare praesumat, ne nimis longa, aut nimis curta, sed mensurata ipsis vtentibus, secundum Vniuscuiusque quantitatem suis Fratribus tribuat. Accipientes itaque Noua, vetera semper reddant in praesenti, reponenda in Camera, vel vbi Frater, cuius est ministerium, decreuerit; propter Armigeros, and Clientes, and quandoque pro Pauperibus.


CAP. XXI. Quod Famuli Alba vestimenta, id est, Pallia non hab^ant.
HOc nempe* quoderat in domo Dei, ac suorum Militum Templi, sine discretione, ac consilio communis Capituli obnixe contradicimus, and funditus quosi quoddam vitium peculiare amputare praecipimus. Habebant enim olim Famuli, and Armigeri Alba vestimenta, vnde veniebant damna importabilia. Surrexerunt enim in vltramontanis partibus quidam Pseudofratres, and Coniugati, and alij dicentes se esse de Templo, cum sint de Mundo. Hi nempe tantas contumelias, totque damna Militari ordini adquisiuerunt, and Clientes remanentes plurima scandala oriri inde superbiendo fecerunt. Habeant igitur Nigra, sed si talia non possunt inuenire, habeant qualia inueniri possunt in illa Prouincia, qua degu^t; aut quod vilius vnius coloris co^parari potest, videlicet Burella.


CAP. XXII. Quod Milites remanentes tantum Alba habeant.
NVlli ergo concessum est Candidas Chlamides deferre, aut Alba Pallia habere, nisi nominatis Militibus Christi.



CAP. XXIII. Vt pellibus Agnorum vtantur.
DECREVIMVS communi Consilio, vt nullus Frater remanens per Hyemem, pelles, aut pelliciam, vel aliquid tale quod ad vsum Corperis pertineat, etiamque Coopertorium, nisi Agnorum, vel Arietum habeat.


CHAP. XXIV. Vt vetusta Armigeris dentur.
PROCVRATOR, vel Dator Pannorum, omni obseruantia, Veteres semper Armigeris, and Clientibus; and si Vetustiores, Pauperibus, fideliter, aequaliter que erogare intendat.


CAP. XXV. Cupiens optima, Deteriora habeat.
SI Aliquis Frater remanens, ex debito, aut ex motu Superbiae, pulchra, vel optima Pallia habere voluerit; ex tali praesumptione, procul dubio, Vilissima merebitur.


CAP. XXVI. Vt quantitas, and qualitas Vestimentorum seruetur.
QVantitatem, secundum Corporum magnitudinem, Largitatemque Vestimentorum obseruare oportet. Dator Pannorum sit in hoc curiosus.


CAP. XXVII. Vt Dator Pannorum, in primis aequalitatem seruet.
LOngitudinem, vt superius dictum est, cum aequali mensura, ne vel Susurronum, vel Criminatorum oculus aliquid notare praesumat, Procurator, Fraterno intuitu consideret, and in omnibus supradictis, Dei retributionem humiliter cogitet.


CAP. XXVIII. De superfluitate Capillorum.
OMnes Fratres remanentes principaliter ita tonsos habere Capillos oportet, vt Regulariter, Ante, and Retro, and ordinate considerare possint. Et in Barba, and in Genis eadem regula indeclinabiliter obseruetur, ne Superfluitas, aut Facetiae vitium denot^tur.


CAP. XXIX. De Rostris, and Laqueis.
DE Rostris, and Laqueis manifestum est esse ^entile: and cum abominabile hoc omnibus agnoscatur, prohibemus, and contradicimus, vt aliquis ea non habeat, imo prorsus careat. Alijs autem ad tempus famulantibus Rostra, and Laquea, and Capillorum superfluitatem, and Vestium immoderatam longitudinem habere non permittimus, sed omnino contradicimus. Seruientibus enim Summo Conditori munditia interius, and ext^rius valde necessaria est, eo ipso attestante qui ait, Estote mundi, quia ego mundus sum.


CAP. XXX. De numero Equorum, and Armigerorum.
VNicuique vestrorum Militum Tres Equos habere licet, quia domus Dei, Templique Salomonis paupertas eximia non permittit amplius in praesentiarum augere, nisi cum Magistri licentia.


CAP. XXXI. Nullus Armigerum gratis Seruientem feriat.
SOlum autem Armigerum singulis Militibus eadem causa concedimus. Sed sigratis, and charitatiue ille Armiger cuiquam Militi seruierit, non licet eidem eum verberare, nec etiam qualibet culpa percutere.


CAP. XXXII. Qualiter ad tempus remanentes recipiantur.
OMnibus Militibus seruire Iesu Christo animi puritate in eadem domo ad terminum cupientibus, Equos in tali negotio quotidie idoneos, and Arma, and quidquid eis necessarium fuerit, emere fideliter iubemus. Deinde vero ex vtraque parte aequaliter seruata, bonum, and vtile appretiari Equos iudicauimus. Habeatur itaque pretium in Scripto, ne tradatur obliuioni. Et quidquid Militi, vel Equis eius, aut Armigero neeessarium erit, adiunctis and ferris Equorum secundum facultatem domus, ex eadem domo, Fraterna charitate impendatur. Si vero interim Equos suos in hoc seruitio aliquo euentu Miles amiserit, Magister, and facultas domus hoc exigit, vt alios administret. Adueniente autem termino Repatriandi, medietatem pretij ipse Miles diuino amore concedat; alteram vero ex Communi Fratrum, si ei placet, recipiat.


CAP. XXXIII. Quod Nullus iuxta propriam voluntatem incedat.
COnuenit his nempe Militibus, qui nihil sibi carius Christo existimant, propter seruitium, secundum quod professi sunt, and propter gloriam summae Beatitudinis, vel metum Gehennae, vt Obedientiam indesinentur magistro teneant. Tenenda est itaque, vt mox diximus, vbi aliquid imperatum a magistro fuerit, vel ab Illo, cui magister mandatum dederit, sine mora, acsi Diuinitus

imperetur, vt moram pati nesciant in faciendo. De talibus enim ipsa Veritas dicit. Ob auditu auris obediuit mihi.


CAP. XXXIIII. Si licet ire per Villam sine iussu Magistri.
ERgo hos tales Milites propriam voluntatem relinquentes, and alios ad terminum s^ruientes deprecamur, and firmiter eis iubemus, vt sine Magistri licentia, vel cui creditum hoc fuerit, in Villam ire non praesumant, praeterquam Noctu ad Sepulchrum, and ad Stationes, Quae intra muros Sanctae Ciuitatis continentur.


CAP. XXXV. Silicet eum ambulare solum.
HI vero ita ambulantes non sine Custode, id est, Milite, aut fratre remanente, nec in Die, nec in Nocte iter inchoare au^ant. In Exercitu namque, postquam hospitati fuerint, nullus Miles, vel Armiger, aut Famulus per Atria aliorum Militum, videndi causa, vel cum aliquo loquendi, sine iustu, vt dictum est superius, incedat. Itaque consilio obfirmamus, vt in tali domo, ordinata a Deo, nullus secundum propriam voluntatem militet, aut quiescat; sed iuxta Magistri imperium totus incumbat, vt illam Domini sententiam imitari valeat, quae dicit Non veni Facere voluntatem meam, sed eius qui misit me.


CAP. XXXVI. Vt Nullus nominatim, quod ei necessarium erit, quaerat.
HAnc proprie consuetudinem inter caeteras adscribere iubemus, and cum omni consideratione, ob vitium quaerendi, teneri praecipimus. Nullus igitur Frater remanens assignanter, and nominatim Equm, aut Equitaturam, vel Arma querere debet. Quomodo ergo? Si vero eius Infirmitas, aut Equorum suorum debilitas, vel Armorum suorum grauitas, talis esse agnoscitur, vt sic incedere, sit damnum commune, veniat coram Magistro, vel cui debitum est ministerium post Magistrum, and causam vera fide, and pura, ei demonstret, Inde namque in dispositione Magistri, vel post eum imperantis, vel Procuratoris, res se habeat.


CAP. XXXVII. De Frenis et Calcaribus.
NOlumus, vt omnino Aurum, vel Argentum, quae sunt diuitiae particulares, in Frenis, aut Pectoralibus, vel in Calcaribus, vnquam appareat, nec alicui Fratri remanenti emere liceat. Si vero charitatiue talia vetera instrumenta data fuerint, Aurum, vel Argentum taliter coloretur, ne splendidus color, vel daecor caeteris arrogantia videatur. Si noua data fuerit, Magister de talibus, quod voluerit, faciat.


CAP. XXXVIII. Tegmen in Hastis, and Clypeis non habeatur.
TEgmen autem in Clypeis, and Hastis, and Furelli in Lanceis non habeantur. Quia hoc non proficium, imo damnum nobis omnibus intelligitur.


CAP. XXXIX. De licentia Magistri.
LIcet Magistro cuiquam Equos, vel Arma, vel quamlibet rem cui libet dare.


CAP. XL. De Mala, and Sacco.
SAculus, and Mala cum firmatura non conc^duntur, nec habeant absque Magistri licentia, vel eius cui post eum domus negotia creduntur. In hoc Capitulo praesenti, Procuratores, and per diuersas Prouincias degentes non continentur, nec ipse Magister intelligitur.


CHP. XLI. De Lectione Literarum.
NVllatenus cuiquam Fratrum literas a Parentibus suis, neque a quoquam Hominum, nec sibi inuicem accipere, vel dare, sine iussu Magistri, vel Procuratoris* Postquam licentiam Frater habuerit, in praesentia Magistri, si ei placet, legantur. Si vero and a Parentibus ei quidquam dire^tum fuerit, non praesumat suscipere illud, nisi prius indicatum fuerit Magistro. In hoc autem capitulo Magister, and Domus Procuratores non continentur.


CAP. XLII. De fabulatione propriarum culparum.
CVm omne Verbum otiosum generare peccatum agnoscatur, quid ipse iactantes de proprijs culpis ante districtum Iudicem dicturi sunt? Ostendit sane Propheta; si a bonis eloquijs, propter taciturnitatem, debet interdum taceri. Quanto magis a malis verbis, propter poenam peccati, debet cessari? Vetamus igitur, and audacter contradicimus ne aliquis Frater remanens fabulationes, vel vt melius dicam stultitias, quas in Saeculo, vel in Militari negotio tam enormiter egit, and Carnis delectationes miserrimarum mulierum, cum Fratre suo, vel aliquo alio, vel de alio, commemorare debeat. Et si forte talia referent^m quemlibet audierit, obmutescere faciat, vel quantocius poterit cito pede Obedientiae inde d^scedat, and fabularum Venditori aurem cordis non praebeat.



CAP. XLIII. De quaestu, and acceptione.
VERVMENIMVERO, si aliquares sine quaestu cuilibet Fratri data gratis fuerit, deferat Magistro, vel Dapisero. Si vero aliter suus Amicus, vel Parens nisi ad opus dare voluerit, hoc prorsus non recipiat, donec a suo Magistro licentiam habeat. At cui res data fuerit, non pigeat illum, si alteri datur. Imo pro certo sciat, qu^a si inde irascitur, contra Deum agit. In hac autem praedicta regula Ministratores non continentur, quibus specialiter hoc ministerium debetur, and conceditur de Mala, and Sacco.


CAP. XLIV. De Manducarijs Equorum.
VTilis res est cunctis hoc praeceptum a nobis constitutum, vt indeclinabiliter amodo teneatur. Nullus autem Frater facere praesumat manducaria linea, vel lanea Idcirco principaliter facta, nec habeat vlla, excepto Cofinello.


CAP. XLV. Vt cambiare, vel quaerere Nullus audeat.
NVnc aliud restat, vt Nullus praesumat cambiare sua Frater cum Fratre, sine licentia Magistri; and aliquid querere, nisi Frater Fratri, and sit res parua, vilis, non magna.


CAP. XLVI. Vt Nullus Auem cum Aue capiat.
QVod Nullus Auem cum Aue accipere audeat, nos communiter iudicamus; non conuenit enim Religioni, sic cum Mundanis delectationibus inhaerere, sed Domini praecepta libenter audire, orationi frequenter incumbere, mala sua cum lachrymis, vel gemitu quotidie in oratione Deo consiteri. Cum Homini quidem talia operante cum Accipitre, vel alia Aue, Nullus Frater remanens hac principali causa ire praesumat.


CAP. XLVII. Vt Nullus Arcu, vel Balista percu^iat.
CVm omn^m Religionem ire deceat simpliciter, and sine risu, humiliter; and non multa verba, sed rationabilia loqui, and non in voce clamosa; specialiter iniungimus, and praecipimus omni Fratri professo, ne in Bosco cum Arcu, and Balista iaculari audeat; nec cum illo qui hoc fecerit ideo p^rgat, nisi gratia eum custodiendi a perfido Gentili; nec cum Cane sit ausus clamare, vel garrulare; nec Equm suum; cupiditate accipiendi Feram, pungat.


CAP. XLVIII. Lt Leo semper feriatur.
NAm est certum, quod vobis specialiter creditum est, and debitum pro Fratribus vestris Animam ponere, atque incredulos, qui semper Virginis Filio minitantur, de Terra delere. De Leone nos hoc dicimus, quia ipse circuit quare^s quem deuoret, and manus eius contra omnes, ^mniumque manus contra eum.


CAP. XLIX. De omni re super vos quaesita, iudicium audite.
NOuimus quidem persecutores sanctae Ecclesi^ innumerabiles esse; and hoc qui c^ntentionem non amant, incessanter, crudeliusque inquietare festinant. In hoc igitur concilii sententia serena consideratione pendeat, vt si aliquis in partibus Orientalis Religionis, in quocunque alio l^co super vos quaesierit rem aliquam; vobis* per Fideles, and veri Amatores Iudices audire iudicium, praecipimus; and quod iustum fuerit indeclinabiliter vobis facere praecipimus.


CAP. L. Vt haec regula in omnibus teneatur.
HAec eadem regula in omnibus rebus, vobis immerito ablatis, perhumaniter iubemus, vt teneatur.


CAP. LI. Quod licet omnibus Militibus professis Terram, and Homines habere.
DIuina, vt credimus, prouidentia, a Vobis in sanctis locis sumpsit initium hoc genus nouum Religionis, vt videlicet Religioni Militiam admisceretis, and sic Religio per Militiam armata procedat, and Hostem sine culpa feriat. Iure igitur iudicamus, cum Milites Templi dicamini, v^s ipsos ob insigne meritum, and speciale Prebitatis donum, Terram, and Homines habere, and Agricola^ p^ssidere, and iuste eos regere* and institutum debitum vobis specialiter debetur impendi.


CAP. LII. Vt male habentibus cura peruigil habeatur.
MAle habentibus Fratribus super omnia adhibenda est cura peruigil, and quasi Christo eis seruiatur, vt illud Euangelium Infirmus fui, and visitatis me, memoriter teneatur. Hi eteni^ diligenter, ac patienter portandi sunt, quia de talibus superna retrib^tio indubitanter adquiritur.



CAP. LIII. Vt Infirmis necessaria semper dentur.
PRocuratoribus vero Infirmantium omni obseruantia, atque peruigili cura praecipimus, vt quaecumque sustentationi diuersarum infirmitatum sunt necessaria, fideliter, ac diligenter iuxta domuum facultatem eis administrent, Verbi gratia, Carnem, and Volatilia, and caetera, donce sanitati reddantur.


CAP. LIV. Vt Alter Alterum ad Iram non prouocet.
PRaecauendum nempe non modicum est, ne Aliquis Aliquem commouere ad Iram praesumat, quia Propinquitatis, and diuina Fraternitatis tam Pauperes, quam Potentes summa Clementia aequaliter adstrixit.


CAP. LV. Quomodo Fratres coniugati habeantur.
FRatres autem Coniugatos hoc modo Vobis habere permittimus, vt si Fraternitatis vestrae beneficium, and participationem petunt, Vterque suae substantiae portionem, and quidquid amplius adquisierint, Vnitati communis Capituli post Mortem concedant; and interim honestam vitam exerceant, and bonum agere Fratribus studeant; sed veste candida, and Chlamyde Alba non incedant. Si vero Maritus ante obierit, patrem suam Fratribus relinquat, and Coniux de altera vitae sustamentum habeat and excedat. Hoc enim iniustum consideramus, vt cum Fratribus Deo castitatem promittentibus, Foeminae eiusmodi in vn^, eademque domo maneant.


CAP. LVI. Vt amplius Sorores non coadunentur Maribus.
SOrores quidem amplius periculosum est coadunare, quia antiquus hostis foemineo consortio complures expulit a recto tramite Paradisi. Itaque Fratres charissimi, vt Integritatis flos inter vos semper appareat, hac consuetudine amodo vti non liceat.


CAP. LVII. Vt Fratres Templi cum Excommunicatis non participent.
HOc Fratres, valde cauendum, atque timendum est, ne aliquis ex Christi Militibus Homini excommunicato nominatim ac publice aliquo modo se iungere, aut res suas accipere praesumat, ne Anathema Maranatha similiter fiat. Si vero Interdictus tantum fuerit cum eo participationem habere, rem suam charitatiue accipere non immerito licebit.


CAP. LVIII. Qualiter Milites Seculares recipiantur.
SI quis Miles ex massa perditionis, vel alter Secularis, Seculo volens renunciare, vestram Communionem, and Vitam velit eligere, non ei statim assentiatur; sed iuxta illud Pauli, Probate spiritus si ex Deo sunt, and si ei ingressus concedatur. Legatur igitur Regula in eius praesentia, and si ipse praeceptis expositae Regulae diligenter obtemperauerit, tunc si Magistro, and Fratribus eius recipere placuerit, conuocatis Fratribus, desiderium, and petitionem suam cunctis, animi puritate, patefaciat. Deinde vero terminus probationis in consideratione, and prouidentia Magistri, secundum honestatem vita Petentis, omnino pendeat.


CAP. LIX. Vt omnes Fratres ad secretum consilium non vocentur.
NOn semper omnes Fratres ad consilium conuocare iubemus, sed quos idoneos, and consilio prouidos Magister esse cognouerit. Cum autem de maioribus tractare voluerit, vt est dare communem Terram; vel de ipso Ordine disceptare; aut Fratrem recipere, tunc omnem congregationem, si Magistro placet, conuocare est competens; auditoque communis Capituli consilio, quod melius, and vtilius Magister considerauerit, illud agatur.


CAP. LX. Quod cum silentio orare debeant.
OMnes Fratres, prout Animi, and Corporis affectus postulauerit, stando, vel sedendo tamen summa cum reuerentia, simpliciter, and non clamose, vt Vnus alium non conturbet, communi consilio iubemus.


CAP. LXI. Vt Fidem Seruientium accipiant.
AGnouimus nempe Complures ex diuersis Prouincijs tam Clientes, quam Armigeros pro Animarum salute, animo feruenti, ad terminum cupientes in domo nostra mancipari. Vtile est autem, vt Fidem eorum accipiatis, ne forte Veternus Hostis, in Dei seruitio aliquid furtiue, vel indecentereis intimet, vel a bono proposito repente exterminet.


CAP. LXII. Vt Pueri, quamdiu sunt Parui, non accipiantur inter Fratres Templi.
QVamuis Regula Sanctorum Patrum Pueros in Congregatione permittat habere, nos de talibus non conlaudamus vnquam vos onerare. Qui vero Filium suum vel Propinquum in Militari Religione perhumaniter dare voluerit, vsque ad Annos, quibus viriliter armata manu possit Inimicos Christi de Terra Sancta delere, eum enutriat. Dehinc secundum Regulam, in medio Fratrum, Pater, vel Parentes cum statuant, and suam petitionem cunctis patesaciant. Melius est enim in Pueritia non vouere, quam posteaquam Vir factus fuerit enormiter retrahere.


CAP. LXIII. Vt Senes semper venerentur.
SEnes autem, pia consideratione, secundum virium imbecillitatem, supportare, ac diligenter honorare oportet. Et nullatenus in his, quae Corporis sunt necessaria, districte teneantur, salua tamen auctoritate Regulae.


CAP. LXIIII. De Fratribus, qui per diuersas Prouincias proficiscuntur.
FRatres vero qui per diuersas Prouincias diriguntur, Regulam, in quantum vires expetunt, seruare in Cibo, and Potu, and caeteris studeant, and irreprehensibilirer viuant; Vt ab his qui foris sunt, bonum testimonium habeant. Religionis propositum nec Verbo, nec Actu polluant, sed maxime omnibus, quibus se coniunxerint, Sapientiae, and bonorum operum condimentum, and exemplum praebeant. Apud quem hospitari decreuerint, fama optima sit decoratus; and si fieri potest, domus Hospitis in illa Nocte, ne careat lumine, ne tenebrosus hostis occasionem aliquam, quod absit, inferat. Vbi autem Milites non excommunicatos congregare audierint, illuc pergere, non considerantes tam temporalem vtilitatem, quam externam Animarum illorum salutem, iubemus. Illis autem Fratribus in vl^ra Marinis partibus spe subuectionis ita directis, hac conuentione eos, qui Militari Ordini perhumaniter sese iungere voluerint, recipere collaudamus, vt in praesentia Episcopi illius Prouinciae vterque conueniat, and voluntatem Petentis Praesull audiat: Audita itaque petitione, mittat eum Prater ad Magistrum, and ad Fratres qui sunt in Templo, quod est in Hierusalem, and si vita eius est honesta, talique consortio digna, misericorditer suscipiatur, si Magistro, and Fratribus bonum videtur. Si vero interim obierijt pro labore, and fatigatione, quasi vni ex Fratribus totum beneficium, and Fraternitas Pauperum and Commilitonum Christi ei impendatur.


CAP. LXV. Vt Victus aequaliter omnibus distribuatur.
ILlud quoque congrue and rationabiliter m^^^ tenendum censemus, vt omnibus Fratribus remanentibus victus secundum loci facultatem aequaliter distribuatur; non enim est vtilis Personarum acceptio, sed Infirmitatum necessaria est consideratio.


CAP. LXVI. Vt Milites Templi Decimas habeant.
CRedimus namque relictis affluentibus diuitiis, vos spontaneae Paupertatis esse subiectos. Vnde Decimas vobis communi Vita viuentibus iuste habere, hoc modo demonstrauimus. Si Episcopus, Ecclesiae cui decima iure debetur, vobis charitatiue eam dare voluerit, assensu il^t^ Capituli de illis Decimis, quas tunc Ecclesia possidere videtur vobis tribuere debet. Si autem Laicus quilibet adhuc illam ex Patrimonio suo damnabiliter amplectitur, and seipsum in hoc valde redarguens, vobis eandem reliquerit, ad nutum eius qui praest tantum, sine consensu Capituli* id agere potest.


CAP. LXVII. De leuibus, and grauibus culpis.
SI aliquis Frater loquendo, vel Militando, vel aliter aliquid leue deliquerit, ipse vltro delictum suum satisfaciendo Magistro ostendat. De leuibus, si consuetudinem non habeant, leuem poenetentiam habeat. Si vero eo tacente per aliquem alium culpa cognita fuerit, maiori, and euidentiori subiaceat disciplinae, and emendatiori. Si autem graue erit delictum, retrahatur a familiaritate fratrum, nec cum illis simul in eadem Mensa edat, sed solus refectionem sumat; dispensationi and iudicio Magistri totum incumbat, vt saluus in dit Indicij perma^eat.


CAP. LXVIII. Qua culpa Frater amplius non recipiatur.
ANte omnia prouidendum est, ne quis Frater Potens, vel Impotens, Fortis aut Debilis volens se exaltare, and paullatim superbire ac culpam suam defendere, indisciplinatus remaneat; sed si emendare voluerit, ei districtior correptio accedat. Quod si pijs admonitionibus, and fusis pro eo rationibus emendare noluerit, sed in superbia magis ac magis sese erexerit, tunc secundum Apostolum, de pio eradicetur grege: Auferte malum ex vobis; necesse est vt a societate Fratrum fidelium, Ouis moribunda remoueatur. Caeterum, Magister, qui Baculum, and Virgam manu tenere debet, Baculum videlicet quo virium imbecillitates aliorum sustentet; and Virgam, qua vitia delinquentium Rectitudinis zelo feriat, Concilio

Patriarchae, and Spiritali consideratione id agere studeat, ne vt ait Beatus Maximus, aut solutior lenitas cohibentiam Peccantis, aut immoderata seueritas a lapsu non reuocet Delinquentem.


CAP. LXIX. Vt a Paschali solemnitate, vsque ad festum Omnium Sanctorum, vnam Camisiam lineam tantum sumere habeat.
INnterea, Quod nimium ardorem Orientalis Regionis misericorditer consideramus, Vt a Paschali festiuitate, vsque ad Omnium Sanctorum solemnitatem, Vnicuique Vna Camisia linea tantum, non ex debito, sed ex sola gratia detur: Illi dico, qui ea vti voluerit. Alio autem tempore, generaliter omnes Camiseas lane as habeat.


CAP. LXX. Quot, and quales Panni in Lecto sunt necessarij.
SIngulorum quidem non aliter per singulos Lectos Dormitorium esse, nisi maxima causa, vel necessitas euenerit, communi consilio collaudamus. Loctualia, vel Lectisternia, moderata dispensatione Magistri Vnusquisque habeat. Credimus enim prorsus Saccum, Culcitram, and Coopertorium Vnicuique sufficere. Qui vero ex his vno carebit, Carpitam habeat, and in omni tempore tegmine Lineo, id est Veluso frui bene licebit. Vestiti autem Camisiis, and femoralibus semper dormiant. Dormientibus autem Fratribus iugiter vsque Mane, nuuquam de sit Lucerna.


CAP. LXXI. De Vitanda murmuratione.
AeMulationes, Inuidias, Liuorem, Murmur, Susurrationem, Detractiones, diuina admonitione vitare, and quasi quandam pestem vobis fugere praecipimus. Studeat igitur Vnusquisque Vestrum, Fratres charissimi, vigilanti animo, ne Fratrem suum clam culpet, aut reprehendat; sed illud Apostoli studiose secum animaduertat. Ne sis criminator, ne susurro in Populo. Cum autem Fratrem liquide aliquid peccasse cognouerit, pacifice, and Fraterna pictate iuncta Domini praeceptum, inter se, and illum solum corripiat. Et si eum non audierit, alium Fratrem adhibeat. Quod si Vtrumque contemps^rit, in Conuentu, publice obiurgetur coram omnibus. Magnae etenim caecitatis sunt, qui se a Liuore minime custodiunt, vnde in antiquam Hostis versuti nequitiam demerguntur.

Vt omnium Mulicrum fugiantur oscula. Caput Vltimum.
PEriculosum esse credimus omni Religioni, Vultum Mulierum nimis attendere: et ideo nec Viduam, nec Virginem, nec Matrem, nec Sororem, nec Amitam, Vllamque Foeminam aliam aliquis Frater occulari praesumat. Fugiat erge Foeminea oscula Christi Militia, per quae solent Homines persaepe periclitari; Vt p^ra conscientia, et Vita secura, in conspectu Domini perenniter valeat c^nuersari.





The Order of the poore Fellow-Souldiers of the Temple in the Holy Citty.
CHAP. I. How they are to heare Diuine Seruice.
YOV renouncing your owne pleasures, and others, who for the safety of Soules, are militant with you for the time to the great King with Horses and Armes, are vniuersally to endeauour to heare Mattins with a Godly and pure affection, and all the whole seruice, according to the Canonicall Institution and custome of the Regular Doctors of the holy Citty. And this (venerable Brethren) is the rather to be done by you, because you despising the light of this present life, and contemning the torments of your owne bodies, haue promised perpetually to disesteeme the world for the loue of God: that being refreshed and satiated with the heauenly food, instructed and established with heauenly precepts, after the consumation of the diuine Mystery none might be fearefull for the fight) but forward for the Crowne.


CHAP. II. That they are to say prayers, if they cannot come to heare them.
BVt if any Brother chaunce to bee remoued or goe abroad vpon the affayres of Christianity in the Easterne parts (which we make no doubt may often come to passe) and by reason of his absence cannot come to heare diuine seruice, we doe enioyne him with one consent, for Mattins to say ouer thirteene Pater Nosters, and for euery hower seauen, but for the Vespers nine. For they that are imployed in so gracious a worke, cannot keepe their competent howers of comming to diuine seruices but yet so far forth as may, let not the apointed howers be past ouer before the inioyned taske.



CHAP. III. What is to be done for the Brethren that are dead.
WHen any of the Brethren that remayne among you draw neere vnto death, which is so impartiall as it spares none, and so impossible as none can escape it, The Chaplaine and Clerke; with those that serue with you for the time vnder the High Priest, we inioyne them to performe their entrusted office, and in the purity of their spirit, solemnely to offer a Masse vnto Christ for his soule. The rest of the Brethren that stand by, to spend the whole night in prayers for him, when he is dead saying, ouer a 100. Pater nosters t^ll the seuenth day. And from that very day wherein his death was aduertised and made knowne to them, till the day prescribed the foresaid number of 100. containing the integrity of perfection, to be had in a Brotherly obseruation. Moreouer we deprec^te by the Diuine and most mercifull charity, and recommaund by our pastoroll authority, that euery day what was giuen and belonging to that Brother whiles he was aliue, so much as is necessary for the support of life in Meat and Drink; be bestowed vpon some poore man till the fortieth day: altogether forbidding all other oblations, which the voluntary pouerty of the poore fellow-souldiers of Christ was vsually accustomed indiscreetly to bestow at the death of their brethren, and Easter solemnytie, or other feasts.


CHAP. IIII. The Chaplaines are onely to haue food and rayment.
ALl other oblations and almes of what kind soeuer, we carefully commaund the Chapleynes and others for the time remayning, to render to the vnity of the Common Chapter. The Seruitors therefore of the Church, are only to haue food and rayment according to authority, and let them not presume to take more, vnlesse the Maister doe freely and charitably giue it vnto them.


CHAP. V. Of the Knights that dye, who are for the time.
THere are Knights in the house of God, and of Salomons Temple, liuing with you for the time vpon meere mercy, wherefore we earnestly entreat you, and beseech you, and finally commaund you, that when the supreame power shall bring any of them to their last day of life, in loue vnto God and brotherly charity, some poore man may haue seauen dayes of sustentation for his soule.


CHAP. VI. That none of the Brethren remayning among you, may make an oblation.
WEe haue decreed (as is aforesayd) that none of the Brethren remayning, doe presume to make any other oblation but day and night let him abide in his profession with a pure heart, that in this he may be like vnto the most wise Prophet. I will take the cup of Saluation, and in my death imitate the death of the Lord. For as Christ laid downe his life for me, so I am ready to lay downe my life for the Brethren. Behold a competent oblation, behold a liuing sacrifice, pleasing vnto God.


CHAP. VII. Of immoderate standing.
THat which wee haue heard related by a most true witnesse, to witt, that you stand to heare Diuine seruice immoderately, and beyond measure; we haue not so enioyned, nay wee find fault with: but at the end of the Psalme. O come let vs sing vnto the Lord, with the Inuitatory and Hymne, wee commaund all (as well strong as weake) to sitt, for the auoyding of scandall. Thus sitting at, the end of euery Psalme, in saying, Glory be to the Father, we commaund you to stand, humbling your selues from your seates towards the Altar, in reuerence of the blessed Trinity. The like is to bee done at the reading of the Gospell, and at We praise thee O God, and in all praises, till the end of Benedicamus Domino. And wee commaund the same order to bee obserued in the Mattins of the blessed Mary.


CHAP. VIII. Of the repast of the Couent.
IN one Court, or rather in one common Hall, we wil you to take your meat together, where whatsoeuer shall be necessary to bee demaanded, if you cannot vnderstand it by signes, you are to aske it very softly and priuately. And at any time, whatsoeuer you want that is necessary, you are to seeke it with all humanity and subiection of reuerence vnto the table, for so much as the Apostle sayes, Eate thy Bread in silence, and the Psalmist ought to encourage that, saying, I haue set a watch before my mouth, that is, I haue deliberated with my selfe, that I would not offend, that is, in my tongue; tha is. I haue kept my mouth, that I would not speake euill.


CHAP. IX. Concerning reading.
AT Dinner and Supper let there alwayes bee some sacred reading. If we loue the Lord, we ought most earnestly to desire and heare his wholesome words and precepts. The Reader he is to inioyne you silence.


CHAP. X. Concerning the repast of the Body.
THrice in a weeke let it suffice to take repast, vnlesse it bee Christmas, or Easter, or the feast of the blessed Mary, or of all Saints: because the accustomary feeding of the flesh, is the necessary corruption of the body. If such a fast happen vpon the Tuesday, that the eating of flesh is restrained, the morrow you may take it in abundance. But vpon the Sunday we thinke it fitting and expedient, that two Messes be allowed to all the Knights and to the Chaplaines, in honour of the holy Resurrection. The rest, to witt, Esquires and Retayners, let them rest themselues contented with one, with Thanksgiuing.


CHAP. XI. How the Knights ought to eate.
GEnerally 2. and 2. ought to eat together, that one may carefully haue an eye to the other, least either austerity of life, or stolne abstinence be intermixed in euery meale, And this we iudge iust, that euery Knight or Brother haue an equall and indifferent measure of wine vnto himselfe.


CHAP. XII. That other dayes 2. or 3. dishes of rootes or Pease shall be sufficient.
VPon other dayes, to witt, Munday and Wensday, and so vpon Satturday, we iudge 2. or 3. dishes of rootes or other meate, boyld pottage, or water-gruell, to be enough for all, and so we enioyne it to be obserued, that whosoeuer happely cannot eat of the one, may feed vpon the other.


CHAP. XIII. What food is be vsed vpon the Friday.
WE commend the Lenten food vpon the Fryday, in reuerence of the passion, to the whole congregation, still excepting them that be weake, and we iudge it to be enough to take it but once a day, from the Feast of all Saints vntill Easter, vnlesse it happen to be Christmasse day, or the Feast of Saint Mary, or of the Apostles, or other times, vnlesse a general Fast fall out, they may feed twice.


CHAP. XIIII. After repast, they must euer giue thanks.
AFter Dinner and Supper wee peremptorily command, thanks to be alwayes giuen to Christ, who is our Purueyer and prouider, with an humble heart, either in the Church if it be neare, or if it bee not, in the same place: and the fragments to be destributed to the seruants, or to the poore, out of brotherly charity, alwayes excepting and reseruing the whole Loaues.


CAP. XV. That the Tenth Loafe be alwayes giuen to the Almoner.
ALthough the reward of Pouerty, which is the Kingdome of Heauen, be doubtlessely due vnto the Poore, yet we command you; that you dayly distribute the tenth of your bread vnto the Almomer, which Christian faith doth assuredly allow of


CAP. XVI. That the Collation be at the arbitrement of the Maister.
WHen the Sun leaues the Easterne parts, and descends into the West, at the ringing of the Bell, as is the custome of that Countrey, you must all goe to the Complyne. But first we wish you to take a generall Collation, which Collation we leaue to the disposition and arbitrement of the Maister, that when he pleaseth, you may haue water, and when he commands, you may haue a competent mixture of wine with your water. But this must not be too too much satiety, but sparingly, because we see wise men to fall away by wine.


CHAP. XVII. That after Complyne, silence be kept.
THe Complyne being ended, you must to bed. After the Brethren are once departed out of the Hall, there is no liberty giuen to speake in publike, vnlesse it be vpon vrgent necessity. And what he speakes, he must speake it softly, vnto his Esquire. It may chaunce that in that distance, whiles ye are going out of the Hall, vpon some great necessity, the Maister, or he to whom the Gouernment of the house is concredited, next after the Master, may speake of some Millitary matter, or concerning the state of your House, with some part of the brethren, because the day is not sufficient for you to doe this: This therefore shall be done in this maner, In all such speach, we altogether forbid scurrility and idle words mouing laughter: and this the rather because it is written, In many words, thou shalt not auoyd sin; And in another place, Life and death are in the hands of the Tongue. And when ye goe to bed, if any one haue vttered any foolish word, we enioyne him to repeat the Lords Prayer, with al humilitie and due deuotion.


CHAP. XVIII. That they that are weary, may not rise to Mattins.
THe wearied Souldiers, we allow not to rise to Mattins, as you must, but they may take their rest with the assent of the Master, or of him to whom the Master will giue credence, and then they must sing Thirteene appointed Prayers, their mind agreeing and going with

their voyce according to that of the Prophet: Sing wisely vnto the Lord, And againe, I will sing vnto thee in the sight of the Angels. But this we leaue to the arbitrement of the Master.


CAP. XIX. That there be a community of Commons kept among the Brethren.
It is recorded in the holy writ; There was diuided vnto euery man according as he had neede: therefore we doe not say that there should be acception of persons, but yet there ought to be consideration of infirmities: Where, he that stands lesse in need, let him giue God thanks, and not be grieued, And he that stands in more need, let him be humbled, because of his infirmity, not extolled because of mercy, and so euery member shall bee in peace. But this we forbid, that it shall not bee lawfull vnto any, to giue himselfe to immoderate abstinence, but euermore follow a common life.


CAP. XX. Concerning the quality and manner of Apparrell.
WE command that the garments bee euer but of one colour, for example, White or Blacke, or as it may be Burrell: especially white for al the Knights in winter and in su^mer, if it may be: That they who haue laide aside a darke life, may learne to reconcile themselues to their Creator by a white. For what is whitenes but perfect chastity? and chastity both the security of the soule, and the sanity of the body. And except euery Knight continue chaste, he can neither come to perpetuall rest, nor see God, as the Apostle Paul witnesseth, Follow peace with all men, and chastity, without which no man shall see God. But yet that this kind of garment may bee free from the suspicion of arrogancy and superfluity, we command it to be such, that euery man alone by himselfe may cloth or vncloth himselfe, put it on, or put it off. He that is the factor for these affaires, must carefully labour to beware, that it be neither ouer long nor ouer short, but a meete measure with him that vses it, acording to euery mans seuerall size. And they that receiue new garments, must alwayes render and restore backe their old, to bee laid vp in the chamber, or where hee shall appoint who hath the office, for the vse of the Esquires and retayners, and sometimes for the poore.


CAP. XXI. That the Seruants are not to haue White garments, that is Mantles.
THis that was in the house of God, and of his Knights of the Temple, without the discretion and counsell of the common Chapter, we doe vtterly contradict, and earnestly command to cut it off, as a very speciall and peculiar fault. For in times past, the Seruants and Esquires had white garments, from whence grew insupportable losses. For there arose vp certaine false brethren in the parts beyond the Mountaines, and marryed men and others, affirming themselues to bee of the Temple, when they are of the world. These haue brought many contumelyes and great losses vnto the Military Order, and the retainers haue hereupon raysed many scandals by their pride. Let them therefore haue blacke, and if they cannot finde such as are to be found in that Prouince wherin they liue, or some such of one colour as is more base* viz. Burell.


CHAP. XXII. That the Knights remaining, are onely to haue White.
IT is granted vnto none to weare White habits, or to haue white cloaks, but to the named knights of Christ.


CHAP. XXIII. That they may vse Lambs Skinnes.
WE haue decreed by a common Counsell* that no brother remaining in winter, haue any other skinnes or hides, or such like belonging to the vse of his body, Cassocke and all, but of the skinnes of lambes or rammes.


CHAP. XIV. That the old be giuen to the Esquires.
THe prouider or giuer of the Cloth, is with all obseruancy to keepe this custome, to giue the olde alwayes to the Esquiers and retainers, and if they be very old, to the poore, faithfully and indifferently.


CAP. XXV. He that is ambitious after the best, is to haue the worst.
IF any brother will haue the fairest and best robes, either as of d^e, or out of pride; by such his presumption, hee shall deserue the very worst.



CHAP. XXVI. That the quantity and quality of garments be obserued.
THere must be obseruation of garments concerning the quantity, according to the proportion and bignesse of the body. He that is the giuer of the cloth, ought to be curious herein.


CHAP. XXVII. That the giuer of the cloth ought especially to obserue equality.
LEt him that prouides with a brotherly eye, consider the length, as is aforesaid, with equall measure, that neither the eye of the whisperer nor accuser can noate any thing, and in all things aforesaid, let him humbly meditate Gods reward.


CHAP. XXVIII. Concerning superfluity of hayre.
ALl the brethren ought especially so to cut their haire, that they keepe regularity, and order, both before and behind. And the same is diligently to be obserued both in the beard and cheeke, that there be neither superfluity nor curiosity.


CHAP. XXIX. De Rostris and Laqueis.
COncerning Rostra and Laquea, it is manifest, that it is a Heathenish thing, and for as much as this is abhominable vnto all men, we forbid it, and contradict it, that no man haue them. Likewise wee permit not others that serue for the time, but absolutely forbid them to haue Rostra and Laquea, and superfluity of haire, and immoderate length of garments. For to them that serue the most high Creator, Cleanlines is necessary both within and without: witnes himselfe saying, Be ye holy, for I am holy.


CHAP. XXX. Concerning the number of Horses and Esquires.
IT is lawfull for euery Knight to haue three Horses, because the singular pouerty of the house of God, and of the Temple of Salomon, doe not admit for the present to augment, vnlesse it bee by the leaue of the Master.


CHAP. XXXI. No man may smite an Esquire that serues freely.
FOr the same cause we grant vnto euery Knight one Esquire: but if that Esquire serue any Knight gratis, and vpon charity, it is not lawfull for him to smite him, or strike him for euery cause.


CAP. XXXII. How that they that remaine for a time are to be receiued.
WE enioyne you faithfully, to buy for all the Knights, seruing Iesus Christ in the purity of their soule in the same house, Horses sitting for such a businesse, and Weapons, and whatsoeuer shall be necessary for them. Moreouer we iudge it good and profitable, to haue the horses prized on both parts equally, which price let it bee kept in writing, least it bee forgotten. And whatsoeuer shall be necessary for the Knight, or his horses, or his Esquire, adding also the furniture of the horses; let it be bestowed in brotherly charity, according to the ability of the house, out of the same house. If in the interim, the Knight by any euent loose his horses in this seruice, the Master and the goods of the house requires this, that he supply others. But the time comming of doing this, the Knight himselfe for Gods loue, is to pay one halfe of the price, the other (if he please) he may receiue from the Community of the brethren.


CHAP. XXXIII. That none is to walke according to his owne will.
IT is sitting and conuenient for these Knights, who thinke nothing dearer to them then Christ, for the seruice according to Which they haue professed, and for the glory of the sacred Trinity, or feare of hell, that they continually yeeld obedience vnto the Master. Therefore it is to be held (as we said before) when any thing is enioyned by the Master, or by him to whom the Master hath giuen command, without delay, as if it were enioyned from heauen, that they will brooke no delay in doing of it. For of such the Truth it selfe sayes. In the hearing of the eare he hath obeyed me.


CHAP. XXXIV. Whether it bee lawfull to goe through the Towne, without the command of the Master.
THerefore wee desire these like Knights who haue left their owne will, and serue others for a time, and we firmely command them, that they presume not to go into the Town without the leaue of the Maister, or to whom this is concredited, vnlesse it be By night vnto the Sepulchre, and to the Stations, which are contained within the walls of the holy City.


CHAP. XXXV. Whether it be lawfull to walke alone.
LEt not these men dare to begin a iourney, eyther by day or night, without a ke^rer, that is, a Knight or a Brother. For in an Army, after they are intertained, no Knight, or Esquire, or Seruant may walk by the Atrium of other Knights to see them, or to speake with them, without command, as is aforesaid. Therefore we earnestly confirme it, that in such a house ordeined of God, no man warre according to his owne will, or rest, but wholly betake himselfe ta the will of the Maister, that so hee may follow the saying of the Lord, I came not to doe mine owne will, but his which sent me.


CHAP. XXXVI. That no man may seeke what may be necessary for him by name.
WE command to write this custome amongst the rest, and we enioyne it to bee obserued with all diligence. No Brother particularly, and by name ought to seeke Horse or Furniture, or Armour. How then? If his owce infirmity, or the weakenes of his Horses, or the Weight of his Armour be knowne to be such, that it is a common losse to goe so; Let him come before the Maister, or to whom the Ministery is assigned after the Master, and let him truely and faithfully demonstrate the cause. For from thenceforth the businesse shall rest at the disposition of the Master, or of him that commands after him, or of the Steward.


CHAP. XXXVII. Concerning Bridles and Spurres.
WE will haue no Gold or Siluer, which are particular riches, to be seene at any time in Bridles or Breastplates, or Spurres; neyther may it be lawfull for any Brother to buy such: But if such things be charitably bestowed vpon them, the Gold or Siluer is so to be coloured, as the brauery or beauty may not bee censured arrogancy. If they be giuen new, the Maister may do with them what he will.


CAP. XXXVIII. No couering to be had vpon Speares or Shields.
THere may bee had no couering vpon Shields and Speares, nor Furelli vpon Launces, because this is not conceiued to be any profit, but losse vnto vs all.


CHAP. XXXIX. Concerning the power of the Master.
IT is lawfull for the Master, to giue Horse, or Armes, or any thing to any man to whom hee will.


CHAP. XL. Concerning Male and Budgets.
BVdgets and Males with locke and key, are not granted, neither may they haue them without the Masters licence, or his to whom the businesses of the house are trusted. In this present Chapter, the Stewards, and they that liue in diuerse Prouinces, are not comprehended, nor the Master himselfe.


CHAP. XLI. Concerning the reading of Letters.
IT is no wayes lawfull to any Brother, eyther to receiue to himselfe Letters from his parents, or from any other, nor to send Letters, without the command of the Master, or Steward. After that the Brother haue leaue, if he please they may bee read in the Masters presence If any thing bee directed to him from his Parents, let him not presume to receiue it, vnlesse it bee first told vnto the Master. But in this Chapter, the Master and the Stewards of the house are not contained.


CHAP. XLII. Concerning the speaking of their owne faults.
SInce euery idle word is knowne to beget sinne, what can they say for themselues before the strict Iudge, that boast and bragge of their owne faults? The Prophet shewes truely: If wee ought sometimes to hold our tongues from good words for taciturnity, how much more from euill words for the punishment of sinne? Therefore we forbid and boldly prohibite, that no Brother make commemoration what hee hath done amisse in the world, or in Military affaires, either with his Brother, or with any other, and what delights of the Flesh he hath had ouer miserable women. And if he chance to heare any other relating such things; he is to make him silent, or at least at soone as he can depart from him, and not lend an eare to him.


CHAP. XLIII. Concerning gaine and receiuing.
IF any thing be bestowed freely on any brother, without gaine; he is to beare it to the Maister or Steward. If otherwise, his friend, or Parents would giue it, but to vse, he may not receiue it, till he haue leaue from the Maister. But to whomsoeuer it is giuen, let it not grieue him, if it be bestowed on another. Yea let him know assuredly, that if he be angry at it, he striues against God. But in this foresaid Order, ministrators are not contained, to whom this ministerie is specially made ouer and granted, concerning Male and Budget.


CHAP. XLIIII. Concerning the Bits of Horses.
IT is a profitable thing vnto all, that this precept appointed by vs, be infallibly obserued of all. Let no Brother presume to make Manducaria linea vel lanea. Idcirco principaliter facta, nec habeat vlla, excepto Cofinello.


CHAP. XLV. That none doe dare to exchange or seeke.
NOw another thing remaines, that none presume to exchange his goods, one Brother with another, without the leaue of the Maister, nor seeke any thing, vnlesse one brother to another, and it be a small base matter, not a great.


CHAP. XLVI. That none catch one Bird with another.
WE giue our common iudgement, that none should dare to take one Bird with another. For it is not agreeable vnto Religion, to be so addicted vnto worldly delights, but willingly to beare Gods precepts, constantly to frequent Prayer, daily to confesse his sinnes with sighes and teares. Let no Brother presume to goe with such a man, doing such things, either with a Hawke, or with any other Bird.


CHAP. XLVII. That no man strike with a Bow, or with a G^nne.
FOr as much as it becomes all Religion to goe simply, and without laughter, humbly, and not to speake many words, but reasonable, and not in any loud clamorous tone: we specially command and enioyne euery professed Brother, that he doe not dare to shoote in a Bowe or Gunne, nor goe along with him that shall doe this; vnlesse it be to keepe him from the persidious heathen, nor that he dare to cry with a Dogge, or prate, nor spur his Horse in desire to take the Beast.


CHAP. XLVIII. That the Lyon is alwaies to be strucken.
FOr it is certaine, that it is specially concredited to you, and due from you, to lay downe your life for your Brethren, and to take from the earth the incredulous, who are euermore menacing the Son of the Virgin. We speake this of the Lyon, because he goes about seeking whom he may deuoure, and his hands are against euery one, and euery ones hands are against him.


CHAP. XLIX. Heare iudgement of euery thing that is asked of you.
WE know that the persecutors of the Church be innumerable, and that they labour incessantly and cruelly, to disquiet them that loue not contention: Let this therefore be taken into due consideration, that when any man shall aske any thing of you, concerning Religion in the Easterne parts, or any other place; we command you to heare the iudgement and opinion of it by faithfull iudges, and such as are true l^uers of truth, and then we enioyne you to doe without partiality, whatsoeuer shall seeme iust vnto you.


CHAP. L. That this Order be obserued in all things.
WE courteously command, that this Order be obserued in all things, which are vndeseruedly taken from you.


CHAP. LI. That it is lawfull for all professed Knights, to haue Lands and Men.
WE doe beleeue, that this kinde of Religion had its beginning in holy places from you, by diuine prouidence, to wit, that you mixe warfare with religion, and so religion to be defended by warfare, and smite the enemy without sinne. Therefore we rightly adiudge, since you are styled Knights of the Temple, that for your renowned merit, and especiall gift of godlinesse; you haue Lands and Men, and keepe vnder you Husbandmen, and iustly gouerne them, and the appointed duetie to be particularly due vnto you for it.


CHAP. LII. That there be a watchfull care had of them that be sicke.
A Bou^^all, there is a watchfull care to be had of the Brethren that be sicke, and that there be seruice done to them, as it were to Christ, that that of the Gospell be had in memorie, I was sicke, and ye visited me. For these ^r^ carefully and patiently to be borne, because of such there is purchased a heauenly recompence.


CHAP. LIII. That things necessary be alwayes administred to them that be sicke.
WEE command the ouerseers of them that be sick, that with all diligence and watchfull

care, whatsoeuer is necessary for their seuerall infirmities, be faithfully and diligently administred to them, according to the abilitie of the houses, V. F. flesh and foules, and such like, till they be restored vnto health.


CHAP. LIIII. That one prouoke not another vnto wrath.
IT is no small thing to be tooke heede of, that no man presume to prouoke another vnto wrath, because the heauenly clemency hath equally obliged as well the poore, as the rich, in propinquity and holy brotherhood.


CHAP. LV. How the Coniugated brethren are to be held.
WE permit vnto you, to haue coniugated brethren, in this manner, that if they desire the benefit and participation of your Fraternity, both of them shall giue after their death their portion of substance, and whatsoeuer they get more, to the vnity of the common Chapter: And in the interim, they must exercise an honest life, and labour to doe good to the brethren, but they may not goe in a white garment or habit. If the Husband dye first, he must leaue his portion to the brethren, and the wife to haue her maintenance out of the other. For this wee iudge to be vniust, that such women should abide in one and the same House with the Brethren, that promise Chastity vnto God.


CHAP. LVI. That Sisters be no more ioyned with Men.
IT is a dangerous thing to assemble or ioyne together Sisters, because the auncient enemy hath drawne many from the right path of Paradise by the company of women. Therefore deare Brethren, that the floure of integrity may alwaies grow among you, it shall not be lawfull to vse this custome any longer.


CHAP. LVII. That the Brethren of the Temple may not participate with such as be excommunicate.
THis (Brethren) is very much to be auoided and feared, that none of the Souldiers of Christ presume to ioyne himselfe with such as be excommunicate by any meanes, or to receiue their goods, least he be made Anathema Maranetha in like manner. But if he be interdicted onely to participate with him, it shall not vnworthely be lawfull for him to take of his goods by way of charitie.


CHAP. LVIII. How secular Knights are to be receiued.
IF any Knight from out the masse of perdition, or any other secular man, willing to renounce the world, will chuse your kinde of life, and communion, you may not presently assent vnto him, but according to that of Paul, Proue the spirits whether they be of God; and if so, you may grant him ingresse. Let the Order therefore be read in his presence, and if he will diligently obey the precepts thereof, then if it please the Maister and Brethren to receiue him, the brethren being cald together, let him lay open his desire to them all in the sincerity of his soule. And then the time of probation is altogether to rest in the consideration and prouidence of the Maister, according to the honesty of the life of the petitioner.


CHAP. LIX. That all the Brethren are not to be cald to secret Counsell.
WE doe not command to call all the Brethren alwayes vnto Counsell, but whom the Maister knowes prouident and sitting for it. But when he will deale with greater matters, as to giue common land, or to dispute of the Order it selfe, or receiue a Brother, then it is sitting to call together all the congregation, if it please the Maister, that so hearing the counsell of the common Chapter, he may doe that which he iudges to be best and most profitable.


CHAP. LX. That they ought to pray with silence.
WE command by common Counsell that all the brethren pray with all reuerence, simply, and not clamorously, that one doe not hinder another, whether it be standing or sitting, as the affection of their minde and body requires.


CHAP. LXI. That they take Faith or Allegiance of their seruants.
WE haue knowne many out of diuers Prouinces as well retainers, as Esquires, most earnestly desiring (for a time) to be admitted into our House, for the saluation of their soules: but it is expedient that you take faith of them, least happily the old enemy suggest something in Gods seruice, by stealth, or otherwayes vnseemely, and so suddenly driue them from their good purpose.


CHAP. LXII. That children, so long as they be little ones are not to be receiued among the Brethren of the Temple.
THough the order of the holy Fathers permit to haue children in the congergation, yet we

will not burden you with any such. But he that will courteously giue his owne sonne or kinsman, to Militarie religion, let him bring him vp till he come to yeares, that he be able manfully, to driue away the enemies of Christ out of the holy Land, with an armed hand. Then according to the Order, the father or parents are to set him in the midst of the brethren, and to open his petition vnto them all. For it is better not to vowe in childehood, then afterward soulely to fall away, when he is grown a man.


CHAP. LXIII. That old men be alwayes honored.
YOu must piously support old men, according to their weakenesse, and dutifully honour them. And let them not be kept short, in any such things as are necessary for their body, the authority of the Order alwayes preserued.


CHAP. LXIV. Concerning the brethren which passe through diuers Prouinces.
LEt Brethren which are to passe through diuers Prouinces, obserue order in meate and drinke, and in others things, so farre forth as they haue power, and let them liue vnreproueably, that they may haue good testimonie, euen of them which are without. Let them not pollute their purpose of religion, either in word or deede, but especially l^t them giue example of wisedome and of good works, to them with whom they are more familiarly conioyned. Let him be a man of the best report with whom they lodge, and if it may be, let not the house be without light for that night, least the darke enemy (which God foresend) finde some opportunitie. But where they shall heare of Knights meeting together, which are not excommunicate, let them haste thither, not so much considering temporall profit, as enternall safety of their soules. And those Brethren which are in the parts beyond the seas, in hope of conueyance directed thither; we wish them to receiue to them at this meeting, whosoeuer will courteously take vpon them the Military order: that both of them may meete in the presence of the Bishop of that Prouince, and the Prelate may heare the desire of the petitioner: which petitioner being heard, the Brethren is to send him to the Maister, and to the Brethren which are in the Temple that is at Ierusalem. And if his life be honest and worthy such a fellowship, let him be courteously receiued, if it so seeme good to the Maister, and to the Brethren. If in the interim he dye; in recompence of his labour and trauell, the whole benefit and fraternity of the poore and fellow-Souldiers of Christ, is to be bestowed vpon him, as vpon one of the Brethren.


CHAP. LXV. That foode be equally distributed vnto all.
WE thinke this also to be very fitting and reasonable, that foode be distributed to all the Brethren equally, according to the abilitie of the place. For acception of persons is not profitable, but respect of infirmities is necessary.


CHAP. LXVI. That the Knights of the Temple haue Tenths.
WE beleeue that you (leauing the wealth of this world) we subiect vnto voluntary pouerty. Wherefore by this meanes it is manifest, that you haue Tenths duely belonging to you. If the Bishop of the Church to whom the Tithe is due, will giue it vnto you by way of cha^itie, by the assent of that Chapter, he ought to giue it of th^se Tithes which the Church then enioyeth But ^sany Lay-man doe damnably withhold it out of his patrimony: he shall leaue the same to you at the b^cke of him who is the Gouernor onely, without the consent of the Chapter.


CHAP. LXVII. Of light and great faul^s.
IF any Brother shall off^nd in any small thing (in speaking or sighting, or otherw^se let him (of his owne accord show his offence vnto the Maister, by way of satisfaction. If they haue no custome concerning light things, let him haue light penance. But if he holding his peace, any other man make knowne his fault, he is subiect to great^r, and stricter and seuerer discipline. But if it be a great offence, let him be sequestred from the familiarity of the Brethren, and not eate with them at the same table, but take his repast alone. The whole matter is at the disp^sition and discretion of the Maister, that he may be saued in the day of iudgement.


CHAP. LXVIII. For what fault a Brother may be receiued no more.
BEfore all things it is to bee prouided, that no Brother potent or impotent, strong or weake, willing to exalt himselfe, and by degrees to grow roud and despend his fault, remaine vnchastened: But if hee will not amend, let him be checked more sharply. If he will not amend by godly admonitios, and harty praiers made for him, but grow greater and greater in pride; then according to the Apostle, let him bee rooted from the flock. Take away euill from you

It is necessary that a dying Sheep be remoued from the society of faithfull brethren. But the Maister, who Ought to hold the staffe and the rod in his hand, to wit, the staffe to support the infirmities of the weake, and the rod to correct the defaults of delinquents, with the zeale of rectitude: let him labour to doe it with the counsell of the Patriarch, and with spirituall consideration, least, as blessed Maximus saith, either loose lenity doe not keepe vnder the sinner, or immoderate seuerity do harden him in his sinne.


CHAP. LXIX. That from the solemnity of Easter, till the feast of All Saints, you must haue but one linnen shirt Surplice.
MOreouer, because we pittifully consider the extraordinary heate of the Easterne region, we ordaine that from the festiuity of Easter, til the feast of all Saints, one linnen Surplisse onely be giuen vnto euery one, not of debt, but of meere grace, to euery one I say that will make vse of it: but at other times he is generally to haue Surplices all woollen.


CHAP. LXX. How many and what manner clothes are necessary in bed.
WEE command by common Counsell, that euery mans sleeping place should be by himselfe, vnlesse there happen some speciall cause to the contrary, or great necessity. Let euery man haue his bed and bedcloathes at the dispose of the Maister. We suppose a Sacke, a Mattresse, and a Couering to be enough for eueryone. He that wants one of these, let him haue a Carpet; and it shall be lawful at all times to haue a linnen couering. And they must sleepe alwayes cloathed with shirts and breeches, and sleeping continually til the morning, they must neuer want a candle.


CHAP. LXXI. To auoide murmuring.
WE admonish you to auoide emulation, enuie, spite, murmuring, whispering, detractions; and we command you to flye from them as from the plague. Therefore deere Brethren, let euery one of you carefully labour, that he doe not priuily slander his brother, or accuse him, but let him consider that of the Apostle, Be not thou an accuser, or a whisperer among the people. When he shall manifestly know that his brother hath offended, let him correct him peaceably and louingly, according to his commandement of the Lord, betweene himselfe and him. And if he will not heare him, let him take to him another Brother: if he contemne both, let him publikely be reproued in the assembly before all. For they are much blinded, who cannot keepe themselues from spite, by which they are ensnared in the auncient wickednesse of that subtill aduersary.


CHAP. LXXII. That they are to shun all kissing of Women.
WE hold it dangerous to all Religion, to looke too much on the beauty of women, and therefore let no brother presume to kisse either Widdow or Virgin, or Mother or Sister, or Aunt, or any other woman. Let the warfare of Christ shun feminine kisses, by which men are many times brought into danger; that with a pure conscience and secure life they may walke continually in the sight of God.


The Crosse of Saint Lazarus.










The Crosse of the Order of Saint Lazarus,Croix de L'Ordre de Sainct Lazare, etc. Reduced into the former splendour, vnder the Kings of Jerusalem, that were Successours to Godfrey of Bologne: As Bauldwine, Amaury and Bauldwine, with the Queenes Theodora and Melisinda, great Benefactours to the Order. But it tooke Establishment at Boigny in France, vnder King Lewes, Sirnamed the Deuout: In the yeare of Grace, One Thousand, One Hundred Fiftie Foure. CHAP. IX.
HEretofore we haue spoken somewhat of this Order, the most Auncient of all Christendome,The Originall of this Order. according to the testimonie of Saint Gregorie Nazianzene, who in the Life of the great Doctour Saint Basile; attributeth to him the birth and originall thereof. This Order was so much the more famous thorow Christendome, by how much the subiect was mercifull and charitable, as namely; taking care of diseased people, infected with such an vncurable infirmity, as was fled and shunned of all, vnfit for the frequencie of men, and making them seeme as dead to the world. Pope Damasus, first of the name, approued this for a good and commendable worke, and commended it to all the Churches of Christendome.
Iulian the Apostata, sworne enemy to the Christians, possessed himselfe of the Houses, which were assigned and giuen by the Church,Care for the reestablishing of this Order. for the relieuing of such miserable people. The Emperours, his Successours in power (but not in vaine and idle worshipping of Idols) did reestablish this worke of Charitie, and the Popes tooke a perticular care of it. This Order was brought into her auncient luster, vnder the Kings of Ierusalem, that were Successours to Godfrey of Bologne. For we finde by the testimonie of William of Tyre, Chancellour of Ierusalem, and other Authors beside, that tooke paines in writing the Voyages and Conquests of our famous French Paladines, in those parts beyond the Seas; that the Kings of the holy Citie Bauldwine, Amaury and Bauldwine, as also the Queenes Theodora and Melisinda, gaue very great gifts to this Order. Which (as all the rest were) was gouerned by a Great Maister;The Order gouerned by a great Maister. and we obserued heretofore, that this Order had her Court, Iustice and Demeanes perticularly, as well in Ierusalem, as in the Citie of Acres.
Moreouer, the Knights of this Order, although they had especiall care of diseased Leaprous people; yet were they not negligent likewise, in skilfull handling of their weapons, and going to war against the Miscreants. And their deuotion made them so admired, and fauoured by King Lewes the yonger, called the Deuout; that at his returne from the Holy-Land, he brought along with him home into France, Twelue Knights of this Order, whom he appointed to be directors and Gouernors of the Hospitals in his Kingdome.
He established their chiefe Colledge and principall dwelling at Boigny in the Diocesse of Orleans, where this good King kept his Court most part of the yeare,The chiefe Conuent of their abiding at Boigny. by the example of King Lewes le Gros his Father. These twelue Knights serued as a Seedplot or fruitfull Orchard, to all the Prouinces of Christendome, for from them Princes deriued Administrators, for exercising the work of Charity on Leaprous people, and it came to passe (by meanes of this Exercise) that all Prouinces acknowledged for

Chiefe of the Order, the House of Boigny; where at the end of euery three years was held their generall Chapter, by the Priors of Italie, Sicilie, England, Germany and Spain.
Establishment of the Order at Beigny.The establishing of this Order of Saint Lazarus at Boigny, vnder King Lewes the Deuout; is recorded in the Court Registers, in the yeare One thousand one hundred fifty and foure. And as well beyond the Seas, as in France, and other places of Christendome, the Bretheren of this Order made profession, of the Rule of Saint Augustine.
To slender purpose was it then, that the first originall of this Order should be attributed to certaine Italian Gentlemen, who passing into the Marches beyond the Seas; shaped their modell and patterne, by the Hospitallers of Saint Iohn of Ierusalem, endeauouring themselues in the curing of diseased Leaprous people, and nourishing them vpon such Almes as were giuen to them.
But it may be, that those Gentlemen Italians did reestablish this Charitie, for vsing care to diseased persons,Concerning certaine Italian Gentlemen supposed the founder, of this Order. afflicted with this incurable maladie; and that by example of the Knights Hospitallers, and them also of the Holy Sepulcher, they kept the passage waies, for safe guiding of Christian Pilgrims, to guard and defend them against the Sarrazins.
So then, seeing themselues encreased and augmented in number, they submitted to the Order of Saint Benedict, and tooke the long blacke Gowne, and (more to despight the Sarrazins) La Croix Verde a Huict poinctes, bordee de Blanc. They made the vowes of Obedience, Pouertie and Chastitie, before the Patriarch of Ierusalem, called Will^am, vnder the Reigne of Bauldwine, fift of the name, King of Ierusalem, about the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred and fiftie.
In discoursing on the Order of the Ship, we obserued, how the Turkes doe hold a firme beliefe; that their great Prophet Mahomet tooke no meane delight, to goe cloathed in Greene, and that his descendants, and the Othomans onely, might perticularly weare this Colour in the Sultane garments and Turbants. Which priuiledge was not permitted to any (whatsoeuer they were) except they could approue themselues of the Stocke of the Othomans,Greene the onely delightfull colour of Mahomet. or of the race of that famous Imposture. It is the Colonell of the Turkish Empire, and Liuerie of the Great Turke; who when he will honor his fauourites wi^h any perticular respect, he giueth them a golden Staffe, and a Greene Cornet; noates of absolute command in Iustice, and in the Warres. As did in Anno One thousand sixe hundred and foure, the Grand Seigneur Hamet, first of the name, to the Bascha of Hungarie, named Hasan Vuzir.
The Popes Innocent, third of the name (the most learned Prelate that had bin before his time) Honorius the third,Great priuiledges giuen to this Order by Popes, and confirmed by other Popes. Gregorie the ninth and Innocent the fourth, gaue to this Order of Saint Lazarus very great Priueledges, and tooke them into their perticular protection. Which Priuiledges were after confirmed by the Popes Alexander the fourth, Nicholas the fourth, Clement the fourth, Iohn the two and twentieth, Gregorie the tenth, Paul the second, and by their Successours in the Holy Seate. The Buls of these Popes doe testifie the antiquitie of this Order of Saint Lazarus. And that vpon this occasion, Pope Pius, fift of the name, a natiue of Alexandria in Lombardie, by his Buls giuen in the second yeare of his Pontificalitie, and of Grace One thousand fiue hundred threescore and twelue, the seauenth of the Calends of February, and third of the Ides of the moneth of August, called it Antiquissimum Charitatis and Militiae Christi Ordinem.The Popes title giuen to thi^ Order. The Picture of this Pope is to be seene (very neerely resembling life) in one of the Glasse-windowes of the Vestrie of the Iacobines at Paris, and his Armes by him, which are Bande d' Argent, and de Sable a six Pieces, and vnder them is written. Pius Quintus Papa, Alexandrinus, Ordinis Fratrum Praedicatorum.
This Order possessed great store of goods in France, vnder the Reigns of our most Christian Kings Phillip Augustus,The wealthie possessions of this Order. Saint Lewes, and Phillip the Hardie, Son to S. Lewes. And the Kings, Phillip le Bel, Phillip le Long, Iohn the Vnluckie, Charles the Wise, Charles the Victorious, Lewes the eleauenth, Charles the eight his Son, King of France, Naples and Sicilie; Lewes the twelfth, Father of the People, and King Frances, first of the name, all bestowing great gifts on this Order, or confirming those Priuiledges which they had. But in time (which bringeth all things to an end) the Kings of England, Germanie and of Spaine, and likewise the Estates of Italie, possessed themselues of the goods belonging to this Order, euery one in his place of power and Iurisdiction: So that the chiefe House thereof, established at Boigny by King Lewes the eleauenth; saw

most of her limbs lopped off, and quite pared away, without any hope of reuiuing again.
And as for those goods, which they enioyed and possessed in France, they were carried away by the Knights of the Rhodes, by vertue of a Bull sent from Pope Innocent,This Order ioyned to that of Rhodes. eight of the name, in the yeare One thousand foure hundred fourscore and ten. Which Bull ioyned these Knights of S. Lazarus, and their Goods (in whatsoeuer parts of Christendome they were seated) to the said Order of the Knights of Rhodes, who maintained themselues in France, vntill the time of King Henry the Oreat, when Brother Aymar de Chates, Knight of Malta, and Gouernor of Diepe in Normandie (Qui portoit d' Azur, a vne Fleur de Lys d' Or, Escartele de Gueulles a vne Clef d' Argent, au Chef de Malte) forsooke the Title of great Maister of the Order of S. Lazarus, giuen af^erward to Philebert de Nerestamg, as we haue formerly said in the third Booke.
And therefore I am enforced in this Chapter, to check and reproue what hath bin said in the former cited third Booke, printed in France:An Error committed in the French Impression. because the Compositor of that Worke, growing forgetfull both of himselfe and me, transposed many lines in the Pages 700. and 701. where he hath made Saint Lewes to be Author of this Order at Boigny; insted of his great Grandfather Lewes the yonger (tearmed the Deuout or Pittifull) seauenth of the name.


CHAP. X.Croix de L'-Ordre de Saincte Catherine du Mont de Sinai. The Crosse of the Order of Saint Catharine of the Mount of Sinai.
SAint Cyprian, in the Treatise which he wrote De Montibus Sinai and Sion, declareth the excellencie of those holy Mountaines, whereof the one is scituated in the holy Citie, honored with the misteries of our Redemption;The Mountain where God conuersed with Moyses. and the other is planted in the confines of Aegypt, and deserts of the Rockie Arabia. On the top whereof, God gaue to the Prophet Moyses, the Tables of the Law, written by his own finger in Saphire Stone: so say the Rabbines, expounding the twentieth Chapter of Exodus. This Mount of Sinai, was the place where God pleased to speake face to face with Moyses, appearing to him in the forme of a burning Bush, or of a fl^ming Furnace, as it is said in the nineteenth Chapter of Exodus. Totus Mons Sinai fumabat, eo quod descendisset Dominus Deus super cum in Igne, and ascenderet fumus ex eo quasi de fornace, eratque omnis mons terribilis. Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoake, because the Lord God descended vpon it in Fire: And the smoake thereof ascended as the smoake of a furnace, and th^ whole Mount quaked greatly.
As much is said of the Mountaine Horeb, very neere to that of Sinai, where God appeared to Moyses, keeping the Sheepe of his Father in Law Raguell, the Priest of Madian. Venit ad montem Horeb, apperuitque illi Dominus in flamma Ignis de medio Rubi. He came to the Mountaine Horeb, and the Angell of the Lord appeared vnto him, out of the midst of a Bush. Moyses transported with admiration, to see the Bush wholly flaming, and yet not consuming it selfe by the long continuance; would haue approached neere to it, to vnderstand the cause. But God commanded him to put off his Shooes, and to goe farefoote vpon that Holy ground. Ne appropinques huc, solue calceamentum de pedibus tuis: locus enim in quo stas Terra Sancta est.
Vpon this Mount of Horeb it was,Where Saint Katherine endured Martyrdome. where the Angels tooke vp from the Citie of Alexandria in Aegypt, the Body of the holy Virgin Saint Katharine, named by the Greekes Aecatherine: who had suffered Martyrdome in Alexandria, vnder the Emperour Maximinus, and not vnder the other Tyrant Maxentius.
In honor and reuerence of these holy Mountaines, Pilgrimes were very desirous to see them; after they had visited the holy places in Ierusalem, and of the holy-Land.
I haue ^ead all the Authors, and seen the Maps or Tables of them, that haue described the condition and estate of these Mountaines, the ground-plot wherof they touch not, but on one side onely, as do diuers Italians and French, and namely Petrus Belonius of M^ns, in his Ob^eruations, and Iacques de Villamont, Knight of the Order of Ierusalem, a Breton Gentleman. Qui porte en Banniere d Argent au Lyon de Gueulles tenant vne Fleur de Lys de mesme, au Chef de Hierusalem. I haue a great Manuscript in Folio, and the Maps of the Holy Land, with other Prouinces in those East parts, traced and figured by the hand and penne of my late Vnckle by the Mothers side (Brother to

any Mother) and my Godfather Maister Andrew Gallus, Parisian, who (in his life time) was Councellour to the King, in his Court of Parliament at Tolossa (Deane of the Professours in the Vniuersitie of that place, the chiefest and most renowned of Christendome) the skilfullest and learnedst men of these times. Hee bare d'Argent a trois Bandes de Gueulles a vn Aigle de Sable, Coronne d Or pour Cimier sur suo Tymbre.
There are represented the two sides of these two Mountaines Sinai and Horeb, with all the perticular Stations made by the Patriarch Moses, while hee kept the Sheepe of his Father in Law: and likewise of the Children of Israel, after their admirable deliuerance from the bondage of Aegypt. The places of deuotion prepared by Christians, after our Sauiour and Redeemer Iesus Christ, are there likewise noated. In that part behinde the Mountaines, are the deserts of Arabia, and the Sea Fr^threa^^^, that is the Red Sea, otherwise called the Arabian Gulfe. Betweene the Mount named (...), and that of Horeb, this Sea maketh a Lake, and a Port or Hauen of good accesse, neere to a small Towne ca^led Raithu, inhabited with Moores, Turkes and Christians:(...) Monkes. where sometime stood an hundred and fiftie Houses, with a little Monasterie, serued by C^l^^^rs of Mount Sinai. There it was, that the Children of Israel found the twelue Weis, and the th^eescore and ten Palmes, whe^ of mention is made in the fifteenth Chapter of Exodus. At the beginning of the Red Sea, is the Towne and Port of Suez, with a strong Castell, built by the Great Turke Sultan, S^l^man, and (...) prepar^d a Fleete, to goe against the Portugals, who were become Maisters of the Ile of Ormus, and of the East Indiaes.
In elder times, the Monasterie of Saint Katharine of the Mountaine Sinai where reposeth the body of that holy Virgin, behinde, or vnder the high ^lar* was stored with a good number of Monkes whom they called Caloyers, after the manner of the Greekes:The Monastery of Katherine of Mont Sinai. bu^ now at this present (thorow necessitie) it is all, if there be two or three there ordinarily. The Pilgrimes of Ierusalem, going to the Mountaine Sinai, were entertained by these Caloyers of Saint Katharines Monasterie, and after Masse, and receiuing the holy Communion, the principall or chiefe Caloyer, made them Knights of the Order of Saint Katharine, vpon her Sepulcher or Tomb; vsing the same Interrogatories, Demands and Ceremonies, as those performed at the Holy Sepulcher in Ierusalem, which you haue heard already
The Habite and Crosse worn by the^ Knights of this Order.
 These Knights ought to weare Cloakes, and on the left side, aboue the Crosse of Ierusalem, the markes of the Martyrdome of Saint Katherine, to wit; A Wheele pierced with six Spokes of Gueulles, n^^led with Siluer. Vne Roue percee a Six R^^s de Gueulles clouee d' Argent. Like as it is here figured, by one of the same forme, which heretofore was giuen me by the deceased Mossire Claude Daub^ay, who (in his life time) was Knight of both the said Orders, Of the holy Sepulcher of Ierusalem, and of Saint Katharine of Mount Sinai, Councellour. Notarie and Secretarie to the King, House and Crowne of France, Baron de Bruyeres le Chasteau and Lord Maior of the Citie of Paris,A great (...). a man of much honor and singular experience. With him I haue diuers times conferred, concerning his Voyages and obseruations, as wel at Constantinople, where he had soiourned very long time, as to other Prouinces in the East parts; and namely in ^^gypt, which he had past quite thorow, euen from the Port of Suez, so farre as to Ierusalem. To preserue the memorie of him to posteritie, we will describe his Armes, and the Genealogie of his Children. Il Portoit d Argent a Treis Tres^es de Sable, deux en Chef, and vn en poincte, and vn Croissant de Gueulles en A^^^me
By Madam Mary l' Alemant his wife, Qui portoit de Gueulles au Cheuron d' Or, a Treis Roser d' Argent, Deux on Chef and vne en Poincte, he hath left two Daughters and one Son.
Peter Daubray, who (meerely in deuotion) forsooke the World, and Riches of his house, to become a Chartreux Monke, and is Proctour de Bourfontaine.
The Daughters are named
D^^e Mary Daubray, Wife to Messire Louis de Cirier, Lord of Neufchelles, Du Plesses sur Au^^u^; de la Ville neusue, Pisselen, Truine, Sainct George, and Baron de Bru^er^s l^ Chasteau, by meanes of his Wife. The same Le Cirier Porte d' Azur a trois Licornes d Or, C^m^er L^corne naissante d Or.
And the other Daughter is
Dame Margaret Daubray, Wife to Messire Francois Pot, Lord of Rhodes, and of Chemaux, Knight and Prouest of both the Orders, Great Maister of the Ceremonies of France, Pl^ Esquire Ca^uer, and Bugle-Bearer to the King: whom we haue said to beare ^ Or a la Face d Azur au Lambeau de Gueules. It is impossible, but that a good Tree should, ring forth good fruite, and a worthy man, to haue Children that shall follow his stepps.

Beatitulo Vbi qui non tull in consilium Impiorum, and cum societate Derisorum non sedit. Salin in^^titutione Domini voluntas eius, and in lege eius Noctu Diuque meditabitur. Erit t^quv^ A bor quae plantata est super riues Aquarum, cuius fructus maturescit in tempere suo, folia eius n^n destaunt, and omne germen eius quod germinat, gran scit, and proficit. Non sic Impij, sed sicut ^st pula quam proijcit Ventus. Propterea non cons^stent Impij in die lisdicij magni, nequ^ Peccatores in societate Iustorum. Quoniam manifesta est ante D^minum via Iustorum, and Via In piorum perdetur.


Blessed is the man, that hath not walked in the Councell of the vngodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, and hath not sit in the seat of the scornefull. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law, will hee exercise himselfe day and night. And hee shall be like a tree planted by the wat^rs side: that will bring forth his fruit in due season. His leafe also shall not wither: and looke whatsoeuer he doth, it shall prosper. As for the vngodly it is not so with them: but they we like the chaffe, which the winde scattereth away from the face of the earth. Therefore the vngodly shall not bee able to stand in the iudgement: neither the sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. But the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous, and the way of the vngodly shall perish.

These are the Blessings, which it ple^seth God to bestow vpon a good man, and to multiply his race vpon the face of the Earth.


CHAP. XI. Of other Militarie Orders, that were in the Holy Land.
I Finde, that vnder the first Latine Kings of Ierusalem,Autres Ordres Militaires de la Lewe-Saincte. there were many other Orders of Knighthood: wh^ch are vtterly lost, as well as the rest, and there remaineth no more but an obscure memory of them. Vnder the Reignes of he second and third Kings, two Castells were built, which caried one and the same name of Mont^-Ioye. The First was betweene Ramah and the Holy-Citty, on the pointe of the Mountaine,Of two Castells in the Holy-Land. from whence the Pilgrimes doe discouer the Citty of Ierusalem: And there they dismount from their Horsses, putting off their Hose and Shooes, and descend downe bare footed so farre as to the Conuent of the Cordeliers, or Gray Fryers.The first Castell.
The other Castell was on the Mountaines of Iudea, aboue the Citty of Dauid, called Bethleem, otherwise named Ephrata, neere to the Tower of Ader, where the Angel deliuered the tydings of Ioy and Reioycing to the Sheepheards,The second Castell. concerning the Birth of the Worlds Sauiour. At the same place where the Angels appeared, the first Christians erected there an Oratoria, and place of deuotion, which they named Ad Tres Pastores: in memory of Three Sheepheards, which went to worship the King of Kings, in a Stable hewen out of a Rocke. You heare what is said by the Learned, Cardinall Baronius, in the First Tome of his Ecclesiasticall Annales.
In these two Castels were (for defence against the courses of the Alarbes) Knights, who had the name of their Garrison,Knights Warriours against the Alarbes, named Bretheren of Mon^ Ioy^ De Monte Gaudio. wearing red Cloakes, and on their Breast a white Star with fiue Rayes or beames. This Order was approued by Pope Alexander, third of the name, who gaue them the Rule of Saint Augustine, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred and fourescore.
Being driuen out of Syria (as well as the other were) they obtained dwelling in diuers Prouinces of Europe; and namely in the Kingdomes of Castile, and of Valen^ia la Grande,Names giuen according to the places where they dwelt. where they were acknowledged vnder diuers appellations, answerable to the places where they dwelt. In Castile they were called The Knights of Monfra^, by reason that the place so named was giuen them by King Ferdinand, tearmed the Saint, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred twenty and one. In Castile likewise they were named The Knights of Trugillo, a Citie which was giuen by the King of Castile, Alphonso the ninth, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred twentie and eight, with the Lands of Sancta Cruz, Zuferola, Cabana, Albata, and other more beside.
Their first name in the Holy-Land.In Arragon and Valencia they possessed Lands likewise, but were there called by their auncient denomination: Los Freyles de Mongoia; Brethren of the Mount of Ioye. In Spaine there is a memory of a great Maister of this Order, named the Count Rodrigo Goncales. Maestre de Monfrac de la Orden de Monte-Gaudio. The Templers possessed themselues of those Lands which they had in Arragon, and in Valencia. In following time, the Brethren of Monfrac, ioyned themselues with the Brethren of the Order of Calatraua, and they of Trugillo, with them of the Order of Alcantara, by which meanes the memory of this Order is lost; onely we haue some noates left in the writings of Hieronymus Romanus, in his Common-wealth; and by Franciscu^ Radez d Andrada, in his Chronicle of the Order of Alcantara. Next to the Order of Mont-Ioye, march them of
The Knights of Saint Iohn of Acres.Saint Iohn of Acres, who at the beginning (euen as the other did) imployed their paines in curing diseased Pilgrimes, who, after they had recouered health, they kept them with them, to guard and defend the insultings of the Infidell Alarbes. They followed the rule of Saint Augustine; had Saint Iohn Baptist for their Patron, ware a Black Habite, and a White Crosse Pattee. After the taking of Acres, they arriued in Spayne, in the time of Alphonso the Astrologer, who gaue them (for abyding) diuers places in Castille. The Learned Tostatus, in his Commentaries vpon Iosuah, the Sixteene and Nineteene Chapters, obserueth their arriuall, decadence and ending: but concerning the birth and originall of this Order, it is vncertaine and doubtfull.
The Order of Saint Thomas, that was Instituted by the King of England, Richard Sirnamed Coeur de Lyon, after the surprisall of Acres. And being of the English Nation,Knights of the Order of Saint Thomas, Instituted by King Richard of England, the first. they held the Rule of Saint Augustine, wore a White Habite, and a full Red Crosse, charged in the midst with a White Scallop. They tooke for their Patrone (as I haue heard) the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Metropolitane of England, Thomas Becket, who suffered Martyrdome (as his fauourours say) vnder the King of England Henry, Second of the Name, the Nine and Twentieth day of December, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, one hundred, threescore and fifteene. He ba^e for Armes De Sable a vn Lyon d'Argent, and his successours, dwelling at Rouen and at Paris (after the taking of Pontoise against the Englinsh, vnder King Charles the Seauenth and Victorious:) caried D'Azur a Trois Tours d'Or Massonnes de Sable, Deux e^ Chef, et vne en Poincte, as we haue said in our Historie of Nauarre.
Knights of Sainte Gerion.The Order of Saint Gerion, who suffered Martyrdome at Cologne in Germanie, with Three hundred and eighteene in his Company, during the Persecution of the Church, excited by the Emperour Maximianus. It was Instituted by the Emperour Frederick Barbarossa: but others say by Frederick the Second, and composed only of Gentlemen of the Germaine Nation. The Knights of this Order, held the Rule of Saint Augustine; wore a White Habi^e, and a full Black Crosse.
Knights of Saint Blaze.The Order of Saint Blaze, Bishop of Armenia, Martyred vnder the Emperour Di^clesian. It was at the height, when the Kings of Armenia, of the Illustrious House of Luzignan, kept their Court and Iurisdiction in the Citty of Acres. And the Knights

of this Order, were Officers and Seruants to the Kings of Armenia, knowne to be of their traine and House; by their habite of Skye-Couller, and a Crosse of Gold worne vpon their breasts, which serued as a Brizure to the Lyon of Armenia, caried by them of Luzignan, as we haue said: in stead of the Auncient Shield, belonging to the Kings and Princes of Armenia, which was D'Azur a Trois Testes de Roynes Amazones d Argent, Coronnees d'Or. 2. et. 1.


CHAP. XII. Orders of the East:Ordres du ^eu^nt, Inde^ Ori^tales, and Occiden^a^e^. And likewise of the East and West Indiaes.
THe Lord of Ioinuille in Champaigne, obserueth in the Three and Thirtieth Chapter, of the life of the Great King Saint Lewes, that the Soldane of Babylon, and of Suria, otherwise called Syria; had Knights that were named De la Hal^qua, that is to say, Knights of the Chamber of Honour.Knights of the Chamber of Honor, created by the Solda^es of Ba^ylon. These were the strength of the Soldanes, as are the Gemissa^res, or Gingisqueres of the Great Turke. These were children (issued and descended of Slaues brought from the East, and solde in Egypt) whom the Soldanes caused to be nourished and carefully educated, and from their tender youth, to bend Bowes, and shoote in them: And according as they grew and encreased in strength and yeares, so they were inured to stronger Armes. Being in the floure of their time, they were enrouled among the Knights of Honor and admitted to guard the Body and person of the Soldane: and th^n they were called Les Bahoris du Souldan, who made them Knights.
The Souldanes or Sultanes, and Tsultans (that is to say Seigneurs) of Babylon and of Suria, beare in Armes, L'Escu d'Or, au Chef de Gueules, a Deux Faces de mesme:The Armes of the Soldanes. La Premiere Br^tesse du coste du Chef seulement; et Autre Haut et B^s.
The Knights de la Halcqua Portoient tous l^Escu d'Or: But it was distinguished from that of the Grand Seigneur, by diuers Charges and Brizures. As namely by Bendes, or by Barres of Gueules: Or by Fowles, Roses, Griffons or other Creatures, according as they were deuised.

Concerning the East Indiaes.
IN the East Indiaes is the mighty Kingdome of China,Of the great kingdome of China. the scituation whereof is very great, vnder the Tropick of Cancer, the one side thereof extendeth it selfe to the North-East, and to the South-East, the length of Foure hundred miles. It is limitted or bounded on the Meridionall or Southside, with the ^ingdome of Cochinchina; On the West or Sun-setting, it hath Tartaria and Persia. Ptolomie acknowledgeth this flourishing Kingdome, vnder the name of Sinarum Populi, in imitation of Geographers that went before him. And they more moderne, haue comprehended this Kingdome of China (the best pollicied and gouerned in the World) to be properly named the Kingdome of Mangi, vnder the name of Cathay, common (by ignorance) to Tartaria,The Chinchis Cham Gouernour of Persia* etc. at such time as the Chinchis Cham had in his power and commaund, the Realmes of Persia, and of Prester Iohn, wholly exterminated (in his time) from all memory and reuiuing againe. For it is a populare errour, to say that there is such a State in the World, confounding it with the Great Negus, Lord of Athiopia, where the Grand-Cham of Tartaria neuer came to set footing.
The Kingdome of China, deuided from Tataria by a List or threading of Mountaines, contayning Fiue hundred miles in length (the places of accesse and passage being enclosed with walls) and contayneth Fifteene Prouinces, as namely Foquiem,The fiftene Prouinces of China. Olam, Sinsay, Susan, Vansay, Oquemam, Aucheo, Hona, Quanton, Quicheo, Chequeam, Saxi, Aynaon, Tolanchia, and Paquia. The first Thirteene of these are eche one gouerned by a Vice-Roy, the two beside, they haue no other Gouernour then the King: in regard that these two last Prouinces Tolanchin and Paquin, are Frontiers to Tartaria, the Great Chams whereof haue heertofore conquered, yea, and gouerned China, in the time of Tamberlaine, King of the Parthians, and Son in Law to the Great Cham.


The Capitall or chiefe Citty, where the King maketh his ordenary abyding, is i^ the language of the Countrey) called Xuntien, and by two other names Taybijn, and Quinzay; and by them of Malabar and Iapan, Cassagale, signifying, both in the one and other tongue, The Citty of Heauen: because the ordenary title, which those people doe attribute to the Kings of China,The King of China Lord of th^ World, and Sonne of Heaue^. His Armes. is Lord of the World, and Sonne of Heauen. And therfore his Armes and Banners are whollie, D'vn beau Bleu-Celeste, and d'Azur de Roche d'Inde a vn Croissant tourne en C. d'Argent, a vne Estoile d'Or en Face.
And these Armes are to be seene painted on the Gates of the Citties of China, which are a great many in number. But concerning the Armes of the Kingdome in generall;The Armes of the Kingdome. they are D'Argent, a Trois Testes d'Hommes de Sable, au Buz, et haut de la Poictrine de Gueules, Deux en Chef, et vne en Poincte.
The Cit^y of Quinzay contayneth in length, so much ground as a Knight (well mounted) can ride ouer in a day. And the greatnesse thereof is described by Marcus Paulus Venetus, in the Threescore and Fourth Chapter of his Second Booke: And by Ioannes Gonsalez de Mendoza, and others beside, who haue written on the wonders of this mighty Kingdome. Not forgetting our Frenche Lucretius, William de Saluste, Lord du Bartas, in the ending of the Fourth day of his First Weeke.

Celuy qui dans l^enclos des Murs de Cassagale
Foule a sec de ses Pieds la M^r Orientale,
Et qui passe, en suiuant tous ses beaux Carrefours,
Et Douze Mille Ponts, and Douze Mille Tours.


Du Bartas su^ la find^ Quatr^esme ^our de sa Premiere Sopmaine.Those that surueighing mighty Cassagalle,
Within the circuit of her spacious Wall,
Doe drie foote dance on th'Ori^ntall Seas,
And passe in all her goodly crossing wayes,
And statelie streetes, fronted with sumptuous Bowers;
Twelue Thousand Bridges and Twelue Thousand Towers.

Because this Citty is built vpon a Lake, after the same manner as is Venice, and other the like Citties.
Distat ad Vrbe Singui quinque dierum spatio alia Vrbs insignis nomine Quinsai, q^^d sonat Ciuitatem Coeli, and est tam magna, vt maior in orbe non putetur. Et ego Marcus (the Venetian Marcus Paulus had seene the whole extendure of China, and the Indiaes) fui in hac Ciuitate, and omnia diligenter lustraui, aduert^ns Consuetudines e^us, and mores populi, and quae illic viderim breuiter, and fideliter referam. Continet circuitus h^ius Vrbis in gyro Milliaria circiter Centum: Pontes vero lapideos habet ^u^decim Milli^, eosque tam altos, vt Naues magnae, erecto malo, pertransire possint. ^undus autem Ciuitatis est in l^co paludeso, fere vt Venetiae. Distat haec Vrbs Orientem versu^ ab Oceane V^ginti quinque Milliaribus, ibi in littere Maris s^ta est Ciuitas Cansu, Portus comm^dissimus, ad quem locum infinitae Naues conueniunt ex India, and alijs regionibus. A Quinsai vero transit fluuius ad Portum illum, per quem magna vis mercium adducitur.
Now, because Latine is not familiare to euery vnderstanding; as my Authour hath bestowed a Frenche version of it, so haue I done the like in English.
The words alleadged by Marcus Paulin Venet^.There are Fiue dayes iourney of ground in distance, betweene the Citty of Singuifu, so farre as to another famous and renowned Citty, which is called Quinzai, that is to say, The Citty of Heauen. It is of such great extendure, that men doe verily beleeue, there is not the like of it in this World. I speake it, because I haue seene it from the one end to the other, and obserued the behauiour and manner of life of the dwellers therein: Wherefore I will briefely and faithfully make report, of that which I haue knowne. The Circuite or Guirdling thereof, is an Hundred Thousand paces (allowing Foure Thousand paces to a Mile, it would be fiue and twenty miles about) It hath Twelue Thousand Bridges of goodly Stone, the Arches whereof are mounted so high; that Shippes, doe easily passe vnder them, with full spread Sayles. The Plantation or seating is in a Marish, like to that of Venice. From this Citty bending towards the East, there are Fiue and Twenty Thousand paces, so farre as to the Ocean Sea, on the shoare whereof is seated the Citty of Cantonfu (the names of the Citties of China, haue euermore their ending in this Sillable Fu, which signifieth a Citty in the Chinoise language) garnished with a goodly Porte or Harbour: And therefore

Shippes of Persia, Ormus, Goa, Cochin, Cananor, from the Phillippies, Iapan, Sian, and from other places of the East Indiaes, laden with all kinds of goods, doe arriue there in plentifull manner. From Quinzay runneth a great Riuer, and commeth to discharge it selfe at this Hauen of Cantonfu: by meanes whereof, Shippes and other Vessells (laden with Merchandises) doe come to Quinzai.
All the Citties of China haue their Vniuersities,Flourishing Vniuersities in the Citties of China. flourishing with Learned Professours: who doe teach all the partes of Philosophie and the Mathematicks. And their last Studie is the Lawes and Customes of the Countrey, the best gouerned of any in the world. Mechanicall Artes are there in full perfection; the whole world trauaileth thither, and no idle or slothfull person is to be seene there begging for sustenance, vpon paine of death.
The degrees of Honor, are the dignity of Doctours and Licentiates,Concerning degrees of Honor. some in Philosophie, and others in the Mathematicks: but the greatest degree of all, is to be Doctour of the Lawes, the most honored in China, next after the Mandarins.
The Doctours are named Loitias, who sit and are caried in Seates, couered with Veyles and Canopies of Silke, embrodered and wouen with Gold and Siluer.The dignity of Doctour. And looke how faire these Doctours haue proceeded in Learning and Knowledge, so much the more are they aduanced in Honour and dignity: For (according to their capacity) they attaine to the Gouernment of the Prouinces,Knights of the Seignour. and are made Manda^^ns, that is to say, Knights to the Lord.
Out of the number of these Loitias, the most skillfull of them are commanded to the Court, where the King giueth them the title of Knights, and the noate of Mandarins that is appointed Hatt or Bonnet of red silke,The Bonnet and Habite of Knighthood. faced with rich Hermines or Martins zublins, whereon is fastened a Star of Golde, with six Rayes or Beames, which is the marke and noate of Knight-hood. Vnder this Bonnet is a vaile of crimsen silke broched with Gold and Siluer, which defendeth downe vpon the shoulders, and at the poynt of this Hood or Chaperon of the Knight, is a great Tassell or button of Golde, the longe Robe traileth downe to the foote, being of fine costly Silke, and bordered beneath with Limbes of Gold and Siluer: the rest is embrodered with all kindes of Creatures and flowers, shaped according to life. And a great Girdle of Gold, curiously set with precious Stones, which Girdle commeth three times about the body, and (in ste^d of Stockings) Guilded Buskins.
The King, in giuing his Order of the Starre to these Loitias, maketh them thereby Mandarins, that is to say, Counts,The Kings Order of the Starre to his Loi^^as and Mandari^^. Gouernours and Vice-Royes of Prouinces (beside that of their birth) where they haue their Palace Royall. In the Haule of Presence, is the Image or Picture of the King, before which the Mandarin falleth on his Knees, and prostrateth himselfe with all reuerence, and before he presumeth to sit downe in the Seate of Iustice. Such Honor and Reuerence is giuen to these Loitias and Mandarins; as no man speaketh to any of them, but vpon his knees, and Requests are made to them by writing, as they vsed to doe to the Romaine Emperours. When they passe thorow the Streetes, all the people withdraw themselues aside, to make them passage, and humbly fall vpon their knees. Let vs now crosse the Ocean Sea from the Porte of Cantonfu, and sayle to the coast of Malabar, in the East-Indiaes.
Malabar extendeth it selfe from Barcelos, so farre as to the Cape of Commorino,Concerning Malabar and her seuerall Kingdomes. and in this extendure are the Kingdomes of Cananor, Montingue, Badara, Tananour, Cochin, C^^lan, C^mmorino, and of Calecut, which is the principall Kingdome, and the King thereof beareth the title of Samorin, that is to say Emperour, in the vsuall language of Malabar.
These Indiaes are inhabited by three kinds of people; the Bramenes (in the Auncient Geographers called Brachmanes) which are Priests,Three seuerall kinds of people inhabiting these Indiaes. of the most Noble and Auncient race in these East Indies. They abstaine from the vse of any Wine, and from all things that hath life; sustaining themselues with Fruits, Hearbs and White-meates, and drinking nothing but cleare Water. They neuer make alliance or medling with any, but such as are Bramenes, and marry not, but once in their life time.Of the B^amenes or Brachmanes. They goe habited in cloth of Cotton, with White Turbants on their Heades, and weare Red Shoes vpon their Feete.
The only marke or noate, which maketh them to be discerned from other people;Their distinguishing from other people. is a C^rdon of three twisted Cotten Threads, which they weare about their naked bodies, like to the Knights of the Bande in Spayne. This Scarffe or kind of Bauldrick, is as an Order, Which is giuen to them in their Temples and Pagodes, with great expences and solemnity.
The greatest despight or iniurie, that can be done to a Bramene; is to breake his Scarffe or Cordon,Degradation from Nobility. the outward noate of his Nobility. He must then haue an other giuen him, with the selfe same Ceremony as the first was. He being attainted and conuinced of any Crime, punishable with a noate of infamy: is to haue his Scarffe and Cordon taken from him, as degrading him from Nobility; this is first done vnto him, before he be banished from the Company, and declared to be but a ^eoman or Clowne.
The Masle children of these Bramenes, hauing attained to the Age of Seauen yeares; are brought to the Pagode, where the Chiefe High Priest putteth vpon their naked skinne, a Scarffe or Belt of two fingers breadth, made of the hide of a wilde Asse, which in their Indian and Malabar language, they tearme Cresuamengam. Before the receiuing of this Ceremony: they are not permitted to feede on An Indian Sallad hearbe resembling the Gill^^oure plant, o^ bastard Pepper. Betell: And from this time forward, they are knowne to be Sonnes of the Bramenes, and then they are enstructed to manage Armes, or to attend on the seruice and worship of their Idolls, because they haue no other imployment, but one of these two vocations, howbeit some haue written, that they addict themselues to Merchandise.
The young Squires doe weare this Belt or Scarffe, crossing the body vnder the left Arme,How they deale with the young Squires. vntill the age of foureteene yeares, and then they are made Bramenes, with infinite sounding of Trumpets and sollemnities; taking then from them the Leather Belt, to put on the Scarffe of three Cotton Threads.
Concerning the Samorin.The Samorin is of the Bramene race, and weareth this Cordon, as Chiefe of this Order, which they hold to be the most Noble in all the World, as also that Race, which hath continued aboue Twelue Thousand yeares, if we please to beleeue their Annales.
The Kings of Cal^^uth beare for Armes, L'Escu d'Argent seme sans nombre de Cerneilles de Sable Birdes which they hold in such reuerence (as being the Symbole of very long life) that they are fed and nourished,Crowes helde in great reuerence. with the releefes and re^cisions of the Samorins Table (who feedeth on nothing but Fruits) by the hands of the Bramenes, who perfourme this seruice themselues.
The Second condition of the Inhabitants in Malabar, are the Nayres; all of Noble Extraction, and meddle in no alliance but among themselues. They giue themselues wholly to Armes,Nay^es the second sort of people. and haue not any other exercise: being alwayes imployed in the Kings seruice, neere about his person, or else in his Warres. The Heads and Principall men of these Nayres, are honored by the Samorin, giuing them a great Bracelet of Gold vpon the right Arme, which is the noate of the Second Order of Knighthood in the East Indiaes. They weare their hayre very long, neuer cutting it,The second Order of Knighthood. but tressed and twined about their heads, because they doe not vse any Turbant.
The last condition is of the common popularity and Mechanicall persons, whom they call Poullia,Po^llia and Moncoys the third sort of people. and Moncoys, which is no matter of our subiect. Concerning the perticularities formerly spoken of the East Indiaes, discouered and possessed by the Portugalles: they are taken out of the writings of Ieronimo Ozorius, Bishop of Sylues in the Algarues; And Edouardo Barboza, a Portuguize; The Nauigations of Lud^uicus Romanus Patritius; Hugo de Linscote Hollander; And (of fresher date) those of Frances Pyrard de Lauall in Bretaine. Now proceed we to the West Indies, possessed by the Spanyards.


Concerning the West-Indiaes.
Creation of K^^ghts to the West Indiaes.THe Yngas Kings of Perou, create their Knights with many Ceremonies, on the principall day of their Feast, which they celebrate yearely in December. Vpon which day, the Sonnes of the Ingas and Caciques, that is to say, the Chiefest and principall men of the Countrey, newly made Knights; doe weare Scarffes of most odorifferous Flowers, stretching from the right Shoulder, vnder the left Arme. They are boared or pierced thorow the Eares, to the end, that they should be mind^^^^,

and remember the day whereon they were created Knights. And the Papas, which in the language of the Countrey, is tearmed the High Priest, maketh vpon their foreheads a streake of Bloud, of the Beastes offered in Sacrifice,The Office and Ceremonie of the Papas to the new Knight^. extending from the right Eare to the left, and causeth them to sweare: that they shall bee (all their life time) Faythfull and Loyall Knights of the Inga. As we learne by Iosephus Acosta, in the Eight and Twentieth Chapter of the Fift Booke, of his Naturall History of the Indiaes.


Concerning Mexico.
THe Kings of Mexico, whose power was quite quayled and exterminated,Many Orders among the Mexicanes. by the valiant Spanishe Captayne Ferdinando Corteze (for vertue is to bee honoured wheresoeuer it is found) had among them diuers Orders of Knighthood: so saith the same Acosta, in the Sixe and Twentieth Chapter of his Sixt Booke.
The most Honorable was of them, who wore their Haire tied vp like a Crowne (being thereby stiled) with a Red Riband, and on the top thereof a great Plume,Knights of the Crowne. the Lambrequins whereof shadowed and couered the shoulders, with Roules or Wreathes of Red Silke in the same manner, and in the fashion of curled locks of Haire: They vsed to weare so many Roules and Lambrequins, as they had bin present in foughten Battailes, and Actions of Warre.
The Second Order of Knights,Knights of the Eagles. was of them that were tearmed Knights of the Eagles.
The Third Order was that of Lyons and Typres, being all valiant and worthy persons, that made themselues knowne and famous by Warre:Knights of Lyons and Tygres. going Armed and cloathed in the skinnes of Tygres, of Lyons, and of other wilde Beastes, which serued as a noate of their Armorie.
The meanest Order of all, was of them which were called Graye Knights, who had their Hayre cut round aboue their Eares, as it were with a dish,Graye Knights as was a great obser^ation (in eldertimes) among Kings and Princes. These men were properly Esquiers, Armed very lightly, only to the Girdling; whereas the other were Armed from head to foote.
All which Orders of Knights had this aduantage and priueledge, to weare both Gold and Siluer in their apparell and garments; to bee serued at their tables in vesselles of Gold and Siluer enamelled; and to weare Stockings of Honour,Priueledges belonging to these Knights. as namely Red Buskins, thickly powdred with flowers of Gold and Siluer. For the common people, they had no vse at all of Stockings, neither had any other seruice, but in Vesselles of Earth, neither might garment themselues, but with Nequen, that is to say ^^^rras, course Hempen and Hurden cloth.
Eche Order of these Knights, had their being and lodging at the Pallace Royall,The Knights Lodgings. the Portall or principall entrance whereof, was figured with the Armes and Enseignes of the Order.
The First, was called The Hostell of Princes.
The Second, was of Eagles.
The Third, of Lyons and Tygres: And
The last, Of Graye Knights.
In the First Booke of these Noble Recherches, wee haue obserued the Armes, which were caried by the Ingas of the West-Indiaes.


The End of the Ninth Booke.



The Tenth Booke is deuided into seuerall Tracts.
1. Of the Nine VVorthies of the World.2. Of Duelloes and Single Combats at the Sharpe, and to the vtmost extremitie of Life.3. Of Iousts, Tourneyes and Tournaments.4. Of Military Paynes and punishments.5. Of Degradation of Noblemen.6. Of Funerall Pompe for Emperours, Kings, Princes, Knights of Order, and meaner Persons.

CHAP. I. Of those Nine Worthies, Or Faraous Men of the World, which haue bin renowned (by Historie) to all future Ages.
THE Life of Man, that hath no knowledge in Learning and Letters,Seneca ad Lucillium. is nothing else but an vndoubted death. Otium sine Litteris vera Mors est, and viui Hominis sepultura. So we learne of Seneca, writing to Lucillins in his Epistle.
Homer, Quintus Calaber his Continuer; Eustatius their Interpreter, with their pursuers and followers, haue written in their Mithalogicall or Morall Fables (which serue for Learners) that Iupiter made an assembly or meeting of the Gods in Euboea (one of the Islands of the Egeum Sea, in the Countrey and Prouince of Boetia) to vnderstand and conclude: What thing was most necessary and profitable for the life of Man.The cause why the Gods assembled together. Which Proposition was balotted, according to the seuerall iudgements of this extraordinary and wunderfull Assembly; some speaking after one manner, and others as themselues best pleased.
Vulcane said, that it was Fire,Fire. in regard that without this Element; it was impossible for man to liue any long time: Fire being one of the Principles of Nature, the principall instrument of Generation, and the conseruation thereof.
Neptune (the pretended God of Waters) stood vp, and maintained; that it was the Element of Water without which the World could not be.Water.
Water is the best Element.
(Saith Pindarus) and most part of the Nations in the World, doe liue without the vse of Fire, rather then the other Element, his contrary.
Tilling and Husbanding of the ground, signified by the Oxe.Ceres, (that good and vertuous Mother) shee auouched the Oxe, the noate and Symbole of Tillage or Husbandry, which was so behouefull and necessary for the life of man: that she made no doubt, but to winne the Honor from all the other opinionists. Whereunto she added, that of all kinds and manner of liuing: there was none more iust and innocent, Then the Countrey Life.

Beatus ille qui procul negotijs
Vt prisca gens Mortalium
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis.

Mercurie (the Sophister, and gentle Messenger of the Gods,A House for the Harbour of Man. with the Golden Beard) defended a House, rather then any thing else, which gaue harbour and couerture to a man, to exempte and shield him from the Ayres iniuries, and furious violences of Beastes. He alleadged withall, that in former times, Men liuing altogether in the open fields, had nothing but Woodes for their Housing; Leaues of Trees for their Bed and Bolster; and hearbs for their foode and diet.
Sylua Domus erat: Cibus, Herba: Cubilia, Frondes.
But he had inuented the manner of buylding and Carpenting Houses,Mercurie said to be the Inuenter of Building. to erect and ioyne them together in number and quantity, which proued to be the sourse and first birth of vnity among Men: whereby this vaunting Doctour promised himselfe, to haue the Honour of the cause, and made the reckoning without his Hoaste. But then stept vp.
Minerua, the Goddesse of Sciences, a Virgin engendred in the Braine of Iupiter, proclaimed to be King of the Gods and Men: Shee very well liked and allowed, that Fire, Water, Husbandry, Townes and Citties were (in trueth) necessary, conuenient and beneficiall for men. Yet notwithstanding, alleadged, that the Gods had some other aime and end, then the Temporall condition of Man, and for his body only. For, he was made to mounte, and pierce much higher; in regard,The Allegations of Minerua concerning Man. that a sparke of the Diuinity was breathed into him, to animate, conduct and mould his spirit: To know what was past: To guide and order the present: And to diuine of things to come. Diuersity of Times, the knowledge whereof was attained vnto by Learning or Letters, that is to say: By reading in the Breuiarie of the World, that is
Historie, the Science of Sciences; the Lanterne to Humaine Life; the faithfull Register of Honour and Blame; the Schoole of good and euill; the Iudge,Concerning the Honor and Maiesty of History. the Rasor, and the Touchstone of Kings and Princes, yea, and of men. And, to speake all in one word, the Grauing Instrument, that works in the Table of Immortality. This opinion was admired, and much commended in the venerable Consistory of the Gods in generall: And the Precedency adiudged to the Learned Pallas.
To you then (Braue and Generous Noblemen) doth this discourse present it selfe, that it may enstruct you, to imploye the most part of those Houres, which remaine to you, next after the seruice of God, wherewith you are to begin the day:) The offer of your persons to the King, and the exercises of Honour,Exercises best besee^ing a Noble or Gentleman. and to the Reading of Historie; is that which can only make you capable, of seruing and benefitting the Common-wealth. What other Houres are remayning, should be imployed in the reading of Books, which tend to profit, and aime at the end of making you the wiser. Shunne and detest all such Books, as offend or wound the Soule, and may be mollestuous to the minde: Such as are Amadis de Gaule, and other fabulous Romancers. Historie appertaineth to a Noble-Man: It ought to be his principall Study,Comparison of Alexander the Great. by example of Alexander the Great, who (by the reading thereof, conquered all the World. For which cause, Historie hath rancked him among the Valiant men of the World, whom Fabulous Romancers haue called the Nine Worthies, giuing to them this Order and Armes.

The First Ranck of the Nine Worthies.
IAson, the pretended Conquerour of the Golden-Fleece. Qui portoit de Gueules, seme de dents, d'ou naissent and sortent des Testes d'Hommes armez de Cabasset d'Argent, a vne Toison d'Or mise en Pal, a cornee d'Azur. Before this Voyage. Il portoit de Gueules a vn Leopard Serpente d'Argent, deuorant vn Sceptre d'Or. But other Romancers set downe in the place of this Iason:
Iosuah, Iudge of Israell, whom they make to beare D'Or, a vne Teste de Lyon arrachee de Gueules, Languee de mesme.
Hector of Troy, D'Or a vn Lyon de Gueules, assis sur vne Chaire de Sable (others say De Pourpre) tenant de ses pattes vne Halebarde d'Argent, au manche d'Azur, le dict Lyon Arme and Lampasse de mesme.
King Dauid, to whom they giue D'Azur, a vne Harpe d'Or, montee de Cordes, d'Argent, a vne Bordure de mesme Diapree de Gueules: with these Hebrew words

(...). de Sable. Others giue him D'Argent, a vne fronde d'Azur, chargee d'vn Caillou d Or.
Alexander the Great, D'Or, au Lyon de Gueules, Arme, and Lampasse de Azur.
Iudas Machabeus, to whom they giue diuers Armes. First D'Or, a vn Basilic de Sable, membre, and Coronne de Gueules. And then afterward D'Or, a vne Roche en Montagne de Sable, chargee d'vne Ancre d'Argent en Pal, and sur la Stangue d'icelle, ce mot Hebrew (...) de Gueules.
Iulius Caesar, whom they make to beare D'Or a vne Aigle esploye (that is to say, with two Testes de Sable, aux Diademes, Langues and Armes de Gueules. Quite against all trueth, because euery one knoweth, that the said Iulius Caesar, and his Successours the Emperours of Rome:Constantine gaue first the displayed Eagle, and his meaning thereby. Porterent de Gueules a vne seule Aigle d'Or. Constantine the Great, hauing planted his Imperiall Throane at Bizantium (which after his name was called Constantinople, and new Rome) was the first that tooke the Eagle displayed. Therby to shew, that the Romaine Empire comprehended both the East and West: Armes still retained by the Emperours his Successours, as well in the East as West.
King Arthur, who bare (by their saying) D'Azur, a Treize Coronnes d'Or. 4.4.4.1. A meere Fable.
Charlemaigne, King of France, and Emperour of the West, to whom they giue for Armes (contrary to trueth) Party, le Premier d'Or, a vne demy* Aigle esployee de Sable, Languee, Diademee, and Armee de Gueules; le Deuxiesme de France sans nombre. And such were borne by the Frenche Emperours his descend^nts, vntill such time as they of the Saxon House, vsurped the Empire against the French: For then they chaunged the Armes of Europe,The Saxon House altered the Armes of Europe. and tooke the Mettall and Couller, belonging to the Armes of the Emperour Otho, whom the Germaines called the Great, and who (as Duke of Saxonie) Portoit Face d Or, and de Sable de Six pieces. And emblazoned them of the Empire D'Or a l'Aigle Esploye de Sable, Arme, Lampasse, and Coronne d'vn Dudeme de Gueules.
Godfrey of Bologne, First King of Ierusalem, Armed (according to Trueth) D'Argent a la Croix potencee d'Or, and Cantonnee de Quatre Croisettes de mesme. Heere you see what, and whom those Romancers haue made to be the Nine-Worthies, alwayes mingling fabulous Tales, among their most serious writings. For, to place Iason, Hector of Troy and Arthur of Bretaigne, among the valiant and famous men of the worlde, are meerly follies: But to make a true Historie, you must ranck them in this manner.
The true ranck of the Nine WorthiesIosuah, Gedeon, Sampson, Dauid, Iudas Machabeus, Aleander the Great, Iulius Caesar, Charlemaige: And Godfrey of Bologne.
And* not to stand vpon Blazons and Deuises, giuen them by fabulous Romancers, and most part of them falsely: eche of them ought to be Armed according to truth, from the foote of their owne braue actions in Armes. And because we know not what were the perticuler Armes of Iosuah,See the first Tome and first Chapter. Gedeon, and Sampson, beside those Generall of the Tribes and Linages, of whence they were issued and descended, which we haue obserued in the first Booke and Chapter of these famous Antiquities: we may lawfully giue them deuises, rather then Armes proper, and (by Example) Arme
Iosuah D'Azur, au Soleil d'Or. In regard that at his Prayer, God made the Sunne to stand still in the Firmament,Armes proper and pertinent to the persons. vntill he had vanquished and ouercome the fiue Kings of Chanaan, according as it is written in the Tenth Chapter of Iosuah.
Gedeon de Sable, a la Toison d'Argent, au Chef d'Azur, seme de Gouttes d'Eau, ou de Larmes d'Argent: By reason of the Fleece, moist^ned with the dewe of Heauen, the ground all about it remayning drie; according as we finde written in the Sixt Chapter of the Iudges.
Sampson the Strong, De Gueules au Lyon gisant d'Or, a l'Orle d'Argent, seme d'Abeilles de Sable. Because that in his younger yeares, he had torne a Lyon in pieces, out of whose putrifaction there came a Swarme of Bees.
Mille animas vna necata dedit.
Sampsons Riddle to the Philistines.And from this accident, Sampson deriued this Probleme and Enigma, for matter of diuining to the Philistines, E Forti, Dulcedo: As it is recorded in the Foureteenth Chapter of the Iudges. Now, concerning
Dauid, the King and Prophet, Hee bare as we haue said in the First Booke and Chapter, according to the Doctrine of Rabbi Abraham, in his Historical Cabala, D'Azur, au Lyon d'Or. Armes borne by the Kings of Iuda and Israel, his successours, in their Pennons, Standards and Banners of Warre, and likewise on their moneys, with this deuise and Legend: Vincet Leo de Tribu Iuda.
Iudas, Sonne of Mattathias, Prince of Modon, Sirnamed Macchabeus, because in all the Enseignes of Warre, he caried this deuice written in Hebrue Letters, Tu in Dijs,Originall of the name of Macchabeus, and their A^e^. vel Fortibus Domine. A Sentence taken from the Fifte of Exodus, and which being written in Foure Letters, formerly noated in the Staffe of an Anker, the people read (by abreuiation) Macchabas, a Sirname which remained to the said Iudas of Modon, and to his Brethren, as is reported by Rabbi Isaack Bens-hola. These Princes of Modon carried the Armes of their Family, which were De Synople, au Nauire Arme, and ^ret^e d'Argent, and their deuise in the Sayles. Armes which were exalted vpon the Tombes and Sepulchers of Prince Mattathias; Iudas his Sonne and Brethren: as wee learne in the First Booke of the Macchabees, and the Thirteenth Chapter.
Now, concerning the Armes of Alexander the Great; we haue said elsewhere, that he bare D Argent, au Lyon de Gueules: As in like manner we haue obserued, speaking of the true Armes of Iulius Caesar, Charlemaigne and Godfrey of Bologne, in such fashion and manner as they seuerally ought to be.


Of Nine Worthy Ladyes: Added to these Nine Famous and Worthy Men of the World.
THe same Romancers haue added, or coupled with these Nine Worthies, Nine other as Worthy and Illustrious Women, Ladyes of High deseruing, whom the Poets tearme Women Warriours, and by the name of Amazones; of whom you may heere behold the Armes and Names, according as I find them to be by them recorded.
Marthesia, or Marpesia, Who bare, by their saying, De Gueules a vn Griffon d'Argent, Lampasse and Arme de mesme, a vne Coronne de Laurier d'Or.

Lampedo Portoit Party. Le Premier de Sable a Trois Testes de Roynes, Coronnes a l'Antique d Or, a la Berdure de mesme. Le Deuxiesme d'Azur a Trois Faces on^ees d'Or.


Orythia D'Azur, a vne Cigne d'Argent, membre de Gueules: le Quartier d'Honneur, charge d'vn Escusson du premier Party de Lampedo.

Antiopa, full Armes du premier Party de Lampedo, which declared, that She ought to March Second among the Amazons.
Penthesilea, D'Azur, a la Bande de Sable, chargee du premier Party de Lampedo; a Six Gri^le^s d'Argent. 3.3.

Minthia, D'Azur, a Trois Chaires and Fautueils d'Or: Deux en Chef, and vne en Poincte.


Hippolita, D'Or, a vn Lyon d'Azur, Arme and Lampasse de Gueules, tenant entre ses Pattes and Griffes de deuant l'Escu d'Antiopa.

Theuca, D'Argent, a vne Aigle de Sable, Lampasse, and Arme de Gueules, brize sur l'Estomach d vne Teste de Royne a l'Antique d'Or. They giue her for the last.
Thamaris, whom they make to beare De Gueules, a Trois Leopards naissans d'Or, Languez and Armez de Synople, Deux en Chef, and l'autre en Poincte: Le resle de l'Escu seme de Tierce-Fueilles percees, and trouees de Argent.
They should haue placed in rancke among these Famous Ladies, the Queenes so Highly renowned for Prowesse.
Semiramis, of whom we haue emblazoned the Armes, in the First Booke and First Chapter: And
Tomyris. Qui portoit de Synople, au Lyon euire (as one would say Sans Vilenie) d'Argent* Coronne de Laurier d'Or, a la Bordure Crenelee d^Or, and de Gueules, chargee de Huict ^restes d'Argent.
And infinite other. But to make their Writings more sublime in worth, and likelier to truth:Ladyes well deseruing to grace an History. they should haue graced their History with these Ladies of immortall memory, obserued in the Sacred Scriptures, as Debora, Hester, Iudith and such like, whose Heroycall deeds and manlike actions; would haue giuen a

much more luminous Subiect, and engendred a deuise of farre fayrer hope and expectation.
The Curious may heere inserte some Leaues of white Paper, and make an addition of Blazons and Deuises, of such Heroes and Princes; as serued themselues in person, at the three most memorable attempts of Asia.
The three most famous ent^rprises of Asia.I. The Siedge of Troye, described by Diuine Homer, Dyctis Cretensis, Dares Phrigius, and Iohn le Maire of Belgia, in his most renowned Romancer, concerning the Illustration of the Gaules.
II. The Conquest of the Golden Fleece by Iason and his Associates, obserued by Apollonius Rhodius, in his Argonautes, and the more then meruaylous perfourmance of all.
III. And the Siedge of Thebes with the Hundred Gates, described at large (with all the perticularities) by the Sophister Philostratus in his painted Plates; Lucian and the like Authours, telling as much trueth, as the Romancers did. But now after our Nine Worthies, let vs come to discourse of Duelloes or Combates: For now adayes, the valiancy and courage of our mad-headed Courtiers, is much sooner seene in the subiect of a common Strumpet; then any Seruice for their King.



CHAP. II. Of Duelloes, Fights and Single Combates, perfourmed at the Sharpe, and to the extremitie of Life.
A Combate betweene Neptu^e and Minerua.AFter the building of Athens, the most famous and renowned Citty for all Sciences; there was a Challendge and Combate, betweene the God of the Sea and Waters Neptune, and the Wife Minerua; who should baptize or giue name to this newe Citty. Neptune, Armed with his Trident or Foi^e with three Tee^h, appeared in the place appointed for Fight, disposed, and ready to Combate within the Railes or Lists, for his owne aduantage.
Minerua, without making any rash or indiscreete haste, shewed her selfe at the end of the Lists,The appearing of Minerua in the Field Armed with a shining and polished Corselet, well nayled, not wanting any Buckle; a Helmet on her head, ouer-shadowed with rich Lambr^quins and Plumes of fayre Eastrige Feathers, a Lance in her right hand, and Target in the left, made of fine Siluer, whereon was figured (not the two Citties of Peace and Warre, represented in that of Achilles, fabrickt by the Armourer Vulcane) but a frightfull Head of G^rgon and Medusa de Sable, a la Gueule ouuerte et Beante de Gueules; the T^^phee of Minerua. As expressing, thereby, that Gentlemen which addict themselues to the Study and knowledge of Letters: are more capable to be Captaines, and commaunde in Armies; then such as are badly educated, who call Ignorance Nobility, and Knowledge Husbandry.
Iupiter would not permit this Combate, rather for sauing the Honor of Neptune, God of the Fishes,Au Poil and a la Plume. the Symbole of Ignorance; then any feare he had of his deare Minerua, whom he knew to be a Generallist, and fit for any imployment, as apte for the Lance, as the Pen. Answerable to the deuise borne by skilfull Captaines: Et Marti, et Mineruae: As prompt for the one, as ready for the other.
Iupiter compounded the contention.To compound this difference amiably, and make knowne to men, that he affected not Duelles and Fights, howbeit, Honour would thereby haue bin proued in good earnest: he appointed, that which of these two Contendants, by smiting the Earth with their Armes, could make some such thing to issue forth thereof, as should be most necessary for Man; that party should haue the preferment, to impose a name vpon this new Citty.
The Maisterpiece of Neptune.Neptune, swelling with rage and fury, smote our common Mother with such violence, that after it had quaked an indifferent while: there bounded forth a furious Horse, snuffling and stamping, the Instrument or Symbole of Warre.

-- Bellum, O Terra hospita, portas:
Bello armantur Equi, Bellum haec armenta minantur.

This is that which Virgill saith, speaking of the birth and originall of the Horse, engendred by the Trident of Neptune.

.. .. .. .. .. .. Tuque O, cui prima furentem
Fudit Equam magno Tellus percussa Tridenti, Neptune

As for the learned Lady and Warrioresse Minerua, she,The trophee and victorie of Minerua. hauing softly toucht the ground with the smaller end of her Lance: immediately rose vp a verdant Oliue-Tree, laden with Leaues and Fruite, for the nourishment and health of Man, and being the Symbole of Peace, declaring, that a man learned, is capable for actions of War, and likewise to manage Peace, when neede requireth.
Oleaque inuentrix Minerua.
The Latine Poet obserueth this debate and contention, at the beginning of his Georgicks.
And because Peace, the bountifull and rich gift of Heauen, is highly to be preferred before warre: Iupiter adiudged the preferrence to Minerua;Athens the Citie of debate or strife. who baptized with her name the Citie of debate, by naming it Athenes.
This Mithologie or Morall meaning, shall serue vs for a Preludium, and entrance into the Lists of Duelles and Combats, and will sufficiently shew, that it was the Custome of our auncient French, to vndertake the hazard of Armes and Combat, to iustifie themselues in an Accusation, fordged against their honour and good fame;His entrance for the ensuing ^i^course. and to sustaine the truth of some iust cause, whereof the proofes were doubtfull, yea, wholly hid and concealed.
The Accuser or Plaintiffe, through defect of Litterall proofes or Testimonials, auouched before the King: that his aduerse Partie was a Traitour, periured and false lyar, offering to iustifie what he said, by Armes and Combat one to one,The Plaintifs accu^ti^n be^ore the King. his owne person against that of the accused, or some other for him, if (by age) he might be dispensed withall from the Combate.
As a Gage for himselfe, he would throw his Gloue down vpon the ground, which the Accused, or some other for him, was to take vp: And the Field of Battaile,The Gage cast downe and taken vp. the day, and the Armes for the Combattants, were to be assigned by the King; for, without his permission, Duelloes or Combates durst not be vndertaken. In absence of the King, the Parliament appointed it; not finding any other meanes of remedy, whereby to agree the Parties.
This manner of deliuering or casting the Gloue as a Gage, seemeth to come from the Orientals or Easterne People, who in the vendition and yeelding vp their Lands, or Paiment of Debts; did giue the Gloue to the Buyers, by forme of consignation,Originall of giuing the Gage. and taking of possession. Which the Romans did, by the tradition of a greene Sodde or Tuft of earth. And our auncient French, by deliuery of a Rushe or Feskue, Per Festucame in our Salique Law, and a thousand thousand other places
We haue an example of deliuering the Gloue, in the Historie of Ruth, the fourth Chapter, where it is said, that the auncient Custome obserued in Israel,An auncient custome obs^rued in Israel Ruth. 4.9. betweene the neerest kinred of one and the same Linage, if any one yeelded or surrendred his right to another: he did put off his Gloue, and gaue it to the purchaser. And this was a testimonie of the yeelding, and transport of buying an inheritance in Israel.
Well know I, that the common Translation beareth a Shoe, and not a Gloue;Comparison of the Shooe and Gloue. but the Chaldean and Syriacke Paraphrase, which serues me better for interpreting some passages of the Sacred Scriptures, beareth the Gloue, and not the Shoe. Dixit Redempt^r ipsi Bo^s, in possessionem venito, tibique possideto: Tunc tulit Boasus Thecam Dexterae ^^ius, and in possessionem venit.
Widdowes were maried by the Brethren to their Husbands, being deceased without issue, to the end, of raising seede to their Brother. And the widdow might then adiorne to the gate or doore of the Citie, the neerest kinsman to her dead Husband, to the intent of marrying with him. Vpon his refusall to doe it, she taketh the Shoe from off his right foote, and spetting in his face, saith; So shall it be done vnto that man, that will not raise seede to the house of his Brother, according as it is written in the

fiue and twentieth Chapter of Deutronomie. This was done by the widdow with the Shooe, in meere contempt.
But if it were a man, that summoned or cited another man before the face of Iustice, when the Iewes sate at the Citie gates, or in some eminent place of their Townes; as an action of honestie, they would plucke the Gloue from off the right hand, which they deliuered as a Gage of assurance, for any thing giuen or granted to a Buyer. And so doe the Rabbines interprete it of the Gloue, De Chiroteca, in the passage of the hundred and eight Psalme of Dauid: In Idumaeam extendam calceamentum meum: I will bring and reduce the people of Edom vnder my power: I will take possession, as hauing won it by true and iust title.
In like manner among our French, he that tooke vp the Gloue, signified by that action,The manner of challenging and accepting the Combat among the French. that he accepted the Combat or Challenge: and, by the same kinde of ceremonie, pluckt off his Gloue from the right hand, and threw it on the ground, to be accepted and taken vp by him that had challenged him. Promising one to another, to present himselfe in furnishment, after the manner of Combat; on such a day, and at such a place, as the King, or his Parliament should appoint. If the man accused of perfidie and treason, presented himselfe before the King, and, maintaining his innocence in the crimes opposed against him; threw downe his Gloue, as offering the Combat against his Accuser, who neither presented himselfe in person, nor any one for him, to the end that he might take vp the Gage: The Accused was accepted, and credited vpon his owne Oathe, that he was innocent of those crimes obiected against him. And these manners of behauiour was common with the French, Ge^mains, Gothes, Lombardes, Spanyards, and other people liuing in the westerne parts.
All which Nations, ouer and beside the Duello or single Combat, for knowledge of the truth,Of other proues beside Combat. in matters of vncertaine and doubtfull proofe: had recourse to taking an Oathe, vpon the dead bodies of holy Martyres and Confessours. And proofe by burning Fire, and Water fiercely boyling, or cold.
In France, such Oathes were ordinarily made by the Accused, on the Bodies of Saint Denys in France, of Saint Germain des Prez les Paris; and of Saint Martin at Tours.Oathe made on dead bodies o^ Martyre^ and Confessours. Saint Gregorie of Tours, in his fift Booke, and two and thirtie Chapter; And (after him) the Monke Aymonius reporteth in his Historie of France, that a Burgesse of Paris, being iealous of his wife, accused her, to be shorter heelde then she should be. The Parents and friends of the Husband and Wife, concluded together, that this difference should be discided by Oathe, taken on the Body of Saint Denys, Apostle of the Gaules. They on the Wifes side, assuring themselues of her honestie; sware that she was innocent. The Husbands kinred maintained the contrary, so that from words,An example happening at Paris. they fell to blowes and effusion of bloud. Hereupon, Diuine Seruice was transferred to another place, vntill the parties had done Penance, and receiued the holy Communion: when the Church was reconciled by Ragnemodus, the twentieth Bishop of the Citie of Paris, and Successor to Saint Germaine; the Wife being hanged or strangled, b^cause she had forfeited her faith and honor. This happened within a while after the death of our Great King Clouis.
Vnder the Reigne of Clothaire the Great (Father to Dagobert, first of the name, restorer of the same Church of Saint Denys in France) Godin, Sonne to Garnier, who was Maire of the Pallace of Bourgongne;Proofe of Godin Sonne to Garnier. made proofe of his fidelitie (called in question) on the Bodies of Saint Medard at Soissons, of Saint Germain at Paris, of Saint A^gnan in the Citie of Orleance; and of Saint Martine at Tours.
Gentlemen professing Armes.Tassilon, Duke of Bauaria, and his principall men of Fiefe (called Leudes in our Salique Law, and in our Capitularies) after he had taken the Oathe of Vassailage and fidelitie, and laid his hand on them of King Pepin le Bref, being then at Cempeigne: was sent from thence to sweare the said Liedge Homage to King Pepin, and to his Sonnes, vpon the Bodies of Saint Denys in France, Saint Germain at Paris, and Saint Martine at Tours: So saith the same Monke Aimonius, in the fourth Booke of his Historie of France,Swearing ^edge Homage. the threescore and fourth Chapter.
After the death of the said Pepin le Bref, the French carried such honor and reuerence to his Memorie: that they referred all differences among them (in cases of

vncertaine and doubtfull proofe) to Oathe made on the Roabe of the same Pepin. Which when King Charlemaigne vnderstood, he prohibited and forbad the custome, by his Ordonance and Pragmaticall Sanction, Registred among our French Lawes, in the Fourth Booke of our Capitularies. Vt non admittantur testimonia Super Vestituram Domini nostri Regis Pepini.
Long time before his Reigne, The iudgement of God (so speake the auncient French) made it selfe knowne by proofe Of hot or burning Iron, that is to say,Proofe by burning Iron* A Plough Share ^r Coulter, brightly burning: whereon the Accused, or the Testimonies for him, walked barefooted, or held it betweene their hands. Charlemaigne at the Title De Homicidijs Clericorum, by him added to the Salique Law, the fift Paragraphe, Si negauerit illum se occidisse, ad Nouem Vomeres Ignitos iudicio Dei examinandus accedat.
By that of Hot Boyling Water, Per Aquam Feruentem, wherein the Accused or his Witnesses were to wash their hands.Proof by boiling Water.
By Colde Water,(...) cold water. in a Pond or tunning Riuer, whereinto (fast bound both hands and feete) they were to be throwne, to trie if they would sincke to the bottome, or not, as sometimes they made triall of Witches, and Sorcerers. And lastly;
By the Crosse,By the Crosse. whereon they were strecht forth, fast bound and mannacled; like to the Cupid of Trouers in Germanie, so much renowned by Ausonius, the Burdelois Poet: In Cupidine Crucifixo. This last proofe was prohibited by our King Charlemaigne, in the first Booke of our French Lawes, the hundred and second Chapter. Sancitum est vt Nu^lus deinceps quamlibet examinationem Crucis facere praesumat, ne Christi Passionem* quae glorificatio est, cuiuslibet temeritate contemptui habeatur.
Noblemen, and such persons as were of free condition, to whom the vse and carrying of Armes onely belonged; had this infernall custome, to discide their quarrels and other Actions, by Iustice of the Duello or single Combat,To whom the Iustice of Combat appertained. and especially at such time, as the cause depended vpon some successiue right. For we reade in our auncient Annalists, vnder the reigne of Lewes of Beyond the Seas, King of France, there was a Processe or Suite attempted, to know: If the Nephew should succeede after his Vnckle, deceasing without Children, with his other Vnckles, the Brethren to his dead Father. If this had bin in France, and in the time of our old Custome of Paris, not admitting the representation in the collaterall ligne, Inter Fratres, Fratrumque filios, this case had bin easie in the clearing.
But the cause was pleaded in the Court of the King of Germanie Lewes, who, vpon the irresolution of his Counsell; ordained, that the descission thereof should be committed to the proofe of Combat betweene two Champions.A cause tria^ tried in the King of Germanies Court for succession. The Combat being assigned, the Nephew had the honor thereof against his Vnckles, or the Champion for them. And since that time (as the Germaines say) it was fully concluded: That Nephewes should pertake and deuide the goods of their deceased Vnckles, with them that were liuing, by the representation of their Father.
Men of Main-morte, and of seruile condition, not hauing the proofe of Armes, but onely by them of burning Iron, and Waters: these trials were perticuler to them,Abbots, Fryers, Monks and Church men. as we learne in our French Lawes, and vnder our Capitularies, in the fift Booke, at the third Paragraphe, De Veneficijs, where it is said, that such as remaine vanquished, to wit; Men Free in the Duello, and the other, by their other proues; shall be punished with Death.
Yet notwithstanding this, Noble persons, yea, Kings and Queenes, disdained not to submit themselues to the Iudgement of burning Iron, and boyling Water. Aimonius, in the fift Booke of his Historie of France, and the foure and thirtieth Chapter,A famous triall made for the King of Germany by thirtie men. reporteth, that the King of Germanie Lewes (of whom we spake so lately before) for to maintaine the truth of his owne right, sent to King Charles the Baulde, King of France and Emperour, his Vnckle: his Ambassadours, and with them thirtie men. Tenne of them made proofe by burning Iron or Plow-shares: tenne more of them by hot boyling Water; and the other tenne by being cast into the colde water, and all of them departed thence, without any harme or offending.
The Germaines doe report, that Chunegonda, daughter to Sigefroy, Count Palatine of the Rhine, made proofe of her Virginitie (in contempt of a bolde accusation made

against her) in the presence of the Emperor of Germanie, Henry the second, her Husband; passing bare-foote ouer twentie Coulters, extraordinarily burning hot.
At the end of our Capitularies, are to be seene the proceedings and prayers, which are vsed at the consecration of those Irons, and the hot and cold waters, as also what perticular Masses were said to that effect.Lewdnesse punished by being ouerbold. And oftentimes hath euidently beene seene, that lewd persons, haue felt the iustice due to their wickednesse, by the examen of those proofes, instead of being otherwise punished. And in Duelloes or Combats of one man against another; such shames as should haue bin inflicted by Iustice, the Church, and Ordenances of our Kings, haue bin abrogated and repealed by those proues.
Ladies accused, to haue made forfeit of their honor, or else accusing some Knight, to haue immodestly attempted her good fame: might present their Champion of Battaile, either to sustaine their innocencie, or to proue that their accusations were true.
Erioldus King of the Lombards, had espoused Gondeberga, a French Princesse, endued with singular beauty of body, and admirable wisedome. At his seruice attended a Lombard Gentleman,The Historie of Gondeberga Queene of Lombardie. who was named Adalulphus, a man of good meanes, and comely feature of body, much respected by the Queene, for his seemely parts and faithfull seruice. This glorious Sot, swolne big with the winde, that blowes no where ordenarily but in Court; grew so audacious and ouer-saucie, that he offered her Loue-seruice, and craued amourous acceptance: Gondeberga, scorning such presumption; spet in his face, and expelled him out of her Court, according as he iustly deserued. This bold Companion, fearing least these newes should come to the King by the Queene: to preuent her, he went to the Lombard King, and told him, that not many dayes since, Taso, who was Gouernour of Tuscanie, had secret communication with the Queene; to imprison him, possesse himselfe of the Kingdome, and to marrie her afterward.
The King beleeuing this accusation ouer-lightly, caused the Queene, (suddenly) to be shut vp close prisoner, and in a very strong Castle of Italie, which was then called Amello.A great error oftentimes in Princes. Clothaire, last of the name, King of France, to whom the Queene was a neere kinswoman, as being descended from the Kings of Austrasia, of the House of France: Sent his Ambassadours to the King of Lombardie, to tell him plainely; that he had (too rashly) imprisoned the Queene his wife (being a Princesse of the Bloud Royall of France) without causing her to be conuinced of the crime, wherewith she was accused.
Vpon answer from the King of Lambardie, that she had deserued that punishment, and farre greater; Lancelot, one of the Ambassadours for France, summoned the Lombard King,The French Ambassadors aduise to the Lombard King to grant power to some one of the Seruants, belonging to the imprisoned Queene, to appeale in the Duello or single Combat, Adalulphus that was her Accuser. Which the King allowing to be but iust and reasonable; Aribert, Cousine to the imprisoned Queene, offered his Gloue as a Gage of Battaile, to maintaine; That the Queene was falsely and wickedly accused by Adalulphus. Who being strictly constrained to take vp the Gage: Erioldus the Lombard King assigned the day, and the Field for Battaile. Wherein he was vanquished, and hanged by the necke, and the vertuous Queene deliuered, after three yeares of wrong imprisonment. This Historie is reported by the Monke Aimonius, in the fourth Booke and tenth Chapter, of his Historie of France.
The Historie of the Countesse of Gastinois.The Annals of Aniou, written by Maister Iohn Bourdigne, doe recount vnder the Reigne of our King Lewes the Stammerer, who was Emperour, that a Countesse of Gastinois, wife to Ingelger, and Godmother to Engelger, Count of Aniou; was accused by the kinred of her Husband (found dead in the Bed by her) that she had caused his death, and made forfeit of her honor, whereby (consequently) she was capable of no pleading, but ought to be punished with death.
Pleading by the Sword.Gontran, the very neerest kinsman to the partie deceased, was the Accuser: to whom, and to the Countesse of Gastinois accused, The King assigned a day of Pleading by the Sword, and at Chasteau-Landon.
At the day appointed, the Parties appeared cloathed in mourning. The Accuser

persisting in his accusation, maintained it still, and offred his Gage of Battaile, against such a Champion as the Countesse should produce. But she (on the contrary) offred to purge her selfe, and to iustifie her innocencie by Oathe, so farre as any woman could doe.
The King hauing consulted with his Counsel, found the offence to be so great and grieuous, in regard of the Husbands so strange death; that the Countesse must needes furnish her cause with a Champion. But the truth appearing so vncertaine, and the case very much mistrusted; it seemed vtterly impossible for her (among so great a number of friends and seruants, as she thought she had) to finde one for her Champion. So that being thus left forlorne, forsaken,Nothing trieth friends more then miserie, and then they striue to be least seene. and brought euen to the doore of despaire; shee stood vpon the point, of loosing honor, goods and life altogether. When suddenly Ingelger, Count of Aniou, her God-Sonne, being aged onely sixeteene years, appeared before the King, and offred to Combat with Gontran, the most renowned Knight of his time, to whom he threw his Gage of Battaile. It was accepted, and the Combat performed before the King and his Court, at the said Chasteau-Landon. Gontran had his head smitten off by his enemy, the Countesse of Gastinois deliuered from death: And she gaue to the Count Ingelger her God-Sonne, the Seigneurie belonging to the Castell of Landon, with the Fiefes and moueables thereon depending.
Froissard, in the second Chapter of his third Volume, describeth a Iouste at the Sharpe, or vtmost extremity, that is to say, a Duello or Combat, performed at Paris, in La Culture Saincte Catherine: betweene Iohn de Carouge, Knight, Lord of Argenteil on the Frontiers of Perche; and Iacques le Gris, Knight also, and both of them of the Court of Peter, Count of Alanson. At returne from a Voyage beyond the Seas, done by the Lord of Carouge; his wife aduertised him, that during the time of his absence: she had bin abused (that is to say, forced) by this Iacques le Gris; who denied the fact, and neuer would confesse it, no, not to the death. The deadly Field was ordained by decree of the Court, and the Husband was the Champion for his Wife, against Iacques le Gris.
The Champions comming into the Field of death, were armed at all points,The ^^^^^tants appearing in the Field. and each man seated in his Chaire. The Count of Saint Paul gouerned the Lord of Carouge: but Iacques le Gris was gouerned by people belonging to the Count of Alanson. They performed their Armes (according to appointment) in presence of King Charles the sixt, and all the Princes of the Bloud, and great Lords as well of France, as of the neighbouring Marches, to see this Combat at the Sharpe, which was euery where bruited abroad, and the victory whereof fell to the Lord of Carouge.The performa^ce of the Combat. And here you may behold the perticularities of the Combat, as they stand Registred in the Court Record; as being essentiall, and sitting to this discourse of ours.




Obseruations set downe in the Court Registers, concerning the Combat.
QVand le Cheualier de Carouge deut entrer au Champ de Bataille mortelle, il vint a sa femme qui la estoit en vn Chariot conuert de Noir, and luy dict ainsi: Dame, par vostre information, and sur vostre querelle, ie vois aduanturer ma Vie, and combatre Iacques le Gris, vous scauez si ma cause est iuste, and loyale. Monseigneur, dict la Dame, il est ainsi, and vous combatez tout seurement, car la cause est bonne. A ces mots le Cheualier baiza la Dame, and la prit par la main, and puis se seigna, and entra au Champ.
La Dame demeura dedans le Char couuert de Noir en grandes Oraisons enuers Dieu, and la Vierge Marie, en priant tres-humblement qu' a ce Iour par leur grace, and intercession elle peust auoir victoire selon le droict qu'elle auoit. Et vous dy qu'elle estoit en grande tristesse, and n'estoit pas asseuree de sa Vie: car si la chose tournoit a desconfiture sur son Mary, il estoit sentencie, que sans remede on l'eust arse, and son Mary pendu. Et en suite de quel ques lignes.
Messire Iean de Carouge combatit si vaillamment qu'il enuoya son Aduersaire a Terre, and luy bouta l'Espee dedans le corps, dont il l'oceit au Champ, and puis demanda s'i^ auoit

bien faict son deuoir? On luy respondit qu Ouy. Si fut Iacques le Gris deliure au Bourrea^ de Paris, qui le traina a Montfaucon, and la fut pendu. Messire Iean de Carouge remercia le Roy, and les Seigneurs (de ce qu'il luy auoit faict deliurer comptant Mille Francs, and l'auoit retenu de sa Chambre a deux Cents Liures de Pension par An durant sa vie) and se mit a genoux, puis il vint a sa Femme, and la baisa, and puis ils allerent a l'Eglise Nostre Dame faire leur Offrande, and puis retournerent en leur Hostel.




The English.




WHen the Knight de Carouge should enter into the Field of deadly Battaile, he went to his Wife, who was there in a Chariot couered with Blacke, and spake vnto her thus. Lady, by your information, and vpon your quarrell, I am come to aduenture my Life, and to fight with Iacques le Gris: You know if my cause is iust and loyall. My Lord, said the Lady, it is so, and you shall Combat most assuredly, for the cause is good. Vpon these words, the Knight kissed his Lady, and tooke her by the hand, and afterward signed himselfe, and entred into the Field.
The Lady remained in the Chariot couered with Blacke, vsing deuout Prayers to God and the Virgin Mary, beseeching them most humbly, that that day, and vpon her intercession, she might (by their grace) haue the victorie, according to the right she had. And I tell you, that she was in great heauinesse, and had no assurance of her Life: for if the case turned to the discomfiture of her Husband, sentence was past, that without any remedy; she should be burned, and her Husband hanged. And within a few lines after following;
Sir Iohn de Carouge Combatted so valiantly, that he laid his Aduersarie vpon the ground, and thrust his Sword into his body, whereby he slew him in the Field; And then he demanded, whether he had performed his duetie, or no? Answere was made, that he had done it. So was Iacques le Gris deliuered to the Hangman of Paris, who dragged him to Montfaucon, and there he was hanged. Sir Iohn de Carouge humbly thanked the King, and the Lords (because his Maiestie had commanded to be giuen him in ready money, a thousand Francks, and accepted him to be of his Chamber, with two Hundred Pounds of yearely Pension, during his life) for which hee fell on his knees before him. Afterward, comming to his Wife, he kissed her, and then went to the Church of our Lady, to present their Offering, and then returned home to their House.




The relation of this Combat by another Author.The Lord Iuuenall des Vrsins, in the Historie of Charles the sixt, setteth downe this Duello or Combat at the Sharpe, auouching it to be fought in the yeare One thousand three hundred fourescore and sixe. And in describing the Historie, he saith, that Iacques le Gris fell, and then Carouge mounting vpon him with his Sword drawn; requested him now to tell the truth. And hee returned him this answere. That before God, and vpon perill of the damnation of his soule, hee had neuer committed the act wherewith he was charged. And yet for all that, Carouge, who verily beleeued his Wife; thrust his Sword through his body, and so he dyed: which was much to be pittied.

The words of the Lord des Visi^s.
For afterward, it was certainely knowne, that he had neuer committed the offence. But that another had done it, who dying of a grieuous disease in his bed: in the very agonie of death, confessed before diuers people, that he was the man that did it.

Behold the miserable condition of Duelloes and Combats, where the danger falleth vpon the innocent, as here is plainely proued to you. And therefore this manner of triall hath bin worthily prohibited, because on which side soeuer this infernall chance falleth: it is alwayes to losse of the Body, and oftentimes of the Soule too, of one or other of the parties. For by the Law of Combats, if the Champion prouided by the partie accused,The Law of Duelloes and Combats. fall in the Combat: he is to be punished with death, and with him his partaker. So the same lot was afforded to the Accuser, and to his Combatant, if he happened to be surmounted. As Froissard obserueth in the Historie formerly reported.

.. .. .. .. .. .. Nec enim lex aequior vllae est
Quam necis Artifices arte perire sua.

And yet neuerthelesse, it was a firme beliefe, liuely imprinted in the soules of the auncient French: That Duello or Combat, being permitted by the Prince, was and is

the Iudgement of God. We haue a Tract very remarkeable to this purpose, in the Historie of France, written by Saint Gregory of Tours, in his seauenth Booke and foureteenth Chapter.
After the massacre committed on King Chilpericke,A Historie alleadged to the same effect the Ambassadours sent from King Childebert of Austrasia, came on behalfe of the King their Maister, to moue and entreate the King of Bourgongne and Orleans Gonthran, to deliuer them the Queene Fredegonde, s^spected of this murder, as also the miserable and disastrous death, of most part of the Princes of the Bloud, to the end that Iustice might be executed. In number of the Ambassadours sent from King Childebert, were Gilles a Bishoppe, Gonthran Boson, Sygiualde and other faithfull Councellours to King Childebert.
King Gonthran had a secret malicious spleene against Gonthran Boson, whom he accused, to haue fauoured the part of the pretended King Gombaud (surprised and dispatched at Saint Bertrand de Commenge) whereunto Boson made him this answere.

Tu Dominus, and Rex in Regali solio resides, and nullus ad ea quae loqueris, ausus est respondere. Iaso^tem enim me de hac causa profiteor. At si est aliquis similis mihi, qui hoc crimen Imping at ^^culte, venial nunc palam, and loquatur. Tu O Rex pijssime ponnes hoc in Dei iudicto, vt ille discernat, cum nos in vnius campi planitie viderit dimicare.

Thou (O my Lord and King) sittest on thy Royall Throane, and no man dare be so bold, as to make answere to those things whereof thou speakest. I protest, that I am innocent in this matter. But if there be any, that doth secretly lay this Accusation against me: Let him come forth now in publique, and speake it. Thou (O most Religious King) committest this matter to the Iudgement of God, that he may determine it, when he shall behold vs fighting in the open plaine Field. Duelloes therefore were not permitted, but by Kings.
The same Author, in the tenth Booke and tenth Chapter, obserueth the Combat,Combat for windfals in Forrests. performed by the command of King Gonthran, for the winde-fals of Wood, and of a wilde Bull, by him found in the Forrests of Vauge; as we said in our Treatise Of the Officers of the Crowne of France. It is the first Duello that I haue read of* performed vnder our Kings of the first Ligne, but other are to be found in Aimonius.
Vnder them of the second Ligne, are to be found few enow. Our King and Emperour Charlemaigne, hauing reduced vnder his obedience the Cities of Barcellona,Combats vnder the second Ligne. Cathalogna, Cerdagnia and Roussillion from the Moores of Affrica, who had possessed themselues of diuers P^ouinces in Spaine: gaue their gouernment in title of a Countie, to one of his loyall followers, named Bera (and not Bernard) who in time of the Sonne to Charlemaigne, Lewes the Debonnaire our King and Emperour, was accused before him, to haue intelligence with the Affricanes of Spaine, and seeking to betray their Soueraigne Prince.
Vpon this denuntiation, Bera, to purge himselfe, went into Germanie before the Debonnaire, at his place of Aix la Chapelle, where the King then held his Parliament.A Combat before King Lewes the Debonnaire. The Accusers threw downe The Gage of Battaile. Bera tooke it vp, and cast downe his owne, with the Lye in their throate, and that he was neither Traitour, nor perfidious. The Combat was fought on Horsebacke, and Bera being vanquished, was forced to confesse his fault. His Shield with the heeles vpward, was broken into small morsels and pieces: but life was giuen him by the Debonnaire, and he confined to ^ouen, there to spend the remnant of his dayes. Our Annales of times speaketh thus.
Mense Ianuario, DCCCXX. Aquisgrani conuentus est habitus, in quo Bera Comes Barcinonae, qui lam-diu, fraudis, and infidetitatis a vicinis suis Comitibus infimulabatur, cum accusatore suo equestri pugna confligere conatus, vincitur. Cumque vt reus Maiestatis, sententia damnaretur, Armis effractis parsum est ei, misericordia Imperatoris, and Rotomagum exilio proscriptus est.
In the Moneth of Ianuarie, Anno DCCCXX. A Sessions was held at Aquisgranum, wherein Bera, Count of Barcellona,Aquisgrano in Germanie.who had long time bin accused by the neighbouring Counts of falshoold and disloyaltie. He attempting to answere his Accuser in a Combat on Horsebacke; was ouercome and vanquished. And hauing receiued sentence of condemnation, as guiltie of Treason; was pardoned, his Armes of honor were broken, according to Order. And

(by the mercie of the Emperour) he was proscribed, and sent in exile to Rouen.
The goods and Gouernments of Bera, were giuen to Bernard, issued of the Bloud Royall, God-sonne and neere kinsman to the Debonnaire; as we are informed by Theganus,Bernard had the goods and gouernments of the vanquished. Archbishop of Treuers, in the Historie of his time. And in this quality of a Prince, this King the Debonnaire made him Great Chamberer or Chamberlaine, of France (anciently these were two Soueraign Offices of the Kings House; but that of Great Chamberer hath bin suppressed, as we haue showne in our Treatise of the Crowne Officers.) This Office requiring residency in the Court; enuious enemies to Bernard (Authors of a bloudy League, against the Debonnaire and his State) accused the Count of Barcellona Bernard, to haue ouer familiar priuacie with the Empresse Iudith, wife to the Debonnaire.
He holding his Parliament at Nimegen, on the Riuer of Vahall; Bernard there presented himselfe, and maintained that he was falsely accused, threw downe his Glo^e as Gage of Battaile:A challenge of Combat without acceptance which no one (in the troupe of his Accusers) expressed any will or forwardnesse to take vp. So is it obserued by the same Theganus, to checke those Spanish Authors, who haue not forgot to set downe this calumnie in writing, against the honor and modestie of Queene Iudith.
Ludouicus in palatio Theodonis (saith Theganus) erat, cum Filijs suis Lotario, and Ludouico; and Ibi supradictus Bernardus purificauit se, de obiecto stupro, postquam Nullus inuentus est, qui ausus fuisset cum armis iam dictam rem ei imponere.
Lodowicke was in the Pallace of Theodon, with his Sonnes Lotharius and Ludouicus: And there the aboue named Bernard, acquitted himselfe of the action obiected maliciously against him. After that there could be none found, that durst (by way of Armes) auouch the said matter laid to his charge.
And yet notwithstanding, Duelloes and Combats at extremitie (which all our Romancers called The Field of Death) were quailed and abolished in France, by the Testamentarie Ordenance of the Father to the Debonnaire, our King Charlemaigne, in the yeare of Grace Eight hundred and sixe.
Si Causa, vel intentio controuersiae talis inter Partes propter terminos, and confinia Regnorum orta fuerit, quae Hominum testimonio declarari, vel definiri non possit; tunc volumus vt ad declarationem eius rei dubiae, iudicio Crucis Dei voluntas, and rerum Veritas inquiratur. Nec vnquam pro tali causa, cuiuslibet generis pugna, vel campus, ad examinationem iudicetur.

If an occasion or intention of such a controuersie shall arise betweene parties, concerning the limits and bounds of Kingdomes, which cannot be made manifest, or defined by the testimonie of men: Then we will, that for the declaration of this doubtfull matter; the will of God, and the truth of things be enquired after, by the doome or sentence of the Crosse. Nor at any time (for such like causes) may Combat or fight of any kinde, or the Field be granted, for searching out of the same.

He rather affected, to leaue the triall to the Crosse, that is to say, To Racking and Tortures; then to discide such cases by Duello, or Combat at the Sharpe. Which the same Emperour would haue to be vtterly suppressed, and admitted the triall of she Crosse, which he had before abolished, as already hath bin said.
Vnder the third Ligne of our Kings (which God hath conserued vnto vs, and blessed in infinite Ages,Extremity of euils grow with the times euen to this present, and it (alone) hath endured longer then both the other together) we haue yet noated the aduantage or excesse, of this rage and infernall furie in reuenge and Combat, to take his full course in France.
This rauenous Wolfe, fleshed with the bloud of our French Nobilitie, made intrusion long time after the changing and succession of the said third Ligne to the Crowne of France: had not the happy fortune of Hugh Capet; the wisedome of Robert his Sonne and Companion; the iudgement of King Henry the first; and the peacefull Reigne of Phillip, first of the name, preuented it by better order. After long Warres, these Wolues entred boldly into Cities and Townes, to make themselues drunke with humaine bloud, as during all the time of the Warre. The very same courses got footing in France, at declyning of the stearne tempests, in the vnfortunate Reigne of Charlemaines Sonnes: when all went to confusion, prey and bootie, euery one liuing as themselues listed, without either feare of God, King

or Iustice, and especially in those Prouinces, which were farre off from the Kings abiding.
Great men serued as shadowes, couertures and retreates, for all the wicked rascalitie of the Kingdome, by whose meanes, Counts and Gouernours of Prouinces (cut off from the Kings) were at defiance one with another; to the end, that they might haue some subiect, to reuenge their quarrels by Combat, or in Troupes, pilling and robbing the plaine Countries, and taking Prisoners, euen as in time of open Wars.Great mens countenances are no meere encouragements. For, after the word of Challenge or defiance was sent out (which lasted commonly foureteene dayes:) they would runne violently one vpon another, cutting mens throates, as if they had bin bruite beasts, or else surprizing them vpon paiment of ransomes.
The Gallicane Church sought meanes to hinder the Duelloes, Encounters, courses and Robberies of the Nobilitie, done with such extremitie one against another.Spirituall Armes exceed those of Princ^ The Churches arme being not strong enough, to hinder the progression of these disorders: recourse was made to God, by Fasting and Prayer; Spirituall Armes, which worke more effectually, then all the power of earthly Princes can doe.
The Bishops of France being assembled together, made these Decrees.
Vt Arma quisque non ferret: Direpta non repeteret: Sui sanguinis, vel cuiuslibet Proximi minime vltor existens. Percussoribus cogeretur indulgere. Ieiun^um in Pane, and Aqua^ omni Sexta Ferta seruarent. In Sabbatho a Carne, and Liquamine abstinerent; soloque hoc contenti Ieiunio, in omnium peccatorum remissionem, nullam sibi scirent aliam subijciendam poenitentiam, si praedicta seruare sacramento firmarent. Quod qui nollet, Christianitate priuaretur; and exeuntem de saeculo Nullus visitaret, nec Sepulturae traderet.

Not any one should beare Armes, or should require to haue them againe, being taken from him, as being (by no meanes) a reuenger either of his owne bloud, or the bloud of any of his kinred. But should euery Friday keepe his Fast with Bread and Water; He should abstaine from Flesh and fat meates vpon the Sabaoth day. And being so satisfied with this Fasting onely, should learne to know; that no other kinde of penance shall be imposed vpon him or them, for the remission of all their sinnes; if they haue bound themselues by the Sacrament, to obserue and keepe all the premises. Which things whosoeuer shall refuse to doe; they are to be depriued of Christianity, and at his departing out of this world, he is not to be visited by any one, nor allowed to haue Christian buriall giuen him.


That euery man for his owne part, should desist from bearing Armes, and surcease from robbing, spoyling or destroying any thing. Nor should pursue reuenge, to cause any bloud spilt, either for friend or Kinsman: but contrariwise, to pardon his enemies. That they should Fast euery Friday with Bread and Water, and on the Saturdayes should abstaine from feeding on flesh, or on any thing wherein was fatnesse. That performing this abstinence, without any other penitence; all the sinnes of them were pardoned, that tooke Oathe, to keepe and obserue those things which were ordained by the Church. But whosoeuer dared to doe otherwise, should remaine excommunicated, cut off as a rotten member from the Communion and Prayers of the Church, and chancing to dye so, should be depriued of buriall.

This is thus recorded by Sigebert in his Chronicle, vnder the yeare of Grace One thousand thirtie and two.
This was one inducement, of bringing the poore people to peace,When fraile hope is weakest, Gods arme is strongest. and that the Great men among them, made a cessation from Armes: a cessation, which happened euen as it were by miracle, quite contrarie to all humaine hope. And therefore it was honored with the name of Treuga Dei, The Truce of God, confirmed in the yeare of Grace One thousand fortie and one, by an abstaining from Warre, betweene the Kings, Princes and Great Lords, Noblemen and Yeomen: who pardoning all receiued wrongs, with free and chearefull hearts, embraced one another, eate, dranke and conuersed together in securitie; which neuerthelesse was of no long continuance.
Because, as the same Sigebert, and our great Chronicle informeth vs, that the two Counts, named Raymonds of Tolossa and of Saint Gilles, and the King of Arragon, warred stearnely each against other, without any apparance or likelihood

of agreement. But it is said, that our Lord appeared to a poore simple man, named Durand,An apparition to be beleeued as men are thereto affected. a Carpenter by his trade (which in Languedocke they call Chapuis) dwelling in the Citie of Puy in Auuergne. To him he gaue a Letter sealed, and in it was imprinted the figure of the Sacred Virgin, seated in a Chaire, holding her Sonne vpon her knee, And as a Legend about the same Seale, was engrauen these words: Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata Mundi, dona nobis pacem.
When the newes of this apparition was published abroad; the Counts of Tolossa and of Saint Gilles, with all the people of the neighbouring Countries, went in order of Procession together and Pilgrimage, to Nostre Lame du Puy, vpon the day of Ascension, according to the auncient custome. All the people being assembled, the Bishop of the Citie of Puy tooke the same William Durand,A relation out of the great Chronicle of France. who was naked, and a poore Carpenter (these are the words of the great Chronicle) and placed him in the midst of all the Congregation, to tell the command giuen him by our Lord.
When he perceiued, that they were all bent with serious attention to heare him: he began to deliuer his Message, and boldly commanded them from our Lord, that they should make peace among themselues. Then all began to cry, sigh, shed teares, and to praise the pittie and compassion of our Lord.A louing reconciliation betweene the two displeased Princes. And the two Princes, who before had so sharpely contended in Warre, as no peace could be listned to: did instantly sweare it on the Text of the Euangelists, with chearefull hearts, and conformable wils, promising to our Lord; that they would euer after liue in Loue and Concord one with another. And in signe of a testimonie, of this reconciliation made by them; they caused to be imprinted in Tinne, the Seale belonging to the Scedule, and the whole Image of our Lady, which they caried thence with them, fastened vpon their white Hoods or Chapperons, being shaped after the manner of Scapularies, worne by Religious men in Abbeyes.
And yet a much greater wonder happened, for such as wore those Signes or significations,A wonder somewhat difficult ^o be credited. were thereby so saf^ly secured and warranted, that if it happened by accident, that one man had slaine another, and should meete with him that kild the Brother of him dead, and well knew him to be the d^athsman of his Brother; all mallice was by him forgotten and forgiuen, he would kindely respect him, enfold him in his armes, yea, kisse him, in signe of Peace and L^ue with sighes and teares, take him home to his House, setting meate and d^inke before him, and supplying all his other necessities. And this Peace was made in Puy by Durand the honest simple man, who liued long after: and this is recorded in our Chronicles.
And so, for some space of time these Duelloes and Combats at the Sharpe ceased. But the Diuell raised them vp againe in fresh forme and fashion, for his owne sporting,Duelloes and Combats permitted by Bishops, for their owne benefit. vnder the Reignes of Phillip Augustus, his Sonne Lewes the eight, and the good King Saint Lewes. It was a lamentable thing to behold, that Bishops of France would themselues permit Duelloes, and take (to their owne benefit) the fines and confiscations. In the Registers of our Court of Parliament* is inserted the agreement made, betweene Richard King of England, in name, and as Count of Aniou and Bertholmew, then Archbishop of Tours, and done by consent of our King Phillip Augustus, their Soueraigne Lord. Among other Articles is namely couenanted that for the Field of Battaile.
Duella tam de Marchaio, quam de Cainone (de Marchais, and de Chinon) sunt Archiepiscopi, si fuerint inter Homines suos; and solent fieri in Espaulo apud Cainonem, and Praesentia, and Campus sunt Archiepiscopi, and poterit eos ducere Archiepiscopus quando voluerit. Et si Duellum fuerit inter Hominem Comitis, and Hominem Archiepiscopi, tale Duellum fiet apud Cainonem, nec Archiepiscopus, nec Comes tale Duellum extra Castellariam Cainonis faciet fieri. Vterque autem de proprijs Hominibus Duellum faciet fieri vbi voluerit. Verum si Homo Archiepiscopi conquestus fuerit de Homine Comitis, and Duellum adiudicatum fuerit, Duellum erit Comitis: Si vero Homo Comitis conquestus fuerit de Homine Archiepiscopi, and Duellum fuerit adiudicatum, Duellum similiter erit Archiepiscopi.

Duelloes and Combats, as well concerning the Marchais, as the Chinon, belong to the Archbishops. If they shall happen betweene their men, and are wont to be performed in the Espaulo at the Chinon: both the Presence and the Fields are the Archbishops, and the Archbishop may want and giue them when he will. But if the Combat shall happen betweene

a Counts man, and an Archbishops man: then such a Duello must be done at the Chinon. Nor shall the Archbishop or the Count cause such a Combat to be done, without the Caste^ of the Chinon: But either of them, concerning their owne seuerall men, shall cause the Combat to be performed where they please. But if the Archbishops man shall be Plaintiffe against the Counts man, and the Combat be granted; then the Combat is to be the Counts. And if the Counts man be Plaintiffe against the Archbishops man, and the Combat adiudged; the Combat in like manner shall be the Archbishops.

At the Prouinciall Councill of Normandie,Priests allowed to fight in Duelloes and Combats. held at L'Isle-banne (by permission of the said King Phillip Augustus) set downe likewise in the Registers of the Parliament Court; is to be read an Ar^icle, wherein is said; That Priests may not fight in Combats, without the permission of their Bishops. You see how the Diuell sowed his seedes among some Priests, of medling in the furious exercise of Armes.
Duelloes and Combats had their course likewise, vnder the most happy Reigne of the good King Saint Lewes, and especially there was one assigned before him.A Historie out of Mathew Paris. Mathew Paris reporteth in his Historie of England, that in the yeare One thousand two hundred fortie and three, the Count de la March, Hugh of Luzignan, called Le Brun (whose Armes and Genealogie we haue obserued in the precedent Booke) was accused before the King Saint Lewes, and his Brother the Count of Poictou, Monsieur Alpho^sus of France) of persidious dealing, treason, and many other enormous crimes, by a French Knight. Whereupon the said Count was arrested prisoner, and committed to safe custodie for further proofe.
Now, although the Count denied it strongly and constantly; yet notwithstanding, the Knight (according to the auncient custome of the French) threw downe his Gloue as a Gage of Battaile. Licet Comes Marchiae constanter infic^aretur,The Knight threw downe his Glou^ and the Count tooke it vp statim Miles supradictus, More Francorum Chirotecam ei porrexit, se offerens, and offering to maintaine, that what he had said, was true, by the Combat of his body against the Knights, before the Court, desiring to the same end, that the day might be assigned, and the Field of Battaile, according to the auncient Lawes of the French, at all times approued. The Count tooke vp the Gage, and promised to defend his innocencie against the Appellant.
The Sonne to the Count de la March, vndertooke the action for his Father, humbly entreating the King, that he might be admitted the Combat for his Father, albeit vnequall in yeares to the Appealant. Which was hindered by the Count of Poictiers, who said, that the Count onely was to fight the Combat. Which being so agreed on, and the day of Battaile appointed; the Appealant, and the Appealed withdrew themselues for their owne preparation, and fitting all things necessary for the Combat.
Isabel, wife to the Count de la Marche (who formerly had bin wife to Iohn without Land, King of England,This is the same Lady, in more sitting place before remembred. and bare yet the qualitie and title of a Queene) hauing heard of these newes, and that the crimes wherewith her Husband was accused, were his ordenary trickes of behauiour, she fled immediately, to conceale her selfe in a secret Chamber, belonging to the Abbey of Font-Eurald. Where yet (neuerthelesse she was discouered by the French and Poicteuins, who hated her to the death for her diuers vngracious behauiours; and in regard whereof, the Poictinins called her Iezabell.
And yet notwithstanding, this Combat was delayed and hindered, at the earnest solicitings and entreaties of the Lords of the Court:The Combat hindred and neuer performed. yet rather in fauour of the children to the Count de la Marche, then for any respect to himselfe. And let it be admitted (saith Mathew Paris) that the foyle had falne on him; his goods being gone with him, and confiscated (according to the custome of France) the Children should haue bin in most miserable condition. So that by the meanes of friends, the choller of the King, and of the Count his Brother was appeased, the Knight Appealant satisfied and contented, and the Count had his life saued, and his faults couered.
The same King Saint Lewes, desiring neuerthelesse, to ouerthrow the vse of

Duelloes and Combats, made this Ordenance, reported by Aufrerus, President of Tolossa,The words of the Decree. in the stile of the same Parliament. We prohibite (throughout our Kingdome) Battailes, in all causes whatsoeuer: And insted of Battailes, we appoint proofes to be made by Charters and Witnesses. It is set downe in the Court Registers of Parliament at Paris, vnder the yeare One thousand two hundred and threescore, and was kept so long as King Lewes liued.
But vnder the Reigne of Phillip the Hardie, his Sonne, and third of the name, this infernall and hellish custome of Combats recouered new strength. So that France was (on all sides) full of bloud and slaughters of the Nobilitie,Combats often suppressed and as often reuiued. who massacred themselues, by cutting the throates of one another, as this furious monster, and the meanest thwarting word, serued sufficiently to cause a Challenge and defiance. Whereupon, he gaue command to Messire Phillip de Beaumanoir, Knight, the very learnedst Ciuile Lawyer (of his time) in France, he hauing bin first Bayliffe in the Countie of Clermont in Beauuoisis (for Monsieur Robert of France, Count of the said Clermont, and Sonne to Saint Lewes) and afterward Bayliffe of Senlis: He gaue charge (I say) to him, to set downe in writing, the cases which concerned Duelloes and Combats. As accordingly he did, writing the Customes obserued in Beauuoisis, in threescore and ten Chapters, whereof, the threescore and first Chapter, containeth the matter of Combat. Which Treatise (saith he himselfe) was made in the yeare One thousand two hundred fourescore and three, the third yeare of the Reigne of the said King Phillip the Hardie.


Here followeth the Chapter Threescore and one, written by Messire Phillip de Beaumanoir, Knight: Which discourseth on Appeales: And how a man ought to forme his Appeale: And in what cases he is to Appeale: And with what Armes he is to Combat. CHAP. III.
MAny times it commeth so to passe in Laye Courts, that Suites and differences fall vnder the Gage of Battaile, wherein it is the purpose of the one, to call the other by name of a Villaine,Seuerall arguments ob^erued by the Author in ca^es of this nature. before the Bench of Iustice. Wherefore it is very expedient, that we should make a Chapter proper and peculiar thereto, which will enstruct; in what case a man may Appeale, and how he ought to forme his Appeale; as also the perils betweene such Appeales, and which Lords ought not to suffer. Moreouer, that such as will Appeale, should know, how they ought to maintaine the Plea of Gages: and the end whereto they will arriue, if they fall into such manner of Plaint.
A man may appeale in all cases of crime.In all cases of Crime, a man may Appeale, or come to Gages, if the Accuser will make the Accusation, according to that which the Appealed must doe. For it is conuenient, that he which is appealed, should defend himselfe, or else he must remaine attainted of the fact. But yet there is an other way, then by direct Appeale. For the Appeale may be so made, as he that appealeth will haue it to be. He may deliuer to the Iudge,I^formations deliu^red to the Iudge. that the offence was committed, in the view and knowledge of so many worthy persons, as it could no way be concealed. And hereupon, he ought to deale as becommeth a iust Iunge, and to make direct enquirie; in regard that the partie would not be called in question. If he doe finde the offence to be notorious and apparant, he must doe iustice according to the offence. For it were a wicked thing, if a man should kill my neerest kinsman at an open Feast, or before, or in the presence of great store of good people: if I should not enter the Combat in his cause, to haue due reuenge executed for him. Hereupon, and in such cases as are apparant, a man may step forth by way of denomination.
He that will rightly appeale, if the case concerne murder, he ought to deliuer his

minde thus to the Iudge. Sir,The complaint vrged in case of murder, I am to speake to you of such a man (and then he ought to name him) who hath wickedly and by Treason murdered such a person (and then hee must name the partie dead:) who was my Kinsman, and the deede was done by his meanes, and by his act, and by his procurement. If he doe acknowledge it: I require you, that you would deale with him as with a Murtherer. If he doe denie it, I will approue it with my body against his; or by a Man that may or shall doe it for me, against him that auoideth it by Excuse. As I will apparantly shew, vpon Time and Place appointed. If he doe appeale the partie, without any other Auoucher then himselfe: then he is to Combat in his owne person, and afterward can haue no other Auoucher.
If the Appeale be made in any other case then Murder, as killing accidently, Man-slaughter, or any of the forenamed cases, wherein appeale may be made:Concerning Man-slaughter, etc. he must declare the case whereby he appealeth, and tell the manner of the fact: he must offer to approue it, if it be denied by the other partie, or any other man for him, as before hath bin said
He that is Appealed, ought not to depart from before the Iudge, vntill he haue answered the Appeale. And if he haue any reasons, whereby he can say,No d^p^ue from the Iudge ti^l the appeale be answered. that he ought not to be so appealed: he is to propound them, and to demand right vpon euery reason, as if they had bin pr^posed in their seuerall degrees. Affirming, that if Law doe not allow his reasons to be good, why Gages may not be granted, in such a villainous detection imposed on him: then he may denie the fact wherewith he is charged, and offer defence in his owne person, or by another man to doe it for him; as crauing Essoigne, to be further testified at Time and Place. Then the Iudge is to take the Gages of the Appealer, and the Appealed, as satisfied with the reasons of the partie appealed.
If he that Appealeth or is Appealed, would haue a friend or Aduoucher that is to Combat for him: he must shew his Essoigne and excuse,Essoign or excus^, for an Aduoucher to fight for the partie. when the Battaile shall be adiudged. And there are many Essoines, whereby, or by some one of them, a man may haue an Aduoucher for him. One of these Excuses is, if he desire to haue an Aduoucher, he must shew, that he is defectiue or wanting in some of his members, by reason whereof, it is euident and apparant, that his body is so much the weaker. A second excuse is, if he exceede the Age of threescore yeares. A third, if he haue any auncient or wonted disease, which happeneth suddenly vpon him:The Excuses alleadged in the seuerall degrees. As the Ioints-Goute, the Vertigo or Dizzinesse in the Braine, the Falling-Sicknesse, and such like. The fourth is, if hee be subiect to a Feauer Quartane or Tertian, or any other disease openly knowne, and without fraude. The fift Essoine is, if a Woman appeale, or is appealed: because a Woman cannot Combate.
If a G^ntleman doe Appeale a Gentleman, both the one and other being Knighted; they are to Combat on Horseback, armed with all such Weapons as they please;Concerning such Gentlemen as are Knights. except a sharpe pointed Poniard, and massie-Battaile-Axe. Nor ought any man to haue more then two Swords, and his Lance; but if they be Esquires, they are to haue also two Swords and a Lance.
But if the Knight or Squire Appealeth Homme de Pooste (that is to say, a Yeoman or Francklin, Alienae potestati subditus, whom Boutillier calleth a Custommarie man,Men subiect to the comma^d of others in his Somme Rurall. The Custome of Bar le Duc, Articles ten and twelue, Terre de Poie, Articles Seauenteene, and the Hundred and Eighteene, Terre in Roture, Hee is to Combate on Foote, Armed in the fashion of a Champion, and likewise as a man De Pooste or Yeaman. For in regard he abased himselfe, to appeale so base a pers^n; his dignity is reduced (in that case) to such Armours, as hee that is appealed ought to haue by right. For it were a very cruell admittance,When men abuse themselues by their Appeale. that if a Gentleman sh^uld appeale a Yeoman or Peazant; to suffer him therefore to haue aduauntage of fighting on Horse back.
But if a Yeoman or Francklin doe appeale a Gentleman, hee is to Combate on Foote, in the manner of a Champion; but the Gentleman on Horseback, Armed with all his Armes. For in the case of defending himselfe, it is very conuenient, that he should vse his owne aduauntage.
If one Yeoman or Francklin, doe appeale an other of the same quality and condition;

the Combate is to be perfourmed on Foote. And such is the quality of the Champion to a Gentlewoman,Of Yeomen appealing one another. if shee appeale, or be appealed, as before the Law hath deuised.
Priueledges of the Soueraigne.The Horse and Armour, of such as come into the Soueraignes Court to Combate, belong to the Soueraigne, whether Peace be made or not: neither can Peace bee made, or quite disclaymed eche of other, without consent of the Soueraigne. But if they fight the Combate, and the Horses be slaine, and the Armes defaced; the Soueraigne can haue no restorement. But hee that is vainquished, looseth his Body,The lands and goods of the vanquished. and whatsoeuer he hath, or holdeth of any Lord, the forfeiture comming to eche Lord of whom he holdeth: his moueables, House or Castell also, returne to the Lords vnder whom they are found to belong. In this manner, whosoeuer proueth to be thus condemned, by the same action he looseth his body; his moueables and inheritances are left in such sort. And the Lords which enioy them (by reason of forfeiture) stand not bound to pay any thing; for hee so condemned, hath discharged any such debt.
Euery day, when Gentlemen come to the Court for Gadges, or to countermaund dayes,Fines for prolonging of dayes. which may bee countermaunded; for the first dayes fine or amends Tenne Shillings must be paid; the second day Twenty; and the third day Forty Shillings. All these dayes must be assigned by Iustice, or prolonged by consent of the Party, for which euery dayes fine is to bee doubled. But the Battaile graunted to a Yeoman, or Francklin; the fine for the first dayes delay is Fiue Shillings; the second Tenne, and the third day Twenty, euermore doubling in that manner.
If the Battayle be in Court betweene men of the County, about Moueables and Goods,Battaile for Goods, Lands or Inheritances. or for Inheritance of Yeomens Lands: the vanquished party looseth the Quarrell, for which the Gadges were giuen and graunted. And the Fine to the Lord, in whose Court (soeuer) the Battaile was wadged, is Threescore Shillings. But if the Battaile be of Gentlemen; He that is vanquished looseth the Quarell, and the Fine to the Lord is Threescore Poundes.
By the Custome of Clermont, in Gadges for Goodes or Lands, eche Party haue his Aduoucher or Vndertaker for him, if he doe require it; bee it that hee haue Essoine,Losse of hand to the vanquished Champion. or none at all, and the Champion vanquished hath his hand cut off. For were it not in regard of the Maime hee beareth, some by Cousenage and cheating might counterfeite for the recompence, or proclaime himselfe to bee vanquished coullorably. Wherefore his Maister is to beare the Domage and disgrace, and he shall cary away the money: in which respect the iudgement of Maiming is good.
It is expedient for him that will Appeale an otherman, or many persons in a case of villainous crime: that he take heede how he doeth appeale them. For if he would appeale two,Of Appealing diuers persons with Gadges. three or more, and throwe downe Gadges against them* ^hee should appeale one of them only in person, and haue there ready some such of his Friendes, as may appeale the rest eche man personally. For if hee appeale them all in his owne person, and offer defence against them all: the Law requireth it necessarily, that he alone must fight the Combate, against ^ll them that hee hath appealed. And concerning this Case, you shall see what ensued (not long since) in the Kings Courte.
Of one knight that appealed three other Knights.A Knight appealed three other Knights of a Man-slaughter, done by Treason and wickedly. And if they confessed the fact, he requested, that they might be punished as such offenders deserued. But if they denied it; he offered to approue it by him selfe, or by others, with Gadges of Battaile. Whereunto the other three made answere, that they denyed the fact, and offered to defend themselues against him, who had there instantly appealed them. But because he had said, that hee would proue it by others with him, and they were not named in the Appeale: they would not allow, that he should deliuer Gadges for any other with him; but required, that he, as he had himselfe alone appealed them all Three, and in a case of villainous wrong, which they themselues were there ready to defend and answere: so he might Combate alone in person against them all three, without any other ayde or helpe with him, and heereupon the Law resolued.
For it was adiudged, that the Knight who had made his Appeale, should Combate

in person against them all Three: because no person may be appealed,Sentence and Iudgement of the Court. that is not present. So the day of Battayle was assigned, and before the appointed day came, one of the three Knights died The other two came into the Court Armed, and he likewise that had appealed them. After the Oathes were taken; in regard there wanted a Party, by meanes whereof they might not goe together: Peace and agreement was made betweene them. By this Iudgement you may perceiue, that when any man will accuse, and offer Gages for diuers persons in a Case of Crime:A Caueat for forming the Appeale. eche man must bee there present, and named, in regard of the perill thereon ensuing.
He therefore that will wisely Appeale, and pursue it in discreete manner, if hee will Combate with no more the one man only: when hee perceiueth the Iudges prepared to giue sentence, before they deliuer a word; he is to speake to the Lord that holdeth the Court, in this manner.

Sir, I am to haue heere a Iudgement this day, and I require,
The forme of discreet and wise proceeding.
that you would cause it to be pronounced by one of these men, as in case of a Iury, and that the Iudgement pronounced by him, you would demaund of the next man following him, and so of eche man by himselfe leasurably: that I may perceiue, if the Iudgement be against me, and who will appeale, that Iudgement may follow.

And the Court ought to graunt him this request. And when Iudgement is pronounced by one of the men, and the second man following: he need attend no longer for making his Appeale, but should call to the next Man, and say in this manner to the Iustice.
Sir, I say that this Iudgement which is deliuered against me, and whereunto P. hath condescended; is false, wicked and disloyall, and for such will I make it against the said P. (who is consenting to the Iudgement) by my selfe, or by a Man that may and shall doe it for me, as hee that hath Essoyne, which I will shew in place conuenient, euen in this Court heere, or in an other, Whether Law may bring me, by reason of this Appeale.
When he shall haue so said: he that is Appealed, must make answere, saying.

The Iudgement is good and Loyall, and I offer in Law to approue with him, or an other for him, that may do it in regard of his excuse or Essoine, either in this Court heere, or elsewhere Law shall bring me.

And then he should request, that it may be demaunded of all the men, if they be agreed vpon this Iudgement: because his defence is the fayrer, when they all haue graunted agreement thereunto.
And then is the Iudge to receiue the Gages, and to take good security of him that Appealed, for the pursuite of his Appeale. But he that followeth the Iudgement,The (...). he needeth not to giue any surety: in regard that he is the Man, who if he bring not the Iudgement to good effect; he shall loose the Iudgement, and must pay Threescore Pounds to the Lord. But for him that Appealed, if the Iudgement fall foule on his side: he is to pay Threescore Pounds Fine, and to him against wh^m he made the Appeale, Threescore Pounds more. And if he Appeale many men,Of A^ ^nd^ and ^ine^ to be paid^ he must make amends to euery man by himselfe, and the amends to each man is Threescore Pounds; in which respect it is very requisite, that he deliuer good security for pursuing his Appeale.
When Gages are giuen in a Case of Crime, or vpon a false Iudgement: the Parties may not make Peace, without the agreement of the Lord.
Thus you see what we haue learned from the Lord of Beaumanoir, wherein are many other things well worthy the obseruation, which I let passe vnder silence, to haste the sooner to my iourneyes end. Only let me tell thee Gentle Read^r, that from these Gages of Battaile, hath proceeded the custome,The Custom^ of cond^mning in Fi^es. of condemning in Fines the Parties Appellant, as well in matters Ciuile, as Criminall, Fines applicable as well to the King, as also to the Parties, according to the nature of the causes, which are mooued by Appeale in the Court of Parliament, and other subalternate Courts, for which (heeretofore) the Apellants stood bound to deliuer Caution: which were no more to be done, if the Appellants be naturall Subiects borne, and dwelling in the Kingdome.
Phillip le Bell (Sonne and Successour to King Phillip the Hardy) King of France and

Nauarre,Prohibition of Duells and Combates. by his Ordenance in the yeare One Thousand, Three Hundred and three, prohibited Duelloes and Combates to his Subiects, vpon paine of being punished, as in the case of High-Treason.
But about three yeare after, he was constrained to reuoake this Ordenance, and to permit Combates againe, to auoyde worse occasions: with certaine modifications and restraints in those Combates, which the Court permitted in foure cases only, to wit.
Foure Cases for admission of Combats.First, when the delict propounded against any one, deserued to be punished with death: As Murder, which Mathew Paris calleth Crimen pessimum, speaking of* Iohn Without-Land, who stabde (with his owne hand) his Nephewe Arthur of Bretaigne.
Second, when an acte was perpetrated and committed so closely and cunningly; as it could not be proued by witnesses, presumptions and other meanes.
Thirdly, when the party accused was called to the Combate, as being suspected to haue committed the Crime, by apparant Indices and presumptions: And
Fourthly, Quando constabat de Cadauere, when it was euidently notorious, that the Crime had bin done and committed.
In these Cases only, the Duell and Combate was permitted by the King, and by his Court of Parliament, and not otherwise.
Now heere we will set downe this Ordenance of Combate, in the Foure cases before remembred; with such Ceremonyes as were vsed in those singular Combates, perfourmed in the yeare of Grace One thousand, three hundred and sixe.


The Ordenance consulted and agreed on, concerning Duells and Combates: And the Ceremonies, to bee obserued and Kept, in Combates at the Sharpe and vtmost extremity. CHAP. IIII.




A Coppy of the Kings Letters Patents.
PHILLIP, By the Grace of God, King of France and of Nauarre, to all such as shall see and reade these our Letters Patents, Greeting. We make knowne, that as heeretofore, for the common benefit of our Kingdomes, wee did generally prohibite to all our Subiects, all manner of Warres, and all Gadges of Battailes, whereby many malefactors put forward themselues, by strength of their bodies and false engines, to commit Homicides, Treasons and all other offences in great excesse, because when they had done them couertly and closely, they could not be conuinced by witnesses, and so the offence remained as countenanced. Now in regard that what we haue done, is not only for the common profit and good of our Kingdome, but likewise to take away from euill doers, all meanes whereby they may in such manner offend: Wee haue qualified our former prohibition in such sort, that where euident apparance may be discerned, of Homicide, Treason, or other grieuous violences and vile actions (only Theft excepted) whereby paine of death ought to follow, yet the transgressions are so closely caried, that the committing of them, and hee that therein hath offended, cannot be conuinced by Testimonies, or other sufficient meanes. It is Our will, that in such occasions of defaylance, hee, or they, that by Indice or Presumptions neerlie leaning to the trueth, concerning the deede done, vpon such facts suspected, shall bee cited and appealed to the Gage of Battaile, and in such cases, the Gage of Battayle ought to take place. And because in this kinde of Iustice onely, wee purposed our former prohibition, forbidding places and times for such Gages of Battayle: it is not now our meaning, that the same prohibition shall be repealed, nor extend to any cases formerly past, nor after the date of these Our present Letters, whereby condemnations, absolutions or enquiries should bee made: to the end that it may be iudged, absolued or condemned according to the fact, as in such cases is required, and thereto plainely appertaineth.

In Witnesse whereof, we haue caused our Great Seale to be affixed to these presents.

Giuen at Paris
on Wednesday -- In the yeare of Grace, One thousand, three hundred and sixe, and of Our Reigne the one and twentieth.






Concerning those Foure things. necessarily appertayning to bee done, before the Gage for Battayle may be adiudged.
I. FIrst of all it is Our will and ordenation, that deed the shall be notorious and euidently certaine, that the euill acte hath happened,Apparance of the deed to be done. and the same acte to appeare plainely: whether it be, Murder, Man-slaughter, Treason, or the like offence by euident suspition.
The Second is, whether the case be such, that death ought to follow thereon,No Gage in case of Theft. or no: The case of Theft onely excepted, wherein no Gage is to be allowed; and the cause to be signified, what payne of death ought to follow thereon.
The Third is, that no man is to be otherwise punished, then by way of Gage,In case of priuy Treason. and it is to be signified in the case of concealed Treason, if he that hath committed the acte, cannot defend himselfe but by his body.
The Fourth, that the party which should be appealed, must be defamed of the fact,Signes and presumptions. by apparant signes, or presumptions likely to be true, and then to signifie the cause of those signes and presumptions.


How the Defendant should come to present himselfe before the Iudge, Without summons or Warning.
II. WE will that in Gage of Battaile, euery man, (that tearmeth himselfe a true man,) in honesty ought to render and present himselfe, without being cited or summoned, if he know himselfe to be accused. But otherwise,Appearing without summons. delay may be giuen him, to haue the aduise of his friends: And then if he appeare not without admonition; yet is not this right thereby impaired, or his Honour any iot impeached.


That no Gage is to bee graunted for Theft or Robbery.
III. ITem we will and ordayne, according to the text of Our said Letters Patents,Of Theft and Robbery. that considering, in the case of Theft and Robbery, the payne and penal^y of death is due iustly thereto: therefore, in Theft and Robbery, no Gage of Battile is to be allowed, according as it is ordered in the case of Theft.


How the Appellant is to propound his Case before the Judge, against the party Appealed.
IIII. ITem we will and ordaine, that when the Gage of Battayle is propounded, and what paine of death is to follow vpon the deed (the case of Theft excepted, as hath bin said) It shall suffice when the Appellant saith,Sufficiency in the Appellant. that the party Appealed hath committed the acte by himselfe, or by some other, suppose that the Appellant is not named heere, nor nameth any.
Item if the case be supposed in generall tearmes, as to say. I say this, and will say, maintaine and defend, that such a one hath trayterously slaine, or caused to be slaine such a one: We will and ordaine, that such a kind of proposition shall not be sufficient,Insufficiencie of the Appeals in generall tearmes. but vnworthy any answere, according to the stile of our Court of France. For it behoueth him to declare the place where the wicked deede was done, the time and the day; also the name of the party dead, or of the Treason committed. Notwithstanding, information concerning the offence may be of such condition; as there shall be no need of telling the houre nor the day, because the case may be obscure, and very difficulte to be knowne.
Item we will and Ordaine, that if the Iudge allow the Gage or Combate, contrary

to the Customes contained in our said Letters: whatsoeuer shall be done to the contrary,No Iudge to goe agai^st the Letters Patents. may lawfully be repealed.
Item we will and ordaine, that the Appellant or demaunder of Iustice, must say, or cause to be said by an Aduocate for him, his minde before vs, or some other competent Iudge for vs: against his aduerse party, he being present. And he is to be very respectiue, that he doe not vrge any villainous speeches, but what may tend to the quarrell only.Duties of the Appellant to perfourme. Further, he ought to conclude with this request, that if the Appealed Party or defendant, doe confesse the matters by him propounded, to be true: that then he may be condemned, as hauing forfeited and confiscated his Body and goods to vs, and to be punished with answerable paines, as our Lawes, Custome, and the matter requireth.
But if the Defendant or appealed Party doe denie it; then the Appellant is to say, that although he cannot proue the matter by Witnesses, or otherwise; yet neuerthelesse he will auouch it, by his owne body against the others, or by one to auouch it for him:The Gage to be giuen in presence of the King. In an Enclosed Field, as a Getnleman and Honest man ought to doe, in our presence, as their Iudge and Soueraigne Prince. And then he is to cast downe his Gage of Battaile, and afterward to retaine his Counsell, for Armes, Horse and all other things, necessarily belonging to the Gage of Battaile. And then in this case, according to his Nobilitie, or other condition appertaining to him, the protestations following are required. Which Protestations, Appellations and Ordenances, shall be Registred downe in our Court of France, and not elsewhere, to iudge if there bee a Gage, or no.
And first of all he is to say: Most Excellent and most Christian Prince, our King and Soueraigne Lord. But if they be not of our Kingdome, in stead of Soueraigne Lord, he is to say.The Appellants speeches to the King. Most Excellent and Most-Christian Prince, our competent Iudge, for bringing a finall end to such matters as haue bin spoken and propounded bee mee: I protest and maintaine, that by lawfull Exoine of mine owne Body, I will haue a Gentleman (instead thereof) this day to auouch the case for me, in my presence if I can, or else in mine absence, who by the helpe of God, and of our Lady, shall perfourme his Loyall deuoyre, at my perill, costs and charges, as reason requireth, at all, or as many wayes as you please, and likewise with Armes and Horses, as if it were my selfe in person, and according as to such a case belongeth.
We also will and ordaine, that the defendant (if he will) may speake the contrary vpon his perill, and request, that the iniuries spoken against him by the Appellant, may be requited with such amends and punishments, as he ought to suffer in the said case.How the Defendant is to make answere in the Kings presence. And that the said Appellant (the Honour of Our Maiesty reserued, or of his competent Iudge) hath falsely and maliciously lyed, and wicked and false he is to speake it. And that in defence of himselfe, by the helpe of God, and of our Lady, with his body, or his auoucher for him, without any Essoyne, if it be said and iudged to be a Gage of Battayle, he will be ready at the day and place, which by the King, as Soueraigne, or his competent Iudge shall bee appointed.
When he is to take vp the Gage.And then (but not before) he is to take vp the Gage from the ground, and afterward make his protestations in manner before said; as also to request his Auoucher for him, in case of a lawfull excuse or Essoyne. Then he may demaunde, and haue his Councell, Armes, Horse and all other things necessary, answerable to the Gage for Battayle; either according to his Nobility, or whatsoeuer condition he is of else beside, as before is expressed. Which words, protestations, and defences, wee will and commaund to be likewise recorded and registred, to vnderstand, whether he may haue Gage, or no, and for Amends making each to the other, according as Iustice shall ordaine.
Oath for p^rsonall appearance at the day, houre and place appointed.In this case, each of them shall sweare, promise and stand bound, to appeare at the day, houre and place to them assigned, as well on the day, to know if the Gage be there, as on that of Battayle, if Battayle be graunted, according to the information of the Processe; which must be seene and carefully respected, by notable wise and honest Men, Clearkes, Knights and Esquires, without bearing fauour to either party. Which Gage, or no Gage, shall be before them adiudged at the day and place, as

hath bin said: on paine of being taken and reputed for a Recreant and Conuicted person, in whom the default shall be made. And we further will and commaund,For deli^ering Pl^dges that they shall bee arrested and stayed, if they doe not deliuer good and sufficient Pledges, and not deparing without our leaue and licence.


What is to bee done on the Kings behalfe, if either of the Parties doe depart without taking leaue.
V. WE will and ordaine, that if any of the Parties doe depart, without leaue and licence of our Court, after the Gages are throwne downe and taken vp: He so departing without our leaue; we will and ordaine, that he shall be taken and proclaimed, to be a Recreant and conuicted villaine.
And because it hath bin, and is the custome, that the Appellant and Defendant, entring into the Field, should come in such due forme as Law hath ordained:Of the Appellant and Defendant, entring into the Field, in what ma^^er it ought to be. Wee order and determine, that they must bring with them all the Armes and Weapons, wherewith they intend to offend one another, and for their owne defence. They shall depart from their Houses and Lodgings on Horseback; their Horses couered with Foote clothes, and garnishments of their Armes; the Viser or sight of their Helmets put downe; their Shields about their necks; their Launces in their hands, their Swords and Daggers guirded to them, yea, in all such fashion and manner, as they purpose to fight the Combat, be it on Horseback, or on foote. For, if they cause their Armes and Weapons to be caried by any other, and beare the Visers of their Helmets exalted or open, without our licence, or leaue of the Iudge: it will bee such preiudice to them, as they must bee constrained to Combate in that manner as they entred into the Field, and according to the present custome.
But because this custome appeareth to vs, to be somewhat iniurious for the Combattants: by our said Letters, and our present Chapters, wee quallifie the same,A qualification of the former strict ordena^ce. willing and ordaining; that the Combattants may depart from their Lodgings, mounted and Armed as hath bin said. The Visers of their Helmets lifted vp, and causing to bee caried before them their Shields, their Launces and other Armes, reasonable and fitt for Combating in such a case. Moreouer, to make it openly knowne, that they be true Christians, at departing from their Lodgings so leysurely as may bee:Shewes that the Combattants be Christians. With their right hands they shall Crosse themselues, or beare a Crucifixe in them, or little Banners, whereon shall bee portrayed, our Lord, our Lady, the Angels, he Saints or she Saints by them made choice of, and to whom they are perticulerly deuoted. With which Crosses or Banners they shall not part, vntill they alight within their Pauillions.


Heere followeth the First of the Three Cries, and the Fiue Prohibitions, which the King of Armes, or Herauld ought to make, at all Gages of Battayle or Combate.
VI. FIrst of all, the king of Armes, or Herauld ought to come on Horseback, to the Gate or entrance of the Lists, and there hee is to Crye once, before the comming of the Appellant.
Secondly, hee is to Crye an other time, when the Appellant and Defendant shall be entred, and shall haue made their presentations before the Iudge.
And Thirdly, when they shall be returned from making their last Oaths; according to this forme following, and crying with a loud exalted voyce.

OR oyez, or oyez, or oyez Seigneurs, Cheualiers, Escuyers, and toutes manie res de Gens, ce que nostre Sire, le bon Roy de France vous commande and deffend sur peine de perdre Corps, and Biens.
Que Nul ne soit arme, ne porte Espee, ne Dague, ne autre Harnois quel qu'il soit, fi ce ne sont les Gardes du Champs; and Ceux qui par le Roy, auront congie, and pounoir de ce faire.
Encores le Roy nostre Sire vous commande, and deffend que Nul de quelque condition qu'il soit, durant la Bataille ne soit, a Cheual; and ce sur peine aux Gentils hommes de perdre le Cheual; and aux Seruiteurs de perdre vne Oreille: Et Ceux qui conduiront les Combateurs, descenduz qu'ils seront a la porte du Champ, seront incontinent tenu^ r'enuoyer leurs Cheuaux, sur la peine que dicte est.
Encores le Roy nostre Sire vous commande, and enioinct a toute Personne de quelque condition qu'elle soit, qu'il s'assise sur Banc, ou par Terre, a ce que Chacun, puisse voir les Parties combattre plus a son gre, sur peine d'auoir le Poing coupe.
Encores le Roy nostre Sire vous commande, and deffend que Nul ne parle; ne face Signe; ne Crache; ne Crie; ne face aucun semblant quel qu'il soit and, ce sur peine de perdre Corps, and Biens.


Now heare you, now heare you, now heare Lords, Knights, Esquires, and all manner of people, that which our Lord the good King of France commandeth and prohibiteth, vpon paine of loosing Body and goods.
None but Guards of the Field to be Armed.That no man shall be Armed, neither weare any Sword or Dagger, or any other Harnesse or Armour whatsoeuer it be: If they be not Guards of the Field, and such as haue leaue granted by the King, and may doe it.
Moreouer, the King our Lord commandeth, and expresly forbiddeth, that no man (of what condition soeuer he be) during the time of Battaile or Combat, shall dare to be on Horsebacke. And that vpon penaltie to Gentlemen, of loosing their Horses; And to Seruingmen,None to be on Horsebacke in the Field. of loosing an Eare: And that such as are appointed Guides and Conducters to the Combattants, shall dismount themselues when they come to the Gate of the Field, and their Horses to be sent away immediately from them, vpon the penaltie before declared.
All to sit downe on bankes or the ground.Moreouer, the King our Lord commandeth, and enioyneth to all persons, of what condition or degree soeuer they be; that they seate themselues vpon banks, or downe on the ground; to the end, that euery one may behold the parties Combatting the more easily; vpon paine to haue a hand cut off.
Moreouer, the King our Lord commandeth and forbiddeth, that any man doe speake, make signe,No noyse or speaking. spie, crie, nor making any semblance whatsoeuer: And that vpon paine of loosing body and gaods.



How the Appellant ought to come on Horsebacke to the Field, Armed withall his Armes.
VII. ANd because that (according to the auncient Customes of this our Kingdome of France) the Appellant ought to present himselfe first in the Field, and before the houre of Midday:Houres of appearing in the Field. And the Defendant before the houre of foure of the clocke in the after Noone, and whosoeuer saileth of these houres, is held and adiudged for a Recreant and Conuict, except the mercie of the Iudge be therein extended, which Customes we willed and commanded, to be still continued and stand in full force: Yet notwithstanding, vpon some good reasons vs mouing thereunto, we haue qualified those Ordenances, and giue our consent* that either we our selfe, or the competent Iudge, may prolong or else shorten those houres, according to the dispositions of the times,Of delaying or shortning the time of the Combat. as to all Iudges shall seeme pleasing. And taking the Parties into our power to agree them, and to order for the good and honor of them both what may be done: or giuing another day and houre, as well before the Battailes beginning, as in the time of Combatting for finishing the Battaile; by bringing them both to one and the same point: yet neither of them to excuse himselfe, complaine or vse any protestations, but that the same was done by their competent Iudges, hauing power and authoritie to doe it.


Here ensue the Requests and Protestations, which both the Parties should make, at their entring into the Field.
VIII. ANd to the Constable, Marshals or Marshall, that attendeth there for the businesse, the Appellant shall say, or procure to be said by his Aduocate,

and likewise to the Iudge, when he is mounted on Horsebacke for entring into the Field, these words which follow, but first at entring into the Field.
My Most-Honorable Lord, my Lord the Constable, or my Lord the Marshall of the Field: I am such a man (on else) Behold here such a Man, who before you, as he that is appointed by our Lord the King, commeth to present himselfe Armed, and mounted like a Gentleman, that must enter to Combat with such a Gentleman, vpon such a Quarrell, as with a false wicked Traitour or Murderer as he is. And hereof I take our Lord, our Lady, and my Lord Saint George the good Knight to witnesse, on this day to vs assigned by our Lord the King, and for the doing and accomplishing thereof am come hither. Here I present my selfe vnto you, to doe my deuoire, requiring you, that you will impart and deliuer to me my portion of the Field, Winde and Sunne, and of all else that is needefull for me, conuenable and profitable in such a case. Which being by you performed, I will doe my duetie, by the helpe of God, of our Lady, and of my Lord Saint George the good Knight.
Moreouer he must protest, that he doth require it, and that it may be lawfull for him, to fight the Combat either on Horsebacke, or on foote;H^s offers to the Marshall. as to his Honor it shall seeme best, either Armed, or disarmed: And to weare those which shall like him, to offend or defend at his pleasure to appoint, before, or in Combatting, if God will vouchsafe him the leasure to doe it.
Then he further requireth, that if the aduerse Partie shall bring to the Field other Armes, then by the constitution of France he ought to bring; that they may be taken from him, and instead of them, he may haue no other, then such as are and ought to be allowed.
Also, that if his enemie bring Armes, fordged by wicked Arts, Charmes,Against Arms forge by wicked Arts and Charme^ Sorceries or Incantations, by meanes whereof it may be manifestly knowne, that the truth and right of his cause was hindered before the Combat, or in the time of Combatting, or after he had performed his best endeauour, and so his right, iustice and honor hath bin impaired: That the proofe of such wicked dealing appearing euidently, his Aduersarie may be punished, as an enemy to God, a Traitour and Murderer to him, and according to the condition of the case. But whether the Armes be charmed or no, his enemy ought to be solemnely sworne therein.
He is also to require and protest, that if the pleasure of God be such,For granting of another day, the first failing. as (before Sunne-setting) He hath not discomfited and slaine his enemie (which he purposed to haue done, if God had thereto bin so pleasing) that a new day may be granted him, because much time of this day was lost, in passage of the Ceremonies before entring into Combat, according to the auncient Rites and Customes. For the space of a whole day may thus be necessarily required: whereto we consent, and freely grant it him.
Moreouer, that if his Aduersarie be not come within the due houre, and assigned by our Lord the King: that his Aduersarie may not afterward be accepted, but held as a Recreant and Conuicted. Yet this request is to remaine within the compasse of our freedome and power. Neuerthelesse,For failing the due appointed houre. if he make delay without our will and command: it is then our pleasure, that it shall be so, as aboue is said.
He is further expresly to demand and protest, that he may bring thither with him Bread, Wine and other Viandes, to eate and drinke for the space of a day, if he shall be in any such neede; with all things else conuenient and requisite for him and his Horse, in such a case. Which protestations and requests, as well in generall,A daies prouision for the Field. as in especiall, he ought to require an Act and Instrument of. And the same requests and protestations of the Appellant, we will and ordaine that the Defendant may make likewise, and in the same forme of the Appellant: except the said requests and protestations, shall be especially and respectiuely forbidden by both the parties themselues. We also will and ordaine, that they may Combat on Horsebacke, or on foote, with all Staues and Armours; except such as are forged by wicked engine, Charmes, Enchantments, and Inuocations vpon Diuels, and all other such like things, forbidden by God and his holy Church to all good Christians.



In what manner the Scaffoldes and Lists of the Field ought to bee ordered and prepared, with the Crucifix, Te Igitur, Tents and Pauillions of the Parties.
For length and breadth of the Lists.IX. FVrthermore we will and ordayne, that all Lists for Gages of Battayle, shall containe Sixescore paces about, or in circuit, that is to say, Forty paces in Widenesse, and Fourescore in Length: which all our Iudges shall stand obliged to see done, and leaue them so to others, that shall come after them.
Wee also will and Commaund, that the Seate and Pauillion of the Appellant (whatsoeuer he be) shall be placed in the Field on our right hand, or of the Iudge: And that of the Defendant,Placing of the Pauillions. is to be vpon the left hand.
And when both of the Combatants shall haue spoken, or caused to be spoken by their Aduocates, the Protestations and Requests before rehearsed, and before their entring into the Field; they must abase or slip downe the Visers of their Helmets, and enter so with their Visers abased, making the signe of the Crosse, as already hath bin said: And in that manner they ought to come before the Scaffoldes, where their Iudge may command them to raise vp their Visers. If the King bee there present, they ought then to say.Speeches to the King or to the Iudge. Most Excellent, and Most Mighty Prince, and our Soueraigne Lord: I am such a Man, who in your presence, as to our Iust Lord and Soueraigne Iudge. But if it be to any other then the King, he must then say. My Most-dreaded Lord, I am such a Man, Who in your presence, as before our competent Iudge, am come this day, and at the Houre by you assigned to me, to doe my deuoire against such a Man, by reason of the Murder, or Treason which he hath done. And heereof I take God on my part, and who therein shall be my helpe this day.
A writing giuen to the Marshall.When he hath spoken these words, or so neere as hee can to the same effect: by his Councellers a writing is to be giuen him, contayning all the former words which (with his owne hand) he must deliuer to the Marshall, and he ought to receiue it. Which being done, we giue him leaue to dismounte, and goe into his Pauillion. But if it shall appeare, that he hath not spoken the former words; then we will and commaund, that they must be done by the Office of his Aduocate.
The second Cry.When all the foresaid things are doe, the King of Armes, or Herauld ought to mount vpon the Gate of the Lists, and make his Second Crie, and the Fiue inhibitions, in such manner and forme as formerly you haue heard.


Now follow the Oathes, which are to be taken by them, that will enter and Combate with Gage of Battayle.
X. FIrst the Appellant is to come (with his Viser exalted) departing from his Pauillion on foote,In what manner the Apellant taketh his Oath. Armed with all his Armes, and his Tenicle thereon. Then by the Guards of the Field, and them of his Councell, he must be brought before the Scaffold, erected before the midst of the Lists, where our Maiesty shall bee placed, or some other for vs in our absence. There the Appellant falleth on his knees, before a Seate and a Table richly adorned, where standeth the true figure of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, placed on a rich Pillow, with the Missale lying by it. On the right hand of this Altar is seated a Priest or Religious Fryer, who speaketh to the Appellant in this manner following.
The Priests words to the Appellant.Arise Knight (or Esquire, or Lord of such a place) Who art Appellant. You behold heere the most true remembrance, of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, who because hee would dye, deliuered his most precious Body to Death, only to saue vs. Require you mercy of him, and earnestly beseech him, that this day he will assist you, according to the right you haue, for he is the only Soueraigne Iudge. Thinke on the Oaths which you are to take; for otherwise your Soule, your Honor and your selfe are in great perill.
When these words are finished, the Marshall taketh the Appellant by both the hands, with the Gauntlets on, and placing his right hand vpon the Crucifix, and his left vpon the Te Igitur: then he causeth him to speake after him word by word, thus.
I Such a one, Appellant, doe sweare vpon this Remembrance of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and on the Holy Euangelists which are heere, and on the Faith of a true Christian, and by the sacred Baptisme, which I hold of God: that I haue certainely a good, iust

and Holy quarrell, and by good right haue in this Gage of Battayle appealed Such a one, a false and wicked Traytour, Murderer or Periured Villaine (according as the condition of the Crime is) and who hath a most false and wicked quarrell on his part to defend. This will I make good this Day, with my body against his, by the helpe of God, of our Lady, and of my Lord Saint George, that good and worthy Knight.
This Oath being thus made, the Appellant riseth, and returneth into his Pauillion, with them of his Councell, and the Guards that conducted him.


The Oath taken by the Defendant, before the Judge.
XI. AFterward, the Guards of the Field goe to the Pauillion of the Defendant, whom they conduct before the Altare, to take his Oath likewise in the forme aforesaid with his Councellers, Armed with all his Armes, and the Tunicle or Coate Armour ouer all, as hath beene said. After he hath beene admonished by the Priest, the Marshall taketh him by the hands, with the Gauntlets on, as before he did to the Appellant. And then he speaketh thus. You, Such a one, or Lord of such a place, say thus after me, and as I doe.
I Such a one, Defendant, sweare vpon this Remembrance, of the Passion of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and on the Sacred Euangelists which are heere,The d^fendants Oath before the Marshall. and on the Faith of a true Christian, and by the blessed Baptisme which I hold of God: That I haue, and thinke firmely to haue, a good, holy and iust quarrell, and good right to defend my selfe by this Gage of Battayle, against Such a one, who falsely and wickedly hath accused mee, false and wicked man as he is, so to appeale me, And this will I make good vpon him this day, with my body against his: So helpe me God, our Lady, and my Lord Saint George, that good and worthy Knight.
This Oath likewise being made, the defendant ariseth, and returneth againe to his Pauillion, according as the Appellant did.


The Third Oath, which both the Parties make before the Iudge.
XII. AT the Third Oath, the Guards deuide themselues equally on either side, and comming to the two Parties, guide them accompanied with their Councellers, as hath bin said; who comming step by step,The bri^ging of them both together, to the third and last Oath. and paired together, when they come before the Crosse, and the Te ^gitur: The Marshall taketh their right hands, and pulling off their Gauntlets, which hee hangeth on the the two Armes of the Crosse. Then must the Priest bee there present, to remember them of the Passion of our Lord Iesus Christ; the perdition of him that shall haue the shame, both in soule and body; the great Oaths they haue taken, and are yet to take; the Sentence of God, who fauoureth nothing but the rightfull cause. Aduising them further, rather to trust to the mercy of the King, then to endaunger the wrath of God, and power of the infernall enemy. And this Oath wee appoint to be the last of the Three: in regard of the mortall hatred betweene them; especially, when they come to see each other, and to shake hands together at parting.
Then the Marshall is to demaund first of the Appellant, saying. You, Such a one, A^ Appellant will you Sweare? If he repent, and make conscience of it,Of repentance before taking the last Oath. as becommeth a good Christian to doe: we will receiue him into our mercy, or else the Iudge shall doe it, before whom he should performe the Combate; to giue, or enioyne him penance, or further to appoint our pleasure. If it fall out to bee so, then they are to be brought backe into their Pauillions, and not to depart thence without our commaund, or order from the Iudge before whom they came. But if the Appellant will constantly sweare it to be true; then the Marshall must demaund the like of the Defendant, and then returning to the Appellant, cause him to speake thus after him.
I Such a one, Appellant, doe sweare vpon this true figure of the Passion of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ; and on these Holy Euangelists heere;The Appellants last Oath on the Faith of Baptisme as a Christian, which I hold of my true God; on the most-soueraigne Ioyes of Paradise, which I vtterly renounce for the most bitter paynes of Hell; vpon my Soule, my Life, and vpon

mine Honor; That I haue a good, holy and iust Quarrell, to Combat with this false and wicked Traitour, Murderer, Periured Villaine: I meane this vile man here before me. And in this case I call God for my true Iudge, our Lady, and my Lord Saint George, that good and worthy Knight. And for this faithfully (by the Oathes which I haue taken) I intend not to beare vpon my selfe, nor vpon my Horse, Words, Stones, Hearbes, Charmes, Sorceries, Drinkes, Carracters, Inuocations on Spirits, or any other thing, wherein I might place the least hope of helping me, and to hurt him. Nor haue I any other recourse, but to God onely, and confidence in my right; by my Body, by my Horse, and by mine Armes to preuaile. Whereupon, I kisse this figure of the Crosse, and these Holy Euangelists, and so am silent.
After the Oath thus taken, the Marshall goeth to the Defendant, whom he causeth to vse the very same words, and in the same manner.
The speeches vsed each Party holding the other by the hand.When the Defendant hath kist the Crucifixe, and the Te Igitur, for more clearing the right of them both; he taketh the two parties by the right hands, which they giuing each to other; hee commandeth the Appellant to speake thus to his enemie.

O thou, whom I hold by the right hand, by the Oathes that I haue taken, the cause for which I haue appealed thee; is a good cause, and lawfull for me to appeale thee, wherein this day I will Combat thee. Thou hast a bad cause, and no iust quarrell to enter Combat, or to defend thy selfe against me, and that thou knowest full well. Whereupon, I call God, our Lady, and my Lord Saint George that good Knight, to be my true Witnesses: a false Traitour, Murderer, and periured Villaine as thou art.



The answere to the Oath of the Appellant, made by the Defendant.
XIII. AFter this, the Marshall saith to the Defendant, that he must make the same protestation, as the Appellant did, taking him againe by the hand.

O thou, whom I hold by the right hand, by the Oathes that I haue taken, the Cause wherein thou hast appealed me, is false and wicked. Wherefore, I haue good and lawfull reason to defend my selfe, and to Combat against thee this day. For thou hast a naughtie cause, and no quarrell to appeale me, or fight against me, and that thou knowest full well. And that this is true, I call God, our Lady, and my Lord Saint George that good and worthy Knight, to be my true witnesses: False and wicked man as thou art.

After these Oathes thus made, and the speeches spoken by either of them; they kisse the Crucifixe together,The Priests departure out of the Lists. and then (paired with their Councellours and friends) returne to their Pauillions to doe their deuoire. And the Priest then taketh the Crosse and the Te Igitur, as also the Table whereon they stood, which he beareth away with him, and departeth thence. And the King of Armes, after all this is done, and in such forme as hath bin said; he maketh the last Crie of the Three.


The Last of the three Cries.
XIV. WHen the King of Armes or Herald is ready to Crie, all the people being seated, and silence made, not to speake a word, the Parties being likewise ready to performe their dutie; then by command of the Marshall, commeth the King of Armes or Herauld into the midst of the Lists, where he crieth three seuerall times;The Combattants leauing their Pauillions. Gentlemen, doe your deuoire. After which words, the two Combattants leaue their Pauillions, Chaires or Stooles, comming forth to mount vpon their Horses, which stand there readily prepared for them, their Staues and Lances by, wherewith they are to helpe themselues, and their Councellors walking with them: when suddenly their Pauillions are beaten downe, and cast forth of the Lists.


How at the two Combattants issuing forth of their Pauillions, vpon the voyce and command of the Marshall; he throweth downe the Gloue.
XV. AFter all is done, the Marshall, who must be in the middest of the Field, by the Scaffold, carrying the Gloue in his hand; crieth three seuerall times.

Let them goe together. At which words he casteth downe the Gloue. Then he that will mounteth on Horsebacke, but he that will not, is left to his owne pleasure.The Combattants left to their deuoire And then the Councellours to both the Parties, without any longer tarrying, depart, leauing each man his Bottell of Wine, and a Loafe of Bread in a Napkin: And then they doe what they can.


In what manner the Gage of Battaile should be granted: And how the Conqueror should drag the Vanquished out of the Field.
XVI. WE will and command, that the Gage of Battaile shall not be granted but in one of these two manners, that is to say. When one of the two Parties confesseth the fault, and yeeldeth himselfe. And the other: When the one shall bring the other forth of the Field, aliue or dead. And dead or aliue as he is, the body shall be deliuered by the Iudge to the Marshall, to order or doe Iustice at our pleasure. If he be liuing, we appoint, that he shall be deliuered to the Heraulds and King of Armes, by whom he shall be disarmed, his Points cut,Proceedings with the Parties aliue or dead. and his Armour cast piecemeale in the Lists, while he lies couched on the ground. But if he be dead, he shall be likewise disarmed, and there left to our appointment, either to be pardoned, or sent to more shamefull punishment, according as to vs shall seeme best. Neuerthelesse, the Hostages of the vanquished shall be arrested, vntill they shall haue made ful satisfaction to the Partie victorious. And the ouer-plus of the vanquisheds goods, shall be confiscate to the Prince.


How the Vanquisher ought to depart out of the Lists Honorably.
XVII. IT is our further will and pleasure, that the Vanquisher shall depart honorably on Horsebacke out of the Lists, in the same forme as he made his entrance; if he be not hindered by some Exoine, or harme happened to his body;Rights belonging to the Victor. carrying the weapon (wherewith he hath conquered his Aduersarie) in his right hand, hauing his Pledges and Hostages freely deliuered to him. And concerning this quarrell, whatsoeuer information can come to the contrary; he is not to make any answere, neither shall any Iudge compell him thereunto, except himselfe be so pleased.
We also will and ordaine, that the Horse as he is, and Armes of the Vanquished,Rights belonging to the Marshall. and all things vpon him, or brought thither for him; doe and shall appertaine to the Constable, Marshals or Marshall of the Field, who in this case haue the charge of all.
And we direct our prayers to God, that he will maintaine the right to him that hath it, and that euery good Christian, may keepe himselfe from falling into such a perill: for, among all other perils that are, this is most of all to be feared, none being worse then the Gage of Battaile. Wherein, many a Noble man hath found himselfe deceiued, whether right were on his side, or no, by being ouer confident in cunning, sleights and strength, or blinded with pride, Anger and ouer-weening;How dangerous a thing the Gage of Battaile is. and sometime by shames of the world giuen, for refusing peace, in Parties but of equall qualitie; who many times afterward, For old sinnes past, haue sustained new penances, in contemning and not caring for the Iudgement of God. But whosoeuer complaineth, and findeth not Iustice, let him referre his cause to God. If for his owne interest (without pride and despight) he requireth Battaile in case of true right: he needeth not to feare cunning nor force, because our Lord Iesus Christ is a iust Iudge for him, such is the common saying of the world, whose aduise yet (in this case) is hard to be followed.


The Conclusion of the Ordenances for Duelloes and Combats.
THese were the true tearmes of the Edict, concerning Duelloes and single Combats, made by Phillip le Bel, Fourth of the name, King of France and of Nauarre;

whereby (at the beginning) he gaue permission to his Iudges, to grant the Field of Battaile. But in regard it was a right, which appertained to a Soueraigne Prince onely;The right of graunting Battaile belongeth to a Soueraign Prince onely. he made a Proclamation in the yeare following, One thousand three hundred and seauen, Registred in the Parliament of Paris: whereby he reuoaked that power from all the Iudges of his Kingdome; Attributing it onely to his Court of France, the Court of Peeres, that is the Parliament of Paris.
And to them it belonged to Iudge, whether any Gage of Battaile might be granted, or not: If they did adiudge it, the execution thereof was to be at Paris, ordenarily (if the absence of the King did not cause the contrary) for all the Prouinces vnder the homage of France, how farre off soeuer they were, holding there his Exchecquer, Soueraigne Iustice, extraordinarie Sessions, the Appeales of Duelloes and Gages of Battaile, should resort to the Parliament of Paris, honored with the title of Excellencie, and honor Of the Court of France.
The reading of these Ordenances, hath caused vs to call to remembrance, many Ceremonies held and obserued in these Fields of Battaile: some few things forgotten, or let sleepe in silence, to be the better knowne in these times, because then they were in full execution.


Ceremonies that were obserued in elder times.
AS giuing to the King, the Constable or Marshall, that carrieth command in the Field of Battaile,The Rod or Warder. A Rod or Wand Guilded: which (like to the Caduceus of Mercurie) being cast in the midst betweene the Combattants, causeth them to sunder each from other.
To obserue also, that the King of Armes, or the Herauld that maketh the Cries and prohibitions, had (for difference) A Rod, or Wand Siluered, as is obserued in the Romant of Raoul de Cambray.

With chearefull lookes the Herauld rideth on,
Holds in his hand a pilled Rod or Wand,
And crieth with a loud exalted voyce:
Barons and Gentlemen of France, Attend
The message, that is sent you from the King.
Let no man here make noyse, fight or affray:
On paine to haue his head smit off this day.

The manner and fashion, of dragging the dead Body out of the Lists, is here forgotten;Dragging the dead body out of the Lists. which we will more at large obserue, in the Chapter concerning Militarie paines and punishments, following hereafter.
But among these Ordenances, may be remembred the auncient Custome, of cutting the Eares of lewd Seruants, refractary to the commands of their Maisters: for it was in France an ordenary paine and punishment for bad Seruants, to haue their Eares cut off.
In our Salique Law, at the Title de Adulterijs Ancillarum, and the fourth Paragraph; Seruus ipse castretur. For meanest faults, they would haue them stretched out vpon a Bench or Fourme,Concerning the punishing of Seruants of the worst kinde. fast bound by the hands and Feete, their bodies naked, as ready for torture and rigour: And with Wands, containing the bignesse of a mans little Finger, Sixescore stripes (of good account and manuall distribution) was to be giuen with the Wand vpon the Bellie. And throughout the Salique Law, at the Title De Seruo qui de furto fuerit interpellatus, at the eight Paragraph.

Si autem Seruus de quolibet crimine inculpatus fuerit, and Dominus Serui ipsius praesens adfuit, ab eo qui repetit admoneatur, vt Seruum suum ad iusta supplicia dare non differat: and qui repetit, Virgas paratas habere debet, quae in similitudinem minimi digiti grossitudinem habeant, and Scamnum paratum habere debet, vt Seruum ipsum tendere possit.

This was the least punishment then ordained, wherewith they chastised their Seruants. At the same Title, and last Paragraph. Si Ancilla in tali crimine inculoatur de

quo Seruus castrari debuerat, CCXL. Denarios, qui faciunt solidos sex, si conuenit, Dominus reddat, aut Ducentos Quadraginta ictus accipiat.
When better fauour was to be showne to better Seruants,Punishment of better seruants. they were to be smitten on the head with Wands of fiue or sixe yeares growth, such as Fagots or Bauins are made of, which are daily growing in our Woods, and tearmed in our Salique Law Amortas; the Gascoigne calleth them Endortes, and the Law of the Baiorians, Gamactas. Sometimes they would belabour their shoulders with sixescore stripes of such a Wand or Cudgell; or fiftie at the least, which was accounted friendly. Rumpebatur dorsum eius Quinquaginta Gamactis.
In our Law, at the Title De furtis Seruorum. If a Seruant, from forth the House of his Maister, did steale the value of two Pence: he was to redeeme his shoulders with sixe score Pence, or else to endure so many stripes soundly laid on, and called d'Amorte. Si quis Seruus foris casa, quod valet duos Denarios farauerit, and inde conuictus fuerit, aut flagellis CXX. ictus accipiat, aut pro dorso suo CXX.Punishment for Theft according to the value. Denariorum qui faciunt Solidos III. culpabilis iudicetur.
If he did steale the value of Fortie Pence: He was to redeeme his Testicles, as well by restitution of the Principall, whereof he had made the Theft, as also two hundred and fortie Pence, for a penalty; or else he was to be Castrated.
Si vero furauerit quod valet Quadraginta Denarios Aut castretur, aut Ducentos Quadraginta Denarios qui faciunt Solidos Sex reddat. Dominus autem Serui, qui furtum fecerit, capitale in locum restituat.
If he were like to the Seruant of Marot, that could remember nothing said vnto him; for the better quickning of his memorie, he had one Fare cut off,A bad medicine for memorie. and this kinde of punishment was practised from the time of our first Kings, Saint Gregorie of Tours, in the first Booke of his Historie of France, and the fortie eight Chapter, speaking of Leudastes. Qui bis, aut tertio reductus a fugae lapsu: Auris vnius incisione mulctatur. And the same Authour, in his fift Booke and eighteenth Chapter, informeth vs, that such as contradicted the Kings commands, had their hands smitten off.
But here is to be obserued, that it was not the right Eare which they vsed to cut off, but the left: because therein is a certaine veine,A strange v^n in the left side of a man. which answereth to the genitall parts, and which being cut away, maketh a man vncapable of the engendring power. And this was done, to the end, that such a race of people, should not leaue to the world any of their vile and vicious breeding, whereof no doubt there are too many. By this manner of cutting off the Eare, were formerly punished Cut-purses, and Domesticke or House-Theeues, in that small streete or quarter, which we see at the entrance of Pont-nostre Dame, la Macque, S. Iacques de la Boucherie, and La Greue, where, in former times, was an ascending, like to that of the Temple; which was called by cutting off Eares; Le Carrefour Guigne Oreille, and in corrupt language Guillory by the vulgar. And this cutting off Eares,Cutting off the Eare a mark of infamie. hath euermore bin held for an ignominious and infamous Act: because such kinde of people (by the Law of the Medes and Persians) were neuer admitted to the Royaltie. Witnesse false Smerdis, obserued by Zonaras, in the second Booke of his Historie. Nor to the Priesthood among the Iewes, as is testified by Iosephus, in the foureteenth Booke, and fiue and twentieth Chapter of his Iewish Antiquities, speaking of the King, and of the High Priest Hyrcanus. Returne we now againe to our Duelloes, the Ordenances whereof (before remembred) were obserued in France, all the while as Duelloes continued.
Vnder the Reigne of Phillip de Valois, sixt and last of the name, King of France, there was a Suite in the Court of Parliament, to haue the Gage of Battaile, for the Castell and Vicountie of Touraine: betweene the Lord de Pons, Knight, and the Count of Commenge. The causes for the Gage of Battaile expresseth it selfe the more familiarly, by the Order and Decree of the said Court; which I haue here set downe verbatim, out of the true Record.




PHilippes par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France. A tous ceux qui ces presentes Lettres verront, Salut. Scauoit faisons que Comparant a nostre Cour de Parlement a Paris Regnaud

de Pons Cheualier d'vne part, and Bernard Comte de Commenge d'autre part. Ledict Cheualier a propose comme de long temps fust meue question and discord Entre Geofroy de Pons Cheualier, iadis Pere dudict Regnaud, and duquel ledict Regnaud est fils, and heritier Vniuersel, seul, and en tous ses biens d'vne part. Et Marguerite iadis Comtesse de Commenge d'autre, pour raison du Chasteau, and Vicomte de Turaine, lesquels Chasteau, and Vicomte, chacun desdits Geofroy, and Comtesse disoit a soy appartenir. Ne^ntmoins ledict Comte Bernard plein de mauuaise intention, and icelle mettant a effect faucement and malicieusement, a fin de frustrer dudict Vicomte ledit Regnaud auquel il deuoit appartenir apres le decez de son dict Pere, considerant qu'apres la Mort de ladicte Comtesse, qui est decedee sans Hoirs descendants de son Corps, and qui n'auoit iamais este grosse, and n'auoit eu aucuns Enfants il n'auroit aucune couleur de retenir, and posseder ledict Vicomte qui appartenoit audit Regnaud, and auroit suppose, and faict supposer vn Part faucement, meschamment, and frauduleusement, ladicte Comtesse estant en tel estat qu'elle ne pouuoit euader la Mort, and qu'elle en seroit decedee. Que ledict Comte auoit publie, ou fait publier que le dict Part estoit deladite Comtesse, combien que faucement il eust este suppose, and que iamais ladicte Comtesse n'eust eu Enfants. Lequel Part ainsi faucement suppose, seroit dedans treis Iours apres la Mort de ladicte Comtesse, par enchantement disparu du lieu, and s'en seroit alle comme il estoit venu, a tout le moins en estoit incognue la maniere du departement; and par fiction auroit este dict qu'il estoit decede. Disoit ledict Regnaud que ledict Comte auoit faict faire, ou faict secrettement ladicte fauce supposition, and que par vne seule personne pouuoit estre faicte ladicte supposition. Et dauantage, proposoit contre ledict Comte, qu'il est notoire que ledict Comte estoit tenu, and oblige a raison de sondict Comte par serment de Fidelite, and d'Hommage au Roy, Royaume, and Coronne de France, and qu'apres le decez de deffunct nostre tres-cher Sieur, and Cousin le Roy Louis (Hutin) estoit demeur^e grosse d'Enfant nostre tres chere Dame la Royne Clemence, and que des^ors ledict Comte premeditant que sur le Regime, and Gouuernement du Royaume de France pourroit se m^uuoir dissention entre nos tres-chers Sieurs and Cousins Philippes (le Long) and Charles (le Bel) Freres, peu apres Roys de France, ou Aultres, pour autant que lors estoit demeure sans Roy ledict Royaume: Preuoyant aussi que si ladicte Royne Clemence auoit vne Fille, pourroit sourdre question, and querele sur la creation du Roy, ou qui deuoit estre Roy: Et que s'il y auoit vn Fils pourroit y auoir debat sur le Gouuernement d'icelu), considerant le commun Prouerbe par lequel communeement on diti Qu'en Eaue trouble faict bon pescher. Combien que par son Serment il fust tenu de garder l'vtilite du Royaume de France, ayant la volonte diminuer les droicts de la Coronne de France, and vsurper le Domaine du Roy, l'acquerir, and applicquer a soy, and se eximer de la subiection, and obeissance en laquelle il est tenu, and par serment oblige au ^oy, and a la Coronne de France, auroit faucement, and entrahison, venant contre son serment, and commettant Crime de leze Maieste faict, ou faict faire conspirations, and auroit parle, ou faict parler aux Barons, ou Nobles dudict Pays, and leur auroit tenu, ou faict tenir propos de faire confederation, and ligue auec luy, pour autant qu'ils pouuoient cognoistre l Estat auquel estoit le Royaume de Prance, and par ce moyen auroit de Celuy qui seroit Roy tous les Priuileges, en si grand nombre qu'ils voudroient demander, and qu'entre autres Gentils hommes il auoit pacte, and fait remonstrance, ou faict faire auoict Regnaud de Pons d entrer auec luy en ladicte Ligue and Confederation. A quoy ledit Regnauld de Pons cognoissant le grand preiudice, and dommage qui en pourroit venir a la Coronne, and Royaume de France, de sa part comme bon and loyal Subiect ne se seroit voulu consentir. Disoit encores ledict Regnaud, comme bon, and loyal, and pour le serment, and la foy en laquelle il seroit tenu vers nous, que ledict Comte auroit faict and dit, ou faict faire, and dire contre son propre serment les choses susdictes faucement, and en trahisen, commettant crime de leze Maieste, lequel Crime est de telle nature, que en Corps, and en Biens il doit estre puny; and encores qu'il fust decede, pourroit estre procede a la Confiscation de ses Biens. Disant outre que ledict Comte auroit faict, ou faict faire lesdictes choses, afin qu'il peust acquerir, and tirer a soy telle puissance que le Roy n'osast and ne peust contredire chose qu'il luy requist, and demandast; Requerant ledict Regnaud de Pons que ledict Comte fust pour les choses dessusdictes deument puny s'il les confessoit estre veritables, and s'il les denioit, offroit ledict Regnaud le prouuer suffisamment contre ledict Comte par Gage de Combat, baillant, and offrant a nostre dicte Cour son dict Gage contre ledict Comte. De l'autre part a prop^se ledict Comte du Commenge pour ses deffences, and afin que ledict Gage de Combat ne fust

receu, and fust ledict Gage annulle, que ledict Regnaud n'estoit receuable en sadicte demande. Et premierement, pour ce que ledit Regnaud en proposant les choses cy deuant dictes, auoit confesse que ledict Comte auoit faict les Conspirations susdictes apres la Mort dudict Roy Louis nostre Souuerain Seign^ur, and les auoit celees iusques a present, and par ce moyen par ce qu'il estoit Homme Lige du Roy, and luy deuoit sa foy, and toutes fois auoit cele vn tel faict, il estoit periure, infidele, and infame and a ceste raison n'estoit ledict Regnauld habile a saire ladicte demande, and ne pouuoit accuser le dict Comte. Aussi a propose ledict Comte, qu'autresoi^ ledict Regnauld l'auroit faict adiourner sur Gaige de Combat, and apres iceluy Regnauld auroit impetre conge d accorder auecques ledict Comte, sans fa re aucune mention desdictes conspirations, and ainsi nous auro^t menty and failly de sa Foy, and consequemment estoit insame, and ne deu^it estre recen a Appeller ledict Comte. Requerant ledict Comte Droict luy estre faict, and rendu sur les^ictes choses. Et disant que si Droict estoit faict contre luy, il n'estoit possible de respondre a la demande dudict Regnauld, par ce qu'il falloit dire esdictes Accusations, and declarer l' An, le Mois, and le Iour, lesquels on dit les Crimes auoir este commis, que ledict Regnauld a proposez en sa demande. Dauantage a propose ledict Comte, que ledit Regnauld auoit faict sa demande alternatiue, disant que ledict Comte auroit suppose, ou faist supposer le Part, et l'Enfant d'un Aultre: Et auroit tenu propos, ou faict tenir audict Regnaud de faire Ligue auec luy, and que telles demandes alternatiues ne vallent pour raison, and ne doiuent estre admises; and suppose qu'ell^s valluss^nt, tout^fois ne deuoit ledict Regnaud estre rec^u par voye de Gage de Combat, alleguant ledict Comte les raisons qui s'ensuiuent. Scauoir est que par les Ordonnances Royaux faictes sur les Duels, and Combats: Nul ne peut appeler Autruy a Combat: sinon que l' Appele, and Prouoque fust suspect des Cr^mes proposez contre luy; and que par Indices vrays semblables il apparust, and lon cogn^ust les Crimes auoir este saicts. Disoit ledict Comte qu'il estoit notoire qu'il n'auoit iamais este suspect, ne diffame des Crimes proposez contre luy, and n'estoit vray-semblable qu il eust commis telles choses, veu que tousiours il s'estoit bien, and fidelement, p^rte and faict deuoir enuers Nous, and Nos Predecesseurs Roys de France en leurs Conseils and Guerres; and auoit este, and estoit de bonne renomm^e. Semblablement a propose ledict Comte, que par l^sdictes Ordonnances, il faloit que les Crimes dont aucun estoit accuse, fussent tels que la Mort s'en deust ensuiuir, and que selon Droict, Raison, and Coustume les Crimes proposez par ledict Regnaud contre ledict Comte ne sont tels, que d'iceux il se doiue ensuiure peine Capitale, suppose que lesdits Crimes fussent vrays; Parce que Crime de supposition de faux Part n'est tel, que, qui en soit conuaineu, doiue pour cela estre condamne a la Mort naturelle; and aussi que faire Conspiration, ou Ass^mblee a fin de demander libertez, ou franchises telles que ledict R^gnaud a declare, n'est vn tel crime, que punition mortelle s'en doiue suiure, par ce que telles choses ne sont contre le Prince, ne contre la seurete de son Peuple, ne contre ses Membres comme sont les Conseillers Royaux. Disant ledict Comte que l'Intention and la Volonte de l'Appelant and Prouocquant, faisoit beaucoup a considerer, par ce qu'il pouuoit apparoir que ledict Regnaud estoit meu non par Iustice, ou autre cause, mais sculement pour auoir ledict Vicomte de Turaine, and non pour autre raison. Parquoy disoit qu'il ne deuoit estre admis par la Voye du Combat. Disoit encores ledict Comte, que suppose, sans preiudice, que ledict Comte eust eu volonte de parler audict Regnaud, ou Autre, d'auoir tels Priuileges, ou franchises, comme dict est, ce n'est cause raisonnable par laquelle on puisse prou^quer a Gage de Combat. Car combien que ledict Comte eust volonte de requerir lesdicts Priuileges, and franchises; Toutefois il estoit en la volonte, and au plaisir du Roy de les luy ^nceder; and ne vaudroit la volonte de les requerir, and n'auroit aucun effect, sinon que de l'Authorite du ^oy elles fussent concedees, and qu ain si clairement pouuoit apparoir qu'en la volonte de requerir Priuileges, and Immunitez n'eschet, and n'est deu Gage de Combat; Et que telle volonte, que ledict Comte n'auoit iamais eue, ainsi qu'il affirmoit, ne regarde, and ne touche cas de Crime, pour lequel il doiue y auoir Combat, mesmes a ce moyen que ledict Regnaud iuroit mis en auant, que de telle volonte, se seroit aucun mal ensuiuy. Et outre a dict ledict Comte, que par lesdictes Ordonnances il faut, que la faict soit tel que par Tesmoins ne puisse est^e prouue: Mais que les faicts proposez par ledict Regnaud contre ledict Comte, peuuent estre verifiez par Tesmoins; parce que ledict Comte offroit faire preuue, que sa Fem^ne veritablement auoit este grosse, and auoit eu vne Fille, que ledict Regnaud maintient auoir este saucement supposee, prouueroit qu'il auoit tenu ladicte Fille pour sienne, and comme sienne l'auoit nourrie, and en son Testament instituee son Heritiere; and qu'en cas qu'il

peust prouuer lesdicts faicts, que ledict Gage de Combat deuoit cesser. Semblablement a dict que les Conspirations, and Assemblees mises en faict par ledict Regnaud contre ledict Comte, se pouuoient and se peuuent verifier, pour autant que Congregations presupposent multitude de Personnes; mesmement que ledict Regnaud en sa demande auroit expose que ledict Comte auoit dict paroles semblables a plusieurs Personnes, parquoy combien que chacune desdictes Personnes en parlast par tesmoignage fingulier, toutefois seroit prouue^ suffisamment telle Conspiration, and Congregation: Et que pour ce, par Tesmoins en pouuoit estre faicte la preuue, and ne deuoit ledict Gage de Combat estre receu. Aussi auroit dict ledict Comte qu'il pouuoit faire clairement apparoir, que lesdictes choses par ledict Regnaud proposees, ne le touchoient aucunement, and n'en estoit charge, and que par Haine, ou Enuie ledict Regnaud auoit prouocque ledict Comte au Combat, and que suppose que ladicte Comtesse fust decedee sans Hoirs descendus de son Corps, ledict Vicomte de Turaine ne fust venu audict Regnaud, pour autant qu'il y auoit Seize autres Personnes, and dauantage, qui feroient plus proches a ladicte Comtesse, lesquelles, and non ledict Regnaud, pourro^ent heriter audict Vicomte; Et de rechef propose par ledict Comte, que par lesdictes Ordondances Royaux, qu'il falloit que le Cas dont l'Accusateur accusoit fust aduenu euidemment; Mau qu'il n'apparroissoit point que les faits proposez contre luy par ledict Regnaud, qu'au moyen desdictes Conspirations par luy recitees, il s'en soit ensuiuy aucune fin, ou effect. Alleguant ledict Regnaud plufieurs autres raisons aux fins ausquelles il tendoit; Et disant en ce que touchoit lesdictes Conspirations, and Confederations que comme bon, and loyal vers son Seigneur, il' les auroit reuelees a nostre Tres-cher Sieur, and Cousin le Roy Philippes; Repliquant encores ledict Regnaud plusieurs autres raisons. Et ledict Comte au Contraire, Requerant que sur ses raisons, and deffences droict luy fust faict, and rendu par nostredicte Cour, and sans se departir d'icelles a offert ledict Comte se deffendre competamment, sur lesdictes choses proposees par ledict Regnaud a l'en contre de luy par le Gage de Combat, qu'il a baille a nostredicte Cour, contre ledict Regnaud, sauf lesdictes raisons, and d^ffences proposees, and alleguees, sur lesquelles, auant toute autre chose demandoit ledict Comte luy eestre faict droict. Lesdictes Parties diligemment ouyes en nostre Cour, sur les choses dessusdictes, and autres que d'vne part, and d'autres ils ont voulu dire, and proposer, Et veues lesdictes Ordonnances Royaux, par ledict Comte alleguees ne faisants aucune mention de Crime de leze Maieste, and considerees, and examinees toutes choses susdictes, and autres qui pouuoient, and deuoient mouuoir nostredicte Cour, eue sur icelles diligente, and meure deliberation. Par Arrest de nostredicte Cour a este'dict que ledict Regnaud estoit ha^ile a proposer contre ledict Comte les choses oy deuant dictes, and que a la demande par ledit Regnaud proposee contre ledict le Comte, se pouuoit, and deuoit respondre. Et quant a ladicte fauce Supposition de Part, and autres choses qui concernent icelle sculement, proposees par ledict Regnaud, contre ledict Comte, par le dict Arrest a este dict, que ledict Regnaud sur ce qui touche ladicte fauce Supposition, ne seroit receu pour Gage de Combat, and a nostredicte Cour, quant a cela seulement, annulle ledict Gage. Et quant aux autres choses par ledict Regnaud proposees a l'encontre dudict Comte, concernant le Crime de leze Maieste, nostredicte Cour par sondict Arrest a receu ledict Gage de Combat, and iceux Gages adiugez, nonobstant choses proposees, and alleguees sur ce faict par ledict Comte. En tesmoin, etc. Donne a a Paris en nostre Parlement, le Vingt and vniesme Iour de Ianuier, l'An de grace Mille trois Cents Vingthuict.

Signe Gien.



The Decree of the Court of Parliament at Paris, concerning the Gage of Battaile, for the Castell and Vicountie of Touraine.
PHillip, by the Grace of God, King of France; To all such as shall see and read these present Letters, Greeting. We make knowne, that appearing at our Court of Parliament in Paris, Regnaud de Pons, Knight, on the one part, and Bernard, Count of Commenge.

^n the other part. The said Knight propounded, that long time since, was moued question and discord, betweene Geoffrey de Pons, Knight, formerly Father to the said Regnaud, and to whom the said Regnaud is Sonne, and vniuersall Heire alone, and in his goods on the one part: And Margaret, sometime Countesse of Commenge, on the other part; by reason of the Castell and Vicountie of Touraine, which Castell and Vicountie of Touraine, each of the said Geoffrey and Countesse said to belong to them.
Notwithstanding, the said Count Bernard, full of bad meaning, and bringing the same to effect falsely and maliciously; onely to frustrate the said Regnaud of the said Vicountie, which ought to belong to him after the decease of his said Father: considering, that after the death of the said Countesse (who is deceased without Heires descending of her body, for she neuer had bin great with childe, neither euer had any children) he had not any couller to retaine or possesse the said Vicountie, which appertained to the said Regnaud. But had supposed, and made to be supposed a false Birth, maliciously and fraudulently, the said Countesse being in such estate, as she could not shunne death, and was (indeede) dead. Yet the said Count had published, or caused to be published, that the said Birth was of the said Countesse, albeit he had falsely supposed it, and that the said Countesse neuer had any childe. Which Birth so falsely supposed, was within three dayes after the death of the said Countess^: By Enchantment vanished out of the place, and made to goe away as it came; at least, the manner of the departing could not be knowne, and then (by fiction) it was said to be deceased.
The said Regnaud said further, that the said Count had made, or secretly caused to be made, the said false supposition, and by one person onely (it might be) was made that supposition. Moreouer he propounded against the said Count, as a matter most notorious and well knowne, that the said Count was held and obliged, by reason of his said Countie, by Oath of Fidelitie and of Homage, to the King, Kingdome, and Crowne of France, and that after the death of our late most deare Lord and Cousine King Lewes (Hutin) our most deare Lady the Queene Clemencia, was then left great with childe. And from that time, the said Count premeditating, that on the Rule and Gouernment of the Kingdome of France, he might moue dissention betweene our most deare Lords and Cousines, Phillip le Long, and Charles le Bel, Bretheren, soone after Kings of France, or others, because the Realme was then left without a King: Foreseeing also, that if the said Queene Clemencia should haue a Daughter, question and quarrell might arise, for creation of the King, or who should be the King. But if she should haue a Sonne; debate would then be moued, about the Gouernement of him: in regard of the common Prouerbe, whereby is vsually said; That in troubled Waters is alwayes the best Fishing.
And although he stood bound by his Oathe, to preserue the vtilitie and benefit of France: yet, hauing a will and desire, to diminish the Rights of the Crowne of France, and to vsurpe the Demeanes of the King; he got and applied them to himselfe, casting off the subiection and obedience, whereto he stood bound by his Oathe sworne to the King, and to the Crowne of France. For he had falsely, and by way of Treason gon against his Gathe, and committed an act of High Treason: causing to be held diuers conspiracies, and had talked, and caused talke to be held, with Barons and Noblemen of the said Countrey, their talke and conference tending, to the making of a confederacie and League with him, whereby they might attaine to know, to whom the Crowne of France should come. By which meanes, of him that should be King, they would obtaine all Priuiledges, to so great a number as they would request.
Among other Gentlemen, with whom he had thus dealt and compacted; he had made meanes to him the said Regnaud de Pons, to enter with him and them into this League and confederacie: Whereto the said Regnaud de Pons, knowing the great damage and detriment, that thereby might come to the Crowne and Kingdome of France (being for his owne part a good and loyall Subiect) by no meanes would yeelde consent. And beside, the said Regnaud saith, as a good and loyall Subiect, and auoucheth by the Oathe and Faith wherein he standeth bounden to vs: that the said Count made and spake, and caused to be made and spoken (contrary to his Faith and Oathe) all the matters before alleadged, falsely, traiterously, and in the act of High-Treason: which offence is of such nature, that in body and goods he ought to be punished: And although he were dead, yet Law might proceede to the confiscation of his goods.
Moreouer he maintained, that the said Count had done, and caused the said things to be done, to the end, that he might draw and procure to himselfe such power, as the King should not dare to gaine say, or contradict whatsoeuer he did request or demand. Whereupon the said Regnaud de Pons required, that the said Count might for these offences be duely punished, if he confessed them to be true: but if he denied them, the said Regnaud offred to proue them sufficiently against the Count, by Gage of Battaile, offring and giuing to our Court his said Gage against the Count.
On the other side, the said Count of Commenge presented himselfe, and stood vpon his defences, and in regard that the Gage of Combat was not receiued, but rather vtterly to be disannulled; therefore the said Regnaud was not receiueable in his demand. And first of all, because he confessed, that the Count had made the foresaid conspiracies, after the death of the said King Lewes our Soueraigne Lord, and had concealed them to this present: in which respect, he being a Liedge man to the King, owing him faith and fealtie, was (neuerthelesse) periured, faithlesse and infamous, in the concealing of such a fact, and so (by iust reason) Regnaud disabled of making any such demand, and therefore could not accuse the Count.
Further the Count propounded, that Regnaud had formerly cited and summoned him, vpon Gage of Combat, and yet (afterward) the same Regnaud had entreated leaue, to make agreement with the Count, without making any mention of the said conspiracies, and so to vs He had lied, and failed in his faith, and consequently, was infamous, and not to be accepted to Appeale the Count; the said Count requesting right to be done him in this case, which being granted to him; he ought not to answere the demands of Regnaud, because he should haue set downe in his Accusations, The yeare, the Moneth, and the Day, whereon these crimes had bin committed, and them he should haue propounded in his demaund.
Moreouer the Count alleadged, that Regnaud had made his demand alternatiuely, saying, that the Count had imagined, or caused to be imagined The Birth, and the Infant of another, and had held conference, or caused it to be held with the said Regnaud, of making a League with him: when such alternatiue demands auaile not for reason, neither ought to be admitted. But suppose that they were valuable, yet notwithstanding, Regnaud ought not to be accepted by way of Gage of Combat; whereupon the Count alleadged these reasons following.
That by the Royall Ordenances made, concerning Duelloes and Combats, no man ought appeale another man to the Combat: except the appealed and prouoked were suspected of the crimes proposed against him, and that by very likely indices it appeared, and the crimes were knowne to haue bin committed. The Count alleadged it as a matter notorious, and very manifestly knowne, that he had neuer bin suspected, nor defamed with any such crimes as were proposed against him, neither could it be likely, that he had committed any such things: in regard hee had bin alwayes honest, and carried him selfe faithfully, in discharging his duetie to vs, and to our Predecessours, Kings of France, in their Councels and Warres, and had bin, and still was of good fame.
In like manner the Count propounded, that by the fore-recited Ordenances, the crimes wherewith anyone was to be accused, must be such, as death ought to ensue thereon. But according to right, reason and custome, the crimes proposed by Regnaud against the Count, were not any such, as by them any capitall paine ought to follow, suppose that the said crimes were true. For, admit the crime of supposing a false Birth, yet it is not such, that (being conuinced thereof) a man should thereby be condemned to a naturall death. And likewise in making a meeting and conspiracie, to the end of demanding liberties and franchises, such as Regnaud had declared; yet is it not any such crime, that punishment of death should ensue thereon, because they are not done against the Prince, nor against the safetie of his people, nor against his members, such as are his Royall Councellours.
Moreouer the Count affirmed, that in such occasions as these, the intent and will of the Appellant or Prouokant ought to be well considered. Because it might easily appeare, that Regnaud was not hereto moued by Iustice, or any other cause: but onely to haue the Vicountie of Touraine, and not for any other reason, and therefore he ought not to be admitted by way of Combat. And let it be supposed (without preiudice) that the Count had a

will to conferre with Regnaud and others, to haue such Priuiledges and Franchises, as hath bin said: yet were it no reasonable case, that he should therefore be prouoked to the Gage of Combat. For, although he was willing to request those Priuiledges and Franchises: yet notwithstanding, it remained in the will and pleasure of the King to grant them; for the will to request is of no worth, or can sort to any effect; except the authority of the King be thereto consenting, Whereby plainely appeareth, that the will of requesting priuiledges and immunities, falleth not to the Gage of Combat. But such a will as the Count had, according as himselfe affirmed, aimed not at any such case of crime, whereby the Combat should be granted: especially in such sort as Regnaud had auouched; but rather such a will, as no harme could haue followed thereon.
And moreouer the Count added, that by the course of those Ordenances it was appointed, that the case must be such, as not to be approued by Witnesses: but the facts propounded by the said Regnaud against the Count, might be verified by Witnesses. For the Count offered to make proofe, that his wife was truely great with childe, and had a Daughter, which Regnaud maintained to be falsely imagined: yet would he approue the Daughter to be hers, as hers it had bin nourished, and instituted by her will to be her heire, which cases being sufficiently to be proued, the Gage of Combat ought to cease. Likewise he said, that the assemblies and conspiracies alleadged by Regnaud against the Count, might lawfully iustifie themselues; because congregat^ons doe presuppose a multitude of persons, because Regnaud had exposed in his demand, that the Count had spoken the same words to many persons, whereby, though each of those persons might speake as a singular Witnesse, yet notwithstanding, it would sufficiently approue such a congregation and conspiracie, which being by witnesses sufficiently to be proued, the Gage for Combat ought not therefore to be accepted.
Furthermore the Count auouched, that he could make it euidently appeare, that the matters propounded by Regnaud, did no way touch him, or was to be laid to his charge, but onely in hatred and mallice, Regnaud had prouoked the Count to the Combat. And let it be supposed, that the Countesse was deceased, without any heires descended of her body: yet the Vicountie of Touraine could not come to Regnaud, because there were sixeteene other persons and more, who were neerer heires to the Countesse, then Regnaud was or could be. Hereunto the Count added, how, by the Royall Ordenances, the Case wherewith an accuser charged another man, ought to haue happened euidently: but it no way appeared, that the facts proposed against him by Regnaud, concerning the conspiracies imputed, that thereon had followed any end or effect.
Many other reasons were alleadged by the said Regnaud, and to what end they tended, adding withall, that concerning the confederacies and conspiracies; as a good and loyall Subiect to his Lord, he had reuealed them to our most deare Lord and Cousine King Phillip, who receiued of him many other matters beside. As the Count did the like on the contrary side, requesting, that vpon the defences and answers by him made; Iustice might be rendred and done vnto him by our said Court, and before his departure thence, he offred to defend himselfe competently, vpon the matters proposed by the said Regnaud against him, by the Gage of Battaile: which he gaue to our Court against Regnaud; those reasons and defences by him propounded and alleadged, alwaies reserued, wherein (before any thing else) the Count required to haue right done him.
Both the said Parties being diligently heard in our Court, vpon the cases before named, and what either side could say or propose: the Royall Ordenances perused ouer, which were alleadged by the Count, without making any mention of the offence of High-Treason, all things being duely and considerately examined, with whatsoeuer else could be moued to the Court, vpon mature and diligent deliberation: By Decree of our said Court it was said, that Regnaud was able to propound against the Count the things before said, and that to the demands by Regnaud against the Count, hee might and ought to make answere. And concerning the supposition of a false Birth, and other things touching the same onely, propounded by Regnaud against the Count: by Decree of the same Court; it was said, that Regnaud (in the case concerning that false supposition onely) should not receiue the Gage of Combat from our Court, that case onely admitted no Gage. And for the other matters proposed by Regnaud against the Count, concerning the crime of High-Treason: our Court, by the same Decree, receiued

the Gage of Combat, and the Gages were adiudged, notwithstanding the cases alleadged and propounded by the Count.
In Witnesse, etc. Giuen at Paris in our Parliament, the One and twentieth day of Ianuarie, in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred twentie and eight.

Signed Gien.





This Decree is very remarkeable. By the Ordenance of King Phillip le Bel, there is no mention made but of the fourth Case,A case proued by witnesses alloweth no Gage of Combat. wherein the Gage of Combat is permitted. There is nothing spoken, concerning the Supposition of a Birth, which must and ought to be proued and verified by witnesses. Hereupon it was that the Court (out of their wonted and approued wisdome) would not admit the Gage of Combat. But concerning the crime of high Treason, the proiects whereof are wrought by subtile and cunning meanes, and that the Lord of Pons, he alone might haue had communication of the Conspiracie with the Count of Commenge: the Court adiudged the Gage of Battaile, as an order for following times, that in the case of Treason, periurie, and breach of Faith against the Soueraigne, the Gage of Combat is not to be refused or denied.
Count Bernard Portoit de Commenge, qui est de Gueulles, a quatre Otelles, ou Amandes pelee, d'Argent en Saultoir.
And for Regnaud, Lord of Pons: Il portoit d'Argent, a la Face, Bandee d'Or, and de Gueulles de six Pieces.
There are memorable Arrests and Decrees, both before and after this, concerning Gages of Combat, which in France they then called Placitum Ensis, The Plea of the Sword.Concerning Plea of the Sword. Wherein they are deceiued, that haue written concerning the Countie of Eu, a Peeredome of France, that the said Countie should appeale in suite to the Parliament of Normandie, because they say, that in the said Countie of Eu, there was (sometimes) Plea of the Sword, where was neuer practised, but onely in the Prouince of Normandie. Among the most memorable decrees, is this, set downe in Latine, but by me turned into French, for the ease of them that doe not vnderstand Latine.


Another notable Decree, concerning the Gage of Battaile or Combat.
A Certaine cause had bin attempted in suite, before the Seneschall of Tolossa, and by Appeale in our Court of Parliament, where Estouleau de Rouchefort, Esquire, did propound that Raymond de Buada,The Case of Estouleau d^ Rochefort, and Raymond de Buada. Knight, was assigned a certaine day, by meanes of kinde friends to both the Parties: to the end, that a louing agreement might be made, in a matter of difference depending betweene them, vpon which day it was concluded, that they should meete there without any Armes. Neuerthelesse, Buada had by treason concluded, that twenty men should be armed in his House, to the intent of murdring the said Estouleau and his vnarmed companie, shut vp in the Church of the place appointed for the meeting. And wickedly and proditoriously, the said Buada had procured a man to be slaine, named William de Bonibot, one of the others houshold seruants, cloathed with his Liuerie, and had prepared diuers ambushes, to surprize him at his best aduantage. All which he offered to approue, by his Body against the Body of Buada, and thereupon threw downe his Gage of Battaile.
On the Knights part was propounded the contrarie, who offred to purge and cleare his innocencie, in the same manner by the Gage of Combat. Vpon both these offers, we caused an Enquest to be impannelled, to vnderstand, if in such cases thus propounded, there might be desert of Gage of Battaile, according to the Royall Ordenances of our Predecessours. The enquirie hauing bin dilligently made by command of the Court; it was found, that this William (whom Estouleau had intended to be slaine, was liuing in good health, and that by confession of the said Estauleau, Buada was innocent. And that it was he himselfe with his company,

that came Armed at the day and Rendeuous agreed on by the Parties, and that Buada, with all them of his company, were come thither without any Armes: whereby Estouleau was cast in Law, hauing prouided so many Ambushes, to betray and intrap the life of the partie accused.
The Enquest hauing bin thus carefully made, and considered on by the said Court: Iudgement was publiquely pronounced and giuen,The sentence giue^ against Estouleau de Rochefort. that Buada was innocent of the crimes imposed vpon him, and that Estouleau had rashly and vnaduisedly throwne downe his Gage of Combat, for which the Court could not finde place or allowance. But condemned him to pay to Buada, for his dammages, interests, costs and expences, whereat he had bin in prosecution of Iustice, as well before the Seneschall of Tolossa, as in the said Court of Parliament. Which interests and expences were taxed to the summe of fiue hundred Pounds Tournois, for paiment whereof, Estouleau was to be committed to Prison in the Chastelet at Paris, or any other Prison where Buada would appoint. Inter Inquestus and Processus. Iudged by the Court of Parliament, in the Octaues of our Lords Natiuitie, the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and eight.
I haue seene the Armes of Buada in Gascoignie, which were De Synople, a Trois pieds de Grisson d' Argent, deux en Chef, and vne en Poincte.
And as for them belonging to Rochefort, there are many appearing at the Parliament of Tolossa, but indeede their Armes are diuers.
Another Decree Registred in Latine, betweene William de Bois-Boisseau, and Iohn Ioguet de Plennendrin, Esquire, and Complainant to the Court,A Case of iniury betweene two Esquires, for Gage of Combat. because a quarrel being moued betweene them, they had iniured one another, and vpon those iniuries; the Seculer Iudge to the Bishop of Saint Brieu had ordained, that these Squires should determine the cause by Gage of Combat. Contradicting directly the Ordenance of King Phillip le Bel (who then reigned) made for the Gages of Battaile, and published throughout all the Prouinces of the Kingdome. For assurance of this Gage of Battaile, the Bishop of Saint Brieu had possessed himselfe of the Armes, Horses and Goods of the Complainants, and kept them till such time as (by a Seriant Royall) he was commanded to deliuer them, vpon good and sufficient Caution.
The Enquest considering on this matter, referring it to the Court to be iudged, and the Parties heard: It was said, that the Bishop of Saint Brieu had adiudged the Gage of Battaile, against the Ordenance of the King;Sentence giuen against the Bishop of Brieu. whereby his proceedings were frustrated, and disannulled. He was commanded to redeliuer the Armes, Horses and Goods to the Complainants, and their Cautions discharged. Beside, the Bishop was condemned in a fine to the King, and appointed to appeare in person, at the Parliament on the first Friday, being fifteene dayes after Pentecoast. Iudged in the Parliament, in the Octaues des Brandons, at Paris, the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred and eleauen, etc.
In matter and case of iniuries, no Gage of Battaile is to be admitted.
Another Decree Registred in Latine, betweene Daniel de Blide, Knight, Demander on the one side, and Guy de Grignan, Knight, on the other side. Because the said Daniel alleadged, that Guy was a Thiefe and periured Traitour,The Case of D^n^el de Blide, and Guy de Grignan. against Lewes, Count of Flanders and Henault, his Liedge Lord, which he offered to approue against the same Guy, by Gage of Battaile, and which he threw into the Court. Guy made answere in his owne defence, and auouched to declare by Gage of Battaile (which he also offred to the Court) of that he was an honest man, his cause being equally and iudicially heard; maintaining constantly, that no Gage of Battaile could be granted against him. The Parties being heard, and the Case deliuered according to Law: Daniel proposed against Knight Guye, that he was a Liedge-man, an Houshold Seruant, and Chamberlaine to the Count of Flanders, whom he had robbed of great goods and wealth: Hauing likewise committed diuers Sorceries and wicked acts of Witchcraft, to hinder the Count his Maister, from hauing familiar acquaintance with his Wife the Countesse, neither could haue it. Whereupon Daniel required, that Guy might be punished, if he did auouch and confesse the crimes imposed on him: but if he denied them, he offred to the Court his Gage of Battaile, to maintaine it Body to Body.
Against this demand, Guy defended, that before Daniel had accused him of these crimes, he deliuered sufficient clearing of this case, by Parties appointed according to Law: and therefore persisted still in his proofe, that there was no place for Gage of Battaile,Gage of Combat disallowed on either side. neither was Daniel receiueable in his new demand, already ordered and ruled in the Court. So the Court by deliberate determination gaue iudgement, that the Gages of Battaile were nothing worth, offered by the said Daniel and Guy.
Pronounced the seauenth day of May, One thousand three hundred twentie and sixe.
Sorcerie ought to approue it selfe by Witnesses, and not by Indices. And as for Theft, it is the same; neither of the crimes admitting Gage of Battaile, according to the Ordenance of Duelloes, which hath bin formerly related.
Another Decree in French Registred, the Court adiudging the Gage of Battaile, without telling the cause, which carried these tearmes.
Gage of Battaile without telling the cause.In the cause of Gage of Combat, Durfort moued in the Court, betweene Arna^d de Montaigue Appellant on the one part, and Emery de Durfort, Appealed and prouoked on the other. The Court by Decree receiued and admitted the Gages giuen by the said Parties, and to them adiudged the Gages.
Done in Parliament fift the day of May, One thousand three hundred and thirtie.
The said Montaigu Portoit de Gueulles a Trois Testes de Leopards arrachees d'Or, Deux en Chef, and vne en Po^e.
And the said Durfort de Gueulles a vne Bande and Bordure d'Or.
Another Decree Registred in Latine, betweene Vidale de Ville neufue, Esquire, Demander and Complainant before the Seneschall of Tolossa,The Case of Vidale and Asperrant. against Iohn d' Asperraut, Esquire, for the death of his Vnckle, Olricke de Langlade, whom he auouched to haue bin slaine and murdred by the said Appellant, and for proofe thereof, demanded Gage of Battaile. The Defendant maintaining the contrary, the Sene^chall said, that there was place for Gage of Battaile, for which he was Appealed. Vpon hearing the parties, the Court affirmed, that the case had bin ill iudged by the Seneschall of Tolossa, or his Lieutenant: who should haue called the Appellant to mends making, because there was no place or reason for Gage of Battaile. This Decree was Registred in the Court of Parliament, in the Octaues of our Sauiours N^tiuitie, One thousand three hundred thirtie and eight.
The Parliament c^n^u^eth on Combats.It would rise to an huge Volume, if I should obserue all the Decrees giuen vpon Gage of Battaile: wherefore we will rest satisfied, with the report of these few in diuers occasions, according as they were offred and demanded: Which doe clearely iustifie, that in matter of Combat, in what place soeuer of France the Parties doe dwell: the Court of Parliament at Paris, it onely taketh knowledge thereof, without any other permission, for fighting in the Duell or Combat.
The Lord of Belay, in the first and eight Bookes of his Memories, maketh mention of a Duell performed in Limosin, by the Barons of Mye, and of Lostanges, against the Lord of Peschell, aged threescore and ten yeares, and full of the Gout, and his Son Pasaiat,A Combat in Limosin. Baron of Gimell, and Viscount de Chastillon, who were Conquerours, M^e and Lostanges being slaine in the Field. But because he relateth not, whether the Duell was done by Decree of the Court, or of the King; I forbeare to speake of the perticularities, wherewith I was made acquainted at Bourdeaux.
I let slip also vnder silence (because the discourse is too common and vulgar) the last Combat, fought in the time of our Fathers at Saint Germaine in Laye, the tenth day of Iuly, One thousand fiue hundred fortie and seauen, before King Henry the second,Another famous Combat and by his permission: Betweene Guy Chabot, Lord of Iarnac, and Frances de Viuonne, Lord of Chastaigneraye, Gentlemen of the Countrie of Angoumois; whose Armes are obserued at the Title of Knights of the Order of the Holy-Ghost.



Of Duelloes and Combates, in what manner they were ordered and managed among the Germaines.
The Allemaignes or Germaines, by example, and in imitation of the French, had places, Townes and Citties,Citties and places ordained for Combates destinated likewise for their Duelloes and Combates perfourmed at the Sharpe and vtmost extremity of life (as also for their ^ousts and Tourneyes, whereon, by Gods assistance, we will discourse in the Tracte next following.) As namely the Townes and Citties of W^t^bourg, in Orientall France, Onospach, in the Burggrauiat of Nuremberg: And of Hallessen in Saxonie.
Before the Senates of which places, such Noble men, as pretended their offences;The forme of de^aunding to haue Corbate g^ted presented themselues, and demaunded to haue Combate in an enclosed Field. The forme of Answere, made by the Senate to such a motion and demaund, caried these tearmes.

We haue receiued your Letters, and are very sorie to see, that your harts are so moued with rancour and hatred, as it seemeth you beare to one another. In which regard,
(...) made (...)
we pray^, that ^ou would desist from Combate, if it may be; and that you would end your Quarrels by the way of mildenesse and gentlenesse, without the aduenturing of ^ndy s^ro^ and without shedding humaine bloud. Consent to our request, and so much the rather; because we entreate you thereto most instantly.

If they perseuered in their spleene, continuing still in claiming Combate, and the Field for Battayle: the Senate then vsed this forme of Iudgement.

Seeing that you stall per sit in your hatred and challenge, and that the way of gentlenesse,
The forme of iudgement by the Senate.
can t^k^ no course of kindnesse betweene you: Wee doe order and appoynt, that you shall appeare in such a day before vs, to heare the ground and subiect of your Quarrell, wherein we mean^ to doe you Iustice.

At the day assigned, the Parties being hard, and no meanes might preuaile, to end the difference betwe^ne them louingly: the Senate then appointed them a certaine,The day of Batt^^e ass^gned. day for mee^ing together, and graunting them the Field of Battayle, taking the future Combatants into the protection and safeguard of the Senate.
The Parties be^ng come to the Rendezvous, or place appointed; the Senate caused them to take the Oaths, as in such cases is accustomed and required; the one not to bring with him any greater traine of attendants, then the other, conformable to the auncient Statutes of Combates, established by the Senate.
Soone after, in the great Market place, or some other found out to be more commodious, is the Field for Combate ordained: which they engirt with Batres or Lis^es, and couer it with Sand all ouer.
For the two Combatants are erected two Tents or Pauillions, capable of receiuing the men and their traine. In each of them is placed a Biere and Coffin,Prouision made for the Combattants. Foure Candl^sticks and Foure Tapers lighted, a Crosse, and Hearse Cloth for the dead, with all things else, fitting for Obsequies and Funerall of the dead. And each of them hath a Priest to be his Confessour, who commeth thither by the Parties owne appointment, with his Godfathers and Councell.
Like Armes (without any difference) are giuen them to fight and defend themselues withall, as well on Horseback, as on Foote: such as the Parties had agreed on,Equality of weapons and Armes. and were specified at the time of requiring the Combate.
The Herauld or King of Armes (on behalfe of the Senate) publisheth by Proclam^ (...) prohibitions to all there present, for crying, speaking, coughing,Especiall prohibitions. spetting or m^ing any signe to either of the Combatants: on payne to haue their right hand and left foot cut off, by the Maister of the high workes, that is the Hangman.
Afterward, the Citty Gates are fast lockt vp, the streets Chayned, and the Barres o^ (...) ^ound enclosed.
Th^ Combatants are brought before the Iudges of the Field,Oathes in the Field. appointed by the Senate, with their Confessors and Godfathers, where they sweare the accustomed

Oaths of not hauing or wearing about them, either Hearbes, Charmes or any Carracters. The Herauld proclaimeth three time: To let the Valiant Combattants goe for the perfourmance of their duty. The Party Victorious winneth the Honour of the Combate,Disgraces of the Vanquished. and the Vanquished Party remaineth infamous all the rest of his life time afterward: being neuer suffered to mount any more on Horsebacke, to carry Armes, or to be present in any publique assembly, but to haue his Beard close shauen. In briefe, he is published to be a Peazant, incapable and vnworthy, to be any more imployed in Charges and Offices.
If he bee slaine in the Field: hee shall haue Honorable buriall; and his death cannot be preiudiciall to them, that are of his descent and Family.



The Third Tracte discourseth on Iusts, Tourneys and Tournaments: their Originall and Continuance from time to time. CHAP. V.
SOme Authours haue written, that the inuention of Iousts and Tourneyes came out of Allemaigne or Germanie, and that they began in the time of Henry,The errour of some Historians. Sirnamed the Birder, Duke of Saxonie and Emperour, First of the name: which is a populare errour, not hauing any subsistance, but only grounded on a meere false opinion and beleefe.
The Histories of Germanie doe report, that at returne from the voyage, which the same Emperour made into Hungarie against the Hunnes, who rauaged and spoyled the frontiers thereof; he sought the meanes, to moulde and harten the Germaines mindes, in matters of Military Discipline, and how to manage well a Horse for future seruices. Which vertuous and notable kinde of instruction, he propounded to such Lords and Princes of Germanie, as were vnder his obedience, for making themselues apte and ready to Iousts and Tourneyes.The Emperours forwardnes, and his peoples vnaptnesse. But this seemed a harshe, vnpleasing and impossible proposition, yea, it exceeded the apprehension of the greatest men in his Court: because such Military kindes of exercises, had neuer bin seene, knowne, nor practised in Germanie.
And because this was the ordenarie exercise of the French and English: Decreuit idem Imperator gratificaturus Hospitibus suis Morem Germanis adeum diem insolitum, sed nobilitati Galliae, Britanniaeque vsi^atum inducere, solemnibus Legibus Equestri decursione certandi; inuitatis ad hoc ad certum Diem, per Edictum, Vicinis, Eternisque Principibus, Comiti^us, Nobilibus, qui de Virtute propria tantum confiderent, vt in conspectu honoratissimo, alienam periclitari non pertimescerent.
The same Emperour decreed, to bring in a Custome of running at the Tilt by solemne ordynances, at that time vnknowne to the Germaines, but vsuall with the Nobility of France and England, inuiting thereunto (by Proclamation at a certaine day) those Princes, Earles, and Nobles both far and neere, who did so much stand vpon their owne valour, that they feared not in a most Honorable Assembly, to make triall of other mens.
The French and Eng^ish skilfull in these Noble Exercises.So speaketh Franciscus Modius of Bruges, in his Pandectes Triomphales, a Booke of singular good reading: Printed in Folio a Francford on the Moein, by Sigismond Feyrabeno, in Anno One thousand, fiue hundred, fourescore and sixe.
For obtayning then a knowledge and light, in the Lawes and Ceremonies of these Noble Exercises: he attayned thereto by a Secretary of his commaundes, named Phillip, who had long time trauayled into farre distant Countreyes and Prouinces, and namely into the Kingdomes of France and England, where he had often times seene Running at the Ring by Noblemen,Running at the Ring vsed only in England. who were very skilfull in the first Exercise, of ryding and managing a Horse: And likewise Combatting at the Barriers,

with the other braue exercises of Tilting, Iousts and Tourneyes.
Vpon his relation made to the Emperour, he gaue charge to the Palatine of the Rhine, the Duke of Bauaria,The Commissioners appointed with the Secretary. and the Duke of Franconia (with whom he ioyned as an Assistant, Phillip the Secretary of his Commaunds) to set downe in writing such Articles, as were necessary for the establishing of so Noble an Exercise, and according as they were practised in the Kingdomes of England and France. Vpon their often meetings together, these Articles following were agreed on, and deliuered to Henry the B^rder, and afterward published openly in his Court.

The Articles agreed on, by the Commissioners, concerning the most Noble Exercises of Tilting, Iousts and Tourneyes.
I. FIrst, that in following time, a Custome should be obserued and kept in Germanie, and the Countreyes thereto belonging,The exercise appointed at euery three yeare^ from Three yeares to Three yeares, (at the least) to celebrate Iousts and Tourneyes for exercise, and to know the Nobility resorting to them. That all Princes, Lords, Barons, and Gentlemen of Noble extraction, being well Armed and Honourably accoustred, should be welcome to them. From these Tourneyes were to be excluded, all such as could be detected of blaspheming the Great and Sacred name of God, the most Holy Trinity, and Christian Catholique Religion. If any such persons, (standing vpon the Nobility of their extraction) durst be so bold, as to present themselues in this Assembly: We ordaine, Will, and it is Our pleasure; that they shall be dismounted, and depriued of their Horses and Launces. And, as a noate of infamy for euer after, so long as the Tourney shall endure: such a one must ride vpon the Barres or Rayles, as a man exposed to the scorne of the whole Assembly.
II. Whatsoeuer person of the Nobility, that shall (aduisedly and wilfully) speake euill of the Emperours person blame or contemne his Ordenances and Commandes,Wrong against the Emperour. and resist against them in deed or word: he shall bee ignominiously expulsed from the Tourney, loose his Horse, and ride the Rayles.
III. Any man of the Nobility, that shall outrage or abuse (by word or deed) the honor of a Wife, Maide or Widdow,Preseruation of Womens honor. and shall possesse himselfe (by force and violence) of their goods and possessions, or shall giue ayde and helpe, to such as shall so wrong and abuse them: he shall loose his Horse, and ride the Rayles.
IIII. From these Tourneyes are likewise excluded, all Gentlemen attainted and conuinced of Crimes, either of Falshood, Periurie, or breach of faith.Gentlemen conuicted of crimes. Whosoeuer being such an offender, shall dare to present himselfe within the Lists: it is the losse of his Horse, and riding the Rayles.
V. Whosoeuer hath betrayed his Lord, and by fraude or craft hath forsaken him, either in going, being there, or returning from Warre,For treachery persidie and cowardise or else hath perswaded his Lords seruants to doe so: Whosoeuer hath not assisted and defended his fellow-Cittizen, his Seruants or other persons, (that did put themselues into his safegard and protection) from all iniustice and violence, but hath councelled and procured the contrary, and by feare and cowardise, by intelligence and wicked practise, left and forsooke them, when hee ought and might haue protected and defended him o^ them: For euer he is to be excluded from Iousts and Tourneys. But if hee dare presume to present himselfe at any; as a manifest noate of shame and infamie, he must loose his Horse, and ride the Rayles.
VI. Whosoeuer shall haue procured the death of his Wife,For treason in a man to his Wife, and to his Soueraigne. or practised and giuen consent thereto. Whosoeuer also hath fauoured, giuen councell, or lodged the murderers of his Soueraigne Lord, either before, or after his death: Hee shall (to all perpetuity) stand banished from these Tourneys, with the losse of his Horse, and riding the Rayles in sted thereof.
VII. Whosoeuer hath perpetrated or committed Sacriledge, and despoyled sanctified places of their goods and riches: Or hath vsurped by force and violence,Against Sacriledge and robbing widowes and Orphanes those belonging to Widdowes and Orphanes, without making restitution (vices

which ought to be reproued, and punished aboue any other, especially in a Gentleman of Honor) He is to be expulsed from these Iousts, after he hath lost his Horse, and ridden the Rayles.
VIII. Whosoeuer shall surprize his enemy by treason, either before hee hath challenged him,Of vniust pur^uing an enemie. or after, and shall pursue him in any other sort, then as is allowed by the lawes of Warre; burning his Houses and Grandges, tearing vp his Vines and Corne, by meanes whereof, dearth of these fruits of the earth, may bring hurt and damage to the Common-Wealth: Whosoeuer also, either by himselfe, or some other by his intelligence, shall lye theeuishly lurking, and waiting on the high-wayes for him: Omnes hi, adempto equo, Septis pro eo, insidere cogantur.
IX. Whosoeuer shall oppresse his Subiects or Seruants, with nouell imposi^ions,Against oppression and extortion. Taxes and Subsidies, either by Land or water (without the knowledge and permission of his chiefe Soueraine Lord) for augmenting and encreasing his owne pr^uate demeanes: And whosoeuer in the lands and Marches vnder his Gouernemen^, shall impose any taxation vpon forraigne commodities, by meanes whereof, Strangers shall be robbed and ill entreated, and Traffick and Commerce hindered: Cum infamiae nota, adempto, Septis imponatur.
X. Whosoeuer (being maried) shall be conuicted of Adultery: If he be a Widdower, and shall maintaine a married Wife, a Religious Sister, or a deuout Woman: If he be shall be a Messenger to the Low-Countries of Women, or of deuoted Sisters,Against adultrie and lewde life. or Nunnes, or forcibly taketh them for his vse: Let him be banished for euer, from the Noble Assembly of Iousts and Tourneys, depriued of his Horse, and sent away in a Shirt of Maile, or set to ride on a Woodden Hobby-Horse.
XI. If any one of Noble Extraction, being not satisfied with such goods, as came to him by birth,Against base minded couetousnesse. Kinred and Inheritance, or otherwise wonne and conquered, or by Wadges and Pensions from his Prince; but shall make himselfe a Farmer of goods, fruites or commodities of any other, vnder borrowed names, because he dare not himselfe auouch it:: He is (for euer) to bee banished from this Noble Assembly of Iousts and Tourneyes. But if his bouldnesse maketh him to presume thither, and is seene there: Equo Multatus, Septa cogatur inscendere.
XII. If any man shall present himselfe at a Iousts and Tourneye, vnder shadow and pretence, that he hath bin ennabled by his Prince, and therefore presumeth to Marche equall,Of made* Noblemens presuming. and as a Peere with them of Auncient Nobility, and cannot be iustified by his owne Birth in the Fourth degree, by the Fathers Stock, or by the Mothers side at the least: Such a Gentleman of the first Edition: ought to be beaten with Roddes and Swiches, his Horse taken from him, and he to ride the Rayles.
Quisquis recentioris sit notae Nobilis, and non talis vt a stirpe Nobilitatem suam, and originem quatuor saltem generis Auctorum Proximorum Gentilitiis Insignibus, probare possit. Is quoque Ludis his and Decursionibus Equestribus existo. Aut si Vnus, Plures u^ emendicatae huiusmodi Nobilitatis, cum ijs, quibus iuris est decurr^ndi, sese permiseuerint, Hi talis verberibus multentur, ex hastiludiorum consuetudine pri^entur, and vbi de Equo concurrerint, Septis, notae causa inequitare adigantur.

Whatsoeuer Nobleman being but of a late stampe, and not such a one, as can proue his Nobility and beginning, from the first foundation (at least) by fower customary Armes of the last Aduancers of his pedigree: Let him also bee exempted from these pastimes and Tournaments. Or if one or more of this begged-kind of Nobility, shall sort themselues with those, to whom the right of Tilting appertaineth; let such bee punished with stripes, bee kept from frequenting these Tournaments, and whereas they should haue Iousted together ^n Horseback, let them be forced to ride vpon a Staffe, or the Railes, that they may be noted from the rest.

According to these Artices and Statutes, the first Assembly or meeting was resolued on,The first appoynted place of meeting at Maydebourg. and appointed to be at Magdebourg, where the Lists and Barres for the Field were prepared; as well for Iousts at the Lance, man to man, and Running at the Ring, as the Barriers and Tournaments of Companies on Horseback. The Scaffoldes, (which our Romaines called Hourds) for the Emperour (defrayed at the cost of the Assembly) for the Princes and Princesses of the traine; for the Iudges of the Field, whom the Germaines named and called Kings of the Sportes; for the Senatours

and Bourgo-Maisters, of the place where the meeting was made, fairely hung with Tapistries, and adorned with the Armes of the Emperour, the Iudges of the Field, and the assigned Citty; with the place and Scaffold for the Kings Heraulds and Poursiuants of Armes, Trompets, Dromes and Fifes.
The day for perfourmance of these Iousts and Tournaments, was proclaimed by the King of Armes, or Herauld of the Prouince; and the place of the meeting,Appointment of the day and place. as well without as within the said Prouince: And said to be in the safegard, protection and defence of the Emperour, or of the Prince that caused the Assembly. With Prohibition vpon paine of death, to all Heretiques, euill members against the Faith, with all Theeues, Banished persons, and such as haue bin detected by Iustice, to come neere he Round by the space of Tenne miles.
Eight dayes before the beginning of the Iousts and Tournements, a generall Proclamation was made, which we tearme A publique Crye;Publique Proclamation for committing offences. whereby was forbidden to any man, of what quality or degree soeuer he were; to commit any trespasse and offence (either by word or deed) vpon the penalty of paying twenty Markes of Money, which pecuniarie punishment was applicable to the Iudges of the Tourney: with the confiscation of Armes and Horses, which appertained to the King, Herauldes and Poursiuants of Armes.
No man was to outrage and defame the Honour of Ladies, Gentlewomen and their Daughters: vpon paine of imprisonment, and Arbitrary amends.
That no Gentleman should presume to the Tourney, or to run at the Ring: if he were not a Gentleman of three descents at the least, as well by the Fathers side, as the Mothers.
Euery, or any Gentleman of Noble extraction,Disgraces arising to Noble Gentlem^n by base mariages presenting himselfe at the Tourney; that had maried for couetousnesse, or delight in a Woman of meane condition: was to be switched with wands, like to a Peazant and villaine, despoyled of his Armes and adornements, his Horse and Furniture taken from him* and he to ride the Barres or Rayles, so long as the Assembly lasted. At the ending whereof, he was to be proclaimed by the King or Herauld of Armes, incapable and vnworthy (for euer after) to appeare among Noble men: his Children and descendants borne, and to be borne, so farre as to the third degree; to be declared as Boores and infamous, excluded and prohibited from Noble Assemblies, vpon indicted penalties.
That all such as were receiued and admitted into the Assembly, stood bound,Duty to be done after Admission. to confesse their sinnes to such Priests, as were appointed by the Bishop of the place: After they had presented their Helmets, Armes and deuises to the Iudges of the Assembly: who caused their Admission to be faithfully Registred, with their Names, Armes and Seigneuries; as also the furnishment or Equipage, and traine.
And to this effect, they which were admitted to be in the Tourney, stood likewise by Oathe obliged, to present themselues to the Iudges,Of presentation to the Iudges. and perticulerly to him of his Iurisdiction and Prouince: to the end, of being matriculated in the Register of Noblemen of the same Prouince, in the presence and conduct of the King of Armes, or Herauldes thereunto belonging. By whom hee must be forbidden, to furnish himselfe with any vnfitting Horse, which may offend such as are, or shall be neere him: vpon paine of loosing him, as also his Armes and other furnishments.
Forbidding bringing into the said Assembly, any Armes offensiue, but only the Club and Sword, custommably vsed by a man on Horseback Aptata sua Arma habeat, vt Nemini nocere possint, aut extantibus acuminibus,For hurtfull or offensiue Armes, either for thems^lues, or the by standers. praeacutisque extremitatibus quemquam laedere valeant. Talis etiam non alijs vtantur, quam Claua Equestri, and Gladio. Let him haue his Armes so fitted and prepared, that they may not be hurtfull to themselues, or to any other of the by-standers, in any manner whatsoeuer. Let him vse also no other Weapons, then a Knights Battaile Axe or Club, and a Sword. They may vse a Lance with a blunted head, to Iouste each against other, that it may not be dangerous or harmefull to either: but not with a sharpened head. And for running at the Ring, the pointe must be rebated.
As for the equipage or furnishment for the day, it is to be prescribed by the Kings of the Tourney, in such manner as it ought to be.
Allowance for presentation at the To^rney in their degres.A Count may present himselfe there with fiue men on Horsebacke, himselfe making the sixt man, but not to haue any more.
A Baron may haue foure Horses.
A Knight three: And
An Esquire with two.
Except they will entertaine and pay an ouer-plus of Men and Horses at their owne cost and expences: but not to be defrayed by the Prince, that occasioneth the meeting, and by monies from the common Purse; excepting also the Nobilitie of such a Circle or compasse, at whose expences such an assembly is to be, and may be in like manner made.
The Oathe giuen vpon these occasionsSuch were the Satutes of these disportfull meetings, where Oath was giuen to all such as came thither: but perticularly they were to depose, to forget and set apart all hatred and rancour, which formerly they had, or instantly bare to one another, vpon any subiect or occasion whatsoeuer. And hereupon it came, that offensive Armes were prohibited, except the Sword, the ordenarie and vsuall Armes for a Knight and Souldiour.
Now, as concerning the Knights Club or Battaile-Axe, all them that haue written of Iousts and Tourneyes, haue let it sleepe in silence, and what the fashion of it was.Of the Knights Club or Battle-Axe. We will therefore set downe such a one, as the French (from all Antiquitie) carried, according to the testimonie of the Monke of Saint Gall in Swetia, in the life of our King and Emperour Charlemaigne.
Erat Antiquorum ornatus, and paratura Francorum Claua, and Baculus de arbore Malo, nodis paribus admirabilis, rigidus, and terribilis, cuspide munuali ex Auro, vel Argent^ cum caelaturis insignibus prae^ixo portabatur in Dextera. Their Club or Battle-Axe was a Staffe of Crab-tree, heauie and very knottie, the hast or handle whereof was garnished with Gold or Siluer, Damasked with diuers Figures and Deuises.
So that although it was an ordenarie Armes of a French Knight; yet neuerthelesse, it was both to offend and defend; and euermore at these Tourneyes, there would be some one peeuish and froward humorist, with one of these Battle-Axes, as we shall speake of hereafter more at large.
After these Tournements were thus performed in grosse, by the Assistants armed at all points, with their Coates of Armes, worne vppermost of all: then each man might deale with his Companion at the blunted Lance.Sport with the Battle-Axe called Change^ng of Cuffes. Or else they would challenge one another, two to two, or else a certaine number of one Circuit or Prouince, smiting at each other with blowes of the Battle-Axe, to lay one another vpon the ground; which in our Romancers was tearmed Changing of Cuffes. And namely in that of Merlin the Prophet, whom they feigne to be Enchanted in a goodly Garden, there to remaine till the worlds ending; by the Lady of Lauall in Bretaigne, she being his Loue-Mistresse: Qui portoit de Gueulles, a Cinq Coquilles (...) Argent. 3.2.
The manly Exercise of fighting at the Barriers.These Barriers with Battle-Axes, were performed by troupes and multitudes within compasse of the Barres; each man being guided by foure Deputies, to keepe the Champions in their ranke and order. Foure other also beside, guarded the entrance into the Barriers, for directing the Champions to their Tourney, and winning the Barrier from his Contrary, according as they deale in the Bars. Which Barriers were not enclosed fast, but onely with strong Cords, which the Guards vsed to cut in sunder when it was due time, and made the signale of retreate to such, as had sped worst in this manly exercise: whom our Romancers tearmed Faire performers, but ill Speeders, that is to say; Faire goers on, but foule commers off; as being astonned with the blowes, or out of breath, some being smitten downe with the Battle-Axe, and others almost stifled in the crowdes. And oftentimes, by being not well mounted on their Horses, were ouer-borne by others better mounted, and trampled vnder-foote. Those to whom such ill successe happened in the Tourney, had their bummes well Sealed vpon the Barre,Disgraces happening in the Barriers. and afterward were compelled to ride it, bare headed, without Armes, onely his Coate of Armes excepted; to be knowne of all the Assembly, for such a Knight, or such an Esquire, vnskilfull in Armes, or sitting his Hors.
After this Sport of Tourney and Barriers, the Germaines (for their last exercise in these Tournaments) came to manage the Sword, not for any offence to bloud; but to cut the Leather straps or thongs, and make the Armes of his Contrary fall from him in the Field, for aduauntage and benefit to the Herauldes.Managing of the Sword, but not to bloud. For it belonged to them and the Iudges, before the beginning of the Tourney (which ordenarily lasted Fifteene dayes) to visite and reuisite their Armes, and the furnishment of such as were admitted to the Tourney, and making the ignorant or ill Armed, to ride the Barre.
This last Exercise being done, they went to Suppe at the generall Banquet,Supper at the generall Banquet. each man to that of his owne Circuite or Prouince: where the Ladies, as well married, as Widdowes, and yonger Gentlewomen, applauded the praises of them, whom the Iudges had commended for fairest performance; and deliuered the Prizes, which were ordained by the Prince that made the Tourney. An Act thereof is made, Signed then, one King of Armes, and two Heraulds (at the least) of euery Prouince.
Afterwards, thankes is giuen and returned on all sides, as well to the Prince, that defraied the charges of so solemne an Assembly; as to the Iudges of the Tourney,The thankfull gratitudes, and Dauncing. and them that carried away the Honour, by commendation of well deseruing. Then began the Dances, wherein the Ladies and Gentlewomen extended their gracefull fauours to the Champions: who led them in the Dance, to the end, that Feminine Nobilitie might pertake in the Exercise of Honour, as well as that of Men.
From being present in these Iousts and Tourneyes, dispensation was granted to Kings, Princes, Dukes and high Barons. Regiae, Ducalis, and Principalis dignitatis persone ab his ludis Equestribus se abstinent, quoniam Reges sui Regni Corona, Principes,Who were dispenced with for presence at the^e Tourneys. and Duces Serto caput adumbrare contenti, non solent, Perinde vt alij, in his Ludicris pugnis decertare, nec vlli Sodaletati se inserire debent. Persons bearing the Dignity of King, Duke, and Prince, may abstaine from these Tournaments; because Kings being content to adorne their heads with the Crownes of their Kingdomes, Princes and Dukes with a Garland or Wreath; are not wont (as others) to contend in these Tilting sports, nor ought to ioyne themselues to any society. They ought not expose themselues to such Exercises; but onely take pleasure in beholding them, and to giue presents to them, who are iudged to be best worthy of recompence.



What number of Jousts, Tourneys and Triumphall Tournaments, haue bin held and perfourmed in Germanie, vpon seuerall dayes and meetings. CHAP. VI.
THe First Assembly or meeting, for these Triumphall Exercises, was held (as we haue already said) by the Emperour Henry, Sirnamed the Birder,Meidenbourg in Germany. being First of the name, and Duke of Saxonie: On the first Sunday after the Feast of the Three Kings, in the yeare of Grace, Nine hundred thirtie eight, and in the Citie of Magdebourg.
The said Emperour Henry, Portoit de l'Empire, that is to say, D'Or, a l'Aigle Esploye de Sable, Brize de Saxe, qui est de Gueulles, au Cheual gay tourne d'Argent.The Armes of the Citie.
Magdebourg, a Citie in the Dukedome of Saxonie, called in Latine Parthenepolis, and dedicated to Venus: Porte de Gueulles, au Portail d'vn Chasteau Tourele, and Crenele d' Argent, Massonne de Sable, la Porte Hersee de mesme. Whereon appeareth halfe a Maide or Damosell, cloathed with Azure, holding

in her right hand a Chaplet of all kindes of Floures, and the other hand by her side.
We shall heere obserue, by a most exact search, and vnspeakable trauaile, the Armes, Blazons, Tymbres, Lambrequins and Creasts, belonging to the Kings of those Tourneys, and we will deliuer them according to trueth. Because Modius in his Triumphall Pandects, hath represented nothing but Shields, cut in Wood, and the most part of them wanting, supposing some by other: but without declaring the Blazons and Coullers, which is the matter only most necessary. The noble Reader may be beholding to me for it, and Modius corrected by this perfected Exemplarie: Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
Kings of the To^rney, Iudges of the Field.The Foure Kings of this first Tourney, (speaking according to the manner of the Germaines, whom we in France tearme Iudges of the Field) were these Knights following.
Charles, Lord of Hohenhowen, of the Circle or Prouince of Suauba: Qui portoit d'Or, Couppe de Sable a vne Estoile d' Argent (the Germaines make all the Starres to haue Sixe Rayes or beames, and the French graunt but Fiue) Mezail, Tarre de front, Cimier vn Proboscide d' Elephant, d' Argent couppe de Sable, de l'vn en l'autre, lie d'vn lacs d' Amour de mesme. Lambrequins d' Or, and les replis de Sable.
Meinolphe, Lord of Erbach, of the Circle of the Rhine. Qui Portoit Couppe de Gueules, and d' Argent, a Trois Estoiles, Deux en Chef d' Argent, and celle de la poincte de Gueules, Escartele (correcting Modius, who nameth there no quartering at all) d' Argent a deux Faces de Gueules. Mezail, Tarre de fronts Cimier, Deux Trompes (which wee tearme the Creast of an Elephant, or Trunck of an Elephant) Couppe de Gueules, and d' Argent a deux Estendards de Gueules en Saultoir: les Lances d' Or, Lambrequins d'Or, and les replis de Gueules.
George, Lord of Wolmershausen (correcting Modius both in Sirname and Armes) of the Circle and Prouince of Bauaria: Qui portoit de Gueules, a deux Faces d' Argent, Mezail, Tarre de front, tourne, Cimier, Chappeau pointu a la Persienne, componne d' Argent and de Gueules. Six plumes ala poincte, le rebord du Chappeau de Gueules, Lambrequi^s d' Argent, doublez de Gueules.
In Germanie there is an Illustrious Familie, bearing the Sirname of Lauming d' Erbschen^kn: Qui porte de Geueules, a vne Face de Sable, Bordee, ou Iumelee d' Argent; Escartele de Gueules, au Lyon d'Or, enferre dans vn Treillis d' Argent. Double Mesal Tarrez. Le Premier, a pour Cimier, vn Lyon tourne seant d' Argent, Coronne d'Or, au Pennache de trois plumes d' Argent,That is to say, the Lyon wounded in a figure Six come^ed. Gueules d' Argent. Lambrequins, Argent and Gueules. Le Deuxiesme Mesal Coronne a pour Cimier l'Escart de cest Escu, c'est adire le Lyon enferre, en figure Exagone, a Cinq plumes, trois d' Argent, and deux de Gueules, Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules. Modius hath taken one Sirname for another.
Ernestus de Grumbach, of the Circle and Dukedome of Franconia: Qui portoit d'Or, a vn Ethiopien tourne de Sable, tenant vne Banquet de mesme, Tymbre tourne, Cimier Vol tourne d'Or. Lambrequins d'Or, double de Sable.

The Second Tourney.
A countrey of Germanie, betweene Hassia and Sweuia.WHich was celebrated by Conrad, Duke of Franconia (that is Orientall France) and at his costly expences; in the Citty of Rotenbourg, it being the chiefest in Franconia. On the Sunday after the Feasts of the two Saints Simon and Iude; in the yeare of Grace, Nine hundred, forty and two.
This Conrad (Sonne in Law to the King of Germanie, Henry, Sirnamed the Birder) Portoit de Franconia, qui est couppe, endenchee d' Argent, de Gueules en Chef, Mesal Tarre, and Coronne d'vn Chappeau, Cimier deux Co^nes d'Elephant, couppe d' Argent, and de Gueules. Lambrequins de mesme.
The Foure Kings of the said Tourney, were these Knights following.
Frederick, Count of Helfenstein, of the Circle of Suauba. Qui portoit Escartele, le Premier de Gueules, a l'Elephant tourne d' Argent, sur vn Terasse d'Or. Le Quatriesme

a l'Elephant demesme. Le Second and Troisiesme d'Or, a vne Barre hochtee de Gueules. Deux Tymbres affrontez. Le Premier a pour Cimier, vne Teste d'Elephant, tournee d'Argent. Les Lambrequins d' Argent, and de Gueules remployez de l'vn en l'autre, selon l'Art. Le Second* vn O^son naissant, tourne d'Or, le Col perce d'vne Virole d'Or a deux queues de Paon. Lambrequins d'Or and de Gueules, doublez de l'vn en l'autre. Heere correct Modius, who giueth no quartering at all.
Thibeth, Count of Andec^s, of the Circle of Bauaria, Couppe du Coste du Chef, d'Argent au Lyon pass^nt de Gueules. ^t en poincte d'Azur, a l'A^gle tourne d'Or. Tymbre t^rre tourne. Cimier Coronne, au Pennac^e de Cinq plumes. Lambrequins d'Or, and d'Azur.
Lewes, Count of Sarwerdden, of the Circle of the Rhine. De Sable, a l' Aigle d'Argent, Arme de Gueules. Mesal Tarre, Cimier, Leurier naissant d'Argent. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Sable.
Lewes, Count of Eberstein, of the Circle of Franconia; d'Argent, a vne Rose de Gueu^s, ^scartele d'Or, au Sanglier tourne de Sable, sur vne Terrasse de Synople. Deux M^sals affrontez and Coronnez, Le Premier a pour Cimier deux Proboscides d'Argent,Lance^ (...) ^rne^ de Quatre Lances de Bague chacun de mesme, a vne Rose de Gueules au Mitan Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueules. L'autre a pour Cimier vn Bus d'Eu^sque ^ourne, vestu de Gueules, a vne Rose d'Argent, mitre d'Argent, aux fanons de Gueules. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Now, concerning the Armes of the Citty of Rotenbourg, seated by Modius on the Riuer of Taubr, called in Latine Tuber, giuing it a Castell,Er^ in the Armes of the C^ttie. or else the Porte and Hauen of a Citty: Correct that, for it is mistaken, setting downe the Armes of Rotenbourg vpon the Neckre, for those of Rotenbourg vpon the Taubr. Which are d'Argent, a vn Aigle de Sable, Brise d'Argent au Portail, ou Chasteau garny de deux Tours de Sable, Massonne d'Argent.


The Third Tourney.
WAs held at the charges of Ludolphe, Duke of Suauba, in the Citty of A Citie in Germany by Acroniu^. Constance, on the First Sunday after the Feast of All-Saints; in the yeare of Grace, Nine hundred, forty and eight.
This Ludolphe Portoit de Suauba, qui est d'Or, a Trois Leopards de Sable. Mezal Tarre, Coronne de front. Cimier, vn Aigle de Sable, Lambrequins d'Or, and de Sable.
The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.
Ernestus, Lord of Winnenberg, of the Circle of the Rhine, De Gueules, au Leurier Gay d'Argent, au Collier de Gueules borde d'Or. Mezal tarre de front, Cimier Leurier naissant (answerable to the Armes. Lambrequins de Gueules, and d'Argent.
Henry de Fraunberg, of the Circle of Bauaria. De Gueulez, au Pal d'Argent, Escartele de Gueules, au Cheuall Gay d'Argent. Mezals Tarrez, and Affrontez. Le Premier,The Persian Tiaras for the heads of Princes and Priests. a pour Cimier la Tiare Persique de Gueules sommee de vne queue de Paon, le rebord d'Ermines Lambrequins de Gueules, and d'Argent. L'autre a pour Cimier vn Cheual Gay naissant, trauerse d'vn Trauail d'Or, somme de deux queues de Paon. Correct Modius, who setteth downe no Quartering.
^r^ch de Redwitz, of the Circle of Franconia. Qui Portoit ^ace d' Azur, and d'Argent d^ Sept pieces, a vne Bande Ondee de Gueules. Mesal, Cimier, vne Teste and Col de Licorne d'Argent. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules; Reply de l'vne en l'Autre.
Frederick de Hirnheim (correcting Modius in the Sirname) of the Circle of Suaula. D'Argent, au Massacre de Cerf de Gueules. Mezal Tarre (the Germaines doe hole the most part of their Helmets in the front, but others are turned on the right side, according to the Perspectiue of Armes) and Coronne. Cimier, Deux Proboscides d'Elephant* l'^ne d'Argent, and l'autre de Gueules. Lambrequins. Idem.
Constans, a Citty seated on the Lake of Ackron; beareth D'Argent,The Armes of Constans. a la Croix plaine de Sable.



The Fourth Tourney.
WAs celebrated by Ridack, Marquesse of A Citty by ^bis in Germanie. Misnia, in the Citty of Mertspourg: the First Sunday after the day of Saint Andrew, in the yeare of Grace Nine hundred, threescore and nine.
This Marquesse, or Margraue of Misnia; Porte d'Or, au Lyon de Sable. Mesal Tarre, and Coronne Cimier, Bus d'vn Sultan a longue Barbe, a la Campanelle Pallee d'Argent, and de Gueules. La Tyare Persique renuersee d'Argent finissant en queue de Paon. La doubleure, and Rebort d'Argent.
The Kings of this Tourney, were these Knights.
Volpert de Franckenstein, of the Circle and County of the Palatinat of Rhine (alias Rhein) Porte d'Or, a vn Pied de Cordonnier, mis en Barre de Gueules. Heaume Tarre, tourne and Coronne; Cimier Vol Tourne d'Or, charge du Couteau a Pied de Gueules. Lambrequins d'Or, and de Gueules.
In Germanie there are many Illustrious Families, which beare the Sirname of
Franckenstein; but their Armes are different from them, of whom we shall haue occasion to speake, in their seuerall places and degrees.
Franckenstein, who beareth D'Azur, a vne Face d'Or. Timbre, tarre de front, according as all the rest. Cimier, Lozange Octogone de Queue de Paon, les Armes dans icelle. Lambrequins, Or, Azur.
The other Franckenstein: He beareth De Gueules, a Deux Barres de Sable, a vne Cheure tournee d'Argent, monte sur vne Terrasse de mesme. Mesal, Tarre, Cimier. Vol esploye. Vne Aile charge du Premier, l'autre Party, de Sable, and au Mitan la Cheure naissant tourne as in Armes. Lambrequins, d'Or, and de Sable.
Ernestus de Kunsberg, of the Circle of Franconia. D'Azur, a vne Poincte d'Argent. Mesal, Tarre, Bourlet d'Argent. Cimier, double Proboscide, l'vn d'Argent, l'autre de Gueules. Lambrequins de Gueules, and d'Argent.
A Leane or Weele for Fishes.Grunolt de Hofer. Of the Circle of Bauaria: D'Argent, a Trois Cheurons Bretessez Chacun de Trois pieces de Gueules. Mesal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, vne Nasse a Poisson, ouuerte par le Mitan, a vne queue de Paon au dessus. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Guillaume, or William of Nippenbourg, Of the Circle of Suauba. D'Azur, a vn Vel, (that is to say, two Winges of Siluer) Escartele de Sable a vne Vase couuert d'Or (heerin Correct Modius, who admitteth no Quartering at all) Deux Mesals Tarrez, Coronnez, and affrontez Le Premier a pour Cimier vn Bus de Fille Coronne D'Or, habillee d'Azur, a Deuz Ailes d'Argent. Lambrequins Azur and Argent. L'autre a pour Cimier vn Vase d'Or. Lambrequins Or, and Sable.
The Armes of Mertspourg.Now, as concerning the Armes of the Citty of Mertspourg, Modius is therein much mistaken, because he giueth it a Lyon. It beareth d'Or, a vn Chasteau en Triangle de Sable, Massonne d'Argent. That of Martspourg beareth d'Or au Fantassin Arme d'Argent, a vne Cornette and Banniere d'Azur, chargee d'vn Lyon d'Or. This is that which is at the Marquisate of Misnia, whereof there is now matter in question, as said to beare the name of Marcomir, King of the French, and First of the name (caried Prisoner in to Tuscanie, as we haue already shewne elsewhere) who had built it. That of Mersbourg, is in the diocesse of Constans, vpon the Lake Podamica, or of Ackron: built by our King Dagobert, and face to face confronting Constans.


The Fifte Tourney.
THis was celebrated in the Citty of Brunschweigh, by Ludolph, Marquesse of Saxonie, Lord of Brunswick; the First Sunday after the Feast of the Three Kings, in the yeare of Grace Nine hundred, fourescore and sixteene.
Modius his false emblazon corrected.Ludolphe beareth (contrary to Modius, whose false Emblazon is thus to be corrected) Au Premier de Saxe Ancienne, to witt, de Gueules au Cheual Gay tourne d'Argent. Le Second est d' Azur a vn Aigle Coronne d'Or. Le Troisiesme est d'Argent, a Treus bouts d'Espee de Gueules. 2.1. Le Quatriesme de Saxe moderne Face d'Or and de Sable de Huict pieces, a vne Coronne de Rue perie en Bande, brochant sur le Tout de Synople. Et sur le Tout de Tout, de Gueules a Deux Leopards passants l'vn sur l autre d'Or. Tro^

Mezails, Deux affrontez, and l'autre Tarre de front, and Coronnez. Le Premier a pour Cimier vn Chapeau (d'Aleman) de Gueules, au Bord releue d'Argent, entre deux Euentaulx de queues de Paon. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules. Le second a pour Cimier vne Pyramide chargee de Saxe Moderne Coronee, and dessus vne queue de Paon. Lambrequins Or, and Sable. Le Troisiesme a pour Cimier l'Aigle du second quartier. Lambrequins Or, and Azur.
The Kings of the said Tourney were these Knights.
H^l^pol^e de Schonstein, of the Circle of Bauaria, Qui portoit d'Or au Pal de Sable. Mezal Tarre de front and Coronne, Cimier vne Nasse d'Ozier ouuerte au mitan, and dessus vn plu^il. Lambrequins Or, and Sable.
Moreouer there is in Germanie an other Family of this Sirname, which beareth De Gueules Coupe eschiquete d'Argent and de Gueules de quatre traicts. Mezal Tarre de front. Cimier Chappeau poinctu a l^Albanoise eschiquete des Armes, le Rebord leue de Gueules, vne Aigrete a la pointe d'enhaut. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Frederick de Westersteton, of the Circle of Suauba, Qui portoit d'Argen, couppe d'Or, Party de Gueules, Heanme au Mezal Tarre de front, and Coronne. Cimier Vn Vol de front, l^vn d'Or, l^Autre de Gueules. Lambrequins Or, and Gueules.
William de Waldenstein, of the Circle of the Rhine. Modius is mistaken, in giuing to Waldenstein, the Armes of Wallenstein: Qui porte Palle d'Argent and de Gueules de huict pieces. Mezal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, Vn Aigle tourne and coronne d'Argent. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueules. But concerning the Family of Waldenstein, they beare De Gueules, an L^urier Gay tourne d'Argent. Mezal, Tarre de front, and Coronne. Cimier. L^urier passant tourne d'Argent. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueules. Correct Modius.
Conrad de Vestenberg, of the Circle of Franconia, De Synople, a vne Face d'Argent. Mezal Tarre. Cimier vne Teste de Bracque tourne de Synople au Collier d'Argent. Lambrequins de Synople and d'Argent.
If this had bin Westenberg: He should haue borne d^Azur, Escheque de Gueules, and d'Argenut. Mezal Tarre. Cimier Deux Cornes d'Azur, a Trois Banderoles chacune Eschecquee d'Argent, and de Gueules. Lambrequins Azur, and Argent,
Braunschweig, Porte d'Argent, au Lyon de Gueules.
At this Tourney was present the Marquesse of Brandenbourg Henry,The Armes of Braunschw^g. so named at his Baptisme: for before, he was a Pagane and an Idolater. Being conuerted to the Faith of Iesus Christ, he tooke for Armes D'Argent, a vn Aigle de Gueules, au Bec and membres d'Or, forsaking his Auncient Armes, which were (badly blazoned) De Sable, a vn Dragon de Gueules.


The Sixt Tourney.
WHich was celebrated at the charges of the Emperour Conrad, Second of the name, Duke of Franconia, in the Citty of Treuers vpon the Mosella,A Citty in Germanie betwee^e Be^gia and the Riuer Mosella. his ordenary abyding: on the first Sunday after Candlemasse day, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand and nineteene.
This Emperour Conrad Portoit de l'Empire, l'Aigle Brize de Fran^onia, qui est Endenche Couppe d'Argent and de Gueulez. Mezal Tarre, Coronne. Cimier Deux Proboscides d'Elephant d Argent, Couppez, and Endenchez de Gueules. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueules.
The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.
Sifrid de warth (Correct Modius) of the Circle of Bauaria. Il portoit d'Argent, a Trois Faces Bretessees (alwayes in diminishing, 3.2.1 de Gueules) Mezal Tarre, et Coronne. Cimier. Vn Vol Tarre, Bretesse, as the Armes. Lambrequins de Gueules, et d'Argent.
In Germanie there are two Families of this Sirname, almost like one another: but the ones name is written with a D. without H. Wardt. The first beareth D'Azur, a vn Aigle tourne d'Or, et couppe en Trois. La poincte d'Or, l'Abisme d'Argent, et le Chef de Sable. Mezal Tarre. Cimier Teste de Limier tourne d'Or, le Collier d'Argent. Lambrequins Or et Azur.
The other Family beareth D'Azur, Flanqui d'Argent, Mezal Tarre. Cimier de Cornes, l'vne d'Argent, and d'Azur en Cheuron droict; and l'autre en Cheuron renuerse d'Azur, and d'Argent. Lambrequins. Idem.
William de Cronberg, of the Circle of the Rhine. Portoit (Correct Modius) au Premier Quartier de Gueules a vne Coronne d'Or. Le Second and Troisiesme Vaire. Le Quatriesme and dernier de Gueules sans charge. Mezal, Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier vne Pomme de Pin de Sable. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Rodolphe de Stoffeln (correct Modius) of the Circle of Suauba, D'Argent au Lyon Coronne tournede Sable. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, Lyon naissant Coronne tourne de Sable. Lambrequins Argent and Sable.
Kilian de Wolffskeel, of the Circle of Franconia: d'Or a vn Aethiopien vestu de Sable, au bouquet de mesme. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, Vol d'Argent, Lambrequins d'Or and de Sable. Grumbach beareth the same: but the Aethiopian is tourned, and reuersed

The Armes of Treuers.
Treuers Porte d'Argent a vn Sainct Pierre, vestu d'Azur, Visage, Mains, and Pieds d'Incarnation.



The Seauenth Tourney.
The first day of May.WHich was held in the Citty of Hall in Saxonie, vpon the renowned Riuer of the Rhine, by the Emperour Henry, Third of the name, Duke of Saxonie: the first Sunday after the Feast day of the two Saints: Phillip and Iacob, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, forty and two.
The Emperour Henry Portoit de l Empire, l'Aigle Brise des Armes de Saxe: Obserued in the First and Fourth Quarters of them belonging to the Marquesse of Saxonie.

The Kings of this Tourney, were these Knights.

Iacques de Elrichshausen, of the Circle of Franconie. Qui portoit Bande de Gueules, and d'Argent de Six pieces. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier Bouc naissant Bande de Gueules and d'Argent, aux Cornes d'Or. Lambrequins de Gueules, and d'Argent.
Michaell de Morsberg, of the Circle of the Rhine. Qui portoit d'Azur, a Trois Aiglons d'Or, 2.1. (Correct Modius) Escartele de Cinq Poincts d'Argent, Equipolez a Quatre de Gueules. Deux Mezals Tarrez, and Coronnez. Cimier du Premier vn Vol de front, charge chacun d'Azur, a Trois Aiglons d'Or. Lambrequins Or and Azur. Cimier de l' autre, vn Bus d'Enfant Poincte d'Argent, and de Gueules, au Bandeau de Gueles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Diepolde de Reischach, of the Circle of Suauba, d'Argent, a vne Teste and Col de Sanglier, de Sable. Mezal, Tarre. Cimier de mesme qu'en Armes. Sable, and Argent.
Wonbold de Cammeraw, of the Circle of Bauaria. D'Argent, au Cheual Marin naissant de Gueules. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier de mesme qu'en l' Escu. Lambrequins Argent de Gueules.
The Armes of Hal in Saxonie.Hall in Saxonie (whereof the question now is) Porte d'Argent, au Croissant montant de Gueules, a Deux Estoiles, de mesme l vne en Chef, and l autre en Poincte. Correct Modius, who hath taken the Armes of the Towne of Braubach (which are d'Azur, au Croissant tourne d'Or, a deux Estoiles de mesme) in stead of these.
Hall in Kochar, otherwise called Kochentall, Porte d'Argent, a l' Aigle esploye de Gueules, Brise d'vn Escu d'Argent, couppe de Gueules.
Hall in Iuthall, Porte de Gueules, a Deux Lyons affrontez, and Coronnez d'Or, tenants vn Tonneau d'Argent entre eux-deux: And
Hall in Henegaw (for there are Foure Halls in Germanie) Porte d'Or a vn Chasteau en Triangle de Gueules, ayant en poincte vn Escu de Bauieres; Escartele du Palatinat du Rhein.


The Eight Tourney.
WAs Celebrated at the cost and expences, and by Harman, Duke of Suauba, in the Citty of Ausbourg, the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Laurence, in the yeare of Grace One thousand and fourescore.
The same Harman Portoit de Suauba, d'Or, a Trois Leopards, l'vn sur l'autre de Sable. Mezal, Tarre Coronne. Cimier, Aigle de Sable. Lambrequins, d Or and de Sable.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Rodolphe de Rechberg, of the Circle of Swaba. There are three Families in Germanie of this Sir-name, and Armes almost alike. Hohen Rechberg, porte d'Or, a deux Lyons adossez, les queues passees en Sautoir de Gueulles, Mezal Tarre. Cimier vn Dain naissant tourne d'Or. Lambrequius. Or, and Gueulles.
Another Rechberg, without any other difference (which I take to be the man now in question.) Qui porte d'Argent a deux Lyons adossez de Gueulles aux queues entrenouees and passees en Saultoir. Mezal. Tarre, Cimier. Dain naissant droict de Gueulles, and Argent.
Another Rechberg, likewise without any difference. Qui porte les Lyons adossez de Gueulles en Champ d'Argent, Escartele d'Argent a vne Dain tourne de Gueulles, rampant sur vn Rocher de Sinople. Mezal, Tarre and Coronne. Cimier Dain naissant tourne de Gueulles. Lambrequins d' Argent, and de Gueulles.
Ambrose of Mubberg, of the Circle of Bauaria. There are two Families in Germany of this Sir-name, but of different Armes.
The first beareth D'Argent, a vn Corbeau tourne de Sable, tenant vn Anneau d'Or a son bec. Mezal. Tarre. Cimier. le mesme Corbeau tourne a l'Anneau d' Or. Lambrequins Argent and Or.
The other which is now in question. Porte d'Or a quatorze Tourteauz de Sable 4.4.3.2.1. Mezal Tarre. Cimier. deux Proboscides d' Elephant d'Or, chargez de Douze Tourteaux de Sable. Lambrequius Or and Sable.
Conrad de Allendorf, of the Circle of the Rhine. D'Or, a vn Poulain a descendre vin en caue, de Gueulles mis en bande. Mezal. Tarre. Cimier. Demy Vol D'Or, audict Poulain de Gueulles en bande. Lambrequins Or, and Gueulles.
Reinard de Leonrodt of the Circle of Franconia. Correct Modius. Il portoit d'Argent, a vne Face de Gueulles. Mezal. Tarre. Cimier. Proboscides d'Argent Facez de Gueulles. Lambrequins d' Argent, and de Gueulles. The Towne of
Ausbourg Porte, Party de Gueulles, and d'Argent, a vn Chapiteau de Colomne, charge d'vne Pomme de Pin. D'Or.


The Ninth Tourney.
WHich was held by Ludolphe, Duke of Saxonie, Count of Supplinbourg. The first Sunday after the Feast of All-Saints, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred and nineteene, in the Towne of Gotting.
Ludolphe portoit de Saxe ancienne, Escartele d' Or, a vn Massacre de Cerf, seme de Tourteaux de Sable. Mezal. Tarre. and Coronne. Cimier, la Pyramide de Saxe moderne, au Cheual gay passant sur teelle d'Argent, le tout dedans deux Faucilles dentees d'Argent au manche d' Or, mis en facon de Vol, entourez de queues de Paon.

The Kings of the Tourneys were these Knights:

Gothard de And law (Correct Modius) of the Circle of Suauba. Il portoit d'Or, a vne Croix plaine de Gueulles Mezal. Tarre. Cimier. Bus d'vn Roy de front, Coronne, a grands Cheueux, habille d'Ermines. Lambrequins d' Argent.
Henry de Torring (Correct Modius both in the Sir-name and Armes) of the Circle of Bauaria. Il portoit d'Argent, a trois Roses de Gueulles. 2.1. Escartele d'Or, a trois Lozenges en Bande, de Sable. Sur le Tout de Gueulles, a vne Pincette mise en Bande d'Argent. Trois Heaumes tarrez, celuy du Mitan de front, and les deux autres affrontez. Sur^le Premier, Thiare Persique d' Ermines, Coronne d Or, a vne queue de Paon, le Reb^rd d'Argent, charge de Trois Roses de Gueulles. Lambrequius. D'Argent, and de Gueulles.
That in the midst Coronne. Cimier, vne Estoile d'Or. Lambrequins d'Or.
The third is Crowned likewise, Cimier vn Paon d'Or. Lambrequins d'Or, and de Sable.
Kilian de Wisentaw (Correct Modius in the Sirname and Armes) of the Circle of

Franconia. Qui portoit d'Or, a vn Pal Lozenge de Gueulles. Mezal. Tarre. Coronne Cimier de Deux Proboscides de Gueulles. Lambrequius d'Or, and de Gueulles.
William de Hundtbusch, of the Circle of the Rhine (Correct Modius in the Sir-name) Il portoit de Gueulles, au Saultoir engresle d'Argent. Mezal. Tarre. Cimier. Chappeau a l Alemande de Gueulles, double and rebord d'Argent. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueulles.
The Armes of the Towne.Gotting Porte en Armes, de Gueulles, a vne Lettre Capitale G. d'Argent.


The Tenth Tourney.
IT being celebrated in the time of the Emperour Fredericke, Sirnamed Barbarossa, first of the name; By Guelphon, fourth of the name, Duke of Bauaria, the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Andrew, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, one hundred threescore and fiue, in the Citie of Zurich; the Armes, whereof we haue obserued, vnder The Order of Saint Gall.
The Armes of the Dukes of Bauaria are Lozenges d' Azur, and d' Argent en Bande, Escartele du Palatinat du Rhin qui est de Sable, au Lyon Coronne d'Or. Deux Heaumes au Mesal Tarre de front, and Coronnez. Cimier. Deux Vols affrontez. Le Premier, charge de Bauiere, and l'autre du Palatinat: Lambrequins, des Metaux, and Couleurs des Armes.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Iohn de Leminger, of the Circle of Bauaria, Qui portoit (Correct Modius in Sirname and Armes) de Gueulles a vn Vase couuert a vne Anse d'Argent; Escartele d'Azur, Party de Gueulles, a vne Face d'Argent. Deux Mezal Tarre and Coronnez. Cimier. Le Premier Deux Preboscides. Facez de Gueulles and d'Argent, au Vase au Mitan d'Argent. L'autre, demy ^ol, d'Azur, Party d'Austriche Moderne* Lambrequins des Metaux, and Couleurs. Le Premier d' Argent, and de Gueulles, l'autre, de Gueulles, and d Azur.
George de Fuchsen, o^ the Circle of Franconia. There are three Families in Germanie, of this Sir-name and Armes.
The first beareth D'Or, a vn Renard tourne de Gueulles Escartele d'Argent, a vne Face d'Azur, au Lyon de Gueulles rampant sur le tout* Sur le Tout du Tout. Party de Gueulles, en Mantel, a la Poincted Azur, Trois Mezal Tarre and Coronnez. Le Premier a pour Cimier vn Renard de Gueulles, ^^u^ne* and plante sur son Cul, comme vn Singe. Celuy du Mitan, vn Plain Vol charge de sur le Tout. Et le Troisiesme vn Lyon naissant de Gueulles. Lambrequins. Le Premier d'Or, and de Gueulles. Le Second, de Gueulles, and d'Azur. Le Troisiesme d'Argent, and de Gueulles. And this Familie called it selfe Fuchsen de Fuschberg.
The other, Porte d'Or, au Renard tourne de Sable. Mesal* Cimier, and Lambrequins, comme le Premier des Trois, qui n^a point de Coronne, ains seulement vn Chappeau a l'Alemande, de Gueulles, au rebord d'Or, sur lequel Monsieur le Renard est assis.
The third Porte vn Renard droict, Mezal Tarre Cimier Renard droit, and Lambrequins, comme il est ^y dessus.
Wernier de Greiffenklaw (Correct Modius in the Sirname) Portoit de Sable, a la B^nd^ d'Argent. Escartele d'Azur au Rais d'Esca^boucle Pommete, and Fleurdelyse d'Or. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, vn Pied de Grison d'Or, a la Cuisse de Sable. Lambrequins d'Or, and d'Azur.
Fredericke de Stauffen, of the Circle of Suauba. There is not any Family in Germany, by the Sir-name of Stauffen, that beareth such Armes as Modius hath giue^ th^m, in regard that
The first Family of this Sir-name beareth De Gueulles, a Trois Calices, couuerts de leurs Volets, d'Or. ^. 1. deux Mezal, Tarre, and Coronnez. Cimier du Premier vne Mitre, a vne queue de Paon dessus. Lambrequins Gueulles, and Or. L'autre a pour Cimier, Teste and Col d' A^gle d'Or, Lambrequins Or and Gueulles.
The other by the Sir-name of Stauffenberg. Porte d'Argent, au Calice de Gueulles sur vne ^nt^nete d'Azur a deux Volets d'Or l'vn sur l'autre Mezal Tarre de front, and Coronne. Cimier vne Fille naissante de dessus vne Montagnete d'Azur, Habillee d'Argent, a^ant sur l' Estomach vn Calice and Volet de Gueulles; au lieu de bras deux Cornes de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles.



The Eleauenth Tourney.
WAs Celebrated in the Citie of * Cologne (called by the Romans Agrippina) at the cost and expences of Florent, Count of Henault, Holland and Zeland; Lord of Friezeland: On the, first Sunday after the Feast of the Three Kings of Cologne, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand one hundred threescore and nineteene.
The same Florent, Portoit de Flandre, Escartele de Hollande. Le Troisiesme de Frize, le Quatriesme and dernier de Zeelande. Armes heretofore very remarkeable, in the discourse concerning the Voyages of Ierusalem. Mezal, Tarre. Cimier vne queue de Paon. Lambrequins, de Hollande d'Or, and de Gueulles.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights following.

Iohn de Helffenstein (Correct Modius in the Sir-name and Armes) of the Circle of the Palatinate. I cannot tell where Modius fished for the Armes which he hath giuen him, and namely the Floures de Luces: For in Germany there are no more then three Families of this Sir-name, and in Armes they be different.
The first is written with one F. alone, Helfenstein, who beareth in Armes, De Gueulles, a vn Elephant tourne, d'Argent sur vne Terrasse, and petite Montagne d'Or au Premier quartier; and au Quatriesme l'Elephant est a droict. Le second and troisiesme escart sont d'Or, a vne Barre, ou fueille de Scie des deux costez de Gueulles. Deux Mezal. Tarre sur le premier est pour Cimier, la Teste and Col d'vn Elephant tourne d'Argent, charge d'vne Barre Sciee de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles. L'autre a pour Cimier vne Teste d'Oye d'Or, le Col perse de deux Euentails, de plumes de Paon. Lambriquins Or, and Gueulles.
The second beareth likewise but one F. according to the first: and en Armes d'Azur, couppe d'Argent, au Lyon naissant tourne de Gueulles (these are they that Modius should haue set downe) Mezal. Tarre. Cimier, compose d'vn Panache de Cinq plumes de couleurs differentes, a scauoir de Gueulles, d'Argent, d'Azur, d'Argent, and de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent and d'Azur.
The third Helfentein with one F. onely, as the two other, hauing in Armes Bande de Sable, and d Or de quatre pieces, a vn poinct quarre d'Azur en Chef au canton d' Honneur. Mezal, Tarre Cimier vn Elephant naissant d'Or, couppe de Sable. Lambrequins, Or, and Sable.
Sifrid de Leubelsing, of the Circle of Bauaria (Correct the Armes of Modius) qui portoit d'Argent a deux Faces de Gueulles. Escartele de Gueulles, Party d'Argent, a deux Bandes d'Azur. Deux Mezals T^rre Cimier du Premier. Vn Chien Braque tourne assis d'Argent, au Collier de Gueulles. Lautre Cimier vn Vol entier, l'vn de Gueulles, and l'autre du Party. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles au Premier; and l'autre, Argent, and Azur.
Otho Wolffgang de Abspergk (Correct Modius in the Sir-name) of the Circle of Franconia. Portoit Party de Gueulles, and d'Azur, a la poincte d'Argent. Mezal Tarre and Coronne. Cimier. Vn Bus d'Enfant tourne, habille de Sable, les cheueux tressez and cordonnez par derriere d'Or, and de Gueulles, la Teste couuerte d'vn Chappeau de Gueulles, au rebord, d'Argent, vn Panache a la poincte du Chappeau, de trois plumes d'Azur, d'Argent, and de Gueulles. Lambrequins Azur and Argent.
William de Landtaw (Correct Modius in the Sir-name) of the Circle of Sua^ba. Portoit d'Or, a trois Cores de Chefen Faces, de Sable, Mezal, Tarre Coronne d'vn Bonnet and Mortier d'Or. Et dessus pour Cimier, vne Queue de Paon. Lambrequins, Or, and Sable.
There is another Familie in Germany of this Sir name of Landtaw, and of different Armes Bande d'Argent, and de Gueulles de quatre pieces* Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Deux Proboscides, Bandez comme les Armes. Lambrequins Argent and Gueulles
The Citie of Cologne, being the Metropolitane. Porte d'Argent au Chef de Gueulles,The Armes of the Citie. a Trois Coronnes d'Or.



The Thelfth Tourney.
IT was held in the Imperiall Citie of Norimberg, by the Emperour Henry, sixt of the name (styling himselfe King of Naples and Sicilie) Duke of Suauba: the first Sunday after Candlemasse day, in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred fourescore and eighteene.
Suauba is obserued in the third Tourney: But I know not where Modiws hath bin fishing for the Brizure of France, and the Marteaux en Barre.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Wilebold de Thengen, of the Circle of Bauaria (Correct the Sir-name and Armes of Modius) Qui portoit de Gueulles, a vne Licorne d'Argent Mezal Tarre Cimier. Licorne naissante d'Argent. Lambrequins, Gueulles, and Argent.
Iohn de Hirnheims, of the Circle of Suauba: His Armes are in the third Tourney.
Ortolphe de Wilhelmsdorf, of the Circle of Franconia. Il portoit d'Azur, Couppe d'Or, a Trois Lozenges de Gueulles, Mezal ^arre Cimier vn Bus de Sarazin tourne, and habille d'Azur, Chappeau pointu recourbe par deuant de Gueulles, le rebord d'Or, a Trois Lozenges de Gueulles, vn Pennache au bout du Chappeau, compose de trois plumes d'Azur, d'Argent, and de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Or, and d'Azur.
William de Reiffenberg of the Circle of the Rhine. If this be the same Reiffenberg according as Modius writeth. Il portoit de Sable, a vne Bande d'Or Mezal Tarre Cimier. Deux Proboscides Facez de Sable and de Gueulles. Lambrequins Idem.
If it be he of Reisenbach, Il portoit Bande d'Argent, and de Gueulles de Neuf pieces, sans Lambeau. Mezal Tarre Cimier. Chappeau poinctu de Gueulles, rebord d'Argent. Cinq plumes, deux au Cordon du Chappeau d'vn d'autre coste d'Argent, and trois au sommet d'Iceluy de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles.
The Armes of Norimberg.Norimberg Porte Moitie de l'Empire. Party de Bande de Gueulles, and d'Argent, de Six pieces.


The Thirteenth Tourney.
WHich was Celebrated in the Citie of Wormes vpon the Rhine, in the time of the Emperour Phillip, Duke of Suauba, by the Nobilitie of the Palatinate of the Rhine: The first Sunday after Candlemasse day, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand two hundred and nine.
The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.
Iohn de Ingel heim, of the Circle of the Rhine. De Sable, a la Croix pleine, Eschequee de Gueulles, and d'Argent de deux traicts Mezal Tarre Coronne Cimier Vol, charge des Armes. Lambrequins Argent, and de Gueulles.
Ernestus de Staffel, of the Circle of Suauba. D'Or, au Massacre de Cerf, en Pal de Sable, au Mitan vn Cloud de mesme Mezal Tarre Coronne. Cimier, Vol d'Argent. Lambrequins, Or, and Sable.
Sichard de Leubelsing, of the Circle of Bauaria. See the eleauenth Tourney.
Lewes de Redwits, of the Circle of Franconia. See the third Tourney.
The Armes of Wormes.Wormes, Porte de Gueulles, a vne Clef d'Argent, mise en Barre.


The Foureteenth Tourney.
THis was performed at the cost and charges of the Noble Gentlemen of Franconia (the Armes of which Circle and Dukedome are formerly obserued) in the chiefe Citie thereof, called Wirtzbourg. The first Sunday after the Feast of All-Saints, in the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred thirtie and fiue.

The Kings of which Tourney were these Knight.

Sigismond d'Eltz, Qui portoit d'Argent, Couppe de Gueulles, au Lyon naissant, tourne, d'Or. Mezal Tarre Cimier. Chappeau tourne, de Gueulles, au rebord d'Ermines, au Vol

entier, l'vn de Gueulles, seme de Coeurs d' Argent; and l'autre d'Argent, seme de Coeurs de Gueulles. An Lyon naissant tourne d'Or, Entre deux. Lambrequins de Gueulles, and d'Argent.
Wolffgang de Hirschhorn, d'Argent, au Demy Massacre de Cerf de Gueulles. Mezal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier Massacre entier de Gueulles. Lambrequins Argent and Gueulles.
Ernefrid de Andlaw. His Armes are in the Ninth Tourney.
Erpffus de Sickingen, De Sable, a Cinq Besans d'Argent en Saultoir, a la Bordure de Gueulles (Correct Modius who hath forgot him) Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Oye, naissante d'Or, au Col seme de Flammes de Gueulles. Lambrequins Sable, and Or.
Wirtzbourg, d'Azur a vne Banniere Crenelee d'Argent, Escartelee de Gueulles,The Armes of the Citie. mise en Bande.


The Fifteenth Tourney.
BEing held and celebrated by the Noble Gentlemen of Bauaria (the Armes whereof are before obserued) the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Michael, the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred fourescore and foure, in the Citie of Ratisbonna, called in the Germaine language Regensbourg.

The Kings of the said Tourney were these Knights.

Conrad de Schencken, de Schweinsberg, of the Circle of the Rhine, Qui portoit Lozenge de Gueulles, and d'Argent, couppe d'Azur, au Lyon passant d'Or: Double Mezal, Tarre. Le Premier a pour Cimier, la Teste and le Col d'vn Lyon tourne d'Or, a deux plumes, au lieu d'Oreilles, l'vne d'Argent, and l'autre de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles. L'autre, Vol double d'Argent, charge des Armes. Lambrequins Or, and Aur.
Iohn de Fraunberg, of the Circle of Bauaria. Looke for his Armes in the Third Tourney.
Sigismond de Ricthein, of the Circle of Suauba. D'Argent, au Cheual tourne gay de Sable. Mezal, Tarre and Coronne. Cimier vn Cheual naissant ^'Or. Lambrequins Or, and Sable.
Conrad de Seckendorf, of the Circle of Franconia, D'Argent, a vne Couleuree de Nenufar, nouee en double Saultoir, Tige, and Fueilles (huict en nombre) de Gueulles. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Chappeau poinctu de Gueulles, au rebord d'Argent. Lambrequins, Argent, and Gueulles.
Ratisbonna, Porte de Gueulles, a deux Clefs passe^s en Saultoir d'Argent,The Armes of Ratisbonna. liees d'vn lacs d'Amour de mesme.


The Sixteenth Tourney.
IT was Celebrated within the Towne of Schwincfor (seated on the Riuer of Moein) by the Nobilitie of Franconia; the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Laurence.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Theodoric de Cammer (Correct Modius) of the Circle of Bauaria. Portoit d'Argent, a vn Hache tournee de Gueulles. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Chappeau plat d'Argent, au rebord d'Ermines, a la Hache de Gueulles tournee, fichee dessus.
Wolffgang de Kemmerer, of the Circle of the Rhine. D'Azur, a Six Fleurs de Lys d'Or. 3.2.1. Au Chef endenche d'Or. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Vol, remply des Armes. Lambriquins, Azur, and Or.
Otho de Schencken, de Geyren, d'Argent couppe de Sable. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. A^gle d'Argent, couppe de Sable. Lambrequins, Argent, and Sable.
Conrad de Hirnheim, du Cercle de Suauba. Whose Armes are before duely obserued.
Schweinfor, Porte d'Argent a vne Aigle de Sable. Correct Modius,The Armes of Schweinfor. who confoundeth both the Mettals and Colours.



The Seauenteenth Tourney.
WAs held in the Citie of Rauenspourg, in Suauba, by the Noble Gentlemen of that Circle and Dukedome (the Armes whereof haue bin formerly obserued) On the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Iohn Baptist, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and eleauen.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Wolffgang de Frawberg, of the Circle of Bauaria. Dictum.
Iacques de Bodmaner, of the Circle of Suauba. Portoit (Correct Modius) d'Argent a tris Fueilles de Nenuphar de Synople. 2.1. Escartele d'Or, a vn Bou^ tourne de Sable. Mezal, Tarre, Coronne. Cimier, Chappeau poinctu de paille, au rebord d'Ermines, Coronne d'Or, and en poincte vne queue de Paon. Lambrequins, Or, and Sable.
Gotschalck de Nesselrodt, of the Circle of the Rhine, De Gueulles, a vne Face Bretessee d'Argent. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, vn Chien Bracque naissant de Gueulles, charge d'vne Face Crenelee d'Argent. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles.
Apelles de Sensheim, of the Circle of the Rhine. Il portoit (Correct Modius) Pale d'Argent and d'Azur de Six pieces, Escartele d'Or, a vn Sanglier Coronne, Sautant de Sable. Double Mezal, Tarre. Le Cimier du Premier est vn Bus d'vn Sarazin a grand Barbe tourne, habille de Gueulles, le Chappeau poinctu recourbe par derriere a vne houppe de Gueulles au rebort d'Argent and d'Azur. L'autre Cimier, vn Sanglier Coronne Sautant de Sable. Lambrequins Or, and Sable.
The Armes of Rauenspourg.Rauenspourg Porte d'Argent, a vne Porte de Chasteau Hercee, a deux Tours d'Azur.


The Eighteenth Tourney.
BEing celebrated in the Imperiall Citie (the ordenarie Prison for Noblemen, that make defailance in Germanie) by the Nobilitie of the Circle and Countie Palatinate of the Rhine: On the first Sunday after the Feast day of All-Saints, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred thirtie and seauen. We will set downe the Armes appertaining to the
Counts Palatines, Electours of the Empire, who doe beare En Manteau, de Sable, au Lyon Coronne d'Or; Party de Bauieres. La pointe de Gueulles, a vne Boule du Monde, croiset d'Or, Heaume Tarre, and Coronne, aux Lambrequins de Gueulles, and d'Or.
Cimier, deux Proboscides d'Elephant, Lozengez de Bauiere, and entre deux vn Lyon assis de front, de Gueulles, Coronne d'Or.
Tenants, and Supports deux Lyons d'Or.

The Kings of the said Tourney were these Knights.

Iohn Truchses de Waltbourg (Correct Modius) Qui portoit d'Or, a trois Leopards tournez de Sable. Mezal, Tarre Cimier. Vn Bonnet Ducal renuerse de Gueulles, vne queue de Paon sortant d'iceluy. Pres de ce Bonnet est vn Estendart charge des Armes de l'Escu. Lambrequins Or, and Sable.
Frederick de Preysing (Correct Modius) Portoit Couppe, Bretesse d'Argent, and de Gueulles (commencez tousiours par la Pointe a blasonner Armes Couppees, quand les couppures sont esgales) Mezal, Tarre and Coronne. Cimier deux Proboscides, le premier de Sable, and l'Autre d'Argent, and entre deux, vn Perroquet, blazonne, selon l'Art de diuerses couleurs. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Sable.
Erasmus de Liechtenstein. There are foure Families of this Sir-name in Germany, of different Armes.
The first beareth, De Gueulles, au Lyon tourne d'Argent; Escartele de Sable, au Lyon naissant de Gueulles, en Chef d'Argent. Sur le tout d'Azur, a vne poincte renuerse^ d^Argent. Trois Mezails tarrez, and Coronnez. Le premier a pour Cimier vn Lyon naissant, tourne d'Argent. Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueulles. Celuy du mitan a pour Cimier vn Chappeau poinctu renuerse d'Azur, au Rebord fendu, d'Argent, au Pennache de Cinq Pl^mes, deux d'Azur, deux de Gueulles, and celle du mitan d'Argent. Lambrequins, Argent,

and Azur. Le Troisiesme a pour Cimier de Sable, au Lyon naissant de Gueulles, acoste d'vne queue de Paon. Lambrequins Argent and Sable.
The second De Gueulles, couppe d'Or. Mezal, Tarre Coronne. Cimier. Vol double, couppe comme l'Escu. Lambrequins Or, and Gueulles.
The third Party, and couppe Endenche de Gueulles, Escartele d'Argent (this is that of Modius) Mezal Tarre Cimier, deux Proboscides de Gueulles, entournees au dehors de Plumes d'Argent. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles. And
The fourth, D'Azur au demy-Vol tourne d'Argent. Mezal Tarre Cimier. Idem. Lambrequins, Argent and Azur.
Adam de Konigsegk. Lozenge d'Or, and de Gueulles en Bande Mezal Tarre Coronne. Cimier. Pennache de cinq plumes celles du mitan, and des deux bouts d'Or, les deux autres de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Or and de Gueulles. The Citie of
Ingelnheim, Porte vne Muraille d'Argent, Crenelee, and Masonnee de Sable,The Armes of the Citie couppe d'Argent, a vne Aigle naissante de Sable. It is held, that in the Castell belonging to this Citie, our King Charlemaigne had his Birth and Originall.


The Nineteenth Tourney.
WAs held by the Nobilitie of the Circle of Franconia, in the Towne of Bamberg, the first Sunday after the Feast of the Three Kings, in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred threescore and two.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

George de Hirschhorn: whose Armes are set downe in the fourth Tourney.
Henry de Nothaft. There are of this Sir-name three Families in Germany, but of different Armes.
The first, is (that which is noated by Modius) Qui porte d'Or, a Face d'Azur Mezal Tarre Cimier, deux Proboscides chargez des Armes de l^Escu. Entre deux vn Chien bracque d'Ermines. Lambrequins, d'Or, and d'Azur.
The second which is Nothaft, de Hohenbourg, Porte de Gueulles, au Vol d'Argent. Mezal Tarre Cimier, Chappeau Poinctu de Gueulles, a l'A^grette de mesme, au Rebord d'Argent, au Mitan d'vn Vol d'Argent. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles.
The third according to the second, but the Crest differeth. Bus d'Enfant habille de Gueulles, Vol d'Argent, au lieu de Bras. Lambrequins, d^ Argent and de Gueulles.
Lewes de Helmstat, D'Argent au Co^q aux Ailes estendues de Sable. Mezal Tarre Coronne. Cimier, Cocq naissant de Sable, orne de Plumes d'Or.
George de Voiten, de Rieneck, Qui portoit de Gueulles, au Belier d'Argent. Mezal Tarre Cimier. Chappeau plat, de Gueulles, au Rebord d'Argent, an Belier d'Or, dessus Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles. The Towne of
Bamberg, Porte d'Argent,The Townes Armes. a vn Homme Arme d'Azur tenant de sa main droicte vn Estendard de Gueulles a la Croix plaine d'Argent, and de l'autre vn Escu, aux Armes de l'Empire.


The Twentieth Tourney.
IT being celebrated by the Noble Gentlemen, of the Circle and Dukedome of Suauba, in the Towne of Eslingen, in the Principalitie of Wirtenberg. The first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Martine, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred threescore and foureteene.

Iohn de Landschaden, Qui portoit d'Or, a vne Harpe de Sable. Mezal Tarre Cimier, vne Teste d vn Roy Vieillard coronne, dont la grand Barbe sert de Lambrequins pour couurir, and entourer ^e Heaume and l'Escu.

Fredericke de Preysing, whose Armes are described in the eighteenth Tourney.
George de Schencken, de ^eyren: Looke for his Armes in the Sixeteenth Tourney.
Phillip de Rietheim. See the fifteenth Tourney.

Eslingen, Porte d' Or. a vn Aigle tourne de Sable.



The One and Twentieth Tourney.
WHich was held by the Noblemen of the Circle and Dukedome of Suauba, in the Towne of Schaffausen; The first Sunday of the Feast of All-Saints, in the yeare of Grace One thousand three hundred fourescore and twelue.

The Kings of which Tourney were these Knight.

Otho de Bintznaw, D'Or, a vne hande de Sable, a Trois Bezans d'Argent. Mezal Tarre Coronne. Cimier, Licorne naissante d'Argent. Lambrequins, Or and Sable.
Reinard de Rhatsamhausen (Correct Modius) Qui portoit de Gueulles, a vn Es^u e^ Abisme d'Argent, charge d'vne Face de Synople. Mezal Tarre Cimier, vn Bracque naissant tourne d'Argent, au Collier d' Or. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles.
William de Sensheim. His Armes are emblazoned before.
Conrad de Welwart. De Gueulles au Croissant montant d'Argent. Mezal Tarre Cimier double Proboscide, Couppe de Gueulles, and d'Argent de l'vn, en l'autre. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles. Il y a vne autre Famille en Alemagne du Surnom de Wilwart, laquelle porte d'Azur en Mantel a la Poincte d'Argent. Mezal Tarre and Coronne. Cimier vn Pennache de trois Plumes, Azur, Argent, and Azur. Lambrequins d' Argent, and d'Axur. The Towne of
The Townes Armes.Schaffhausen, seated vpon the Riuer of Rhine, Porte d'Or* au Belier gay de Sable: quelques vns le font naistre d'vne Tour d'Argent, Masonnee, and Crenelee de Sable, sur vne Montagne de Synople.


The Two and Twentieth Tourney.
THis Tourney was celebrated by the Nobilitie of the Circle and Dukedome of Baeuaria, in the Citie of Ratisbonna, otherwise called Regenspourg (the Armes whereof are formerly obserued) the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saints Bartholmew, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred fourescore and sixeteene.
The Kings of the said Tourney were these Knights.
William de Frawnberg. His Armes are noated before.

Gotthard de Egolfslein. Portoit d'Argent, a vne Teste d'Ours, tournee, de Sable, Mezal Tarre Cimier. Teste d'Ours. Lambrequins Argent and Sable.

In Germany there is another Family of the Sir name of Egolfsheim, which beareth, D'Azur a vne Teste de Ly^n ailee d'Or (which are the Armes of Saint Marke of Venice, Qui porte d Argent a ladite Teste de Lyon ailee de Gueulles) Mezal Tarre Cimier, Demy Lyon aile d'Or. Lambrequins Azur, and Or.
Iohn de Landschaden, of whom the Armes are before in due place set downe*

Erckinger de Rechenberg. De Gueulles, a vn Rasteau d'Or, mis en Pal. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Double Proboscide, de Gueulles, and entre deux vn Rasteau d'Or en Pal. Lambrequins, Argent and Gueules.

In Germany there is another Family of the same Sir-name, but of different Armes; Qui porte de Gueulles, a vne Teste de Belier tournee d'Or. Mezal, Tarre and Coronne. Cimier, Belier naissant tourne de Sable, aux Cornes d'Or. Lambrequins Gueulles, and Sable.


The Three and Twentieth Tourney.
IT being held by the Noble Gentlemen of the Circle and Countie of the Palatinate of the Rhine, in the Towne of Darmstat, seated on the Rhine, betweene Heildelberg and Franckford, the first Sunday after Candlemasse day, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred and three.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Iohn de Morsberg, whose Armes are remarked in the seauenth Tourney.
Lewes de Schellenberg. In Germany there are three Families of this Sir-name, but differing in their Armes.
The first beareth, D'Argent a vne Teste and Hure de Sanglier de Sable, aux defences d'Or. Mezal Tarre Cimier. Teste de Sanglier. Lambrequins Argent, and Sable.
The second beareth Face de Sable and d'Or de Quatre Pieces (which is somewhat neere to that of Modius) Escartele d'Argent a vne Teste de Lyon arrachee de Gueulles. Double Mezal. Le Cimier du Premier est vn double Pr^boscide; l'vn d'Or, l autre de Sable. Lambrequins d'Or, and de Sable. L^autre a pour Cimier Teste, and Col d'vn Lyon de Gueulles. Lambrequins Argent and Gueulles.
The third Family beareth, D' Argent, a Trois Roses de Gueulles. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier neuf Barbeaux des Champs, auec deux Roseaux d'Or. Lambrequins Argent and Gueulles.
Iohn Sirnamed Dore de Zenger (Correct Modius) Qui portoit d Or, Couppe de Sable, a vne Tenaille d'Argent, mise en Face. Double Mezal Tarre, and Coronne. Le Cimier du Premier est vn Lyon tourne sur ses deux pieds de deuant d'Argent a deux A^les d'Or, l'autre de Sable. Celle d'Or, Couppee d'Argent seme de Gueulles de Nenuphar de Synople, a vne Tenaille tourne de Sable. Lambrequins d'Or and de Sable. L'autre Cimier est vn Aigle Coronne d Or. Lambrequins Sable, and Or.
Wolffgang de Schenck, de Geyern, whose Armes are before remembred. The Towne of
Darmstat, Porte d'Azur, a vne Fleur de Lys d'Argent en Poincte,The Townes Armes. and vn Lyon naissant tourne de Gueulles en Ches, a vne Face de Sable, chargee en Ab^sme d'vn Bezant d' Argent (Correct Modius.)


The Foure and Twentieth Tourney.
WHich Tourney was celebrated by the Nobilitie of Suauba, in the Towne of Heilbron, the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Iames and Saint Phillip, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred and eight.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Alban de Closen. D'Or, a Neuf Tourteaux de Sable, 3.3.3. Escartele d'Or, a vn O^son de Sable (Correct Modius) double Mezal Tarre. Le Premier, Coronne lequel a pour Cimier, vn double Proboscide, d'Or, semez de Tourteaux de Sable. Lambrequins d'Or, and de Sable. Le Cimier de l Autre, vn Chappeau a l'Alban^ise d'Or, seme de Tourteaux de Sable, a la Poincte vn Plumard, de trois Plumes d'Or, de Sable, d'Or, le Rebord d'Ermines. Lambrequins d'Or, and de Sable.
Wolffgang de Sachsenheim. D'Argent, a vn Cimier de Cornes de Boeuf de Gueulles. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Tel que dedans l'Escu. Lambrequins Gueulles and Argent.
A^am de Sotern (Correct Modius in the Armes) De Gueulles a vn Z. poinctu, and non Pot^nce d'Argent. Mezal Tarre Cimier, Chappeau plat, de Gueulles, le Rebord d'Hermines dans vn V^l es^end^ de Sable. Lambrequins de Gueulles, and d' Argent.
Lewes de Stein, d'Altenstein. De Gueulles, a Trois Marteaux d'Or. 2.1. Mezal Tarre Cimier de double Proboscide de Gueulles, enferrez de b^uts de traicts empennez d'Argent. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles. The Towne of
Heilbron, Porte d'Argent, a vn Aigle de Sable (Correct Modius.)


The Fiue and Twentieth Tourney.The Townes Armes.
WHich was held by the Nobilitie of the Circle and Dukedome of Bauaria, in the Citie of Ratisbonna: the first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Luke, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred and twelue.
The Kings of the said Tourney were these Knights.
^olffgang de Wittenhorst, Correct Modius, for the Sir-name and the Armes of the Circle of Bauaria. D'Or a Deux Iumelles de Sable, l'entredeux des Iumelles de Gueulles. Mezal Tarre Cimier vn Chappeau plat de Sable, au Rebord de Gueulles, a deux Flustes d'Aleman audict Chappeau en guise de Pennache, componnees des Armes de l'Escu. Lambrequins. Or, and Sable.
If this were the Familie of Westendorf. Il portoit d'Azur, a vne Grue tournee d'Argent, sur vne Terrace de mesme* Mezal Tarre Cimier la mesme Grue, Lambrequins d'Argent, and d'Azur.
George Stein, de Steineck, of the Circle of Suauba. D'Argent a vne Face viuree de deux pieces d'Azur. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Vol ploye, viure, de l'Escu. Lambrequins Argent, and Azur. Correct Modius, who giueth him Trois Racloirs, or Ratissoires de P^isles en Pal: wherein he is deceiued, by taking them instead of the Armes of the House of Steinecke. These belong to the Families of Pflaumer, of Stadion, Vom-stein, of Gangler, and of other Illustrious Houses in Germany.
William de Pallant of the Circle of the Rhine. Face d'Or, and de Sable de Six pieces. Mezal, Tarre Coronne. Cimier. Vol estendu d'Argent, and au mitan l'Escu Face. Lambrequins, Or and Sable. This Pallant is Sirnamed de Moreames, For there is a Familie that beareth the Sirname of Pallant, without any other addition, who beareth the Armes aboue Emblazoned. Escartele d'Or, a vne Face endenchee, ou bien Ondee d'Azur. Double Mezal Coronne, le Cimier, and Lambrequins de Moreames du Premier, and quant a l'autre Cimier, vne queue de Paon. Lambrequins Or, and Azur.
Another Pallandt, Qui porte Face d'Argent, and de Sable, de Six Pieces. Mezal, Tarre and coronne. Vol estendu, and dedans les Armes de l'Escu pour Cimier. Lambrequins Argent, and Sable. And another Family of the Sirname of Pollandt, which beareth, D'Azur, Seme de Treftes d'Or, a vne Roue en abisme d'Argent de cinq raiz, Mezal, Tarre, and Coronne, Cimier la Roue entouree de Trefles d'Or. Cimier, Azur, and Or.
Lewes de Auffses, of the Circle of Suauba, d'Azur, a vne Face d'Argent, chargee d'vne Roze de Gueulles en Abisme. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, double Proboscide d'Azur, charge de la Face, and Roze blazonnez en l'Escu, and au mitan vne Plume de Paon d'Or. Lambrequins Azur, and Argent.


The Sixe and Twentieth Tourney.
WHich was celebrated by Huldricke, Count of Wirtenberg. (Il portoit de Wi^tenberg, Escartele de Montbeliard, formerly obserued) for the day and delight of his Marriage with the Daughter of Henry, Duke of Bauaria, in the Towne of Stuttgardt, the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred thirty and sixe.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights following.

Wolffgang de Harf (Correct Modius) D'Argent, Couppe de Gueulles, a vn Lambeau d'Azur. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Chappeau d'Azur, au Rebord d'Ermines. Vol estendu l'vn d'Azur, and l'autre d'Argent. Lambrequins Azur and Argent.
Iohn de Nothaft (take away Remss in Modius, and place there Nothaft de Hohenbourg, or of Frowenberg) These two Families, Portent de Gueulles, au Vol d'Argent, Ceste^cy Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, vn Bus d'Enfant habille de Gueulles, a deux Ailes d'Argent, au lieu de Bras. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles.
Nothaft de Hohenbourg. Mezal, Tarre. Cimier. Chappeau poinctu de Gueulles, a vne Aigrete au bout, le rebord d'Argent, dedans vn Vol d'Argent. Lambrequins Argent and Gueulles.
Nothaft, without addition, Porte, d'Or, a vne Face d'Azur. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, double Proboscide, Componne d'Or, and d'Azur, and au mitan vn Chien and Leopard m^uchete.
George de Beldersheim (Correct Modius in the Sir-name and Armes) De Gueulles, seme de Croix Clechees au pied fiche d Or, a vn Estrier desmonte en Abysme de mesme. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Licorne naissante de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles.
Michael de Lowenstein, De Sable seme de Treffles d'Or, a vn Lyon tourne, and coronne d'Argent (Correct Modius, who giueth it seme de Billettes, as well as the third Shield) Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Lyon naissant tourne, and Coronne d'Argent, dedans vn double Prebos^ide de Sable acoste de Treff^es d'Or. Lambrequins, Argent and Sable.
Another Familie of the Sir-name of Lowenstein, but differeth in Armes, who beareth, Au Premier, and Quatriesme quartier d'Argent, au Lyon coronne de Gueulles. Au second d'Azur, a Trois Roses d'Argent. 2.1. Couppe d'Or, a vn Aigle naissant de Sable. Au Troisiesme d'Or, a vn Aigle tourne de Gueulles. Sur le tout Lozenge d'Argent, (...) d'Azur (qui est de Bauieres.) Et en pointe, vn autre Escu forme d'Argent, a vne

face de deux pieces de Gueulles. Trois Mizal, Tarre, and Coronnez, le premier and dernier de coronnes d'Or. Celuy du Mitan d'vn Bonnet Carre, Ducal d'Azur double d'Ermines. Cimier, du Premier vn Aigle tourne, and coronne d'Argent. Lambrequins Or, and Azur. Du Mitan vn Lyon assis de front de Gueulles, Coronne d'Or. Lambrequins Or, and Azur. Le Cimier du dernier vn Aigle d'Or, accoste de quatre Estendarts, deux d'Argent and deux de Gueulles. Lambrequins Argent and Gueulles.
Stattgardt, Porte d'Or, au Cheual Gay de Sable.The Townes Armes.


The Seauen and twentieth Tourney.
THis Tourney was held in the Towne of Landshut in Bauaria, vpon the goodly Riuer of Iser: by Lewes, Sirnamed the Rich, Count Palatine of the Rhine,Isara a Riuer of the Ali^broges, falling into Rhodanus neere to the Hill, Cemenus and Duke of both the Bauariaes, for ioy of his Nuptials, in the yeare of Grace One thousand foure hundred thirtie and nine. We haue already noated the Armes of this Prince Electour, wherein you are to Correct Modius.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

George de Freybourg. D'Azur, a six Bez^ns d'Or. 3.2.1. (Correct Modius) au Chef d'Argent. Mezil, Tarre, Cimier, vn O son naissant au Col d'Argent, la teste du Corps d'Azur, Seme de Bezans d'Or. 1.2.3. a deux Esuentaux de queue de Paon. Lambrequins Argent, and Azure. Co^rect Modius* who giueth but three Bezans.
Michael de Resenberg. Pale, Contre Pale de Gueulles, and d'Argent Mezal, Tarre, Cimier deux Cels d'O^e, and testes l'vne de Gueulles, and l'autre d'Argent, a vne Roze de Gueulles, fueillee de ^nople au Mitan. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles.
In Germany there are many Noble Families of this Sir-name of Rosenberg, but differing in Armes.
The first is that of the Sir-name and Armes of the Vrsins, obserued in the Discourse of Poland. And this is among the most Illustrious Houses of Germany, and graced with Title of Prince.
Ille porte des Vrsins, au Mezal Tarre de front, Coronne. Pour Cimier, vne Rose de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles.
The other beareth, D'Argent, a vne Rose de Gueulles, fueillee de Synople, de Six pieces. Mizal Tarre Cimier. Branche de Roze, Blazonnee, commne l'Es^u mais auec vne queue ^arnie de ses fueilles, outre celles de la Roze. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueulles.
Iohn de Staufer de Thunau, D'Azur, a vne Poincte d'Argent mouuante du Chef, Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Vn Chappeau poinctu d'Azur, coronne d'Or, a vne queue de Paon dessus. Le rebord d'Argent, Lambrequins d'Argent, and d'Azur. Correct Modius, who giueth him for Armes Couppe.
There is another House famous in Germanie, by the Sir-name of Stapfer, which beareth, De Sable a vne Haye d'Or (en Face) and vne planchette de mesme. Mezal, Tarre, Coronne. Cimier Vol double de Sable, a la haye, and planchette d'Or. Lambrequins, Sable and Or.
Philip de Scharpfenstein. D'Argent, a vne Face de Sable, entre vne Iumelle de mesme (Correct Modius) Mezal, Tarre, Cimier. Vol double d'Argent a la Fasse ^umelee de Sable Lambrequins Argent and Sable.
There is mother Familie of this Sir name of Scharpfenstein, which beareth, D'Argent a vne Fasse, and dem^e de Synople. Mezal, Tarre Cimier Vol double d'Argent, charge de la Fasse and ^ye de Synople. Lambrequins Argent, and Synople.
Lan^shut porte d'Argent, a trois Chappeaux quarrez and Cor^onnez d'Azur. 2.1.The Towne^ Armes.


The Eight and Twentieth Tourney.
WHich was celebrated by the Noble Gentlemen of the Circle and Dukedome of Franconia in the time of the Emperour Fredericke, Third of the name, and in the Citie of Wirtzbourg (he Armes whereof are formerly obserued, with them of Franconia) on the first Sunday after the Feast of the Three Kings of Cologne: the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred threescore and foureteene.
In this Tourney, were renewed the old and auncient Statutes for Iousts and Tourneys, and diuers newly added, to gouerne and order the Furnitures of Noble Gentlemen, that were then present there, and for the times following. Moreouer, that these Tournaments were to be held and celebrated, onely in these foure Cities of Germanie.Bamberg.Norimberg.Wirtzbourg: AndMoguntia, or Mentz.
The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights following.
Fuerard de Grumbach.George de Fuchs^n.Erckinger de Seinshein.Sebastian de Seckendorff.Whose Armes are all of them obserued in the precedent Tourneys.


The Nine and Twentieth Tourney.
BEing held in the Citie of Mentz, by the Nobilitie of the Circle and Palatinate of the Rhine, in the time of the same Emperour Henry the Third. The first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Bartholmew, in the yeare of Grace, One Thousand foure hundred and fourescore.
The Kings of this Tourney, were these Knights.
William, Count of Furstenberg, Qui portoit d'Or, a vn Aigle de Gueulles, a l'Orle d'Argent, Viurce d'Azur: l'A^gle brize sur l^Estomach d'vn autre Escu Escartele. Le Premier, and Quatriesme de Gueulles a vn Genfanon d'Or. Les Second, and Troisiesme d'Argent, a vne Bande endenchee de Sable (Correct Modius, who hath let slip in silence the Brizure of the Eagle.) Trois Mezails Tarrez, and Coronnez.

Cimiers. Du Premier vne Mitre d'Euesque, d'Argent, ornee de Rubis de Gueulles. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles.


Cimier du Mitan, vn Carreau de Gueulles, houppe d'Or, a vn Van a vaner clisse d'Argent. Lambrequins Or, and Gueulles.


Cimier du dernier teste and col de Chien Bracque d'Argent, a l'Oreille chargee d'vne Bande endench^e de Sable. Lambrequins Argent, and Sable.

William, Count of Furstenberg (Sonne to this Henry) about the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred and fortie, in the time of King Frances the first, hauing giuen out some speeches, against the honor and reputation of the Lord of Vasse-Grongnet, a braue French Knight. (They of this Noble House carried this Nickname of Grongnet; and for Armes, D'Or a vne Face d' Azur, de Trois pieces.) The said Lord de Vasse sent him a Challenge by an Herauld, to fight with him in single Combat, thereby to auouch, that he had lied, and as many times more as he toucht the honour of him or his, as many times more he did lye. The Count was content, to keepe these lyes all hi^ life time, without aduenturing into the Field.
In Germanie there are others of the name of Furstenberg, but varying and differing in their Armes: In regard that they beare D'Or, a vne Face de deux pieces de Gueulles. Mezal, Tarre and Coronne. Cimier deux fucilles de Chesne d'Or Eschecque, and de Gueulles Lambrequins d'Or, and de Gueulles.
George de Frawnberg, his Armes are named before.
Iohn de Flersheim. Il portoit Couppe en Trois d' Azur en Chef, and de Gueulles en Poincte, a la Face d'Argent. Mezal, Tarre, Cimier, vn Buz de Fille habillee de Gueulles au Vol, au lieu de bras, Couppe comme l'Escu. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Gueulles (Correct Modius for the Armes.)
Bleichard de Lanschaden, the Armes of whom haue bin obserued before* The Citie of
Mentz seated where the two Riuers of Rhine and the Moein doe meete. Perte de Gueulles, a deux Roues d'Argent, ioinctes ensemble par vne Croix pattee de mesme, ^n Bande.



The Thirtieth Tourney.
THis Celebration was perfourned by Phillip, Prince Electour, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of bothe Bauariaes: The first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Bartholmewe, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and one in the Citty of
Heidelberg, the Capitall and chiefe Citty of the Palatinate,The Armes of the Citie. seated vpon the Riuer of N^ckre: And beareth De Sable, au Lyon tourne Coronne d'Or.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Manog Marchalck de Bappenhein, of the Circle of Bauaria (Correct Modius in the Armes) Il'portoit Coupped d' Argent and de Sable, a deux Esp^es nues passees en Saultoir, les Gardes croise^s de Gueulles: Escartele de Vaire-Contre Vaire. Double Mesal, Tarre, le Premier Coronne, ayant p^ur Cimier deux Estendarts en Saultoir, charge^ du pr^mier quartier. Lambrequins, Argent, and Sable. Cimier de l'Autre, le ^uz d'vne ^oyne Coronn^e* and ses Cheueux tressez and Cordonnez par derriere, d Or, habille de mesme. Lambrequ^ns Or and Azur. In Germanie there are many Families of this Sirname of Marchalck, and as different in the Armes, as some wayes in the Sirnames.
Marchalck^d E^^et* Face d'Argent and d'Azur de Huict p^eces, a vne Barre ondee de Gueules ^r^chante sur le tout. Mesal, Tarre, Cimier Licorne naissante de Gueules. Lambrequins, d'Argent* and Gueules.
Marschalck, de Osthe^, d' Argent a vn Treteau de Table, perce, vuide, and crenele a l' Antique en Sau^t^r de Sable, Mesal Tarre, Cimier. Lyon naissant habille de Sable, auec vn Cheppeau plat a la Flamande d'Ardent, cordonne s^ubs la gorge, de mesme. Lambrequins. Argent, and Sable.
Marschalck, de G^tsmans hausen d'Argent, a Deux Faces de Gueules, mises en Pal, Mesal Tarre, Coronne. Cimier. Double Proboscide d'Argent, Couppez d'Gueule de l'vn, en l'autre acostez de Band^r^les d'Argent, and Gueules.
Marschalck, de Biberstein, d'Argent Frette de Gueules, Mesal Tarre, Cimier Double Pro^scide d'Argent, vne Aigrete de Gueules au Mitan, Lambrequins, d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Marschalck, de Stuntzberg. De Gueules, au Cleuron Tourne en Barre d'Argent, Masal Tarre, Cimier. Vol charge du mesme Cheuron, des Coul^urs de l'Es^u, Lambrequins, Idem.
Marschalt, d'Oberndorf, d'Argent, a Vne Face Bretessee en Chef de quatre pieces d'Azur, celle de la Poincte, Bretessee en Poincte, Mesal Tarre, Cimier. Chappeau poinctu charge des Armes, and Coronne, finissant en queue de Paon, le Rebord Bretesse de Gueules. and
Marschalck, d' Argent, a la Barre Lozengee de Sable. M^sal Tarre, Cimier. Buz d'vn Homme a longue Barbe, au Cocqueluchoa, and l'habillement d'Argent, a la Barre Lozengee de Sable, Lambrequins. Argent, Sable. And so others.
Wolffgang de Waldeck of the Circle of Suauba, D' Argent, a vn Aigle naissant, tourne, and Coronne de Gueules, a vn Saultoir pery de Gueules en Poincte. Mesal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, Aigle entier, tourne, and Coronne d'Or. Lambrequins de Gueules, and d'Argent.
In Germanie there other Families of this Sirname but differing in their Armes. For
The Counts of Waldeck Portent d'Or, a vne Estoile de Sable, Mezal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, Vol, d'Or, charge de l'Estoile des Armes. Lambrequins, Or and Sable.
An other Waldeck. De Gueules, au Vol d' Argent. Mezal Tarre, Cimier, Buz de Fille habillee de Gueules, au Vol, au li^u de Bras. Lambrequins, Argent, and Gueules.
An other Waldeck de Gueules a Trois Haches d'Argent, 2.1. Mezal Tarre, Cimier. Buz d'vn V^eillard Barbu habille d'Argent, a deux Oreilles d'Asne a la teste, l'vne de Gueules, and l'autre d'Argent, Lambrequins. Gueules, and Argent.
Iohn de Seckendorff of the Circle of FranconiaBertrand de Neselrod, of the Circle of Bauaria:Their Armes are knowne.



The One and Thirtieth Tourney.
IT was held by the Nobility of the Circle and Dukedome of Suauba, in fauour of Ebrard, Count of Wirtenberg, in the Towne of Stut^gard (the Armes of the County and Towne are formerly obserued:) On Wednesday after the Feast day of the Three Kings of Cologne, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and foure.
The Kings of the said Tourney were these Knights.
Iohn Iacques de Bodman, of the Circle of Suauba.Sigismond de Leiming, of the Circle of Bauaria.Erckinger de Seins of the Circle of Franconia.Adam de Pallants of the Circle of the Palatinat.The Armes of these Men are before noated.


The Two and Thirtieth Tourney.
WAs Celebrated by the Nobility of Bauaria, in fauour of Prince George, Count Palatine of the Rhine,Inpolstadium, a Citty of No^m by Danubius. and Duke of both the Bauariaes: In the Citty of Ingolstat, the first Sunday of the Feast day of Saint Gyles, being the first day of September. In the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and foure.

The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.

Iohn de Woffstein, D'Or, a deux Lyons Leopardez de Gueules. Double Mezal, le Premier Coronne, a pour Cimier vn Aigle tourne, and Coronne d'Or, le Vol, c'est a dire, ses Ailes semees de fueilles de Nenuphar de Synople. Lambrequins d'Or, and de Sable.
L'autre a pour Cimier vn Chien naiss^nt de Sable, au Collier d'Or, tenant vn M^uton dans sa Gueule. Lambrequins, Or, and Gueules.
George de Eysenheuen (Correct Modius in the Sirname) D'Argent, a Trois F^rces de Sable mises en Bandes. Mezal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, vn Escu des mesmes Armes, and vne Aigrete dessus. Lambrequins d'Argent, and de Sable.
Iohn de B^u^kperg (Correct Modius the Sirname and Armes) d'Argent, a vne Face d'Azur. Mesal Tarre, Cimier, vn Vol charge de l'Escu. Lambrequins, Argent, and Azur.
Huldrick de Braidenstein. D'Azur, Couppe d'Argent. Mesal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier. Vol charge de l'Escu. Lambrequins, d'Argent, d'Azur. There is likewise in Germanie other Families, which beare the Sirname of Breidenstein called of Bredenbech; Qui porte d'Argent au Dragon Aile tourne, ayant deux pattes de Griphon, and la queue de Serpent de Gueules. Mesal Tarre, Cimier le mesme Dragon, Lambrequins, d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Ingolstat a Citty of Bauaria, seated on the great Riuer of Danubius, Porte d'Argent, a vn Griphon,The Armes of the Citie. sans Ailes, d'Azur a grandes Oreilles, and iectant par sa Gueule du fue de Gueules.


The Three and Thirtieth Tourney.
WHich was held by the Noble Gentlemen of the Circle and Dukedome of Franconia, in fauour of the Prince Electour Albert, Marquesse of Brandenbourg, in the Capitall Citty of the Bourgrauiat of Nurnberg, vulgarly called Norimberg, and tearmed also Onoltzbach: The first Sunday after the Feast of the Ascension, in the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred fourescore and fiue. The Armes of the same.
Albert Marquesse of Brandenbourg are, Au Premier Quartier d'Argent, a vn Aigle de Gueules: au Second d'Argent, au Griffon Coronne de Gueules. Le Troisiesme est du Burggrauiat de Nurnberg, qui est d'Or, au Lyon tourne, and Coronne de Sable, a la Bordure Componnee de Gueules, and d'Argent. Le Quatriesme Escartele d'Argent, and de Sable, qui est de Zollern. Et sur le Tout d'Azur, au Sceptre d'Or, en Pal. Triple Mesal Tarre, dont les deux derniers sont Coronnez. Cimiers.
Le Pr^mier, est vn Chappeau Ducal de Gueules, au Rebord d'Ermines. Double Prob^scide,

Componne de Gueules and d'Argent, and au Mitan le Lyon, qui est du Burggrauiat. Lambrequins, d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Le Deuxiesme vn Vol de Sable, parseme de Coeurs d'Or. Lambrequins, d'Or, and de Sable. Et
Le Dernier, Bonnet Ducal de Gueules, fourre d'Ermines, a vne Queue de Paon. Lambrequins. Or, and Sable.
The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.Iohn de Fuchsen,Alexandre Marschalck de PappenheimConrad d'AuffseesAdam de Torring.The Armes of these Men are formerly obserued.
Onoltz^ach, the chiefe City in the Burggrauiat of Nurneberg, sporte, de Gueules,The Armes of the Citie. a vne Bande ondee d'Argent, chargee de Trois Poissons d'Azur.


The Foure and Thirtieth Tourney.
THis Tourney was celebrated by the Nobility of Franconia, in the time of the King of the Romaines Maximilian, First of the name: The first Sunday after the Feast and sollemnity of the Three Kings. In the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and sixe, in the Citty of Bamberg, the Armes whereof are formerly described.
The King of the Romaines beareth, D'Or a l'Aigle simple tourne de Sable au Diademe and Cercle de Gueules: sur la Brizure duquel sont les Armes particuliers de l'Esleu Empereur. Et cestuy cy portoit d'Austriche Moderne, Party de d'Ancienne Bourgongne.

The Kings of this Tourney, were these Knights.

George de Gumpenberg, De Gueules, a vne Bande d'Argent, chargee de trois bouts d'Espec de Synople (Correct Modius for the Armes) Escartele, de Gueules, a la Bande d'Argent, chargee de t^s fueilles de Nenuphar de Synople. Double Mezal. Le premier a pour Cimier, double Proboscide d'Elephant d'Ermines. Lambrequins d' Argent, and de Gueules.
Lautre Mezal coronne tient a Cimier, Vol de Gueules a la Bande, d'Argent, chargee de trois fu^illes de Nenuphar de Synople. Lambrequins, d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Philippe d'A^^urgk (Correct Modius) D'Azur, a six Fleurs de Lys d'Argent. 3.2.1. Au Chef endenche d'Or. Mesal Tarre, Coronne Cimier, Vol, charge de l'Escu. Lambrequins Azur, and Argent.
Conrad de Schellenberg. See his Armes in the Three and Twentieth Tourney.
Iohn Truchses, de We^zhausen. D'Or, a deux Faces Eschequees de Gueules, and d'Argent de deux Traicts. Mesal Tarre, Cimier double Proboscide d'Elephant, charge de l'Escu, and dedans vn Bus de Royne coronnee, sa Tresse cordonee par derriere d'Or, habille de Gueules. Lambrequins, d'Or, and de Gueules.
There are diuers Families in Germanie of this Sirname of Truchses, with additions and different Armes: which we are content to let slip in silence, because wee would not breake this discourse of very laborious inquisition, and hasten to


The Fiue and Thirtieth Tourney.
WHich was held by the Nobility of Bauaria, in the Citty of Ratisbonna: the First Sunday after Candlemasse day. In the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and seauen.
The Kings of this Tourney were these Knights.William de WolffsteinPhillip de CronbergWhose Armes are before remembred.
Henry de Zulnhart, De Gueules, au Bouc naissant d'Argent. Mesal Tarre, Cimier, de mesme qu'en l'Escu. Lambrequins, d'Argent, and de Geueules.
Hildebrand de Thungen, d'Argent, a la Face de Gueules, charge de trois Paux ondez d'Or, Mesal Tarre, Cimier. Le Bus d'vn Sarrazin a longue Barbe, habille de Gueules, Chappeau poinctu de mesme, au Rebord d'Argent, a trois Aigrettes* Lambrequins d'Argent. and de Gueules.



The Sixe and Thirtieth Tourney.
THis was Celebrated by the Noble Gentlemen of the Circle and Countie Palatinate of the Rhine, in the Citty of Wormes: The first Sunday after the Feast day of Saint Bartholmew: In the yeare of Grace One thousand, foure hundred, fourescore and seauen.
The Kings of this last Tourney were these Knights.Lewes de RheinacChristopher de GammerOtho de Lichtenstein, andFrederic Dalburgk,All their Armes are before obserued.
And this was the last Tourney: After which we haue seene (So speaketh Sebastian Munster, in the third Booke of his Cosmographie) the common degree of the Nobility, to plundge and sinke themselus in the puddle of all Vices,The harme ensu^g by want of Noble imployment. yea, in the eye of the whole world. And the ignominie which they received publiquely in these Tourneys; serued as a Cauesson or headstall for a Horses nose, or Bitt in a young Coltes mouth, to restraine our Gentlemen, vpon the tearmes of Vertue and Honour. By the extirpation of this Honourable Exercise among them, they became euen prostituted to all vile abuses, without obseruing any pathe or way to goodnesse. So farre goeth Munster, speaking nothing but the trueth.
Heere we could represent and Figure (euen to the life) the Armes and Blazons of all the Nobility of Germanie, both Lords and Ladies, Maried Wiues, Widdowes and Daughters,The Authours supplying of Modius his great defects. who (according as Modius writeth) haue bin present at these Tourneys; but the labour and paines would hould mee ouer-long. It shall satisfie mee therefore, to expresse none but them only, which Modius* hath declared to vs, and correcting them where they are wanting and defectiue, or so badly presented, that they come very short almost of any vnderstanding. He might haue demonstrated their Coullers and Mettals at the least, which had bin easie enough for him to haue done: if he had knowne, or were skilfull in that admirable vnderstanding, wherein the Germaines (so learned and curious in Armes as euer were any) are not meanely experienced, which knowledge our Grauers and Sculptures ought to pursue and imitate. The Germaines (I say) in presenting the Armes of a Gentleman, make vse of certaine Letters, which doe serue them as noates or markes, for figuring the Mettalls and Blazons in the Shield or Escutcheon, with the Creasts, Mantles and Supporters.
The Heraldry vsed among the Germaines where by they make knowne their Mettalls and Coullers.They make vse of Two Mettalls, and Foure Coullers, as we doe.
Or, which in their Language they call Gelb, and they make it knowne by the Letter G.
Argent, tearmed in the Germaine tongue Weis, and they make it vnderstood by a double W.
Azur, among vs is named Blew, and that Couller by them is figured with a B.
Gueules, which they tearme Roth, they vse to present by the Letter R.
Synople, Which they call Grun in their Language, is denoated by a Leafe of Ne^^phar, as if we meant to say by a Trefoile, or Three leaued Grasse.
And Sable, which they tearme Schwartz, as much to say as Black, they expresse by the Letter S. Which by the following Table may be the more easily comprehended of euery one.

G

Gelb.

W

Weis.

B

Blow.

R

Roth.

Vn Trefoile

Grun.

S

Schwartz.


In like manner, we that are French-men, can make representation of our Armes by noates and markes, comming neere to the Language of our owne vnderstanding: As we haue done in the Armes of Monsieur le Clerc, Counceller.

The Heraldy vsed among the French.



Or.


O

By these Markes.

O.


Or.




Argent.


A


A.


Argent.




Bleu.


B


B.


Bleu.




Rouge.


G


G.


Gueules.




Verd.


V


V.

Verd, and



Sable.


S


S.


Sable.




But for our better making knowne and discerned, the Coullers and Mettals of the Germaines Armes; we haue figured them fairely to you, in the Module or Piece that doeth expresse the Order of Saint G^ll. There wee haue presented the Armes of those Foure Men, that were the Authors or founders of the Switzers Liberty.See the great Piece concerning the Switzers. Wherunto should haue bin added the deuise of Mantles, Helmes and Creasts, which we could not expresse vpon their Armes, in regard of want of roome and space, fitting and beseeming such a gracefull Ornament, and therefore we will heere speake them in the due Order of Emblazon.

Conrad de Baumgarten Portoit de Sable a vne Fleur de Lys d'Argent, Couppe d'Argent a vn Chardonneret de Gueules au Premier quartier. Au Second de Gueules, a vn Oyson d'Argent en Poincte Taille d'Azur and d'Or, au Lyon de l vn en l'Autre. Triple Mezal, dont les deux Premiers sont Coronne, and le Dernier non. Cimier de Premier, vne Fleur de Lys d'Argent and sur icelle vn Chardonneret, Lambrequins d'Argent and de Gueules.


Le Second Cimier est vn double Proboscide entoure de plumes de Paon, ledict Proboscide d'Or, and dedans vn Lyon de mesme. Lambrequins d'Or and d'Azur.


Le Dernier Cimier est vn Quarreau de Gueules, and sur iccluy vn Oyson plante d'Argent Lambrequins, Argent and Gueules.


Garnier Stoufacher D'Argent a vn demy Pal branchu and fueillu de Synople, a vn Aigle perce dessus de Sable. Mesal Tarre, Cimier vn Aigle de Sable. Lambrequine Argent, and Sable.


William Tell. De Gueules, au Pal d'Argent, charge de Trois Fleurs de Lys de Gueules. Mesal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, Grosse Aigrete d'Argent a trois Fleurs de Lys esleuees sur leur Tige de Gueules. Lambrequins Argent, and Gueules.

Arnoul de Meschtal. De Gueules, Couppe d'Argent, Au Cerftourne Rampant de l'vn en l'Autre. Mesal Tarre, and Coronne. Cimier, Cerf naissant tourne de Gueules. Lambrequins, Argent, and Gueules. Returne wee now againe to our Iousts and Tourneys.



A Famous Tourney or Tournament, perfourmed in Normandie, in the time of King Lewes the Younger, and in the Seauenth yeare of the said Kings Reigne. CHAP. VII.
FOulque, Count of Aniou, Touraine and Duke Maine and afterward King of Ierusalem, in regard of his Wife,The Mariage of Geoffrey Plantagenet to Maude the Empresse. who was Daughter to King Bauldwine, Second of the name (as we haue said in the Precedent Booke) maried his Eldest Sonne Geoffery, Sirnamed Plantagenet; to the daughter of the King of England, and Duke of Normandie, First of the name. This Princesse was named

Mahauld, or Maude, Sirnamed the Empresse: because before this Marriage with Plantagenet, she had bin Widdow to the Emperour Henry, Fift of the name. After the decease of Foulque in Ierusalem, Geoffrey caused a Tourney to be made, on the sandie shoare of Mount Saint Michael in Normandie, betweene the English and the Normans. At this Tournament was present on the Normans side the Count of Flanders Thibault, Count of Blois, and the Count of Mortaigne Stephen, all of them being Nephewes to the King of England Henry, First of the name.
A Tourney betweene the Engl^h and Normans.The holders and maintainers of this Tourney, were the Normans against the English, who were farre fewer in number then the Normans: And this was the reason, that Count Geoffery, (with them that were his followers) tooke part with the weaker side, I meane the English.
After the Tourney was begun, either side entred Pesle-mesle together. The whole Campe and the Lists resounded with the clattering of Armes, noyse of Trumpets, muttering of voyces, and neying of Horses. Yea, the Mount Saint Michael seemed to sparkle Fire, with the reuerberating and reflection of the Sunnes bright beames, transcending from an infinitie of Shields, Bouclers and Targets of the Assaylants and Defendants.Such accidents men of Armes are subiect to. The Tournement being well heat^d on both sides, the Ashtree-Launces flew in shiuers, and euery man being well warmed in their Armours: came to handy-strokes with their Swords, the keene edges whereof (at euery blow) made deepe entrance into their Armes and Shields. Some of them dismounting other of their opposites, when their Horses (escaping from them, and being disburdened of their Maisters) ran at free liberty about the field, hauing broken their Reines, and by no meanes were capable of staying.
Our braue Plantagenet, and Royall minded Geoffery, more furious then a Lyon, layd soundly vpon the Normans, without any dissembling, but in meere honest earnest,The Normans enforced to the retreat. and where he espied any of his followers to be distressed: thither he ran speedily, dismounting many with his Launce, piercing quite through their bodies, and others feeling the slices of his Sword, were glad to leaue their rancks, falling downe on the ground without motion or life. So that the Normanes, making Retreat their best aduantage, were glad to get gon, and forsake the place.
Yet madly enraged, to be thus curstly handled, and by such an vnequall poore troupe: they challenged the English, to Combate at the vtmost extremity of life. Vpon the same spread abroad of this Tourney,A Combate challenged at the vtmost extremity. and to be perfourmed in Normandie; among many other that resorted thither from the parts beyond the Seas, there came a Giant of immeasurable corpulence, or hugenesse of Body, and thought as strong as an other Sampson. Hee appointed himselfe to take part with the Normans, and they (securing themselues by such an vnexpected succour) set downe a setled resolution, to beare away the victory from their English enemies.
The Giant stood proudely brauing, on an high aduaunced Hillock without the Normans Camp, and with a dreadfull astonishing voyce, dared the English to Combate against him: which much daunted and dismayed the small number of the English,The English dismayed by the Giant. and made them fully perswaded, that they were no way able, to contend against this huge Colossus and mountaine of flesh. But Count Geoffery perceiuing the Englishmens dismay, whom (before) hee beleeued to bee of inuincible courage: forthwith mounted on his Horse, tooke his Launce, and offered himselfe singly to maintaine the Combate. But the Giant, hauing a Launce that equalled a Weauers beame in bignesse, encountred the Count with such fury and Violence, as pierced quite thorow his Shield and Armour, so farre as to the effusion of Bloud. Yet sate the Count firme and vnshaken on his Horse, as a man no way to be dishartened, and welcommed the Giant with such a sound salutation; as made him measure his length on the Ground,The Giant slaine by Count Geoffery. so astonished with the fall, that the Count lightly leaping from his Horse, set his foote vpon him, and smote off his head: taking his Horse by the Bridle, to serue as a spoyle and Triumph of his victory, to the great disgrace of the Normans, thus bereft of the Conquest, whereof (before) they made full assurance.
This Tourney and Duello, is worthily described at large by Ioannes Monachus m^ioris Monasterij, in his First Booke, concerning the Life of the said Geoffery Plantagenet, and in these words.





SVblimato Patre eius Fulcone in Hierosolymitanum Regem. Consul Gauffredus Armorum exercitijs, and laudis adipiscendae operam dedit. Nonnullo tempore elapso in areno a Montis planicie a Britoni^us, and Normannis Torneamenti dies assignata est. Conueniunt ad Normannorum Partis subsidia Dominus Comes Flandrensis, Theobaudus Comes Blesensis, and cius frater Stephanus Mauritaniae Dominus. Hi tres Henrici Regis Anglorum erant Nepotes. Conuenit, and ipse Consul cum suis, corum multitudini numerum accrescens.
Stabant ex aduerso Britannorum acies armis quidem and animis strenuae, sed numero pauciores. Videns itaque Consul Andegauensis Gauffredus Brittannica cohortis imparem congressum, auulsus a multitudine, ad paucos se contulit, ipsis opem laturus: sit congressus, commiscentur acies, fit multus Armorum strepitus, sonant editui, turbae multiplicis varia vox intonat, dant Dextrales dissonos hinnitus, a Clypeis aureis Sole relucentibus, mons ipse Michaeliticus resplenduit. Animantur Viri ad certamen, franguntur hastae fraxincae, emutilantur enses, iam pede pes teritur, Vmbone repellitur Vmbo, euacuantur sellae, supinantur Equites, Equi deiectis Sessoribus suis, ruptis habenis, hinniendo vagantur. Partis aduersae singularis terror, Gauffredus Aduersarios impetit, huc, atque illuc discurrens suis subuenire satagit, Lancea multos deijcit, Ense ictus ingeminans innumeros ^ita expellit. Sequuntur Britones spem Victoriae Ducem praeuium, varia Mortium genera Aduersarijs inferentes. Instat A^degauensis Leone ferocior, instat phalanx Britannica iam de Victoria praesumens. Normanni siquidem immenso certamine fatigati, terga dantes fugam arripiunt, and multitudo a paucis confecta, ad Castra repedare compellitur. Normanni vero confusione inopinata deiecti, Singulare certamen Britonibus proponunt.
A transmarinis namque partibus Torneamenti fama deducente, Miles Sansonicus gigantae magnitudinis aduenerat. In cuius viribus, and audacia confidentes, de Victoria praesumebant. De castris igitur Normannorum Hom^ ille humanitatis excedens metas progrediens, stans in loco eminentiori, agminibus Britonum improperans, prouocat cos, vt Quilibet eorum Singulari congressu cum ipso decertaret.
Expalluit vultus Audientium, and Fortium robur emarcuit: Quippe verebantur singuli cum tantae enormitatis bellua Singulare inire Certamen. Intuens vero Gener Regis magnanimos a natura Viros ad inusitationis inuitae Vocem, tanquam euerues, and eiulatos dissolui spiritu, and obiecti impatiens improperij, prosilijt in Equum, arma corripit, and spectantibus vndequaque cateruis Singularem cum Giganteo Milite iniuit congressum. Fit altercatio dura, Vir etenim ille humanae virtutis modum excedens, Lanccam quasi liciatorium habens, Andegauensem impetit, and eius Scutum, and loricam, non sine sanguinis effusione perforat. Stat Andegauensis tanquam Equo radicatus immobilis, and Impetitorem suum Lancea transuerberans, deiecit, and deiecto desuper stans, Ense Caput abscidit. Equum vero Victi, Victrici manu deducens cum Normannorum ignominia, and suorum gloria Tropaeo potitus, gloriosus Victor abscedit.

Taken out of Joannes Monachus maioris Monasterii.
HIs Father Foulke being created King of Ierusalem, the Consull Geoffrey gaue himselfe to the exercise of Armes, and purchasing of renowne. In processe of time, there was a day of Torneament appointed by the Brittons and Normanes, vpon the Sandy plaine of the Mount. There met for the aide of the Norman party the Lord Earle of Flanders, Theobald, Earle of Bloys, and his brother Stephen Lord of Mortaigne; these three were Nephewes to Henry King of England. And the said Consull likewise came thither with his followers, augmenting the number of their Company. Right against them stood the English Army, valiant both in armes and courage, but fewer in number. Therefore the Consull Geoffrie of Angiers considering the vnequall coping of the English partie; withdrew himselfe from the multitude, and ioyned himselfe with the lesser side, ready to giue them aide and assistance. The encounter is made, the Bands are ioyned together, great is the clattering of Armour, the Trumpets sound, the diuers noyses of the disordered Companies doe thunder in the ayre, the coupled Horses send forth confused neyings, the very Mount of Saint Michael did glitter with the golden Targets reflecting from the Sunne. The men are animated to the fight, their Ashen Speares are knapped in peeces, Swords are broken

in sunder, now one foote driues forward another, one Buckler repulseth another; Saddles are made empty, Horsemen cast on their backes, and the Horses (their Riders being dismounted) doe runne about neying with broken raines. Geoffrey, the onely terrour of the aduerse part, setteth vpon his Aduersaries, and running hither and thither, is carefully imployed to bring succours to his Souldiers, casting many downe with his Launce, and doubling blowes with his Sword, inforceth a great number to giue vp the Ghost. The English follow their Captaine, breaking way before them, being the very hope of their victory, giuing diuers kindes of death to their Aduersaries. Geoffrey of Angiers, more couragious then a Lyon. presseth vpon them, the Brittaine band rusheth after, presuming now of the victory. The Normans, tyred with the great conflict, turning their backes, betake themselues to flight, and the multitude, being wasted by a small number, were enforced to retyre to their Campe. But the Normans deiected with this vnlooked for confusion, propound to the English a single Combat.
There was come from the parts beyond the Seas a Sampson-like Souldiour, of a Gyant-like Stature, brought thither by the report of the Torneament, vpon whose strength and hardinesse they relying, did presume of the Victory. This man therefore (exceeding the ordenary condition of men) issuing out of the Norman Campe, stood in an eminent place, and vpbraiding the English troupes, challenged any one of them to cope with him in single Combat.
The countenances of all that heard him were pale, and the strength of the valiant men failed; for euery one feared to enter Combat hand to hand with a Monster of so great disproportion. But the Kings Sonne in Law beholding those men, who were by nature couragious, to be dishartned, euen as it were Cowards, and Recreants, at the hearing of such vnusuall speech, vttered in their despite; was moued in spirit, and not enduring this disgrace offered, mounted vpon his Horse, snatcheth his Armes, and entreth single fight with this Gyant-like Souldier, their troupes on euery side beholding them. The contention was rigorous. For that man, exceeding the measure of humaine strength, hauing a Speare as it were a Weauers Beame, assayleth Geoffrie of Angiers, and pierceth through his Shield, and Coate of Defence, not without effusion of bloud. Geoffrie stands immoueable, euen as it were fast rooted to his Horse, and striking his Assailant thorough with his Launce, bore him downe to the ground, and standing ouer him, smote off his head with his Sword. So hauing obtained the triumph, he led away in his victorious hand the Horse of the vanquished, and went thus away a glorious Conquerour, to the disgrace of the Normans, and the glory of his owne followers.





Thus you see what was written by this honest Monke, who deliuereth it in good tearmes,Count Geoffrey Duke of Normandy. and liued vnder the Reigne of King Lewes, Seauenth of the name, called The Pious or Pittifull. And the same Authour informeth vs, that the same Count Geoffrey, who was by his wife Maude the Empresse Duke of Normandie, and his descent Kings of England: tooke great delight to visite strange Prouinces and Countries, to be present in person at lousts and Tourneys.
In confinio Flandrensium, and in longe positis terris coepit Torneamenta perquirere, and laudis cupitae, and bene gestis rebus in dies emolumenta percipere.
He began to search after Torneaments in the frontiers of Flanders, and in other farre Countries, and (day by day) to receiue the benefit of desired honour by his noble exploites.
Iousts and Tourneis with losse of life.By the narration of this learned Monke, you may vnderstand Gentlemen Readers, that these Iousts and Tournaments were neuer performed, without the losse and effusion of bloud, and some or other made but a sorrie reckoning, of being inuited to so costly a Feast, which extended oftentimes to the extremitie of life. Lancea multos deijcit, ense ictus ingeminans innumeros Vita expellit. Ouerthrew many with his Lance, and doubling blowes with his Sword, enforced a number to giue vp the Ghost.
And that they which tooke part with the Count of Aniou, were the deathsmen of a great number of Normans: onely through the spleene and mallice, which the one Nation bare euen to the other, whereon ensued the Challenges of Combat, to the extremity of life. And this gaue subiect and occasion to the Princes, the Counts of Flanders, of Blois, and of Mortaigne, to make their complaint to the King their Soueraigne Lord, Lewes Seauenth of the name, and Sirnamed the Pittifull; against

the said Count Geoffery of Aniou: that in pride and arrogancy, and because hee was Sonne in Law to the King of England Henry, First of the name,Complain^ made to the King against the Court. he ioyned himselfe in this Tourney on the Englishmens side, who were strangers, and in fauour of them, had ill entreated his vassayles and Subiects, with whose Bloud he had died Red the Lists of the same Tourney.
Vpon these Complaints, King Lewes the Seauenth tooke order for Iousts and Tourneyes, and by his Ordenance, set downe in the Register of the Court, in Iuly One thousand, one hundred, threescore and three, where it is expressely decreed: That the Barons may assist, and bee present at Iousts and Tourneys,The Kings Decree for Iousts and Tourneys which were held in the Kingdome: Only to see them, and to fit as Iudges. But if they were either Assaylants or defendants; then they should haue no other Armes then a Corslet and Helmet, a Shield without any bosse and pointe, a blunted Ashen Lance, and a Battle Axe in the same manner, without any head of Steele or of Iron.
King Phillip Augustus, Sonne and Successour to Lewes the Seauenth, confirmed the same Ordenance, forbidding any offensiue Armes in Iousts and Tourneys;All offensiue Armes prohibited in Iousts and Tourneys or the Princes of the Sacred Lillies of France, should make themselues any Chiefe men or Commaunders in them, to auoyde and preuent all such perills, as formerly had happened in those Sports and Pastimes, and ordenarily chaunced in such great Assemblyes. And it is recorded in the Court Registers, that the same Augustus, in the Moneth of May, the yeare of Grace One thousand, two hundred and nine, tooke Oath of the Lords Lewes, his eldest Sonne (who succeeded in the Kingdome after him, and was Eight of the name) and of Phillip of France, Count of Bologne,The Kings charge to his Sonnes. his youngest Sonne) in feare of such perills: that (not without his leaue) they should goe to any Tourneys, in hope of any prize of Honour. But when such Triumphes were held, on after an other; They might goe to see them, and wearing no other Armes then as Knights, only with a Corslet and Helmet.
The Monke of Saint Denys in France, William de Nangis, in the Life of King Phillip the Hardy (Sonne and Successour to the King Saint Lewes) Third of the name, writeth in his fiue and twentieth Chapter: That for welcomming to the Court the Prince of Salerne, Charles of Aniou, Sonne to the King of Sicilie Monsieur Charles of France, Duke of Aniou, Brother to the same King Saint Lewes; King Phillip the Hardy suffered a Tourney to be held, whereat was present one of the prime Princes of the Bloud, who thorow the weightinesse of his Armes,A Tourney permitted by King Phillip the Hardy. and great number of blowes receiued by the Battle-Axe, expired the fortune of his life. This happened in the yeare One thousand, two hundred, threescore and nineteene.
Mathew Paris, the Monke of Saint Albanes in England, writeth vnder the yeare, One thousand, one hundred, fourescore and foure ^e, that the King of England Richard, First of the name, appointed certaine places in his Kingdome,Iousts and Tou^neys in England. for the holding and perfourming of Iousts and Tournaments, that his Subiects might be made ready to Horsemanship, and fit for Armes, when occasions required.
Eodem Anno Rex Ricardus in Angliam transiens, statuit per loca certa Torneamenta fieri, hac fortasse inductus ratione, vt Milites Regni vtrinque concurrentes, vires suas, flexis in gyrum fraenis, experirentur: Vt si bellum aduersus Crucis inimicos, vel etiam sinitimos mouere decreuerit, agiliores ad praelium, and exercitatiores redderentur.

The same yeare King Richard passing ouer into England, appoynted Tornements to be held in certaine places, being induced thereunto (peraduenture) for this cause: that the Souldiers of the Realme by Iousting syde against syde, might proue their strengths, their raines turned into a carrire. That if he should decree, to make Warres against the enemies of the Crosse, or against the borderers: they might thereby be made more nimble, and better experienced for the warres.

And although these Iousts and Tourneys were performed without offensiue Armes, but only with rebated Lances, Canes and Reeds growing in Marishes, as I haue oftentimes seene in Spayne: yet notwithstanding, diuers occasions of disorder and confusion hath ensued thereby, and cost the carcking of some crownes, as wee vse by way of a Prouerbe in France, And heereupon the forenamed Monke Matthew Paris recordeth, that the Kings of France and England, Phillip Augustus and Richard the First, reposing themselues some few dayes at Messina in Sicilie, before their further

crossing ouer the Seas: A Ioust and Tourney was there held with Canes, betweene the French and English, where some felt themselues a little too neere toucht and thence grew the beginning, of some grudge and discontentment betweene those two great Princes.
Hoc nimi^um inter praedictos Principes discordiae seminarium dignoscitur extitisse^ a scauoir le quel de ces deux Princes establiroit vn Roy de Hierusalem, le Roy fauo^isant le Marquis de Montferrat, and le Roy d'Angleterre Guy de Luzignan, auquel il vend^l Isle de Cypre, comme nous auons dict) cuni tamen haec discordia primo apud Messanam Sicili^, primitiua, sed occulta puliulauerit, and postea per Cannarum Hastiladium infoelix suscepit paulatim incrementum.
This doubtlesse is knowne to be the first beginning of discord betweene the aforesaid Princes (as namely, which of these two Princes should establish a King of Ierusalem: King Phillip fauouring the Marquesse of Montferrat, and the King of England, Guye of Lusiguan, to whom he sold the Isle of Cyprus, as we haue elsewhere said) When as notwithstanding, this debate did first begin to bud at Messanna, a Citie of Sicilia, first indeede, yet scarce perceiued, and after (by little and little) tooke increase through that vnfortunate Tilting with those Cannes.
Such Coat^ were called lacks of the Linnen Armone.The same Author, speaking of the Tourney which was performed by the French in the Citie of London, before the Sonne to King Phillip Augustus Monsieur Lewes of France, was receiued thereinto, and Crowned King of England, the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred and sixteene, saith. That a number of English Knights were dismounted in the Field, and among other speciall men of marke or noate, was the Count Geoffrey de Mandeuile.
Eodem tempore exierunt ab Vrbe Londinensi Barones, cum Militibus qui de Regno Franciae nuper adu nerant, ad Equesirem Ludum, quod Hastiludium vel Torneamentum dicitur, cum hastis tantum and lineis armatu^is) a Lances mornces, plastrons, and Gobesons de toile bien picquee and cordelee, comme les Corps de cottes de femmes a l'Antique) Cumque Equos cursim agitantes, and semutuo cum Hastis ludendo percutientes (de faisoient au ^aussi^ce disent nos Anciend Romanciers) diem aliquantulum protr^xissent, quidam ex ^rancigenis, Hastam quam tenebat ludendo dirigens in Gaufridum de Mandeuille, Comitem ipsum letaliter vulnerauit. At idem Co^es Mortem su^m per^ussori, post dies paucos, in dolorem and querimoniam multor^m, moriens condonauit.
The same time the Barons, with Knights who were lately come out of the Kingdome of France, went out of the Citie of London, to that Knightly sport, which is called running at Tilt or Tourney, onely with Speares, and Linnen furniture (with rebated Lances, and Quilted Armours, well plated and thickned all ouer, ^ike such bodies as women vsed to weare in Auncient times.) And when thus pricking forward their Horses, to run and strike at one another, by way of pastime with their Speares, they had spent some part of the da^e, a certaine Frenchman, leuelling the Speare which he held Iestingly against Geoffrie, Earle Mandeuill, gaue him a deadly wound. But the said Earle (after a few days) departing out of this life, to the great griefe and lamentation of many; did freely pardon the partie that wounded him.
Exercises of the Round Table.The principall care and prouidence, of such as met at these Iousts and Tourneys (which Mathew Paris calleth Hastiludia Mensae Rotundae, Exercises of the Round Table) was to sit well their Horses, to keepe themselues fast in their Saddles and Stirrops. For, if any man fell, and his Horse vpon him, at these encountrings with their Lances: lightly worse did befall him, before he could any way get forth of the Preasse. But others came to heauier fortune, their liues expyring in the place, being ^od and trampled on by others.
And yet neuerthelesse, it was the maine and principall charge of the Iudges, that they should forbid all Noble men,(...) from bringing vp any nouell fashion or behauiour, exceeding the allowed and common rule: for containing themselues the more firmely in their Saddles, and keeping their Stirrops. Here you may reade the Statutes of the Tourneys.


Statutes made by Royall Authority, Concerning Iousts and Tourneys.
NEmo vt Equo firmius haereat, and maiore molimento co deturbetur, extraordinaria, and insolita adiumenta circumspiciat; ijsque fretus in certamen descendat; sed communi modo Sellae Equestris, and Stapedum vsu contentus, per omnia, sit dexteritate magis sua, quam arte tutus.
Si quis contra haec fecerit, is Omnium incurrat Ordinum odium, and contemptum; Armisque. and equo, cum phaleris and stratis eius mulctetur. The same
Ne quis vt E' quo haereat facilius, insolita and inusitata auxilia circumspiciat, sed Sella Equestri communi contentus sit, Stapedesque habeat ex more aptatos. Qui secus fecerit Equo, Armisque multetur.

Let no man (that he may sit more stedfastly on his Horse, and be dismounted with greater strength) seeke for extraordinary and vnusuall helps, and (relying vpon them) enter into Combate; but being content after the common custome, with the vse of an Horsemans Saddle and Stirrops; in all things let him defend himselfe, rather by dexterity then by subtilty.


Whosoeuer shall doe contrary to this, let him incurre the hatred and contempt of all the Orders, and be punished with losse of Armes, and Horse, with the Trappings and Furniture.


Let no man (that he may more easily keepe his Horse) search out for vnwonted and vnaccustomed helpes; but let him be content with a common Horsemans Saddle, and haue his Stirrops fitted to him according to the manner. Whosoeuer doth otherwise, let him be fined to the losse of Horse and Armour.

It was sufficient to haue a Saddle and Stirrops for the Genet or Horse,The Romans had no Saddles or Stirrops for their Horse. like to the Barbarian and Turkishe Horses. The Auncient Romaines had not any such vse of Saddle and Stirrops for their Horses, according as wee haue. For if wee would but peruse the Antiquities of Rome, with other noates of the Emperours, and Romaine Captaines for Horseback: we shall finde no vse of Saddles at all, neither any to bee put in practise, vntill the time of the Emperour Constantine, Sonne to Constantine the Great: about the yeare of Grace, Three hundred, forty and one, which we learne of the Greeke Historian Zonaras, who (throughout his whole Historie) maketh not any mention of a Saddle for a Horse; before such time as Constans, seeking to bereaue his Brother Constantine of the Empire: made head against his Army, and entring into the Squadron where himselfe was, cast him beside the Saddle of his Horse.Prices and rates ordered for Saddles for Horses not to be exceeded
Great Theodosius the Emperour, who began to reigne in the yeare of Grace Three hundred, fourescore and two, at the twelfth Booke of his Code, in the Law. Quoniam, de curs. Public. C. ruleth the prices or expences for Saddles and Petrelles belonging to Horses, rating them at a certaine summe: which if any man exceeded, his Saddle was broken in pieces and the Petrell, and surmounting the value of Threescore Pounds of Gold; were taken and confiscated to the Emperour.
The Poet telleth vs,The Lapithes, that first fou^d the vse of Bits and Bridles. that the First men which tamed the Horse (a generous Creature, and the Symbole of Warre) with Bitt and Bridle, were the Pelethronians, a People dwelling in Thessalie.

Frena Peletronij Lapitae, gyrosque debere
Impositi Dorso, atque Equitem docuere sub Armis
Insultare Solo, and gressus glomerare superbos.

But of Saddles and Stirrops, for contayning a man fast on horseback, there is no other mention made then of the Margarians. So saith Plinie in the Seauenth Booke and Fifty Six Chapter of his Naturall History. And they which interpret this verse of Horace. Ep. 14. Lib. 1.
Optat Ephippia Bos piger, aptat arare Caballus.
This word Ephippia is mistaken Grammatically, as to vnderstand therby a Saddle for the Horse; because the word (in the Greeke notion and meaning) implieth a man on Horseback, and not a Saddle.
It was reputed a common and triuiall thing, to deck or adorne a goodly Horse with a Pettrell (which the Emperour Theodosius baptized with the name of Auerta) of some Scarlet Cloth, wrought with Gold and Siluer, and Fringed with small Bels of the same brauerie, and about his eyes, the Bridle also beautified with Roses of Gold,

and Siluer, or Roundels made of the same mettall; as Mules fot pacing in the Streets are furnished, with flat Lingots of Brasse or Copper, for the seruice of Princes and great Lords: because the Poet sheweth their vse in his Seauenth Booke.

Ins^ratos Ostro Alipedes, pictisque tapetis
Aurea pectoribus demissa monilia pendent.

And it was of those Pettrels and Harnesses for Horses, that the tearmes of the Law. Quoniam (before noated) were meant.
As for Stirrops, tearmed in Latine Stapedes, and Stapphiae; the auncient Romans had neuer any knowledge of them. And such among them in Rome, as were called Knights,Stirrops vnknown to the auncient Romans. Noblemen by extraction, and other beside, that made vse of Horse seruice in actions of Warre: they neuer had any Stirrops, whereby to mount vpon their Beasts, but leapt vp lightly vpon their backes, without any helpe or other aduantage.

Infrenant alij Currus, ac Corpora saltu
Subijciunt in Equos, and strictis Ensibus adsunt.

So speaketh the Poet in his twelfth Booke: And at the same place, discoursing of Turnus, he saith
Poscit Equos, at que Arma simul, saltaque superbusEmicat.
The first and last Alphabet of Exercises, whereunto the Romaine Esquires were called,The Exercises of the Roman Esquires. was to mount and leape vp lightly (both on the right and left side) of a Horse, made for the same purpose of Wood: which they vsed to doe before they were made Knights, as we learne by the Captaine Vegetius, in his Art Militarie. When they had made themselues apt and ready, for mounting and leaping vp in their Doublets; then they made a further practise thereof, being Armed at all points, according as the courses of time should require, to gallop a liuing Horse with weapons in their hands, at all such aduantages as the enemy should assayle, in the fore, in the rere, on the right hand, or left. For to this purpose and effect, the Esquires and Maisters of Managements (being named Decursores, as their Schollers were) made apt their Horses in this exercise, and men to backe and sit them.
Now, concerning such persons as were well stept into yeares, or else disaduantaged by defect of health,For elder persons and such as were of feeble disposition. who had neede of helde, and some meanes for mounting on Horsebacke, the Surueyars and Ouerseers for the High-wayes; had it as an especiall Article in their charge, in Pauing the Streetes and publique places; to set Stones vp on end, or to erect steps on either side the way, at the end of euery hundred paces, for the ease and aduantage of them as (by reason of their indisposition) could not mount on the Corde. An inuention found out (according to the saying of Plutarch) by Caius Gracchus, onely to winne the good opinion of the People, and make himselfe the Torch or Firebrand of a League, furiously enraged against his Faction.
For Shooing the feete of Horses.For Shooing the feete of Horses, it is questionlesse an vndoubted maxime, that such men as could subiect and Maister the Beasts mouthes; would be as carefull and prouident for their feete, and haue them well Shod, vpon paine of being fellowes with him, ouer whom they ought to be Maisters, according to our auncient Prouerbe. Be Maister of thy Horse (and of thy Wife by priority, priuiledge, and without comparison) Companion with thy Dogge, and Seruant to thy Hauke. So (for common people) their Horses were shod with Iron; but those belonging to Emperours, Princes and Queenes,Horses shod with Gold and Siluer. with Gold and Siluer, according to their prodigalitie: As did Poppaea, the wife to the Monster in Nature Nero; according to the testimony of Xiphilinus, and Plinie, in the three and thirtieth Booke, and eleauenth Chapter, of his at large described Naturall History. Hauing thus farre wandred out of the way, let vs returne againe to our Tourneys.
The same Mathew Paris (whose discourse we haue somewhat swerued from and broken, in regard of our Knight, to giue him a Cariere with his Horse) obserueth vnder the yeare One thousand two hundred forty and seauen, that about the Feast of Saint Martine,A Tourney granted to be performed at Northampton. the King of England, Henry, third of the name, in fauour of his Brother by one and the same wombe, William of Lusignan Count of Valencia (whose

Armes are formerly obserued) newly created Knight by him: permitted Robert, Earle of Glocester, to celebrate a Tourney at Northampton, against the said Count William of Valencia, and his Associates, newly made Knights. But King Henry fearing, least some bad distribution of blowes, would happen to the Poicteuins, by the English; forbad the effecting and execution.
And the same Author reporteth, that in the year following, the same King Henry the Third, suffered a Tourney to be performed at Nebridge,Another Tourney at Nebridg where the Knight of Valentia before named, would needes be seene in his best and manliest behauiour. But he was ouer-borne with blowes, and beaten to the ground, his Armour battered in pieces, and loosing the most part of it: And was very well bumbasted, according to the Law of Iousts and Tourneys.

Willielmus vtribus imperfectus, quum impetus Militum durorum, and Martiorum sustinere non praeualeret, multa amisit postratus, Et egregie, vt introductiones militiae initiales addisceret, baculatus est.

William, being not perfect in strength, when he was not able to beare the stroakes of those sterne and warlike Assailants; being quite ouerthrowne, lost much, and was soundly basted, that he might learne the first introductions of Armes and Warfare. If then they would make no spare of a Prince, what thinke you should be done to others?
These new Knight Nouices, were thus well beaten with blowes,Punishments both for new learners and others of more experience to make them remember the rules and maximes of Iousts and Tourneys. As for them of elder standing, and aunciently seene at such Exercises; if they sustained any spot or blemish in their renowne: they were dismounted from their Horses, and their Saddles set vpon the Railes or Barres, and there were they to ride, all the time as the Tourney lasted.

Si quis contra aestimationem suam, Officiumque fecisse conuictus fuerit, cum eo, non de laude, gloriaque, sed de Equo concurratur: eoque adempto, Ipse cum sella Equestri septis imponatur, in eisque ad finem vsque decursionum ita perdurare cogatur.


If any shall be connicted of doing contrary to their estimation and dutie, let not any Ioust with him for honour, and renowne, but for his Horse: which being taken from him, let him be placed vpon the Railes in his Horsemans Saddle, and be inforced to sit there, euen to the end of the Tilting.

Now, because infinite other sinister accidents happened in Iousts and Tourneys, it being a place, which bad disposed persons made as a Rende-vous, there to reuenge their particular quarrels (howbeit in the first Oathe taken by the Iudges of the Field,Iousts and Tournements prohibited. of them that entred into such Assemblies, they should leaue without the Lists all spleene and rancour) and euen as boldly in such Military pastimes, as in Duelloes and Combats: These sports were also iustly prohibited and forbidden, as well by Decrees of Fathers of the Church, as Ordenances of our Most Christian Kings.
William de Nangis, a Monke of Saint Denys in France, obserueth in the Life of the King Saint Lewes, the three and fiftieth Chapter, that vnder the yeare of Grace One thousand two hundred and threescore: this good King (the Mirrour of Princes) caused a meeting to be made at the Citie of Paris, on the Sunday after E^ster day, of the Generall Estates of his Kingdome, composed of the Prelates and chiefe Barons thereof, concerning matters written to him by the Pope:A meeting of the Kingdomes ^ates at Paris. That the Tartarres had intruded themselues into the Lands beyond the Seas, discomfiting the Sarrazins in a foughten Battaile, and conquered the Prouinces of Armenia, with the Cities of Antioch, Tripoly, Damas and Aleppo, threatning to besiedge the strong Citie of Acres, with the neighbouring Countries, and quite to expell the Christians out of the East.
Hereupon it was ordained, that throughout all the Kingdome, prayers and generall Processions should be made, Blasphemers should be punished.Punishment of S^earers and blasphemers. And ^uery Estate were to reforme their Feasts and Banquetings, as also the excesse and superfluitie vsed in their attire and garments: And Iousts and Tourneys were prohibited for the space of two whole yeares. All men being enioyned (during that time) to recreate themselues with no other exercises, then shooting in the Long-Bow and Crosse-Bow, or Tillar.
Inhibita etiam fuerunt vsque ad Biennium Torneamenta, and iniunctum est, quod non

luderetur alijs ludis, nisi quod Homines se exercerent in Arcubus, and Balistis.

Tourneaments also were inhibited for two yeares space: And it was enioyned, that none should play at any other sports, but that men should vse the exercise of Crosse-Bowes and Tillars.

The King of France slaine in a Tournament.But now let vs see, what was ordained by our holy Mother the Church, in regard that Iousts and Tourneys were prosecuted with vnfortunate and Tragicall endings: as it happened at Paris, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand fiue hundred fiftie and nine.

WE forbid hereafter to keepe or hold, those detestable Fayres and Markets, which are called Tourneys, Exercises, wherein the Nobilitie are present in person at dayes appointed, to performe their ostentation of boldnesse, and vttermost meanes of strength, in all their best and richest brauery, assayling one another to their perill and danger, that men should loose both bodies and soules.
Decree of the Church gainst Tournaments
It is therefore prouided, that if any man (in such Assemblies) shall runne the fortune and ieoperdie of life: howsoeuer he may be penitent for it, and desire to be absolued; yet notwithstanding, he shall be depriued of buriall in hallowed ground, and places of Christian enterment.

The Popes Innocentius and Eugenius made this holy Ordenance, and it was renewed in the Eleauenth Generall Counsell of Laterane,The renewing of the former Ordenance. held at Rome by Pope Alexander the Third, the foureteenth of the Calends of Aprill, in the yeare of Grace One thousand one hundred threescore and nineteene, in these very words:

Detestabiles illas Nundinas, vel Ferias, quas vulgo Torneamenta vocant, in quibus Milites, ex condicto, conuenire solent, and ad ostentationem virium suarum, and audaciae temere congredi, Vnde Mortes Hominum, and Animarum pericula saepe proueniunt, fieri prohibemus. Quod si quis eorum, Ibi mortuus fuerit, quamuis ei poscenti poenitentia non denegetur, Ecclesiastica tamen careat Sepultura.


We forbid those detestable Faires, and sporting dayes, which they commonly call Tournements to be kept, wherein Gallants (according to appointment made) are wont to meete, and skirmish desperately together, for the ostentation of their valour and hardinesse; from whence (many times) proceede both the death of men, and the danger of their soules. And if any of them shall dye there, although penance be not denied him, requiring it; yet he shall want Ecclesiasticall buriall.

The Counsell of Vienna in Daulphine.At the Generall Counsell of Vienna in Daulphine, Celebrated by Pope Clement, fift of the name, in the yeare of Grace, One thousand three hundred and twelue; Iousts and Tournaments were againe prohibited; and in the very same tearmes, as were obserued in the former related Counsels.
Now you shall see one speciall Record, which I haue taken out of our great Chronicle, and inserted here.
Enuiron la feste ^e Monsieur Sainct Denys, le Cardinal Nicolas deffendy tous les Tournoyemens, and tant les Tournoyans, comme les Souffrans, and Aydans, and mesmement les Princes qui en leurs Terres les souffroient il ietta graud Sentence contre Eux, and apres ce, sousmettoit leurs Terres a l'Interdict de l'Eglise. Mais apres ce, le Pape a la Requeste des Fils du Roy, and de plusieurs autres Nobles, dispenca auec Eux, parce qu'ils estoient nouuiaux Cheualiers (ils auoient este faicts Cheualiers par la Roy Philippes le Bel leur P^re en la grande Eglife de Paris, a la Feste de la Pentecoste, l'An Mille trois Cents and Treze, auecques les magnificences des Bourgeois, and Mestiers de Paris, descrites tout au long dans lesdictes Chroniques) pource que par trois Iours deuant Keresme, ils peussent ausdicts Ieux, iouer tant seulement, and non plus.
About the Feast of my Lord Saint Denys, the Cardinall Nicholas did prohibite and forbid all Tournaments, and as well the Tourneyers, as the Soueraignes and Ayders, and especially those Princes, in whose Lands they were permitted, by Interdiction of the Church. But after this, the Pope, at the request of the Kings Sonnes, and of many other Noble Gentlemen;Prohibition of Tou^neys and dispens^tion with them. dispenced with them, because they were newly knighted (They had bin made Knights by King Phillip le Bel their Father, in the great Church of Paris, at the Feast of Pentecoast, in the yeare One thousand three hundred and thirteene, with the magnificences of the Bourgesses and Tradesmen of Paris, described more at large in

the Chronicles.) Because that for three dayes space before Lent, they might then addict themselues to those sports and pastimes, but no longer.
We will content our selues, with so slender a flourish made vpon this discourse of Iousts and Tournaments, referring a further taske to be taken therein, by such as can bet^er enlarge the Argument, then we haue now done. We will therefore enter into another discourse.



Of Militarie Penalties, Paines and Punishments: And likewise of the Degradation of Noble-Men. CHAP. VIII.
THE Greeke Poet Homer (whom diuine Plato calleth The Father of Science,Homer, the Father of Sc^n^e and Vertue. and of all Vertue) feigneth with a comely and pleasing grace: that the Goddesse Thetis, being deliuered of her Sonne Achilles, did suddenly dip or plunge his naked body into the Riuer of Stix, thereby to m^ke him inuulnerable, and not to be hurt by any wound. Afterward, she sollicited Iupiter, King of the Gods and Men, to auert and turne from her Son, those destenied harmes or euils, which might threaten death to him in any high enterprise.
Now, to speake more properly, this is the module and carracter of a Knight,The true module of a man f^r Armes. or man that addicteth himselfe to Armes and Wars, who euen from his tender youth and yongest yeares, should custome and inure himselfe, to beare and endure all distempers and oppressions, whereto the season^ of the yeare are subiect and harden or make bold his body, to the exercises of paine and trauaile: In imitation of the auncient French and Gaules, whose naturall disposition is, described by the Latin Poet, in the ninth Booke of his Aeneieds.

Durum a stirpe genus. Natos ad Flumina primum
Deferri^us, saeuoque gelu duramus, and vndis
Venatu inuigilant Pu^ri, Sylu^sque fatig^nt,
Fic^tere ludus Equos, and Spicula tendere co^u.

And like as for entring into the Temple of Honor,Vertue the onely aime of a Gentlemans actions. a man ought first to passe thorow that of Vertue: euen so a yong Gentleman should make Vertue the onely obiect, bent and aime of all his actions, to the end, that by meanes thereof, he may attaine to the Temple of Honor, for the conseruation whereof, he ought to be a thousand times more carefull, then of his owne life.
When the Goddesse Thetis bathed her yong Paladine in the Riuer of Stix; shee plunged in all his body, onely the soales of his feete excepted, whereby she he^d him. Onely by that part was he wounded and slaine,Achilles slaine in the Temple by Paris Alexander. in the Temple of the Citie of Troy, by an Arrow sent from the Bowe of Alexander Paris (the most effeminate Coward, and idlest lazie yongster in all the Troyans Armie) as he was denoutly kneeling vpon his knees, to espouse the faire Polixen^: of whom he was in such sort enamoured, ^hat (for her sake) he exposed himselfe to the rage and furie of his deadly enemies.
T^ s^le of the ^oo^, is the most tender and daintie part of a mans whole body. Adde hereunto Polixen^; and dast^rdly Paris, which are the Symboles and true Idiomes of voluptuous d^sire, and a sloathfull n^gligent eye, that misguide many braue (...) and Souldiours, e^en to the height of all misfortunes, and then to a wo^ (...) fa^ous endilig^ is may serue as a good Lesson, to you that are braue and g^nerous French Noblemen, to turne your backes on the common high

roade way of Vice, and to pursue the faire foote-steps of Vertue, by qualifying in your selues all vnruly passions, for your sooner arriuing at the Theator of Honour. Whereunto you may be conducted,The noble Lesson of Scopio the Affrican. by that great Captaine Scipio Affricanus, who soundeth in your eares night and day, euening and morning, yea, and at all houres, this goodly Lesson in fiue Latine words, more excellent and better then that of King Lewes the eleauenth of the name, which he caused to be taught to King Charles the eight, his Sonne and Successour.
Maxima cunctarum Victoria, Victa Voluptas.
By this Victory ouer your selues, taming and tutoring your owne passions, you will soone come to honor. Whereas contrariwise, if you suffer your selues to be surmounted by wanton pleasures, like to the Beast Matreas, that deuoureth her owne selfe; you will make a most lamentable and vnfortunate ending.
Now, as for the honoring of Noblemen, Kings inuented prizes and recompences of Honor and worth: so likewise, to bridle and restaine them, as breathing them in the wayes of Vertue, they deuised and made Militatie Ordenances, to take beginning from the time, when they were enroled for the managing of Armes, for seruice of the King,The Red and Bloody Booke of Infamie. and Sacred Crown of the Lillies, euen to the ending of their liues, by a ciuill death in their own persons, with ignominie, transmittable to their Sons, because they were not onely depriued, of the memory and Honors of their Fathers, transcribed in the Red or Bloody Booke: but also by confiscation of their Goods, if they were seated and dwelt in Countries subiect to confiscation, in regard that there is a difference betweene those that are subiect to confiscation, and such as are not subiect thereto.
Those Countries and Prouinces, which stood subiected to Confiscation, were properly them of the Kings demaine, and Lands belonging to the Sacred Crowne of France,Countries subiected to Confiscation. as dependine thereon immediately, and returning thither againe (as to their head and spring) as well by the crime of Fealonie, as other cases likewise which deserued an infamous kinde of death. In whatsoeuer part of the Kingdome, those goods af demaine and Royall Patrimony were seated, consisting of the Crowne, or aduanced into a Peeredome and high Baronnie; if there were no substitution made, before the Prince had giuen the honor and title of Excellencie and honor, then they were liable thereto.
In Prouinces, which neuer (before in times past) were immediately of the Royall demaine,Prouinces not subiect to Confiscations. as in the Dukedomes and Prouinces of Bretaigne, Aquitaine and the like, ruled and gouerned by perticular Dukes, and onely with charge and reseruation of liedge Homage, and cases thereupon depending. In those Prouinces our most Sacred Monarches, by wise Counsell and admirable foresight, admitted no place for confiscation. Because the Subiects and Seruants of these great Fifes and Baronnies had bin constrained (at all times) to follow their Lords and Rulers in Warres, although the warre were made against the King, their Prince and Soueraigne Lord. And thence it came that the Court, in sentences of condemnation of ciuile death, on them conuicted of the crime,Concerning sentences of condemnation be they Nobles, or Yeomen, the tearmes of confiscation to the King is added thereto, of such inheritances as are in the places of Confiscation. Which neuerthelesse might extend it selfe, throughout all Lands and Seigneuries vnder obedience to our Kings, if there were not a custome to the contrary, which ought to be held as a certain and infallible Law, and as a Law tollerated by the Prince, vntill such time, as it shall be reformed by his Prerogatiue and Authority.
Ordenances Royall for the Military condition.In France there are Royall Ordenances for the Estate Militarie, and prescibed to the Nobility, whose principall function is to follow Armes.
He that is wanting at his faction, being of the Guard, and is to come ouer late, deserueth Le Morrion de Dix en bas.
If he offend in the same againe; he is to be imprisoned three dayes, and persisting on still, to be fined according to the exigence of the case.
The penalties extend to common Soldiors.If he commit any Theft in the Corps du Guard: to be punished with the Strapp^d^, and casheered from the Company, in the most eminent part whereof, he is to raceiue this exemplary punishment.
If he commit Theft any where else, that deserueth death; he is to be hanged and strangled before the whole Company:
If he set Houses on fire, force, or offer, violence to any Maides or Women: he is to vndergoe the same punishment.
If he lay hand on his Sword in the Corps du Garde, against any Commander, or member of the Company: He is to haue the Strappado, and to be Bastinadoed through the Campe, and afterward excluded. These are the paines and penalties provided for Souldiours.
Now, concerning Gouernours, and Captaines of Places and of Companies:Penalties appointed for G^uernours and Captains. If any of them doe suffer him else to be surprized by the enemie, or flye from the Battaile, or surrender the place of his Gouernement, by Cowardise and negligence of courage, or else by intelligence: The greatest honor that he can hope for, is to loose his head vpon a publique Scaffold. Or, a paine much more cruell, to let him goe with his life saued; after he hath bin degraded of Nobilitie, and proclaimed a Traitour* and he and his posteritie Peazants.
According as it fortuned to Captaine Franget, Gouernour of Fontarabie, which cowardly he surrendred to the enemy, in the time of King Frances the first, the yeare of Grace One thousand fiue hundred and fourescore.The punish^ of Captain Franget for betrayi^g Fontarabie. Sentence and Judgement was giuen by the Officers of the Crowne, the Constable and Marshals of France in the Citie of Lyons. This Franget being brought into the great Market place of the Citie, was mounted vpon a Scaffold, quite disarmed, his Shield emblazoned with the heeles of the Armes vpward, and then broken by the King of Armes, he publiquely baptized with the name of Traitor, then dragged by the feete, and throwne quite downe from off the high Scaffold: his life saued, in regard of his many yeares. But degraded of Nobilitie, he and all his posteritie published to be Villaines, and vncapable (for euer after) to be^re Armes. Which was done vnto him vpon good and iust cause, for where negligence and cowardise in courage is so euident, that i^ standeth cleare from all apparance of excuse: it is proofe sufficient of perfidie, treason and villainie, which rightly deserueth paine and exemplarie punishment.
Our graue Auncients, the Gaules and French, exemplarly punished their Souldiours, that by cowardise in Couruge, fled from before the enemy,How the Gaules punished their Cow^rds. instead of standing manfully to the fight. To couer (for euer) their shame and turpitude, they drowned them in some stinking pit of pudled water, hurling clay and filth vpon them. Ignauos, Imbelles, and Torpore infames, Coeno, ac Palude, inicita, desuper Crate, mergunt. So speaketh Tacitus in his Germania.
And as for them that (by intelligence and treason) had conference with the enemie, discouering the secrets of the Armie,For Traitours and Intelligence^s with the enemy. and rancked themselues with the contrary side: if they could be taken, they were branched aloft and below on Trees, saith the same Tacitus. Proditores, and Transfugas Arboribus suspendunt.
If any Captaine betrayed his Countrey, or troubled the peace and tranquilitie thereof, by Factions and Partialities: he was burned aliue,For betraying his Countrey. according to the testimony of Iulius Caesar, in the first Booke of his Memories of the Ganlish warres, speaking of Orgetorix. Moribus suis Orgetorigem, ex vinculis causam dicere coegerunt, damnatum poenam sequi oportebat, Vt Igni Cremaretur Come we now to such Militarie penalties, paines and punishments, as were in practise among the Romans.
The rigour and seueritie vsed by them, euen for the smallest faults among their men of warre: made their State more mightie,Of Militarie punishments among the Romaines. and of longer continuance then all the other in the world. Such Souldiours as (by lacke of courage) had left their ranckes, their Guard, or place of Sentinell, for feare of looking the enemy in the face: It was their meanest infliction (and yet neuerthelesse full of shame and disgrace) to be let bloud in diuers parts of their bodies, to take thence the crauen cowardly bloud, which had infected the whole masse of flesh, so to make them the more couragious and full of spirit. And vntill by some act of noate and worth, they had redeemed this taxation of rowardise; they were left to themselues in a Quarter a side, to be daily gazde on with shame and disgrace. Which blemish, if they neuer recouered, and became established in their ranke of reputation: they neuer had any part or portion whatsoeuer, in the spoyles which other Souldiours made on the enemy either in the surprizall of Townes and strong places, or in the ranged Battaile.
The Generals encourging of his SouldioursIn which case, so soone as the Generall of the Army had animated his Souldiors, with this forme and manner of speaking; Gloriae, Pariterque Praedae Consulite: all was Pillage. Such as bare Armes, passed by the edge of the Sword: the common vulgar sort were sold as slaues (for euer) in open markets; and the rest were left to the Souldiours discretion, Maides and Wiues, all past with their losse of honour. Sacra, Prophana simul (without any exception) Puberibus trucidatis, vmbelle Vulgus sub Corona venum datum; reliqua praeda Victoribus cedebat. Cowards and Crauens were frustrated of this Pilladge.
For such as were ouer desperate and Hare-brand.The same punishment of Bloud-letting, was exercised on such Souldiours as were rash and desperately light-headed in skirmishes, their bloud boyling ouer-hotly: to take away this wilde behauiour from them, it was thought fit to let them bleede; because they did not onely expose themselues to perils and dangers, without any reason or iudgement; but likewise were the ouer-throw of many other beside.
Sometimes they had Barley-Bread giuen them, for their best prouision, like as to the Rascalitie of Campe-following Boyes: As it is obserued by Aulus Gellius, in the tenth Booke and second Chapter of his Atticke-Nights. Or else they were commanded out of the Campe; to abide and lodge there, without any couertures or Tents whatsoeuer, but left to the iniuries of all weathers.
Cornelius Tacitus, in the thirteenth Booke of his Annales, speaking of the Generall Corbulo,The punishing of rash presumption. Gouernour of Syria, who had prohibited his Captaine of the Vantguard Pactius Orphitus, to meddle with the enemy: yet notwithstanding, he fought against him to his disaduantage, against all hope or expectation; saith he. Congressus cum Hoste funditur. Et damno eius exterriti qui subsidium ferre debuerunt, su^ quisque in Castro trepida fuga rediere. Quod grauiter C^rbulo accepit. Increpitumque Pactium, and Praefectos, Militesque Tendere omnes extra Vallum iussit. Inque ea contumelia detenti, nec nisi precibus Vniuersi Exercitus ex soluti sunt.
Any Soldiour that forsooke the Campe; in going from his Ensigne or Colours, he was to be punished with death, without all hope of mercie or pardon. Tacitus in the former obserued passage,The penaltie of leauing the Colours and Campe. saith. Quia duritiam Coeli, Militiaeque multi abnuebant, deserebantque remedium seueritate quaesitum est. Nec enim, vt in alijs Exercitibus primum alterum-ve delictum venia prosequebatur: Sed Qui Signa Reliquerat, Statim Capite Poenas Luebat. Although he lay frozen to the ground, yet it was not permitted to any Souldiour, to abandon or leaue the Campe: neither could he dispence with himselfe, to goe a forradging at his owne pleasure, nor to fetch wood, though he were ready to die with cold. Annotatusque Miles qui fascem lignorum gestabat, ita praeriguisse Manus, vt oneri adhaerentes, truncis Brachijs deciderent.
For running from ^he Field for safety of life.He that for the speedier sauing himselfe from the Warre, threw away any part of his Armes on the ground, or engaged or sold them; was punished with death; So doth the Ciuile Lawyer Modestinus enforme vs, vnder the Title De re Militari.
He that did steale any thing in the Campe or Armie, his right hand was cut off, that had bin the instrument in the action: but for the first time of offending that way, he had a Veine opened,For theft in the Campe. to bleede. So saith Frontinus in his Stratagems of Warre, the fourth Booke. Marcus Cato memoriae prodidit, in furto comprehensis, inter Commilitones, Dextras esse Praecisas, aut silentus animaduertere voluissent, In principijs Sanguinem missum.
Theft punished vnder the Emperours.And afterward vnder the Romaine Emperours, such Soldiours as were attainted and conuicted of Theft, were beaten naked with Roddes: Ita vt inter verbera, and fustes expirarent. So saith the Ciuile Lawyer Modestinus D. de re Militari.
Such Villaines as forced or violated the Wiues of their Hosts, were punished and chastised in a strange manner, worthily answering to their wickednesse. Two Trees were cleft thorow the midst, and their tops bended downe to the ground by maine strength of men:The punishment of Adultrie. then was the Malefactour fastened thereto by the Feete, and so quartered by force and violence of the Trees in returning vp to their height againe. Militem, qui Adulterium cum Hospitis vxore commisserat, ita puniuit, vt duarum Arborum capita inflecteret, quas ad Pedes Militis deligaret, easdemque subito dimittere^, vt scissus ^lle, vtrique penderet. So speaketh Flauius Vopiscus, in the life of the Emperour

Aurelianus. This punishment had bin long time put in practise by the Greekes, and Plutarch, in the life of Alexander the great, tearmeth this punishment by the name of Diasphendon.
The Ordenances of our Sacred Monarches,The punishments of the French in their Armies, by precedent example. punished all furious and violent acts with exemplarie paines and torments: prohibiting the haunt and resort of Girles and Whoores into their Armies. Whereon followed the Militarie Lawes, which were made for ryding the Mal-Mouton (which at this present we tearme riding the Canon) as is obserued by Nicetas, in the life of the Greeke Emperour Audronicus Poleologus, speaking of a bold and shamelesse Wench; Euphrosina Arieti moenia percutienti, equitantis instar imposita fuit. The Auncient French caused the Nose to be slit, or cut off, and to be led starke naked through all the quarters of the Armie, of all such Souldiours as were found coupled with any of them. Ligurinus.

Non erit in nostris nobiscum Foemina Castris,
Qui Reus extiterit Spolijs nudatus abibit
Turp^ter; and Naso mutilabitur illa resecto.

And by this slitting of their Noses, they were made knowne to other for example. As much they did in former times to Whoores and Adulterers,Slitting of Noses. being found and apprehended in the act.

Deiphobu^ vidit lacerum crudeliter ora:
Ora, manusque ambas, populataque tempora raptis
Auribus, and Truncas, inhonesto vulnere, Nares.

They vsed to cut off their Noses and Eares, but perticularly the Nose, which the Poet (very aptly) tearmed Vulnus inhonestum, because by this cutting away the Nose, it made such a deformity in the face, as it seemed no longer the face of a reasonable creature.
Among the Romaines, those that they called Filles and Femmes de ioye, presented themselues to the Pretor, before they declared, what estate and prosession of life they had made election of, and then withdrew themselues to the Act: it being noated downe likewise in the Pretors Table. After this election made of such a brutish and dissolute kinde of life; they were expressely charged and forbidden, to be present or seene in any publique Assemblies, or to ranke themselues among the Romaine Matrons. From whom those Courtezans were distinguished,Strumpets distinguished from the Roman Matron^ by a Red Locke or dressing of a Cowes Haire, which those Mistresses of the common gender were bound to weare; whereas the Romaine Ladies ware their dressing Blacke.
And so the Latine Poet,The honorable name of marriage slandered. giuing this name of Strumpet to Dido the Queene of Carthage, who to couer her fault (hauing forfeited her honor) with the faire name of Marriage: Coniugij nomine culpam praetexerat; saith, that shee was Red-Haired.

Nondum illi Flauum Proserpina Vertice Crinen
Abstulerat.

And Inuenal, in his sixt Satyre, describing the goodly prankes of that impudent and immodest Empresse, the Mother to Britannicus, the Romaines delicate peece.

.. .. .. .. .. .. Titulum mentita Lyciscae
Ostenditque tuum generose Britannice ventrem:

Affirmeth, that she attired her head with a Periwig of Red Haire, couering therewith her modest blacke attire, when (all the night long) she wandred from Stewes to Stewes, to satisfie her lustfull appetite.
Et Nigrum Flauo Crinen abscondente Galero.
Very rarely was to be found in the Romaines Campe, any such wanton darlings,The Romans Campe was called Chaste. as now we are speaking of. Castra Romanorum ita diceb^ntur, quasi Casta: they were neuer soyled or polluted with any Villainie. But let vs leaue Venus, and come to Mars.
When the Captaines would chastise gently such Souldiours, as (thorow defect of courage) had plaid the Cowards, fors^king their Ranckes and Files of Battaile;How the Persians vsed Cowards. they vsed the fashion of the Persians, which was, to make them walke all the quarters

of the Armie, carying a dead Cow on their Shoulders, and leading a Whore by the hand, naked in their Shirts and Smocks.
Or else they were attyred like women, and in that manner led through all the quarters of the Campe and Armie. This was put in practise by Iulian the Apostata, and (before him) by the Emperour Constantine, according to the testimony of the Historian Zozimus in his third Booke. Amictos veste Muliebri per Castra duxit, ratus Militibus, qui Viri essent, eam Poenam, morte grauiorem futuram.
The Greekes punishing their Cowards.Which the Greekes also (before the Romaines) exercised, vpon such Souldiours as wanted courage: for three seuerall dayes together, they would bring them into a publique market place, attired in the garments of Women.
Among the Lacedemonians, they were exiled and banished out of all Companies, being reputed vncapable and vnworthy, to beare any publique charge or Office. And although they were of yeares fitting for mariage, yet through the rigour of the Law ordayned by Solon:The Law of the Lacedemonians. there could not bee found a woman to marry with any of them, because they hated to haue a Sonne, infected with the Cowardise of such a Father.
Moreouer, permission was graunted to all commers and goers, to smite and beate them as they met them on the wayes, and they not daring to make answere, to any iniurious speeches vsed against them,In what manner they vsed Cowards. or to complaine of any outrages done vnto them; all matter of suite and Iustice was vtterly denied them. They went in poore and greazie garment, their beards close shauen, and without any Mustachoe, which was the marke of a valiant Soldiour. This we learne of Plutarch in his Liues, and namely in that of Agesilaus.
For leauing Armes and Colours.Quintus Fabius Maximus, the most moderate man of all the Auncient Romaine Captaines and Commanders, caused the hands of his Souldiours to be cut off, that left their Armes and Colours: This we learne of Valerius Maximus, in his Antiquities; of Appianus Alexandrinus; and of Iulius Frontinus in his Stratagems of Warre, the first Chapter of his fourth Booke: Iulius Celsus, in the eight Booke of his Memories of the Gaules Wars, written by Iulius Caesar, who exercised the same seuerity at the Siedge of Vxoleu in Guienne.
Sometimes change of Military discipline was vsed, to Soldiours failing in their Dutie.Change or alteration of Military disciplin That is to say, Seruitours on Horse backe, were reduced into the ranckes of them that s^rued on Foote; and the Fantassins retreated to the degree of Bisognians and simplest Souldiours, which were they that vsed to carry Stones and luggage in the Armies: As it is obserued by the Lawyer Modestinus, throughout the title De re Militare. And Valerius Maximus reporteth an example in the second Booke of his Antiquities, of certaine Romaine Soldiours, that suffred themselues to be taken by Pyrrhus, King of the Epirotes. Decreuerunt Patres, vt ex ijs qui Equo meruerant, Peditum numero militarent; and qui Pedites fuerant, in Funditorum auxilia transcrerentur. They placed them with the base Groomes and Campe-Boyes, that guarded the Baggage, and tended on the Prisoners taken in Warre.
Rigorous Lawes of auncient Roman Discipline reuiued.In like manner Iulian the Apostata (who in his time, would needes reestablish, and bring againe into practise, the rigorous Lawes of Military discipline of the Auncient Romaines, as well as their Idolatry) Equites Quartae Sagittariorum Cohortis omnes contrusit in infimum Militiae gradum. So speaketh his Secretary Ammianus Marcellinus, in his nine and twentieth Booke. And in his fiue and twentieth Booke: Tertianorum Equestrem numerum, ademptis Signis, Hastisque diffractis, inter Impedimenta, and Sarcinas, and Captiuos agere iter imposuit. The same Historian writeth, that this Iulian the Apostata condemned ten Soldiours (that insted of firme fighting on foote, had turned their backes vpon the Parthians) to be first degraded, and afterward executed to death: According to the auncient Lawes.
For losse of an Ensigne to the enemy by negligence of chief Officers.If the Ensigne or Banner of a Company or Legion, was wonne by the enemy, through the negligence and faint-heartednesse of the Chiefes, Sergeants and Corporals of the Squadron: those Souldiours were presently disarmed, and punished with death before the other Officers: Titus Liuius in his second Booke, maketh the Consull Appius to speake in this manner. Vbi Arma, vbi Signa essent singulis r^gitans, inermes Milites, Signo amisso, Signiferos, Virgis caesos, Securipercussit. He caused

all their Heads to be smitten off, after they had bin first well beaten and whipt naked with Roddes.
If a Captaine had transgressed, or contemned the Generals command;For transgressing the Generals command by a Captaine. it valued his life, as being certaine to loose his head. Tacitus, in the foureteenth Booke of his Annales, saith. Poenius Posthumus Praefectus Castrorum secundae Legionis, cognitis Quartadecimanorum, Vicesimanor umque Prosperis rebus, quia pari gloria Legionem suam fraudauerat, admieratque contra ritum Militiae Iussa Ducis, Seipsum gladio transegit. He killed himselfe with his owne Sword, to auoide the shame of an exemplary death, most certaine and assured for Captaines of Bands, that were disobedient to their Generall. So the Consul Appius in Titus Liuius, at the passage before alleadged, Centuriones Duplicariosque qui reliquerant Ordines, ad Palum deligatos, Virgisque caesos; Securi percussit.
Before they were put to death, they had their bodies tornes with stripes;The manner of beheading among the R^mans so we learne of Polybius in his Politickes. And for cutting off the Head, the custome vsed among the Romans, was to make a pit in the ground, whereinto the guiltie off^nder descended, and there was his head smitten off, standing vpright, and not kneeling on his knees: as Tacitus noateth in the fifteenth Booke of his Annales, speaking concerning the death of the Tribune Seuerius Flauius.
Such as were the Authours of any vproare, riot or sedition in the Campe; were brought before the Generall of the Armie, his Lieutenant,For riot or sedition in the Ca^pe. or some one of the Tribunes, who ascending vp on the Tribunall, summoned the Soldiours to an Oration; and after the accused persons were heard to speake in their own defences, and found to be faultie: the Tribune smote them with the end of his riding Wand, or with a Rod made of the Vine Swiches. Which being thus done, the whole multitude of the Souldiours fell furiously on those Mutiners, whom they wounded and smote with Stones and Staues, vntill they left them starke dead on the ground. This is auouched by the Roman, Cornelius Tacitus in his Annales. Stabant Legiones pro Concione, districtis gladys. Reus in suggestuper Tribunum ostendebatur, si Nocentem adclamauerant, praeceps datus trucidebatur; and gaudtbat caedibus Miles, tanquam semet absolueret.
Quintus Curtius, in the Life of Alexander the Great, the sixt Booke;Punishment of mutiners in the Campe. and Arrianus vpon the same subiect, writing of such Mutiners, say, that they were beaten down with Staues and Stones. Omnes a Nichomachanominati, more patrio, dato signa, Saxis obruti sunt. Such was the custome among the Greekes, wherein the Macedonians also were pertakers. And, with the same kinde of vengeance the Greekes punished Traitours, that fell off, and tooke part with the enemy. Proditores, Signorumque Desertores Saxis obruebantur, so say the same Historians.
The Auncient Romaines drew them in pieces with foure Horses,Punishment of traiterou^ ^euolter^ as Titus Liuius telleth vs in his History, speaking of Metius Suffetius; and the Amorous Poet.

Sic doluit Metius, tunc cum in contraria versos,
Vltores habuit proditionis Equos,

Scipio the Affrican, called the Great, hauing subdued the Citie of Carthage; fastened all the Romaine Soldiours found therein, to Crosses with foure Nayles. And as for the Latine Auxiliaries, he commanded all their heads to be smitten off; because both the one and other, had rancked themselues with the contrary side.
The other Scipio commanded such offenders, to haue their bodies torne with Whippes in sight of the people. And as an ordenary kinde of punishment,How Scipio punished such offenders. after they had bin whipt naked with Roddes; they were throwne downe from the Tarpeian Rocke. Which kinde of death, the wise Seneca gaue a proper name vnto, tearming it, Militare Supplicium; in his first Booke of Anger, and the sixt Chapter.
If any Cohort or Legion (through cowardise of courage) fled from before the enemy, or else grew into mutinie, to make it selfe a Band apart:Punishment o^ a cowardly Legion. the rigour obserued by the auncient Romans was such, that they all perished by the Sword. Legio vniuersa quae Rhegium occupauerat, obsessa, deditione facta, Securi percussa est, saith Titus Liuius in his fifteenth Booke.
Among the Romaines, Soldiours grew fit for enroulement, when they had attained

to the Age of seauenteene yeares.The enrouling of Roman Soldiors. Before, to gaine the faire title of Exempt, they were bound to make faction during sixteene yeares, and to remaine foure other yeares in the Campe, exempted from the labours of Warre, which extended to all extremity. So that at the end of twentie yeares, they then enioyed all exemptions: to be licensed, and recompenced with Lands and Seigneuries for them and their posterity: So saith Aulus Gellius, in the eighteenth Chapter of his Atticke Nights. These distributions of Lands and Seigneuries, giuen to the Veterans, that is to say, to the old Soldiours, exempted from the Souldiours Cassocke (as we say at Paris) were ordered and stiled by diuers names: as namely Parishes, decimated Fields, by the Noble Historian Tacitus called Agri Decumates, and Lands of Lot or deuision, as we haue formerly obseru^d in the discourse of our Salique Lawes. So the Poet noateth for the fruite of the Ciuill warre, that the grounds and Lands of Cremona, were distributed to the old Soldiours, who had warred for Augustus, against the Chiefe pertakers Antonius and Lepidus. And those Lands being not sufficient to recompence the Veteranes; Mantua (his owne Countrey) serued as a supplement of succour, and was annexed to Cremona by right of neighbourhood.
Mantua vae miserae nimium Vicina Cremonae.
Of Lands distributed to old Soldiours.Now, these old Soldiours being Licentiats; all the rest of their life time enioyed Military Honors and Priuiledges, hauing (before their retreate) Letters Patents giuen them of Ennobling by the Emperor, to testifie what good Seruices they had done for the Common-wealth.
The Infamous Mission, was when the Casheere was giuen to Legions and Cohortes Ob male nauatam operam, for hauing carried themselues cowardly in the Warre.Of such old Soldiours as were en^obled by the Emperour. And to such Casheerde Companies command was giuen, to beare no more Armes vpon paine of death: And if they were Horsemen, neuer to mount on Horsebacke againe. The Emperour Galba comming to the Empire, by the death of the impious and wicked Nero: decimated the Praetorian Guards, casheered a part of them, and made Foote-Soldiours of Horsemen. The Horse belonging to one of those Knights, followed (step by step) after his dismounted Maister, and would not leaue him, to serue any other. The Maister gaue him a stroake with his Sword, and afterward wounded himselfe cruelly, so that the Horse and Maister dyed both together.
Concerning Casheered Captaines.There was yet another punishment vnder the Romaine Emperours, ordained for Traitors; which was with Fire, burning them aliue: As we learne by the Law, Si quis aliquid, at the first Paragraph De Poenis, at the Digest, and in the Law Proditores. D. de re Militari.
The bloody Law of Decimation.And as for Decimation, it was two cruel and extreame a rigor, to cut the throates of a whole Legion, which consisted (as we haue said in the first Booke of Officers, belonging to the Crowne of France) of fiue thousand and sixe hundred Foote-Soldiours, and three hundred men on Horse-backe. And yet neuerthelesse, wee haue obserued the exemption thereof, in that Armie of Thebes, vnder the Order of Gall.
The mildest kinde of Decimation.The very mildest course was that of Decimation, that is to say, when one Souldiour was taken out of ten (as it fell to his Lot) and so put to death: when oftentimes the Lot lighted on the innocent, who yet notwithstanding, passed the Pikes, as Tacitus affirmeth in his Annales, the foureteenth Booke. At quidem insontes peribunt? Nam ex fuso Exercitu, cum Decimus quisque Fuste feritur, etia^ Strem sortiuntur. Habet aliquid ex iniquo omne malum exemplum, quod contra sing^los, vtilitate publica rependitur. And so in Titus Liuius, the Consull Appius caused the heads to be cut off, of Captaines and principall members in the Romaine Armie, and Decimated the Companies of Soldiours. Caetera multitudo Sorte Decimus quisque ad Supplicium Lecti.
The two Gates of the Roman Armie.Vulgar and common it was, that in the Campe of the Romaines there were two Gates or Doores, the one called Praetorian, and the other Decumane, which was that whereby the Souldiours came forth, after they had bin Decimated before the Praetor, in the Tent or Pauillion of the Generall of the Armie, Ante Principia, where

were kept the Military Banners and Ensignes. They were drawne violently out of the Campe, by this Gate Decumane, and on the bancke of a ditch had their heads smitten off. Polybius, in the sixt Booke of his Pollitickes, baptiseth this Decimation with the Greeke name (...) howbeit oftentimes by way of commiseration, they came to Decimate the twentieth Souldiour, and sometimes the hundred man.
Appius Claudius, was the first Generall of the Romaine Armie, that did first put in execution so cruell and bloudy an Ordenation. For, as concerning the Greekes,The first executer of so bloudy an ordenance. it is very vncertaine who was the first Inuenter. We vnderstand indeede by Seneca, in the twentieth Chapter of his third Booke of Anger, that the King of the Persians Cambyses conducting an Armie, was brought to such extreamitie through want of Victuals: that he was enforced to Decimate the Soldiours, who should haue foode, and leaue the rest hunger-starued to the death.
The Romaine Emperours haue made proofe too often of this cruell punishment: As did Augustus, by the report of Suetonius in his Life, the foure and twentieth Chapter: Cohortes, si que cescissent loco Decimatas Ordeo pauit.This cruelty after vsed by the Romai^ Emperour. Centuriones statione deserta, itidem vt Manipulares Capitali animaduersione puniuit; pro cetero delictorum genere varijs ignominijs affecit; vt Stare per totum diem iuberet ante Praetorium, interdum Tunicatos, Distinctosque, etc.
By Caius, the Noble Historian Tacitus, in the third Booke of his Annales saith: Decimum quemque ignominiosa Cohortis Sorte Ductos fuste necat.
By Galba, the same Author in the first Booke of his Histories, saith. Horror animum subit, quoties recordor ^eralem interitum, and hanc solam Galbae Victoriam cum in oculis Vrbis, Decumari deditos iuberet, quos deprecantes in Fidem acceperac.
Valerius Maximus, in the second Booke and second Chapter of his Antiquities,Titus Maister of the Horse vnder Piso the Consull. obserueth the Historie of Titus, Maister of the Romaine Horsemen (vnder the Consull Piso) who suffering himselfe to be inuested, surprized, and shut vp in Sicilie by the Fugitiues, to whom he cowardly deliuered vp his Armes: was iustly sentenced with this punishment.
Eum Consul Toga lacinijs abscissis amictum, Distinctaque Tunica indutum, Nudis pedibus a Mane Noctem vsque, Ad Principia per omne tempus Militiae adesse inssit.Thrust out of the French and Rampier. It was not enough to haue his life saued, because it was couered with all shame and ignominie, farre worse to be endured then a thousand deaths: but he must be excluded out of the Trench and Rampier, without any Tent or Pauillion, exposed to the iniuries of all times, and haue for nourishment nothing else but Barley Bread onely.
To be left without Garment, and in a Cassocke onely, was (among the Romans) a noate of infamie, and the marke or Symbole, of being bereft both of goods and honor. Summum dedecus Toga priuari apud.
Romanos rerum Dominos, gentemque t^gatam.
Because, before pronouncing the sentence of ciuill death, against a man accused of any crime: He that gouerned or presided in the Counsell, after he had balo^ted the Iudges opinions, and counted the most voyces concluding on death; if he were a Senatour, he was despoyled of his Scarlet Roabe, and the Sentence pronounced, In Laticlauio. If he were a Knight, or a Plebeian; then of his Cassocke.The manner of pronouncing the sentence of death. This Ceremonie of taking away the Roabe, or the Cloake or Cassocke by verdict of the Iudge, was the Preiudication or fore-iudgement, of losse of life and goods which fell to the Exchecker, if the partie accused died not before the sentence of death was pronounced. In which case, during the continuance of the Roman Common-wealth, Confiscation had no power, no more then vnder the State of the Emperors, for such as either by their command, or else in regard of feare, imposed death vpon themselues; saued their goods to their posteritie. Which Tacitus called Praemium festinata Mortis, and (by his custome and phrase) written Pretium festinandi.
We learne further concerning this auncient obseruation, from the same Valerius Maximus, in the ninth Booke and twelfth Chapter of his Antiquities,Concerning the death of Caius Licinius Macer. speaking of the death of Caius Licinius Macer, a learned Roman Ciuill Lawyer, accused of concession

or priuie extortion, in which action presided Cicero the Oratour, in these words.
Caius Licinius Macer vir Pratorius, Calui Pater, repetundarum reus, dum Sententia diriberentur, in Menianum conscendit: Siquidem cum Marcum Ciceronum, qui id Iudicium cogebat, Praetextam Ponentem vidisset, misit ad eum qui diceret, Se non Damnatum, sed reum perijsse, nec sua bona Hastae subijcit posse. Ac protinus Sudario, quod forte in manu habebat, Ore, and Faucibus coartatis, incluso spiritu, Poenam Morte praecurrit. Cognitare, Cicero de eo nihil pronontiauit.
The Office of Diribitorem among the Romaines.The Romaines called Diribitorem, the man that in iudgements criminall, distributed to each Senatour three Ballots and Tablets of Iuorie. He threw into the Ballotting Boxe, that which he pleased, and according to his owne iudgement. That of Absolution was marked with the Letter A. That of Condemnation, with the Letter C. And the third with these two Letters N. L. Non liquet, Shall be more amply informed. In auncient times, there was nothing giuen to the Iudges, but two Flint Stones, the one White, the marke or Symbole of Absolution, and the other Blacke, the noate of Condemnation.

Mos erat Antiquis, Atris, Niueisque lapillis
His damnare Reos, illis absoluere culpa.

A Custome of the Romaines deriued from the Greekes.So speaketh Ouid in his Metamorphosis. A Custome deriued from the Greekes by the Romaines, as Plutarke witnesseth in his Liues, and elsewhere, saying, that in criminall matters, a man is not to trust his Mother, for feare least (thorow negligence or ouersight) she cast the blacke Beane instead of the White. And that which is reported by Valerius Maximus, in the History of Titus and Piso, in these tearmes Discincta Tunica, Nudis Pedibus, is very well worth the obseruation, and fitly serueth to this subiect, Because in foure words was contained the auncient French Prouerbe: Of making Honorable Amends, Vnguirt, and without Hose or Shooes, that is to say,A French prouerbe of long obseruation. Nuds Pieds, and sans Ceinture, whereof here you may behold some Examples.
The Aduocate for the Children of Monsieur Lewes of France, Duke of Orleans, wickedly murdred by Iohn, Duke of Bourgongne (as hath bin declared in the Order of Orleans) concluded, that for so execrable an assassinate, the said Iohn of Bourgongne stood bound, to appeare in person at Paris vpon a certaine day, in the Castell of the Louure, or some such other place as should please the King to appoint, and that vpon a Scaffold, prepared for the purpose: The people of Paris being present, the said Iohn of Bourgongne,The publique confession of the Duke of Bourgongne. being without Girdle, and bare headed, kneeling before Madam of Orleans and her Children, accompanied with such persons as they pleased. He did there declare and publiquely confesse with a loud voyce; that maliciously and treacherously, he had procured the said Lord of Orleans to be murdered, by hatred, enuie and couetousnesse, and not vpon any other occasion. This is thus reported by Enguerran de Monstrellet.
It was a most ignominious thing to be without a Girdle, as being a manifest marke and noate of infamie, the vse and practise whereof was obserued, as well in matters Ciuile, as Criminall, for seizure and abandoning of goods, the repudiation of some hereditament, and likewise for making honorable amends.
The open submission of the Brugelins.The same Monstrellet informeth vs, that the Brugelins, being brought into a very good order to the number of about foureteene hundred men, came and presented themselues before their Duke Phillip of Bourgongne, second of the name: All and euery one of them bare headed, bare footed and without Girdles.
Likewise, that in the Moneth of September, the yeare of Grace, One thousand foure hundred threescore and fiue, a Norman, that had called the Parisians Brurgongnons; was condemned with an ignominious sentence, to be performed before the Hostell of the Citie,The punishment of a Norman for abusing the Parisians. in the place called Le Greue, and before the Aduocate for the Merchants of the same Citie. His Head bare, vngirded, and holding a lighted Torch in his hand. To speake there openly, that he had falsely and maliciously lyed, in speaking those words, humbly entreating, that they would be pleased to pardon and forgiue him. Which being done, his tongue was boared through with an hot burning Iron, and he for euer banished out of the Kingdome.
For renuntiation and repudiation of Inheritances, the same Monstrellet furnisheth vs with a double example.
Monsieur Phillip of France, tearmed the Hardie, the first of the foure last Dukes of Bourgongne, dyed at the beginning of the yeare One thousand foure hundred and foure. Margaret of Henault his Widdow,For renouncing inheritances. renounced the moueable goods of the deceased, laying vpon the Hearse-Cloth, that couered the dead body of her Husband; His Keyes, His Purse, and his Girdle, and required to haue an Act thereof from the Notaries, to stand and auaile in her defence, against the Creditours to the deceased Duke her Husband.
As much auoucheth the same Author,Leauing goods left by an indebted Husband. concerning the Widdow to Waleran of Luxembourg, Count of S. Paul. And this is the interpretation of our auncient French Prouerbe; Hurling the Keyes vpon the Graue, so soone as it is couered. That is to say; Renouncing them to the Comminaltie, and to Succession.
Declaring hereby, that like as the Husband, at bringing his wife into his House, giueth and deliuereth to her his Keyes, and by that action, acknowledgeth her as a Companion in his communitie (so long as she hath three things alwayes before her eyes; namely, the feare of God, loue of her Husband, and care of his Household charge;Three vertues in a worthy wife. the infallible noates and markes of an honorable Wife) which our Salique Law calleth Partem Conlaborationis; So in the same manner, after the death of her Husband, ouer charged with debts and payments; the Wife leauing all to the Communitie: She throweth her Keyes vpon the Graue, with her halfe Girdle.
To be without a Girdle, is at this present day among vs (according as it was in times past) the Symbole and marke of cession and forsaking goods,Of leauing goods to Creditours. and for a man to leaue his Girdle to his Creditours; is a signe of cession, made by Letters granted from the Princes fauour, who protecteth the bodies of his Subiects from imprisonment, when they abandon and leaue their goods to their Creditours, whereof they make publique declaration. This Custome came from the auncient Gaules, as we are enstructed by Suidas; because in former dayes, the Girdle was the Symbole of Riches and abounding in goods. And from thence, in a quite contrary sense, forsaking and leauing the Girdle, declared neede and pouertie.
At Rome, this cession and forsaking of goods,The manner of p^rting with goods at Rome. was done before the principall gate of the Capitall, vpon an exalted Stone, whereon was engrauen the figure of a Lyon. Vpon which Stone. The Cessionarie or parter from his goods, standeth bare headed, and without his Girdle, crying with a loud voyce, Cedo Bonis, to the end, that the Romaine people hauing heard it with vnderstanding; should be forewarned, of medling any more with men of the like weake condition. This publication of Cedo Bonis being thus made by the Cessionarie, he commeth downe from the Stone, and his breeches being put downe, his naked shame is there discouered, and openly whipt with Roddes.
Whereupon, this Theater of Marble was named The Stone of Scandale and infamie,The Stone of Scandale and Infamie. and from thence forward, he that made this cession, was published intestable, vnworthy and vncapable of bearing any testimonie: the light whereof we receiue from the Oratour, in his second Philippicke. For this benefit of cession (which the Emperour Iustinian in the eight Law, calleth Auxilium miserabile. C. was introduced and put in vse by Iulius Caesar, in the time of Cicero the Oratour.
Before those dayes, and in the time of the Common-wealths springing,Cruell and bloudy Creditours. the Romaines had the libertie, to take their debtors that could not make payment, and to dismember them in pieces, each man taking a piece, and so paying himselfe with part of his flesh, according as it is written by Aulus Gellius. And the Law of the twelue Tables allowed and permitted this barbarous Custome, to keepe men from becomming debters, and make them carefull House-keepers. Afterward it was changed into another forme, more mercifull in outward appearance, by reducing such knowne vnpayable debtors into Slauerie and Seruitude; which wee see was put in practise euen among the Iewes, as we reade in the fourth Chapter of the fourth Booke of the Kings. Ecce Creditor venit, vt tollat duos Filios meos, ad seruiendum sibi.The Sons of Debtors made Bondmen. Behold, the Creditour is come, to take vnto him my two Sonnes, to be bond-men. A Custome

likewise vsed by the French our Auncestours (according to the testimonie of Noble Tacitus in his Germania) who had among them a quite contrary forme for cession of goods, and repudiation of inheritances, then that of forsaking the Girdle, and casting the Keyes vpon the Graue.
Lands held by rent or ignoble seruices.Because taking possession of Lands in Soccage, were made by tradition, and deliuery of a Switch, or Rodde of an Elle in length: and in want thereof, a Rush, or a Corne-Straw. From whence this forme of possession, was tearmed Infestucatio, deliuering of the Rush.
But if it were in Fiefe, or Free-hold, the Prince and Soueraigne Lord (vnder our first Monarches) inuested and seized his Seruant by a Ring,Inuesting and seizing a Seruant by gift of a Ring. which he put vpon his Finger, the roundell whereof was marked with such an Armes, as hee would haue his Seruant to beare. And very oftentimes, this seizement was made by deliuery of a Rush or Straw, whereof the Romaines had deriued the practise, as taken from the Gaules, according to the obseruation of Aulus Gellius, in his last Booke and ninth Chapter, vpon the subiect De Ciuilibus, and Festucarijs Actionibus, whereof he discoursed very effectually, being of the Gaules Nation.
And as the taking of possession was noated with the word of Infestucation, Infestucationem Dominic^m: so the same Cession of goods, and forsaking of inheritances, was branded with the tearme of Exfestucation, by breaking the Rush, or Corneblade of Straw.
This course or forme was taken from our Salique Law, at the Title De Chrenethruda,Publication of a mans insufficiency for paying his debts. that is to say, De la Cession. He which knew himselfe to be vnable of making payment; at the Law-day would present in the Court of Iustice twelue honest and sufficient men, free from scandale or reproach, to beare witnesse of his insufficiency and pouerty, with a faithfull declaration, of all his goods and faculties, in the presence of all his Creditours, and kinred that were to succeede him to the third generation, as well by Father and Mother, as Collaterall.
Hauing made his open publication, he entred into his House, and from the foure corners of the Planchers, gathered vp so much dust as filled his left hand, and setting his foote on the step or threshold of the doore (called in our Salique Law Durpill^m) and holding the Ring thereof in his right hand,A mans eiection of himselfe. with his other hand that held the dust which he had gathered vp; he threw it vpon his owne shoulders, and likewise vpon the neerest kinsman he had. Then stripping himselfe into his Shirt, vngirt, bare legged, and by helpe of a Staffe, he lept vpon a hedge or dunghill; giuing his Creditours and kinred to vnderstand by this Ceremony, that now he was worth iust nothing, and when he made that leape, all his goods and liuelode lept away from him. In Camisia discinctus,In criminall cases. and discalceatus, cum palo in manu supra sepem Salire debet. Such was the forme of Cession, and parting from goods in criminall matters, that is to say, in case of killing any one.
But in Ciuill matters, the case was otherwise gouerned. The debtor caused all his Creditours to be called together, and in their presence he declared; that he had abandoned and giuen ouer all his goods to them.Proceeding in ciuil occasions. In signe and assurance whereof, he layed a Hollie-wand, or else a Corne-straw vpon the Threshold of the doore. In case of such a resignation, it was called Chrenechruda per Durpillum, and Festucam; Cession by the Ro^de and Threshold. But this custome is abolished, and the former is retained in Ciuill occasions, in most parts of France: As in the Custome of Bourbonnois, the threescore and twelfth Article; Of Auuergne, the fourth Article; and De la March the threescore and fourth Article. In which places, the surrender or Cession is made, by being Vngirt, Bare-foote and bare legde. And hereof descended and came our auncient Prouerbes: Tender, and giue vp the Girdle; And leaue off Hose, Shooes and Bootes. But this last is ordenarily vnderstood, to signifie the death of some debter. So leauing this Argument, let vs come to the case of Degradations.
Degradation vsed among the Romans. Among the Romaines they began to degrade Souldiours and men of warre; by taking from them their Girdle and Sword. An Act which made them as Villaines and Peazants all the rest of their life: According as is said in the second Law, at the Paragraphe, Ignominia. Vers. Sed and si, de his qui not, inf. at the Digest. And this is the

same which we haue formerly obserued from Curopalates, in his Tract concerning the Offices of the Court of Constantinople.
The Ciuill Lawyers call it Exanctorare, that is to say, Insignia Militaria detrahere,How this D^gradation is performed (...) France. which by vsing but one word in French, we tearme Degrader. In regard that this Degradation is performed by seuerall degrees, taking away the Armes piece by piece, from them that they will haue to be degraded. Among vs, the auncient Ceremonies, vsed in the Degradation of a Knight or Gentleman, were as followeth.
After that, by command from the King, enstruction was giuen for the Processe, against such a one as had committed a Fellonious act in his owne person;The degrees of proceeding in the (...) the case being censured before the auncient Knights of the Court; being there assembled to the number of fiue and twenty, or thirty: they condemned the partie accused to losse of life, according to the importance and consequence of the Crime, either Treason, Intelligence, or Fellonie. And before they proceeded to the execution of their sentence and Iudgement of death; the condemned person was to be degraded of his Nobilitie, and the same ought to be done in this manner.

The true Order and forme of Degration, according as it is performed in France.
FIrst of all, two Scaffolds were erected in some faire and conspicuous place,Preparation of two Scaffold* well engirt or defenced with Lists and Barres. The one was couered and adorned with goodly Tapistries, Chaires, and Seates, for the Knights, Iudges, and other their Officers.
The other was much more highly aduanced, as appointed for the condemned Knight, the Kings, Heralds, and Pursuiuants of Armes. At both the ends were placed two Formes or Benches, for twelue Priests to be seated on them.
In the middest of this Scaffold standeth the condemned Knight, armed at all points, and his Shield or Escutcheon of Armes (emblazoned according to Art) fastened before him, vpon some conuenient materiall belonging to the Scaffold.
After Proclamation made by one of the Kings, or Herauld^ of Armes, with a loud intelligible voyce, concerning Sentence and Iudgement of death, pronounced on the condemned Knight standing there present; the Priests begin to sing aloud the Vigils and Prayers for the dead, so farre as to Placebo, and then proceede on to the end of Misere mei Deus.
At the ending of each Psalmes, after Requiem eternam,Degradation of the condemned Knight. the Priests make a pause and silence, during which time, the Kings and Heraulds of Armes doe begin to degrade the condemned Knight, despoyling him of all his Armour, beginning with his Helmet, it being the Armour for his Head. And at euery Stanza, the Herauld that holdeth the part taken from the despoyled Knight, crieth with a loud voyce:
This is the Helmet and Bassinet of such a man (naming him by his name, Sirname, Seigneuries and qualitie) Knight, attainted, and conuicted of Fellonie, Intelligence, Treason, Incendie, etc. (according to the crime) and therefore condemned and sentenced to such and such punishment.
This is the Chaire of Gold, and Collar of his Order; this is the Gorget; the Coate of Armes, his Girdle and Sword, his guilt Spurres, his Gauntlets: And these are the seuerall parcels of his Armour, naming them piece by piece, as they are taken off from his body, which is not done, but at the ending of euery Psalme.
When they come to speake of his Shield, there fastened before him on the Scaffold, one of the Pursuiuants, turning it topsie turuie diuers times, at last proclaimeth with a loud voyce: This is the Shield and Blazon of Armes, of this Traytour

and disloyall Knight here present; and then a Herauld breaketh it in three pieces with a Hammer.
After the last Psalme of Prayers for the dead, the Priests arise from their Seates, and circkling round the condemned Knight; lay their hands on his head, singing the hundred and nineteenth Psalme of David, beginning with these words: Deus laudem meam ne tacueris. In which Psalme are contained the imprecations and maledictions, threatned against the execrable Traytour Iudas, and such as he was.
And like as the Squires, that would receiue the Order of Knighthood, in the Euening before the Ceremonie, were Bathed and washed, and spent the whole night in some Church, deuoutly on their knees in Prayer, that they might be the better prepared in soule and body, for worthy receiuing the Order of Knighthood.
So the Psalme of maledictions being ended, one of the Pursuiuants of Armes, holdeth a Siluer and Guilt Basi^, full of luke-warme water, ouer the head of the Knight there present: And the King of Armes demandeth with a loud voyce three times, the name, Sirname and quality of the despoyled Knight; whereto the Pursuiuant hauing repeated his name three times, as thereby answering to the demand: the Herauld or King of Armes replieth; that he is deceiued, and that he whom he had so often named, was a Traytour, disloyall, periured, and a man of false faith. And to let the people perceiue that hee spake nothing but truth, he turneth himselfe to the Iudges, Knights; and then the Register of the Order causeth him to pronounce, that by plurality of voyces of the Knights there present, the man now in question, and whom the Pursuiuant had named three seuerall times, had bin already openly proclaimed, to be vtterly vnworthy of any more calling by the name of a Knight; but in regard of his vices and foule offences, was banished from their frequencie and company, degraded of Nobilitie, and condemned to punishment. Which being pronounced, the King or Herauld of Armes poureth the Basin of water, vpon the head of the despoyled Knight.
This last Act done, the Knights Iudges descended from their Scaffold, cloathed in Roabes and Hoods of mourning, and walke in that manner to the neerest Church.
The degraded person likewise descended from his Scaffold, but neither by Ladder or Stayres as he went vp: but is let downe by a Cord, fastened vnder his arme-pits, and laid vpon a durtie wheele-barrow, couered with a Cloath for seruice of the dead, and so brought to the Church where the Knights attended for him. The Priests sing the Funerall Recommendums, with prayers appointed for the dead, ouer the miserable degraded Knight: who is afterward deliuered to the Iudge Royall, and then to the Hangman for execution to death, according to order of Law appointed: Except it shall please the King to grant grace, either by Banishment for a time, or else for euer out of the Kingdome.
After this execution, the King of Armes proclaimeth publiquely, and with a loud Voyce; that the Children and descendants of the degraded Knight, are Ignoble and Peazants, vnworthy and vncapable of bearing Armes; nor to be seene or appear at Iousts, Tourneys, in Armes, Courts, or meetings of Kings, Princes, Lords and Gentlemen; on paine of being whipt and beaten naked with Rods, like infamous villaines and wretches as they were.
Vnder the flourishing State of the Romaines, the braue Knights and valiant Captaines that had carried themselues in faire dutie against the enemy; were honored with Triumph. It was lawfully permitted them, to decke and beautifie Temples and publique places with their Armes, and those which they had wonne from the enemy, in signes of Trophees.

Barbarico Postes Auro, Spolijsque superbi.
Multaque praeterea sacris in Postibus Arma,
Captiui pendent Currus, curuaeque Secures,
Et Cristae Capitum, and Portarum ingentia claustra,
Spiculaque, Clypeique:

So speaketh the Poet Virgil, in the seauenth Booke of his Aeneid^s: And Claudian n Eutropium.


Festinas vrgete Manus, meus ecce paratur
Ad bellum Stilico, qui me, de more, Tropoeis
Ditat, and hostiles suspendit in arbore Cristas.

Which they put in practise the rather,An encouragement to following times to serue as a memory of their boldnesse and courage, to their descent and posterity.
In like manner, the Armes of Cowards and crauenly minded Knights, were battered and broken by the hand of Iustice. And among the Romaines, the very last office of all other, was denied to them, which is buriall, in the Monument or Sepulcher of their Ancestours* Their bodies were throwne into a Ditch,The reward of Cowards and Crauens. in some filthy blinde by-place, without any Ceremony whatsoeuer: according to the testemonie of Polybius, in the first Booke of his Pollitickes.
Their Armes, Images, Standards and Statues, ran the very same fortune of infamy, as their bodies did, being trailing in the publique streetes, and cast into noysome sinkes and Laystals.

Descendunt Statuae, Rastemque sequuntur.
So Iuuenall telleth vs.

The Noble Romaine Historian, in the third Booke of his Annales, speaking of them belonging to Piso, dragged along the Streetes to the A place in Rome, where condemned men were cast downe. Gemonian Scala, by the basest kinde of people: their Armes and Statues were likewise bruised and beaten into small pieces.

Frangenda miseram funestat imagine Gentem.
Obserued by Iuuenall.

Senatus Scalas adferri, Clypeosque, and Imagines eius eoram detrahi, and affigi Solo iubet. So speaketh Suetonius, in the Life of Domitian.
Moreouer, it was a very capitall crime and offence, to keepe the portraits and Figures of Traitours and perfidious men;The Pictures of offenders not to be kept as we learne of the Oratour in his Action for Caius Rabirius, where he saith, that Sextus Titius was condemned to grieuous punishment, because he had kept by him, the Table and Portraiture of Lucius Saturninus.
We will conclude this Chapter, with a notable obseruation of our Auncient French, who kept it for a custome, that if a Gentleman were condemned to death,An ancient custome obserued by the old French. for hauing troubled the State, and the repose of his Prince; or robbing on the High-wayes; violation of Wiues or Virgins; thieuing on Passengers; vndoing an honest man, by burning his Grandges and Garners, with such like other actions, farre vnfit for a Noble or generous minde: As they conducted him to his doomed punishment, they would make him to carrie a Dogge on his shoulders, round about the neighbouring parts, where he had exercised his thefts and pilfferies.
Otho of Austria, Bishop of Frisinghen, writeth (much to this purpose) in the Life of the Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa,The History of Count Harman of the Rhine. the eleauenth Booke and eight and twentieth Chapter, that the Count Palatine of the Rhine, Harman, being attainted and conuicted of Fellonie, with ten of his Complices: made honorable amends according to the Law. They were led and conducted a Germaine Mile, each of them carrying a Dogge vpon his shoulders. And obseruing this auncient Custome, he saith. Vetus consuetudo apud Francos and Sueuos inoleuit, vt si quis Nobilis, Ministerialis, vel Colonus. Perduellionis, Praeda, aut Incendij Reus inuentus fuerit, antequam Morte puniatur, ad confusionis suae ignominiam, Nobilis Canem; Ministerialis Sellam; Rusticus Arat^i rotam de Comitatu gestare cogatur.
The Gentleman was constrained to carrie a Dogge on his shoulders:Punishment of offenders for example. The Officer, and Chamberlaine a Chayre or Stoole doubling: And the Countrey labouring man, a Wheele of his Plough or Cart, and so to walke from one Village to another; to the end, that the beholders should know their seuerall vocations in this punishment, before they suffered execution.
The Poet Guntherus Ligurinus, in the life of the same Emperour Fredericke Barbarossa, the fift Booke, hath well remembred this auncient Custome.

Quippe vetus mos est, vt si quis Rege remoto,
Sanguine, vel Flamm^, vel seditionis apertae.
Turbine, seu crebris Regnum vexare rapinis
Audeat, ante grauem quam fuso sanguine poenam.
Excipiat, si Liber erit, de more vetusto
Impositum Scapulis ad contigui Comitatus
Cogatur per rura Canem confinia ferre.

A Hisory alleadged ^ut of Suggerus, Abbot of S. Denys.Suggerus, Abbot of Saint Denys in France, in the Life of our King Lewes le Gros, sixt of the name, speaking of the Assassinate, committed on the person of the Count of Flanders (Sonne to Lewes, King of Denmarke, Heire to Bauldwine, Count of Flanders, Sonne to Robert of Ierusalem) in the Church of Saint Donatus of Bruges, by one named Burchard, Nephew to the Prouost of the said Church, and his Complices, speaketh thus. King Lewes le Gros, being requested by his Barons, to assist them with his powerfull Arme, that Iustice might be done for such a Fellonious fact, committed vpon the Count his Subiect and Liedge-man: gaue order to his Armies, which he had in the Field, against Henry King of England, and Thibault, Count of Champaigne.
Into Flanders they went with part of the Armie, which comming to Bruges, besiedged Burchard and his Complices fortefied in the Church, the Tower and Castell of the Count, and of Saint Donatus. Long continuance of the Siedge, Pestilence and Famine, constrained Burchard to shift for himselfe in the night time. But being betrayed and taken, and censured with seuerity of iudgement; the King commanded,The taking of Burchard and his death. that he should be bound and chained vpon an high Wheele, with his face vp towards Heauen, aliue, to be rent and torne by Rauens and rauenous Foules of the Ayre. And Soldiours marching on the ground vnderneath the Wheele, gaue a thousand wounds to his body with their Pikes and Arrowes, whereby his life expired miserably. Afterward, his body, being so massacred and mangled, with more holes then a ranging Siue; was throwne into a filthy stincking Laystall.
The Arch Achitophell, and prime Counceller of this horrid murder, named Berkolde,The death of Berkold, chiefe causer of the murder. being likewise apprehended, was hanged by the Armes vpon a Crosse Gallowes, and a Mastiffe Dogge fastened by him, which Dogge, as leisurely they prickt with Darts; he snarled at the liuing man hanging by him, biting and tearing his face, and voyding (oftentimes) his loathsome excrements vpon it. Furcis cum Cane suspensus, quotiens* Canis percutiebatur, in eum iram retorquens, totam faciem eius masticando deuorabat: Aliquando etiam, quod horribile dictu est, stercorabat, sicque miseram Vitam miserior miserrimo, Morte perpetua terminauit.
Adde vnto this exemplary death, the miserable end of Bauldwine, Count of Flanders,The death of Bauldwine, Count of Flanders. Emperour of Constantinople, at large declared in the precedent Booke, and thereby gather; that the auncient French, executing to death Traitours and Fellons, made them to suffer seuerity of the Law, carrying a Dogge vpon their necke and sholders, for two reasons.
The first, as we haue set downe in the end of the second Booke, concerning the principall Officers of the House and Crowne of France; serued to make knowne to the people:Two reasons why the Dog was carried. that the condemned party, was of Free and Noble extraction, to whom it was permitted by the Law of his original and birth, to take his pleasure and pastime in hunting.
Canibus circundare Saltus.
The other reason was likewise to make manifest, that the Dogge being the Hieroglyphicke, Embleme and Symbole of faithfulnesse towards his Maister; the Gentleman attainted and conuicted of Fellony, was exposed to the view of all the people, as a man without Faith, and any loyaltie whatsoeuer, towards his Prince and Benefactour, and consequently, as worthy of paine and punishment, as the Dogge (that now shamed him) deserued to be affected.
For among all creatures vnfurnished with reason, the Dogge hath not his like for loue and faithfulnesse to his Maister*The praises of the Dogge for loue to his Maister. Infinite examples are to read, of Dogges that haue couragiously defended their Maisters, or else haue reuenged their death, when they haue bin slaine or murdered in priuie places. As did the Dogge, of Pyrrhus, and of others beside: as is reported by Plutarke, and by Aelianus in his Naturall Historie
Titus Sabinus, a Romaine Knight, being executed to the death, by the instigation,A very worthy and memorable History. and to pacifie the furious rage or the bloudy Sejanus: his Dogge continued alwayes by to defend his body, so long as it was kept vpon the ground. And such bread or other foode, as was giuen to the Dogge, he would bring it to the mouth of his Maister, as thinking thereby to feede and nourish him. And when the same dead body was throwne into Tyber, to serue as prey for the deuouring Fishes in that Riuer: the Dogge leapt into the water after his Maister, holding vp the body in his teeth, to keepe it from sincking. And that braue Citie of the World perceiued by this act, more loue and faithfulnesse to be in this poore creature: then appeared in men, who who vnder pretended and feigned friendship, had betrayed this honest worthy Knight.
Appio Iunio, and P. Silio Coss. cum animaduerteretur ex causa Neronis Grammatici filij in T. Sabinum, and seruitia eius, vnius exijs Canem nec a carcere abigi potuisse, nec a Corpore recessisse; Abiecto in Gradibus Gemonijs moestos edentem Vlulatus, magna Populi corona circumstante; ex qua cum quidam ei cibum obiecisset, ad os defuncti tulisse. Innatau^t idem in Tyberim, cadauere abiecto sustentare conatus, effusa multitudine ad spectandam Animalis ^idem. So speaketh Plinie in the eight Booke and fortieth Chapter of his Naturall Historie, where the Noble Reader may haue an infinite number of the like examples.
I haue seene many Noble Families in France,Noble Families bearing the Dogs Sirname. bearing the Sirname of Robin, and in Nauarre and Gascoigne the Sirname of Perron, of Peraux and Perrots (all these names signifying a Dogge) who beare for their Armes D' Azur de Sable, or de Synople, Au Robin, ou Perron, that is to say, A vne Chieu gay d'Argent, tenant vne Espe nue de mesme. Wherein doe speake properly, this is but a Ceuise and Embleme, whereunto is ordenarily giuen for the Soule and Legand, these words. Viriliter age, and sustine Domine, deriued from the last Verse of the seauen and twentieth Psalme of the Royall Prophet Dauid. And so it is neuerthelesse, that the faithfulnesse of this creature in the seruice of his Maister, hath giuen him the authority and priuiledge, to appeare in the Theater of Honor; next to Eagles, Lyons, and Leopards, Armes of high deseruing.
This creature beareth and sheweth such loue to his Maister, that he knoweth him by his voyce. Soli Dominum nouere. Ignotum quoque si repente veniat intelligunt:How the Dog knoweth his Maister. Soli nomina sua, Soli vocem domesticam agnoscunt. Itinera quamuis longa meminere. Nec vlli, Praeter Hominem, memoria maior. So saith Plinie in the fore-recited passage.
And to knit vp this discouse, with a well spunne thred from a worthy Authour, the Greeke Poet Homer writeth,Of Vlysses and his Dogg^. that wise Vlysses returning into his Isle and Realme of Ithaca, after the absence of twenty yeares, imployed in Voyages to strange Prouinces, and likewise at the Siedge of Troye: was knowne of none but by his Nurse-Mother, and his Dogge. And vpon the same subiect, this creature (for his faithfulnesse) is fixed at the feete of Marbles and Tombes of Kings and Knights.

Car nul des Animaux ne sert tant aux Mortels
Que le Chien garde-Forts, garde-Parcs, garde-Hostels,
Diligent Pouruoyeur, qui d'vn Nez veritable
Fournit de mets friands des grands Princes la Table.
Amy iusqu'a la Mort. Frayeur du Loup ruze:
Poeur du craintif Larron, Veneur bien aduise.
Ce dict noste Lucresse, en sa docte Semaine.


The Dogge (aboue all Creatures) fits man best,
To keepe his Castell, Parke, House: All in rest.
A nimble Purueyer, by his sente still able,
With delicates to decke a Princes Table.
A Friend to death: The wilie Woolfes affright,
And filching Thiefe: A Huntsman day and night.

So speaketh our Lucretius, his learned Weeke.




The Ceremonies, vvhich are to be obser-in the Exequies and Funerals of the most Christian Kings, the Kings of France. CHAP. IX.
IF they haue departed this life, out of the royall Citie of Paris, the Capitall of the Realme of France, the body is brought into the Church, and Monastery of Hault Pas, in the Subvrbs of Saint Iames, neere vnto Paris, or else to Saint Anthonie of the field, according to the solemnity of the man, and state of the Prouince, whether or from whence they are brought; but if they dye in Paris, they stirre not out of the Louure their Pallace royall. But we will haue no other patterne, or modell, then the example of those Ceremonies, and regardable state, which were performed in the pompous funerals of Henry the Great, of famous memory, as they were and ought to be obserued.
King Henry the great was laid vpon his bed in the Cabinet of the Louure on Friday, the fifteenth of May, in the yeare One thousand sixe hundred and tenne, some fiue houres after noone, whither Maister Henry Gondy, Bishop of Paris, first Confessour of the King and his Court, repayred (For you must consider, that wheresoeuer his Maiesty is, this Diuine Ceremory and office is daily celebrated, according to the custome of Paris, and none other) and so the accustomed Prayers for the soule of the dead, were solemnely performed, and after him the rest of the Cardinals and Prelats resident in Paris continued the same.
About midnight the body, was disrobed of all apparell, and the very Shirt, and taken from the bed of the Cabinet was brought into that of the Chamber, and there reuested a new, with a faire white Shirt, a Doublet of blacke Sattin, a night Cap of crimson Veluet embrodered with Gold, and so exposed to the View, as a sad spectacle of all the Parisien. After this on Sa^urday morning, within foure houres of night, the foure Orders of Friers mendicants in Paris, sung day and night round about the bed their Canonicall houres, and prayers for the soule departed.
On Saturday, the sixteenth day of May, in the yeare, One thousand sixe hundred and tenne, foure houres after high noone, the body was opened, and the entrailes taken out, and so enclosed in a Casket of Lead, which was conueyed into a Carosse, to be enterred at Saint Denys of France, the solemne and ordinarie burying place for the Christian Kings.
The Heart was reuerently put into a great siluer Basin, by Monsier the Prince of Conde, Francis of Burbon, who kist it all bloody as it was, and so after him the Princes, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of the Court performed the like: when this Ceremonie was finished, the Heart was perfumd and enclosed within another hart, artificially made of Siluer, all guilded, ^nd so deliuered by the said Prince of Conde to the Iesuites, at their professed Colledge of Saint Lewis, in Saint Anthonies Streete in Paris, and by them to be transported to the Colledge of Fleche in Aniou.
The body being orderly embaulmed, wrapped vp in many folds of Serecloth, and bound hard with wexed rowling bands, was put into a Coffin of Cipresse, which was also enclosed in a strong square Chest of thicke wood, bound about with Iron, hauing eight Rings, and as many Hookes for the better accommodating, it to be borne vpon mens shoulders in the Funerall pompe; which was the charge of the Scotch Guard with white sleeues, who were not to abandon or forsake the same, till it was brought to Saint Denys, and there solemnely enclosed into the Ceremonious Vault for the Coffins of their Kings. Ouer all this was a sumptuous Hersecloth,

fastned and nayled with many little blacke Nailes of blacke Veluet full of crosses of white Sattin.
The great Chamber of the Lou^re was hung with rich tapstry of Silke interwouen with Gold and Siluer threds, which the deceased King had prouided in his life time, and all the Chamber was couered vnderfoote with cloath for that purpose.
Afterward, the Princely body, or Beere was brought before the Chimney, and set vpon certaine Tressels between two great crosses; i^ was then couered with a large cloath of Purple Veluet semy flowry of Gold, so richly Embroidred that you could scarce see the ground-worke: and for the greater state, it trayled three foote round about on the ground; ouer all was a sumptuous Canopy, of the same seme floury Gold fringed, spangled, crispinde, and indented accordingly. In the head of the Canopy in the middle was a rich embroidery with the Armes of France and Nauarre crowned with Imperiall Diadems, and compassed or inuironed round about with the two Orders of Saint Michael, and the Holy Ghost: As for the ornaments of cloath of Gold at this time about the Hearse, if it be done, it is done out of ignorance.
Berry King of Armes, in the life of Charles the seauenth, talkes of a Herse Canopy, and ornaments of Saint Denis Chancell with the Church of Paris, of Violet or Purple Veluet semy flowry with Floure de lis of Gold without number, or limitation: and in the manuscript Chronicle of the Chancelor du Prat, hath it thus: The good King Lewes the twelfth, departed out of this life, at his lodging of the Tournelles, the first day of Ianuary, in the yeare One thousand fiue hundred and foureteene, and after his body was ceremoniously embalmed, and feared: it was brought into the great Hall of the same lodging, and there enclosed in a Coffin of Cipresse, with a sumptuous couering of Watchet or Blew Veluet semy flowry with Floure de lis of Gold.
On both sides, where the body remained or was reposed, there were two stately Altars ordained and adorned, very richly, as couered in the same manner with Purple Veluet embroidered with Gold, hauing Canopies of the same fashion.
Before the body stood two little Stooles, couered with Cloath of Gold, and on them two holy Water-pots, one for the people, who had holy Water sprinkled as they passed through the great Hall into the Chamber, and so went through the gallery of the pictures: the other for the Princes, Prelats, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen.
Behinde the body, was another Stoole couered and adorned in the same manner with cloath of Gold, but vpon that stood a Crosse: At the foure corners of the Coffin, were placed foure great Candlesticks of Siluer gilded, wherein were as many great white Virgin Waxe Tapers, which burnt continually, and so did those, that were on the Altars.
Both of the one side, and the other of this great Chamber, were placed diuers long Formes couered with Tapistry of Silke: behinde the body, on the left hand by the Gallery, there were two Chaires and a Bench couered with Cloath of Gold for the Cardinals, Archbishops, Counsellours of State, and Masters of the requests; behinde them was ano^her Bench for the Kings Almoners, and behinde them, two others for those of the Order of the Religion.
On the other side, all along by the wall, there were likewise long Benches for the Pages of the Chamber, and before them for the Gentlemen in ordinary; and before them, as neere to the Hearse as was conuenient, two other Chaires, and a forme couered with cloath of Gold, sutable to that which the Cardinals had, for my Masters the Princes of the bloud, the Officers of the Crowne, and Knights of the Orders.
The foure Mendicants, Capuchines, and other Monasticall Orders, sung day and night, not a Plaine song, or diuersity of Tunes, but after the manner of the Friers Minims and Capuchins, who take the Cue one of another and answere by courses.
On either side of the holy Water-pots, as neere the body as was conuenient, were also two little stooles couered with great Mantles of Cloath of Gold, on which two Heralds attended in their Coates of Armes, ouer Cassocks of Veluet, with quoifes of their function, and gilded Scepters of Wood in their hands; these went vp and downe from one to another, or (if you had rather) stood still to giue the Holy-water sprinckled to the Princes, Prelats, and Lords, who passed by to receiue it ouer the body of the Defunct.
Within the Gallery of Pictures, there were eighteene Altars couered with blacke, on which were said a hundred low Masses euery day, but within the Kings Chamber were sixe of a h^gher note, the last of which, was alwayes the ordinary Masse for the Defunct, cellebrated in his life time by the Singing-men of his Chappell in the same manner as he himselfe was wont to heare it. This Order was obserued, as well in his owne Chamber, as in the great Hall, where appeared a solemnity of Mourning from Ascension day, to Saint Peter and Saint Paul, the last saue one of Iune, when the body was transported into the great Church of Paris.
The Kings body remained in the Chamber full eighteene dayes, vntill Friday, the feast of Saint Barnaby, the eleauenth of Iune: The day after the Feast, the body was remoued from place to place, till it was laid on a bed of Honour prepared in the great Hall of the Swiss, to whom it was presented the seauenteenth of Iune, and so it came to the charge of the Archers of the Corps du Guard of Scotts: At euery one of these changes, and descents of the body, many Archbishops, Bishops and Abbots in the best robes of their Prelacy, or if you will Pontisicallibus, attended with the Officers of the Crowne, Knights of the two Orders, Lords and Gentlemen, Captains of the Guard, and Officers of the Kings Pallace.
This Hall of the Swissers was most richly prepared with the Kings best tapistry, the wals were hung, and the very roofe and feelings aboue were adorned, and as fo^ the Pillars, or if you please, the Supporters of the hanging Vault, they were all couered with cloath of Gold, from the very toppe to the bottome of the pauement.
In the crosse-windowes from one side to another were, erected those Altars to say Masse on, which stood in the gallery of pictures.
At the top of this Hall, there was a halfe-pace of fiue steppes, or degrees, and before the Chimny a platforme of foure greeces or staires higher, vpon which was raised a Bedsted of nine foote long, mounted on high and fashioned in state round about (except where the bolsters lay against the Chimney:) for the Chimney was on the backe of the beds head, you had also three more steps euery one a foote high and broad, as if you went vp by degrees.
The Bedsted was apparrelled in this manner; the Teston and top had a great cloath of State full of Floure de Luces, with Vallens and all things accordingly: on the bolsters and bed it selfe, were fine large Sheetes of the cloath of Holland, both Cambricke and Lawne, which trailed a great way on the ground, and the ground it selfe was all couered with rich cloath vnder feete. Ouer this was a Couerlet or Quilt of freezed gold, full of crosses of Siluer quartred and cantoned with the Armes of France and Nauarre, with a large border of purple Veluet semy flowry, or ful of Floure delises of Gold, a foote and a halfe broad; there was also another Border of Ermines, as large as that of the Veluet, which was done in such a manner, as if there had been three Couerlets: the first, which for heighth and largenesse surpassed, was of Floure delises: the second of Ermines: the last, of fine Cambricke or Lawne, which couered all to the bottome.
Now vpon this freesed cloath of Gold, in the midst of the bed (the true coffine elsewhere conueied away) was the portraiture of the King laied carued to the life, and apparrelled with robes of State, as he accustomed in magnificent solemnities. He had first on a very fine Shirt of Holland, with a ruffe, as he was wont to weare, when he was liuing: ouer his Shirt was a Wastecoate of Crimson Sattin, plaited or doubled with Carnation Taffety, laid ouer with gold lace, the sleeues came no further then the elbowes, but the skirts within foure fingers of the knees. Ouer his Wastcoate he wore a Dalmatique Gowne of Violet Sattin, full of Floure de Luces

of Gold, so richly embrodered, that you could scarse discerne the ground-worke, besides it was laced round about with a fine thinne plate of Lace of Gold and Siluer foure or fiue fingers broad: this came also to the elbow, and halfe way to the legge; the Buskins and Sandales, which were open Shooes, were of Purple Veluet embrodered with Floure de Luses of Gold, yea the very soles of the shooes were made of Crimsen or Red Sattin.
Ouer this Dalmatique Gowne was a Mantell Royall of six Els long of Purple Veluet, s^my ^ory with Gold, with a facing and edging or border of Ermines. It was open on the right side, bound and made fast vpon the right shoulder with great butons of Violet silke and Gold, friesled and crespinde with the same: the traile of this great Mantle was laid vpon the left shoulder, insomuch that you mig^t easily discerne, how the Wast-coate and Gowne came but to the elbowes, the rest of the Shirt to the tying about the wrist to the hand: to the compassing of ^he necke, to the comming vp to the enclosure before the brest, was all delicately frisl^d, and wrought most curiously.
About the necke of this Mantell Royall, otherwise called the Mantelet, besid^s a doubling or tippe^ of the Furre of Ermines, there was cast ouer him the great Coller of the Order of the holy Ghost, the King also wore a night Cap or Coife of Crimosen Sattin, ouer which was an Imperiall Crowne set full of Diamonds, and pretious Stones: on both sides of his head there were also two Pillobers of Violet Veluet semy flowry of Gold embrodered as the rest: vpon which, on the right hand, was laid the Scepter Royall, and on the other side the Scepter and hand of Iustice: on the other side againe as neere to the bolster of the Bed, as was conuenient, was the Royal Chaire couered with Purple Veluet, embrodered also with Floure de Luses of Gold. In a word, the Altars, Chaires, Benches and Stooles from one side to another, were all of the same fashion, as you heard before in the Kings Chamber.
Round about the Hall-doores, and winding Staires there hung vp diuers square Tables, in which was set out in the best oylie colours, the Scucheon with the Armes of France and Nauarre, crowned with Imperiall Crownes within, a border of the Orders of the King, and Supported by two Angels.
All the while this Image and Portrature of the King remained in this great Hall, there was solemne Seruice at Dinner, and Supper time in the same manner, as was accustomed the King liuing, that is to say: Bendic te: the Grace from the Prelate; the Musi^ke to the Graces; the Seruice, and say of the Wine and Meate, as well by the Masters of the House, as by the Gentlemen, Seruants, and other Officers of the Month, and thus was hee attended on in his Bed in open view with all solemnitie.
But when Wednesday the twentie two of Iune approached, the great Hall made an exchange with his rich and magnificent furniture putting on a maske of sorrow, and shewing a face of mourning: For it was presently hung with blacke both from the top to the bottome, yea round about the very Pillers: within, ouer the hangings of Serge there were two Borders, of black Veluet couered with the Armes of France and Nauarre, embrodred with Gold, in which manner the two great Porches, and the Staires were also dressed.
The Hall it selfe was in a manner made shorter by certaine diuisions: For from the Chimney to the fiue degrees or steps, and all the space where the bed of Honor stood, the Tapestry was presently couered with Serge and blacke Veluet. Into the middle of the Hall the body of the King was brought, and set vpon three Tressels of foure foote and a halfe high, whereon, was put the forenamed Chest in which was the Cipresse Coffin, which was couered with a large Hearsecloth of blacke Veluet, trailing on euery side vpon the ground, full of crosses of white Sattin, with the Armes of France and Nauarre embrodered: It was also furnish^d with another couering of cloath of Gold, freesd, crossed, and tipped or dressed with the same, round about a border of Purple Veluet, with Floure de luces of Gold, embrodred to the full, with a welt and bordure of Ermines foure fingers broad.
Vpon the last named cloath or Couerlet of State, there were foure Pillowes and Cushions of cloath of Gold, freesed and purled: vpon which, by the right side of his

head was placed the Royall Diadem, and vpon the other three the Order of the holy Ghost, the Scepter of Maiestie, and the hand of Iustice, and at his feete was a great Crosse of Gold.
The Coffin had ouer all a Tilt or stately frame of wood, painted ouer with blacke, of ten foote long, and nine foote broad, vpon the railes and barres of the same, from the one side to the other, were foureteene great Waxe Tapers or Candels of white Virgins waxe, weighing sixe pound a piece, which burnt day and night, and at the foure corners were also foure other Tapers of the same weight, and aboue toward the head of the Coffin (higher then the rest) was a great Herse or Canopy, altogether charged with twelue burning Candels of the same weight and fashion.
Ouer the top of this Coffin and frame there was spred a great cloath of Estate, or Canopy of blacke Veluet, fringed with blacke Silke and Gold, interwouen and crespinde with knots of the same.
On both sides of this sumptuous frame were two Altars, in like manner couered with blacke for to say Masse at, as you heard befote in other preparations.
Without the Lists and Barriers, or Railes in a foote or thereabouts, was a little low Stoole couered with blacke Veluet, vpon which stood a Vessell of holy Water, and on either side two other low Stooles, decked as the former, for two Heralds of Armes, who in this seruice wore Chapperons on their heads, their Martiall Robes, and ouer that their Coates of Armes, who gaue the holy Water sprinckell.
From one side to another were also seuerall Formes and Benches, couered with blacke Serge for the Princes, Prelats, and Officers to sit on, and others who were assistant in the Seruice, and attended the Sermons, that were made during the time, that the body remained there.
On Sunday the twentieth of Iune, after Euening Prayer, all the Churches of Paris, as wel Parishes, as Monasteries rang their Bels in their accustomed tune for the dead, which lasted three dayes together, euen till Wednesday night, wherein they prayed day and night for the soule of the defunct, and the Churches with the Monasteries (during those three dayes) were all hung with Blacke, bedecked with Veluet, hauing the Armes of France and Nauarre, their Chappels with continuall burning Candels, and their Chant^ies expressing a great deale of sorrow, the principall Marchants and Burgesses of Paris frequenting their Parish Churches all the three dayes, and hauing solemne Seruice for the dead, their Shops shut vp, and themselues forbidden to sell any thing.
On Thursday being the first of Saint Iohn Baptist the Bels began againe, and lasted till Saturday following, euery Fraternity answering one another, continuing the accustomed Prayers and Dirges for the soule of the departed.
This solemnity of Seruice in Prayers and Orisons for the dead, lasting full three dayes, as you haue heard, to the honour of the departed, and accomplishment of the Funerall Ceremonies, was not onely celebrated in Paris, but in all the Villages and Townes adioyning, yea ouer the Country: so that in truth it was so generall a sorrow, and seruice in burning of Candels, and mourning for this our Henry the great, in his Obsequies and Prayers for his soule; that the like was not performed for fiue precedent Kings, neuer since Lewes the twelfth, surnamed the Father of the People.
The body of the King was full fiue dayes in the Hall of sorrow, during which time, the Comminaltie of Paris came flocking in to receiue the holy Water-sprinckell: and the Friday after S. Iohn Baptist, the King hauing dined at the Hostell of Longeuile departed some foure houres after noone, to performe his solemne prayers ouer the Coffin of the deceased King his Father.
Before his Maiesty marched the great Maister, or Prouost of the House, with his Lieutenants, apparrelled in long mourning Robes, and Chapperons on their Heads, followed with the Guard of Archers in their Cassocks and mourning Roabes, with their Chapperons in forme and fashion, that is to say, that all such as were appoin-to mourn, had certaine Bonnets and Caps on their Heads, and ouer all a Hood, which they tearme a Chapperon.
The Kings Guard of Swissers marched after them, which belonged to the great

Prouost: After the Swissers marched the Fifes and Drommes, all couered ouer with Blacke Cipresse; then followed the two hundred Gentlemen of the Kings House, their Pollaxes or Axes all couered with Cipresse, their points downeward: then came nine Heraulds in their Coates of Armes, marching two and two, with Monioy King of Armes all alone, and the last: Next vnto them, the Knights of the Order of the Holy Ghost, euery one with his Collar and ornaments of his Order, which came ouer their Roabes, with Hoods accordingly.
After them came his Maiestie himselfe, with the Cardinall Francis, Duke of Ioieuse on the right hand, and rhe Cardinall of Sourdis on the other: his Maiestie was reuested with a long mourning Roabe, and large sleeues of Scarlet dye, but Violet colour, with a close Hood on his Head, without any Collar of his Order: the traile, or taile of this Garment of sorrow, was full fiue Els long, and supported by fiue Princes, whereof two were of the blood royall, that is to say, on the right hand Monsier le Prince of Conde, Francis de Burbon, and Monsier the Count Soysons, Charles of Burbon, and the three others were of the House of Lorraine, the Duke of Guise on the right hand, the Prince Ionueile, or Iainuile, his brother, on the left; and at the end of the traine the Duke D'elboeuf their Cosin: Next after his Maiestie, there was a distance of place, and then were carried in mens Armes, for their infancy or tender yeares, the Dukes of Orleans, and Aniou, brothers to the King, in blacke Roabes with formall Hoods accordingly. For you must vnderstand, that in such a solemnity, it is lawfull for none, but the King himselfe to weare Scarlet Violet, but if they had beene of age, then it belonged to them to carry vp the Kings traile, or the long taile of his Vestement; and after them followed the other Princes of the blood, amongst whom was no stranger Prince admitted.
The King paced on foote from the said Hostell and House of Longue-Ville, to the Pallace or Castell of the Louure, whose first Port or Gate was all hung with blacke Serge, bedecked with a Funerall Girdle, as it were, of blacke Veluet with the Armes of France and Nauarre, embrodered to the number of fiue, all of one fashion, and in the same manner it was furnished within, as well as without.
At the Doore or entrance of the great staircase his Maiesty was receiued by Monsier the Duke of Fronsac, Count of Saint Paul: the Prince sirnamed of Orleans, and others of the House of Longueuile, with diuers Marshals of France and Knights of the order, which alwayes remained in the great Hall, before the body of the deceased King his Father, where they kneeled vpon Cushions of Purple Veluet, hauing afterwards on either side the Kings brothers, my Lords the Dukes of Aniou and Orleans, who also kneeled vpon Cushions of blacke Veluet
There were also a great number of Archbishops and Bishops solemnely ^euested with hoods, or bonets of blacke Veluet ouer their white Sattin Miters. The Kings Chappell sung continually De Profundis, and other Musicall Psalmes, after whom the Cardinall de Perron, Archbishop of S^ns, and great Almonor of France made the accustomed Orisons, which being done, there was an aspersion and sprinkell of Holy Water vpon his Maiestie, who also cast the same vpon the body of the defunct; after him, my Lords the Enfans of France perform^d the like, onely those two that were the Kings brothers, but none of those, who did support the traile of the Kings Robe, or long Gowne: this Garment with the Hood of Scarlet Violet, belongeth properly to the Heraulds.
The same day about fiue houres and a halfe within night, my Lord the Chancellour Sillery Brulart, and the Lords of the Counsell approached the Coffin, and besprinkled the Body with Holy Water.
The day following being Saturday the six and twentie of Iune, about the eight houre in the morning, there was a Summons proclaimed for the enterment of the King. The Lord of Rhodes, Knight of both Orders, and great Maister of the Ceremonies in the Court of France, hauing receiued the stile and title of the deceased King at the hands of Monsier the Chancellour, and other the Lords of the Priuie Counsels, proceeded from place to place with foure and twenty Criers belonging to the body; certaine Diuines of Paris, and many other persons adorned with mourning roabes and countenances of sadnesse. The first Summons was in the Court of Parliament,

from thence they went into the Chamber of Accounts, and so into the Court generall of the Kings aides, or Prerogatiue: from thence to the Mint, and so to the other Offices giuing warning of the Kings entertainment.
When these Ceremonies were dispatched abroad, the Maister of the Ceremonies with his foure and twenty Criers and Proclaimers returne back againe to the Louure, and so came before the Marble Table in the great Hall of the Pallace, and after they haue sounded certaine little Bels, Monsier Melon the principall amongst them, published the Kings title, and with an audable voyce proclaimed the Superscription in this manner.
Noble and honorably deuoted persons, pray for the soules of the most high, most puissant, and most excellent Prince Henry the great, by the grace of God, the renowned Christian King of France and Nauarre, most happy, most victorious, and incomparable in all clemencie, mercy and magnanimitie, who is departed out of this world at the Pallace of the Louure: looke I say, that you doe pray religiously, that God may receiue his soule. For on Thursday, some two houres after Noone the body of his Maiestie shall be aduanced, and carried into the Cathedrall Church of Paris, where must be continuall Mattins, and Vigils said for the dead; the day after, early in the morning, the Prayers and Seruice accustomed are for to be solemnely celebrated, and when all is done, the body to be transported to Saint Denis, and there to be inhumed and buried with all princely solemnitie; looke you pray then, that God receiue his soule.
This was the manner and Tenour of that Cry and Proclamation made first in the Pallace, and afterward in the foure quarters of the great Citie of Paris, beginning at the Hostell or before the Towne House: the great Gates during the three dayes of the interment all couered with Blacke Serge, bedecked with quarters, or Scutcheons of blacke Veluet, with the Armes of France and Nauarre.
The same day of the Summons, at the tenth houre or there abouts, or at tenne a Clocke, the Court in their Pallace Robes, went solemnely to giue the Holy Water to the deceased body. At one of the Clocke came the Chamber of accounts: at two the Court of Aides or Prerogatiues: at three, the Officers of the Mint, and so followed the Vniuersity* the Ciuilians, and the whole body of the Burgesses of Paris.
On Tuesday, being Saint Peters day, about Noone, all the Parishes with the Collegiate and Monastery Churches of Paris, did goe to giue the Holy water sprinckle, and so to say the accustomed Prayers in the Church ouer the body of the Defunct: they entred by the doore by the great Staires, and departed by that of the Hall of sorrow, and went out marching in order with measured distance, and so continued in Saint Germans Church, called the Church of Pickaxes, from whence they departed within two houres by the Principall Gate, and tooke the Streete of the Louure, otherwise named Austruch, for to get into the great Streete of Saint Honore, and so they turned by the Crosse of Trayor, all along the ditch of Saint Germaines, otherwise called the Streete of dry Trees, and so passed ouer the new Bridge, turning by the Key or Wharfe of the Augustines, marching by Saint Michaels Bridge to the new quarter and Streete of our Ladies Church, where all the Companies of his Maiesties Guard were ranged in order, euen to the doores of the Church: but for the better vnderstanding of this Solemnitie, they were thus Marshalled.
First came the Captaine Marchand, Colonell of the Archers of the Citie of Paris, and his Lieutenants in their habilliments of mourning, followed by the three Companies of the Guard of the Citie, in their Iackets or Cassockes with mourning Hoods ouer their Heads. The one sort or company abased their Halberds, their points almost touching the ground: the second company carried their Bowes and Quiuers reuersed: the third Company had their Harquebusses in the bought of their Armes, sustained by one hand, and in the other a burning Torch of two pound weight with the Scutcheon and Armes of the Citie, which is, A Field Gueulles, a Ship vnder saile Argent well rigged, and in good Equipage, on a Cheef of France.
After these companies came the new sect of the Francisian Friers, of the suburbs of S. Martins, and those called de Picque-puce: the Capuchins and Minorites, carrying their great Cross of wood; the poore Schollers of Mont Aigu Colledg in Paris; the Cordeliers,

Friers Iacobins, Augustines, and Carmelites, the Fuellants in a browne habit, with all the other Orders, as well in the Parishes, as Monasteries; hauing euery one foure Torches of yellow Wax of two pounds a pe^ce, with the double Armes of the King.
After them followed more then fiue hundred poore men in long mourning gownes from the top to the toe, with hoods ouer their heads. After them followed the lame Souldiers, maintained by the charity of Christian people; in the same abillements as the poore men were: euery one carrying a burning Torch, with the double Armes of the King. Next them, the 24. sworne Criers of Paris.
Then came the Knight de ^uest, with his Lieutenants and Souldiers, as wel on foot as on horsebacke, trayling their blacke Ensignes on the ground. A little after, on the right hand, marched the Sergeants of the Verge of the Guildhall in Paris, in a blacke Vestment, or short cloake, with their swords by their sides, and Truncheons in their hands, blacked at the two ends: and then followed the Sergeants of Horse on foote, as the rest. On the left hand, were the Sergeants of the State-house (or Guildhall) in their Liueries. After these, came the publike Notaries of the Courts of Iustice, in garments and hoods of Mourning: and next them, the Commissaries of the same Courts.
The Prouost of Paris, was mounted on horsebacke, with a Truncheon in his hand couered with blacke Veluet. He was apparrelled in a long Robe of the Serge of Florence; it had a traile or traine of two Elles, supported with three of his owne name, with a hood ouer his head: before him, marched sixe Sergeants of the twelue, with their Cassockes, and hoods ouer their heads, their Halberds and Partisans downward to the ground. He was attended on with Vshers, Audiencers, and Registers, with the three Lieutenants, Ciuill, Criminall, and Particular, with Councellers, Aduocates, and Proctors, belonging both to the King, and the Iudicatures.
After these, on the right hand, followed the Sergeants on Horsebacke, who ordered the squadrons of the Castles; and on the left, after the Sergeants of the Towne-house, followed the Commanders of Wards, with their Deputies. Wee may resemble them to Aldermens Deputies, or Captaines of Fifties, Squadrons, and Tenn^s. Then came those who had beene Shrieues, with the foure and twenty Councellours of the City.
Heere was another diuision: and so there marched after them diuers Religious Orders. Such as were of the Holy Crosse of Bretonnery, the Billeres, the white Cloakes: those of Saint Catherine du Val, the Schollers, and the Mathurins. Then followed in order all the Parishes: Saint Paul, S. Cosme, S. Estien of the Mount, S. Medard, S. Eustace, S Crosse of the Citty, S. Sauiour, S. Iames of the Shambles, S. Innocent, S. Iosse, S. Germain the old, S. Landry, S. Leu, S. Gilles, S. Geruais, S. Nicholas of the Field, S. Laurence, S. Peter among the Beeues, S Andrew de Laas, S. Hillary, S Geneuiefue of Ardents, S. Peter of Arcis, S. Christopher, S. Martiall, S Iohn in the Grene, S. Nicholas of Chardonet, S. Bartholmew, S. Seuerin, S. Iames of the Hospitall, S. Magdalen, S. ^enis de la Chartre, S. Sulpice, and S. Marcel.
Now you must consider, that in this solemnity of Marching, the most ancient Parishes of Paris are those which are last named, and so must take precedency of the first, and the like is to be obserued in the other Orders of Religion, and the Churches Collegiates.
After the Parishes, marched the Religious Orders of Bernardine, S. Maglory, S. Victor, S. Martin in the Field, S. German the neerer, and S. Geneuieue of the Mount, all which tooke the right hand. Then on the left hand, followed the Churches called the Daughters of our Lady, that is to say, S. Estienne of the Greekes, the Sepulcher, S. Opportune, S. Honore, S. Benoit the conuerted, S. Mederic, and S. Germaine of the Auxerrois.
Then on the left hand followed the holy Chappell of the Pallace, and on the right, our Lady of Paris, and these onely sung through the Towne.
After the holy Chappel, marched the whole body of the Vniuersity; before whom came their Beadles in mourning vestments, ouer which were certaine coats of Armes of Violet Taffata, fringed with silke of the same colour painted all ouer, euen from the necke or Collar, with an artificiall Cloud, out of which issued a hand, holding a booke

of Gueules, filletted with Gold, vpon three Flower de Lizes of the same, which is the Armes of the Vniuersity: the Masters and Gouernors of the Colledges, marched along in their furred Cappes: and the Rector or Vice-Chancellour came face to face with the Deane of our Ladies Church.
Betweene the Canons of the Church of Paris, and the professors of Physicke, and other Sciences marched the Kings Musitians, euery one in a Surplesse, and a Hoode on the left shoulder.
After the Clergy and Vniuersity of Paris, marched along the Harbengers, Messengers, Postes for the packets, Courtiers, Masters ouer the Postes, with their Mourning Robes, Hoods on their heads, and the Scutcheon of France vppon their brests on the left side: they were conducted by the Lord de Varenne, Comptroller generall of the Postes.
Then followed the Officers of the great and smaller Stables.
After them, marched the Hoboyes, Trumpets, Fifes, and Drummes, not sounding at all, but all turn'd topsie-turuie, the mouths of their Instruments downward, their Bannerols wound vp, their hoods or hats very low carried, and their head bare.
Then came Monsieur de Crequy, Master of the Campe, with the Captaines, Lieutenants, and Ensignes of the regiments of the Guards, who were all on the right hand: and on the o^her, Signeur de la Curee, with the Captains and Cornets of the squadrons of Light-horse.
After them, marched the great Prouost of the Hostel Belangreuille on Horse-backe; followed of his Lieutenants and Archers on foote, hauing their Mourning Robes, without their Hoods, and beneath their Cassockes carrying their Halberds very low.
Next, came the Captaine of the Porters Lodge of the Louure, with all his Attendants. Then the Captaine of the Switz on horsebacke, followed with an hundred Switz on foot of the Corps du Guard, their Ensigne halfe rowled vp, carried on their shoulder, and couered with blacke Cypers, all their Armes turned backward.
Then followed two hundred Gentlemen of the Kings Pallace, in mourning habits, Hoods on their heads, their Halb^rds or Axes couered with black Cypres, with their points downward. Then came the Officers of the Kings house on the right hand, with the Gentlem^n seruitors, and the Masters of the Hostell, their Truncheons couered with blacke Cypers, the end pointing to the ground. On the left hand marched the Officers of the Mint, the Court of Aydes, and the Chamber of Accompts, with such as appertained vnto them.
Presently followed twelue Pages of Honor, apparrell^d in blacke Veluet, b^re headed, the hats carried very low, booted, spurr'd, and mounted on horsebacke, couered with blacke Veluet, crossed with white S^ttin, without Armes; euery horse led by a Footman all in blacke, bare-headed, and their hats carried very lowe.
Then marched the Squires and Querries, with twelue Armourers and sumpter horses with Armes; after whom came du Vidame du Mans, Captain of the hundred Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber.
Next vnto him followed the Bishop, first Confessor to the d^ceased King, instead of the Bishop of Paris, who was wont to go next before the Corpes or Coffin, after the fashion of Curates or parish Parsons, who follow the domest^cke seruants of the Defunct, and are immediately betweene the body, and them: but after the Pourtraitures of the Kings were diuided from their true bodies, the Bishoppe of Paris being the first Curate, and Ordinary of the King in euery place where he shall remaine, ought to follow the body in his Diocesse, to deliuer it to those of S. Denis in France. For, in regard that Paris is the cheefe City of the sacred Realme of France, the Bishop thereof hath the chiefe cure and care of the true body, till it be disposed of into the ground: and this is the reason, why the Diuine Seruice is celebrated at all times in the Kings Chappell, after the manner of Paris, and therefore the Bishop of Paris attending now the true corps of the Defunct to Saint Denis, another Bishop the first Confessor of the King, went immediatly before the portraiture, as it was now in the Chariot, with a crosse borne before him, and two Almoners following after.
Now came the Chariot of Estate, in which lay the Effigies of the deceased King. It was all couered ouer downe to the ground with black Veluet, crossed vvith crosses

of white Sattin, cantonned or quartered with sixe great Scocheons with the Armes of France and Nauarre, with the two Orders of the King with rich Imbroidery. It was drawne along with six horses, two and two, couered with blacke Veluet, crossed with crosses of white Sattin: on the left side, vpon the first and last horses, were two coachmen in blacke Veluet, bare-headed, and Hoods hanging full lowe.
Round about the Chariot of Armes, marched the Archers of the Scotch Guard in a mourning habite ouer their white Cassockes, with their Hoods on their shoulders; their Halberds and Partizans couered with blacke Cypres, their points caried downward, as you heard before.
In the Front before, were the Lords Vitry, Praslin, and Montespan, Captains of the Kings Guard, in their Mourning Robes, and Hoods on their heads.
There followed them, the Kings Almoners, Preachers, and Confessors, and then sixteene Bishops, two and two, with the Archbishop of Lions, all on foot, reuested as the first Confessor of the King, with caps of black Veluet ouer their Miters of White Sattin.
After them, marched the Bishops of Chalons, Noyon, and Beauuais, reputed Earles: the Bishop of Laon, a Duke (the Bishop and Duke of Langres, was at this time exempted by reason of sicknesse,) and the Archbishop and Duke of Reimes, Peeres of France: and these were mounted on their Mules.
After them, marched Myron, Bishoppe of Angiers; representing the person of the great Almoner of France Iames Duny, Cardinall du Peron, excused by his Gout.
After whom followed the Lord of Bon-Oeil, being on horseback alone, in his robes of Mourning, and the Hood vpon his head, which we call due forme. And after him came the Ambassadors of Sauoye, of Venice, and of Spaine, mounted on Horsebacke, attyred in their Mourning Garments, and without Hoods. Each of them was conducted by a Bishop, mounted vpon his Mule.
Then followed after, the two Nuntio's to the Pope, mounted on their Mules, with their Conducters.
The Ordinary, conducted by the Archbishop of Embrun.
The Extraordinary, by the Archbishop of Aix in Prouence, both the one and other, as well as the Bishops, Peeres of France: and they which conducted the Ambassadors, were cloathed with their Violet Saplers and Rochets, and likewise their great Copes. After the Nuntios marched
The CardinallesDe Ioyeuse, Archbishop of Rouen. And,The Cardinalles De Sourdis, Archbishop of Burdeaux, with their Violet Coapes, and Mules adorned with the same.
So finished the solemne Funerall Pompe: after which, were carried the Honors of the deceased King: but before his Picture or Effigie, which seemed as if it had beene liuing. And yet notwithstanding, all they which carried it, were cloathed in Mourning, with Hoods on their shoulders, and square Caps on their heads.
First of all,
Three Heralds of Armes of France marched equally together, hauing their Coates of Armes ouer their Mourning Gownes, their Hoods vpon their shoulders, black Veluet Caps (of the old fashion) on their heads, and their Scepters in their hands, couered with blacke Cobweb Lawne all ouer.
The Lord of Rhodes, Great Master of the Ceremonies of France, Knight, and high Prouost of both the Kings Orders, Prime Esquire, Caruer, and Bugle-bearer vnto the King, riding alone on horsebacke, in his Mourning habit, and Hoode vpon his head; bearing a Lance pointed with Blew, and headed with Golde, which was the Phanon Carre, that is to say, The Cornet of France, made of violet Veluet, semed with Flower de Luces d'Or de Cypre, in rich Embroidery, more full then wanting any, Frindged verie largely with Gold.
It was followed by the Cornets of the Marches and Prouinces of France, appertaining to the Sacred Domaine of the King. To wit, the Viscounties, Counties, Dukedomes, Peeredomes, and other Seigneuries on the Frontiers of the Kingdome; and of them which (by right) belonged to the Crowne of France.


The VISCOVNTIES.

BEARNE.
A Soueraigne Viscountie, holding the Parliament at Pa^, 
with two Bishopprickes, and thirteen Baronies. Porte d'Or, a Deux Vaches de Gueulles, accornees, Accolees, and clarines de Gueules, Coronnes d'vn Cercle.
Bearne, King of Armes, with his Coate of yellow Veluet, assisted by two Heralds*
Her Cornet of yellow Sattin, the Lance painted with the same colour, and charged with the same Armes: carried by Sir N. representing the prime Baron of Bearn.


LIMOGES.
AN Ancient Viscountie, and Patrimonie to the Dukes D'Albret, Kings of N^uar. Porte d'Ermines (which we speak in one word of Bretaign) a la Bordure de Gueules. It is of the Parliament of Guienne.
Limoges, Herald of Armes* his Coat of white Veluer, with the Armes of his March
The Cornet of white Sattin, the Lance painted white, charged with the said Arms. Carried by the Seneschall of Limosin.



The COVNTIES.

COMMENGE.
THe Frontier March of Spaine, within the Pyrenean Mountaines. After that, the Lords thereof were conuerted to the Christian Faith, they tooke for Armes, De Gueules a quatre Otelles (which are blanched Almonds) d'Argent disposees en Saul^oir. And for deuice, these words: En Croyant, Nous Amandons.
Commenge, Herauld of Armes, with his Coat of red Veluet.
The Cornet of Red or Crimson Sattin, the Launce painted with the same colour, cha^ged with the said Armes: carried by the Viscount of Pegulhan, of the sirname and Armes of Commenge, and hereditary Seneschall of the same Countie.


Saint GILLES.
A County, March, and Prouince, Frontiering on the Mediterranean Sea in Languedock. Porte de Gueules, a Six Chasteaux d'Or. 3.2.1.
S Gilles Herald of Armes, wearing his Coat of Crimson Veluet.
The Cornet of Crimson Sattin, the Launce so painted, charged with the sayde Armes: carried by the Seneschall of Nismes, and of Beauquaire.


PROVENCE.

A County of very great extendure, Limitrophing on the Mediterranean Sea, and the Alpes. Porte d'Or, a Qua^re Paulx de Gueules, au Chef de France sans nombre. Shee hath her Parliament, and two Metropolitane Cities.

Aix, where the Parliament is kept; And
Arles, tearmed the White.

Prouence, King of Armes, cloathed with the saide Liueries, betweene two Heralds of his March.
The Cornet of yellow Sattin, with the foresaid Armes, and coloured Lance: carried by the high Seneschall of Prouence. It is a Parliament apart, or by it selfe, and of resort therto, are the Counts of Folqualqu^er, and the Lands adiacent.
The horse of State, trapt and couered with yellow Satten, fringed with Gold, and bearing the said Armes; and the like Armes enamelled on the horses Chaufraine. A Plume of the Colour and Mettall of the saide County. The horse being ledde by the two chiefe Barons of Prouence.
L'Escu d'Or, Blazonne des Armes, Coronees du Cercle: caried vpon the top of a staffe, printed Gueules and Gold, by the prime Viscount of Prouence.


BRESS^ and BAVGIE.
THe Counties of Bresse and B^ugie, revnited to the Sacred Crowne of France, in exchange for the Marquisate of Saluces; done by the said King Henry the Great, of famous memory. M^rche^ and Frontiers of Sauoye, and of the County of Bourgongne, are ann^xed to the Gouernment, and resort to the Parliament of Bourgongne at Dijon, with the Bayliwickes of G^^x, and of Ve^omey.

Bresse. Porte d'Argent a la B^nde d'Azur, (...) Deux Lyons de mesme, l'vn en Chef, and l'autre en Poinct.


B^ugre. Porte de Gueules, au Lyon s^ne d'Ermines, Arme, Lampasse, and Coronne d'Or.

The Cornet of red Sattin, charged with the Armes quartered of Bresse and Baug^e carried by the Bayliff^ of the Countries.


ARTOIS.
A Countie, Peeredome, and Appan^ge of France, resorting to the Parliament at Paris. De France, au Lambeau de Gueules de Quatre pieces, charge de Do^ze Chaste^^x d'Or.
The Cornet of sky colour Sattin, with the saide Armes, carried by the Bayliffe of Artois.


BOLOGNE vpon the Sea.
A Countie and Frontiere on the Ocean Sea, resorting to the Parliament of Paris. Porte d'Or, a trois Torteaux de Gueules. 2, 1. Escartele d'Or, au Gonfanon de Gueules, Frange de Synople.
The Cornet of yellow Sattin, with the saide Armes painted: borne by the Bayliffe of Lou^^nois.


HOYE, and GVINES.
BOth in one Countie, and Frontering the Ocean Sea: But Callis is the Capitall Citty, a Gouernement a part by it selfe, and resorting vnto the Parliament of Paris.
The Cornet of yellow Sattin (the Lance painted with the same colour) charged with the Armes of the said Countie, which are Vaire, Contre-Vaire d'Or, d'Or et d'Azur: carried by the Bayliffe of Guines.


VERMANDOIS.
WHich is a Countie, Limitrophing on the Ocean Sea, and vpon the Estates of Flanders, comprehending the Gouernements of Piccardie, Amiens, of Montd^dier, Peronne and Roye; As also Abbeuille, Ponthieu, and the March of Corbie. This Prouince is of long extend^re, and resorteth to the Parliament at Paris. It was (in former times) the second Gouernement of France, giuen to the second Prince of the Illustrious blood of France.

Porte Eschiquete d'Or, ^t d'Azur de Cinq Traicts.

Vermandois, King of Armes of Piccardie, his Coate of yellow Veluet, Es^quichete d'Azur e^ Broderie, with his two Heralds.
The Cornet of yellow S^ttin, with the Armes of the March, carried by the Bayliffe of V^rmandois.
The horse of Honor, with the same adornment of Veluet, and Armed Chanfraine, (...) o^ Mettall and Colour, led by long Cordions of S^lke of the same colour, and by the two prime Barons of Piccardie.



POICTOV.
BEing a Countie and March of very great extendure, bounded with the Ocean sea. It was long since erected into a Peeredome, and the Resort to the Parliament of France, which is at Paris. Porte de Gueules, a Cinq Tours d'Or, Massonnees de Sable e^ Saultoir.
Poictou, King of Armes for this rich Prouince, with his Coate of Crimson Veluet, bearing Armes of the Countie, with his two Heralds.
The Cornet of the same, and carried by the Seneschall of Poictou.
The horse of Honor, in like maner as before, conducted by the two chiefe Barons of Poictou.
The Shield of Armes, the same: carried by the first Viscount of Poictou.



Auncient Counties and Peeredomes, and euen to this present Honoured with the Title of Precedency, at the Sacring of our most Christian Kings.

TOLOSSA.

 BEing a Countie, and the capitall City of Languedock, honoured with a Metropolitane Sea, with a Parliament of France, and with an Vniuersitie the most famous of Christendome. Porte de Gueules, a la Croix Cleschee, and Terminee de Douze Pommes d'Or.
Tolossa, King of Armes, his Coate of crimson Veluet, semed with the Armes of his March, in rich Embroiderie of Gold, going in the midst, betweene his two Heralds.
The Cornet of crimson Sattin, carried by the Seneschall of Tolossa.
The horse of Honor, as before.
The Shield of the Peeredome in the same manner. This is the third Peeredome in account.


CHAMPAIGNE.
A Countie Palatinate, and a great March, resorting to the Parliament of France, accounted for the second Peeredome. Porte d'Azur, a deux Cottices d'Argent, Potencees, and Contrepotencees de Treize pieces d'Or.
Champaigne, King of Armes for this great March; his Coate of Skye-coloured Veluet, with the Armes of his March in embroidery of Gold, and going in the midst betweene his two Heralds.
The Cornet of blew Sattin, carried by the Bayliffe of Troyes.
The horse of Honor as before, lead by the two chiefe Barons of Champaigne.
The Shield of the Peeredome, carried by the Count of Vertus.


FLANDERS.
IT being a Countie and Peeredome of France, of Ancient resort to the Parliament at Paris; and the prime Peeredome amongest the Counties. Porte d'Or, au Lyon de Sable.
Flanders, King of Armes, cloathed in his Coat of yellow Veluet, embroydred with the Armes of his March, and going in the midst betweene the two Heralds thereof.
The Cornet of yellow Sattin, carried by the Bayliffe of Flanders.
The Horse of Honor, in forme as before, and led by two Barons of Flanders.



The DVKEDOMES.
KIng Henry the Great, of whose Obsequies and Honourable Funerall Pompe, we are now making relation, being in peacefull possession of the Kingdome, made an

Ordinance and declaration, concerning the vniting of his Ancient Patrimony, depending vpon the Crowne of France, and of that whereof he was Lord, when hee came to the saide Crowne. Giuen at Paris in the moneth of Iuly, and yeare of Grace, one thousand, sixe hundred and seuen. Signed Henry, and on the Fold, By the King, De Lomenie (the said Lord de Lomenie, Counceller to the King in his Councels of Estate and Priuate, and chiefe Secretary of his Commands: Porte d'Or, a vn Arbre de Synople, au Chef d'Azur charge de Trois Lozanges d'Argent.) So that by meanes of the sayd Ordinance, the Viscounties of Bearn and of Limoges; the Counties of Foix, of Armagnack, and other Seigneuries came to the Crowne. Among which, is the Dukedome of Albret, the Auncient Patrimony of the Kings of Nauarre, Iohn, Henry the first, and Iane d'Albret, Queene of Nauarre, Mother to King Henry the Great: which was done to preserue the memory of this Royall Ligne.

ALBRET.
WHich is a Dukedome, on the Frontiers of Gascoignie and Nauarre, resorting to the Parliament of Guienne, the Capitall City whereof, is Tartas. Portoit de France, Escartelle de Gueules.
Albret, King of Armes, in his Coate of crimson Veluet, assisted by two Heraulds of his March.
The Cornet of crimson Sattin, borne by the Seneschall of the Country.
The horse of Honor, in manner as before, ledde by the two cheese Barons of the Country.
The Shield carried by the prime Viscount.


BRETAIGNE.

 A Dukedome of very great extendure, coasted along with the Ocean Sea, which hath her Parliament alone by her selfe at Rennes, and her Chamber of Accompts or Exchequer at Nautes. Porte d'Argent seme d'Hermines de Sable. Howbeit, this ought to be otherwise contraried, according to the naturall whitenesse of the Hermine, to wit, De Sable, aux Ermines d'Argent, sans nombre.
Bretaigne, King of Armes, wearing his Coate of white Veluet, powdred with Ermines; going in the middest betweene the two Heralds of his March.
The Cornet of white Sattin; carried by
The horse of Honor, couered with white Veluet, spotted with Ermines, the Armes on the Chaufraine, with Lambrequins of white and blacke* M.
The Shield of the saide Dukedome. P.



Ancient Dukedomes and Peeredomes, being honoured to this present, with the Title of Assistance, at the Sacring of our Most Christian Kings.

GVIENNE.

 ANciently called Aquitaine, a Dukedome and Peeredome of France, the chiefe City whereof is Bourdeaux, honored with a Metropolitan Sea, and with a Court of Parliament: wherunto resorteth the Prouinces of Agenois and of Condonois, Les Landes, Perigort, Xaintonge and Limosine, and hauing a very famous Vniuersity. Porte de Gueules, a vn Leopard d'Or.
Guienne, King of Armes, habited in his Coat of crimson Veluet, going betweene two Heralds of his March.
The Cornet of crimson Satin, caried by the Senescal of Guienne.
The horse of Honor in like manner. M.
The Shield of the Dukedome, as before. P.



NORMANDIE.

 IN former times the Dutchy of Normandie, was named Neustria, a principall Dutchy and Palatine of France, whereof the principall or capitall City is named Rouen, a Metropolitane Towne, and seat of Court of Parliament, formerly called Eschicquier. Porte de Gueules, a deux Leopards d'Or.
Normandie King of Armes, in his Coat of Crimson red Veluet with the Armes of his Limitation, hauing as assistant, two other Heralds, in the same manner.
The Cornet was of crimson Sattin doubled, supported by the great Seneschall or Steward of the Prouince.
The horse of Honor was caparisond in the same manner, and led by an Officer in state.
The Escocheon of Armes was also carried by a man of quality. N.N.


BOVRGVNDIE.

 THis Dutchy is the principall and ancient Peere of Fraunce, whose Court of Parliament is kept at Dijon in the Diocesse of Langres, a principall Dutchy belonging to the Church. Porte Ba^de d'Or and d'Azur, de Six pieces a la Bordure de Gueules, Escartelle de France a la Bordure componnee d'Argent, and de Gueules.
Bourgongne King of Armes in his coat of Violet Veluet with the Armes of his Prouince, betweene two other Heraldes in the same Furniture.
The Cornet of Watchet Sattin, or serene Azure, supported by the Bayliffe of the Dutchy.
The horse of Honor caparisond in blew or Violet Veluet, as the Heralds, led or conducted by N.N.
The Scutcheon of this Principality, was open or hollow aboue, and in the middle a double Flower de Luce of Gold, carried by N.



Dukedomes erected, as Peeres of France, being the Portion and Reuennues belonging to the maintenance of my Lords, the Kings Children.

EVREVX.
THe Dutchy of Eureux, was the auncient Patrimony and portion of the Kings of Nauarre, after Monsieur or the Lord Lewis of France was made Earle of Eureux: (he was sonne of King Philip the Hardy, sonne of S. Lewis) and Father of Philip d'Eureux King of Nauarre, by reason of his wife the Lady Iane of France, daughter vnto King Lewis Hutine. The Armes of Eureux are those of France, a la Bande Componnee d'Argent, and de Gueules, as is to be seene at this day in the Coine of Nauarre.
Eureux, King of Armes, in his Coate of France, assisted with two Heraldes of the Prouince.
The Cornet in the same manner.
The horse of Honor accordingly.
The Scutcheon of Eureux, with the Crest and Supporters of France.


VENDOSME.
THis Dutchy was the ancient Patrimony of the Kings of Nauarre, by the sirname of Bourbon, the first Prince of the Blood. It beares De France, au Baston de Gueules charge de trois Lyons d'Argent, the Crest of France, which is a double Flower de luce.
Vendosme King of Armes in his Coat of Violet Veluet, with the Armes of the Prouince, assisted with two Heralds.
The Cornet in the same manner.
The Horse of Honour accordingly.
The Scutcheon with the Crest of France, etc.


ALENSON.
THe Patrimonie and reuenew of the yongest Sonne or second of France, before the Duchy of Valois was annexed, or reunited to the Crowne: it beares of France, a border Gueulles charged with eight Besans Siluer, the Heralds call them plats. Alenson King of Armes in his Coate of Violet Veluet with the Armes of his Prouince betweene his Heralds.
A Cornet.
A Horse of Honour.
A Scutcheon with the Crest of France, as before.


ANIOV and TOVRAINE.
THe ordinary Patrimony and portion of the third Sonne of France. The Armes of Aniou are as those of France, within a Border Gueulles.
The Armes of Touraine are as those of France, within a Border engrayled and componee of Or and Gueulles.
Touraine King of Armes in his Coate of Violet Veluet with his Heralds.
Cornet.
Horse of Honour.
Scutcheon, with the Crest of France.
Aniou, King of Armes in his Coate of Violet Veluet, with his Heralds.
Cornet.
Horse of Honour or State.
The Scutcheon, as the former.


ORLEANS and MILAN diuided or vnited together.

 THe portion and patrimonie appertaining to the second Son of France: the Armes of France with a Lambeaux, or Table of Siluer. Milan beares Argent with a Giure of Azure scaled Gueulles.
Millan King of Armes in his Coate of white Veluet, seme de Giures assisted with the Heraulds of the same Prouince.
Cornet of double white Satten.
The Escutcheon accordingly.
Orleans King of Armes in his Coate of Violet Veluet, semy de France, with his Heralds.
Cornet Blew or Azure Sattin.
The Horse of State in Violet Veluet.
The Scutcheon, accordingly as in the rest.


DAVLPHINE.

 THis principality is the portion or reuenew of the first or eldest Sonne of France, Heire apparant to the Sacred Crowne of the Floure de Luce by his birth: which is a Principate establishing his Court of Parliament at Grenoble, and from thence is the Principality of Orenge raised, or set vp, as we haue said elsewhere.
Monsieur le Dalphine beares as France, quartred with a Dalphine: the Field de Or, the Dolphine Azure.
Dalphine King of Armes, in his Coate of Violet Veluet, with a Crowne for his Prerogatiue.
Cornet; Violet Veluet.
The Horse of Honour or State, as the same.
The Scutcheon accordingly, but that these honours and markes of Soueraigntie were carried and mannaged by the foure Barons of Dalphine, after whom followed those markes of Soueraigntie, which immediately belonged to the Crowne of France, namely:


IERVSALEM and SICIL.

 THe King of Armes of the same name,


with his Coate of Violet Veluet between his Heralds.
The Cornet of Violet Veluet.
The Horse of honour, couerd or caparised with Violet Veluet, semy a border of Gold of Cipresse, with a Lambeau or Table of red Veluet.
The Scutchion of Sicell, as of France with a Label Gueulles, and a Crowne of Floure de Luces.


HIERVSALEM.
THe King of Armes of the said name, in a Coate of white Veluet with the great Crosse of Hierusalem, embrodred with Gold of Cypresse, with his Herald.
Cornet of the same.
Horse of State likewise.
The Scutcheon of the same Realme.


FRANCE and NAVARRE.

 THe King of Armes of the same name with


his Coate of crimson red Veluet all alone, his Heralds going before.
The sixe Prouinces of that Kingdome.


Low Nauarre.


D'Olite.


Tudelle.


Sanquessa.


Viana.


Pampelone.


The Heralds hauing their Coates of redde Veluet with the Armes of their diuisions, the last the lesser, the first more fuller.
The Cornet.
The Horse of Honour.
The Scutcheon of Nauarre within his Order of Lillies, or Floure de Luces.
After them followed the Cornet with the colours and liueries of his Maiesty, the most Christian King; Orenge, white and blew, powdred or couered all ouer with Hercules Clubs in a border of Argent, with his Maiesties deuise, which is an H. crowned, enterlaced with two Scepters in Saltoir, a Sword in Pale ouer all, with a rich border of Gold of Cipresse, with the Motto or words as about the edge of a piece of Coine.


DVO. PROTEGIT. VNVS.
This Deuise is remarkeable, and to be seene in all the pieces of Gold or Florins of his noble ancestors, or in the Flowrets of euidences; the Penons and Guidons were of the same colours, liueries, and deuises carried by N. N.
The Helmet of Gold crowned open before, the Crest double Lillies or Floure de Luces, de Or: the Labels of the files of the same colours, and Liueries carried by N.
The Shield of Gold crowned, charged with the Deuise: carried by N.
The Horse of estate couered or caparisond with blew Veluet, with a rich border of Gold and Siluer, linked with the same, and the same Deuise, led by N.
The great Standard of blew Sattin with the deuise, colours, and brodery of Gold of Cypresse, caried by N.

After these followed

Another great Standard of blew Sattin, or colour of the serene heauen, doubled with a rich brodery of Floure de Luces of Gold of Cipresse, yet voyded so plainely, that you might behold a plaine Crosse of white Sattin, which is the Crosse of France, supported or carried by N.
The great Standard of Saint Michael, the guardian Angell of France, of double blew Sattin or Azure, rich embrodered with Gold and Cipresse, powdred with Stars of Gold, carried or supported by N.
The great Standard of Saint Denis, called Dionisius Areopagita, the Apostle of France, of double Sattin crimson red, powdred with flames of Gold, in a rich embrodery: Saint Denis reuested as of auncient time (according to the truth of the Story) all in white, carrying his Skull betweene his hands: this Statue was supported or aduanced by N.
The great Standard of the holy Order of Saint Esprit, or the holy Ghost, made of double greene Sattin, with one pillar of Siluer, rancked with rich embrodery of Gold or hauing rankes, the rest powdred with flames of Gold most plainely voyded, a border of Ciphers with the Coller of the same Order, fringed with Gold.
The penon of France, of Violet Veluet semy, or powdred with Floure de Luces of Gold of Cipresse, carried by N.
The Guidon of the same, carried by N.
Another great Standard of France of the same, carried by N.
After which followed certaine Squires on Horsebacke, carrying his Maiesties Armes, that is to say:
His Spurres of Gold couered with Cipresse, vpon a Truncheou, couered with blacke Veluet, carried by Beniamin.
His Gauntlets in the same manner, carried by Beuis.
The Scutcheon of France with an Imperiall Diadem, and the two Orders of Saint Michael, and the Holy Ghost, round about, carried by Puluinel.
The Coat Armour of Violet Veluet powdred with Lillies of Gold of Cipresse most plainely voided, doubled of Violet Sattin, carried by the Viscount de L'Isle.
His Helmet of Gold with an Imperiall Crowne of the same, to which was adioyned the mantell Royall of Violet Veluet, couered with Floure de Luces of Gold of Cipresse furred with Ermines; it was carried by the Lord Liencourt the first, or principall Esquire.
The Kings Horse of honor couered, or caparisond with Violet Veluet, semy flowry with golden Lillies of Cipresse, with fringes and crespines of the same, with the Labels and Plumes Violet and Yellow, it was led by three Esquires on foote: Lu Passe: Lu Ferte: and la Reuiere Breton.
After them marched Montioy, King of Armes of France, all alone
After him followed twelue Pages of the Chamber, apparrelled in blacke Veluet on foote, with Bonets on their heads of the same.
After them came on Horseback all alone Roger de Belgrade, great Esquire of France, carrying the Sword Royall in a Scarfe, the Scabberd, Girdell, and Hangers of Violet Veluet, full of Floure de Luces of Gold of Cipresse embrodered, the whole couered with Cipresse.
Then followed the Vshers of the Chamber, carrying their Maces of Gold couered with blacke Cipresse.
After them marched the Bishop of Paris, being the Kings Curat, or hauing the charge of the Kings body, with him of Angiers, representing Cardinall Peron, great Almoner of France.
After them came the Court of Parliament in Robes of red Scarlet, with Hoods of the same furred with Ermines, and Bonnets or Hats on their Heads, the Court of Parliament did not seeme to mourne, to show, that Iustice did not cease in France. In the midst of them, the portrature or effigies of the King was sumptuously carried in



his bed of State, or Chariot of honor, with an Imperiall Crowne on his head, the Order of the Holy Ghost about his Coller or neck, the Scepter Royal in his right hand, and a hand of Iustice in the other, with a border of Ermines.
The couer or Canopy of this bed of State or Chariot of honor, vnder which (as you haue heard the portrature lay was supported or carried by the sixe Presidents of the great Chamber (Monsier the first President de Harlay, absent by reason of sickenesse) apparrelled in their Mantels, Hoods, and Caps of maintenance on their head, a Vestment of honor vsed of auncient Monarkes and Potentates, the first two, who went before, were the President Mole on the right hand, and Iambeuile Camys on the other; in the middle were the President Thou and Sequire; behinde, came the President of Blanc mesnil Potier, and Forget.
Round about the Lords of the Parliament, marched some of the Scotch Guard.
After them followed the Prouost of Marchants Liury Sanguin, Counsellor of the great Chamber, with the foure Sheriffes of Paris in the Roabes of their Liuerie, without mourning, carrying another Canopy or cloath of Estate, after the body. This Canopy was of Cloath of Siluer, damasked with great red branching worke, to the bottome of the same, crossed with white Sattin round, without any Coates of Armes, the Staues which vpheld it, couered with white Veluet. It was receiued of them or from them, by the Religious or Clergy of Saint Denis in France, at the bowing of a Crosse in the Village of the Chappell, and then earried by th^m after the portrature vnto their Church, where the said Canopy remained euer after.
Next to the Sheriffes and the Prouost of the Merchants, marched in front, and on Horseback couered with blacke V^luet, crossed with white Sattin, the Duke of Fronsacke, Earle of Saint Paul, by the sirname of Orleans, representing the great Maister of the Hostell of France, and he carried in his right hand a Staffe, couered with blacke Veluet. In the middle came the Duke of Guise, carrying the great Banner of France of Violet Veluet, powdred with Floure de Luces of Gold of Cipresse, with a rich embrodery fringed with the same, he represented the great Chamberlaine of France; and the Baron de Thermes on the left hand, represented the first Gentleman of the Chamber.
After them marched the Lords, that were principall mourners, that is to say, my Lords: The Prince of Conde and Count Soisons, Princes of the bloud, Knights of the Order of the Holy Ghost, with their Orders aboue their necks, or Collers.
The Duke of Guise, Prince Ianuile, and Duke of Elbeuf; Princes of the House of Lorraine, but not Knights of the Order. The Dukes of Espernon, AndOf Montbazon.Knights of the said Order.
All riding on H^sebacke, one after another, with Chapperons on their Heads, and Collars of the Order vpon their mourning Roabes, hauing long traines, containing about fiue E^s in length, and carried vp by their Gentlemen.
After the great mourners, Marched in front
The Vsher and Herauld of Armes, Of the Order of the Holy Ghost, being followed
By the High Treasurer, and the Register of the said Order: And they were followed
By nine Knights of the Order, being mourners on foot, according as all the rest of the Funerall Pompe were, which was composed of
Foure and twenty Pages, belonging to the Kings Stable, wearing Coates and Night-Cap of blacke Veluet.
An hundred Gentlemen of the Kings House.
Foure Tr^mpets, couered with blacke Cypresse, bearing their Trompets Boccales downeward.
Foure Banners, of foure Companies of Archers of the Kings Guard, consisting of foure different Cullers, as namely Red, Green, Blew and Ash-Culler, couered likewise with black Cypresse, the Cullers trailing on the ground, and the Guard the heads of their Halberds in like manner.
Such was the traine of this enterment, wherein were counted ten thousand persons cloathed in mourning, and teares trickling downe their cheekes, for the most part of them.
The Streetes of Paris, where the Conuoye passed for the two first dayes, were hung all with blacke, the most part of them being blacke Veluet, with the Armes of the deceased King, and of the Citie.
At euery sixt House, all along the said Streetes, stood men in mourning, each one holding a lighted Torch in his hand, bearing the Armes of the Citie: the principall Gate whereof was hung with blacke Serge, and thereon blacke Veluet also, with the Armes of the dead King, during the three dayes of the Obsequies and Funerall.
The Churches of our Lady in Paris, and of Saint Denis in France, were hung with Serge, and blacke Veluet vpon it, with Armes of the deceased King. The bodies of those Churches, the Quires, the Wings, Crossings, Trauersings, Pillers and Vaults, both aboue and below, were full of burning Waxe Lights, each of them containing a pound weight, and standing (not aboue a foote in distance) one from another.
In the Q^i^e of the Church of Paris (as also in that of Saint Denys, ^ccording to the length and widenesse of them) was fixed a frame, called Vne Chappelle Ardente, of Carpenters worke, the nether-part whereof was sixteene foote in largenesse, and the toppe supported by foure great Pillars square, of twentie foote in height, which sustained three Friezes, and thirteene Piramids, with their degrees, all full of Crosse-Crosselets and pins of Wood, which carried aboue three thousand burning Waxe-Candles, each of them containing a pound in weight. These Piramides (and especially the thirteenth in the midst of all) were so highly raised, that they seemed to touch the roofe of the Church. These Chappelles Ardentes were within the plaine grounds painted with Ashe colour, and Floure de Luces of Orpine Siluer, according as the foure great Pillars were, the Ballestars and Pillars round about, but beneath they were painted blacke.
Vpon th^ third Frieze aloft, were rancked the Armes of the Duchies, Counties and Seigneuries, belonging to the Crowne of France, all represented in Funerall Pompe.
That in the midst, was engirt with a folding of Violet Veluet, very thickly powdred with Floure de Luces of fine Gold, in richest embrodery.
The last, but the first in order, was engirt with a wrapping of Blacke Veluet, and cou^ed with the dead Kings Armes, in rich Embroderie.
The great Pi^amid in the midst, was entoured with three gilded Crownes, in manner of Ga^lands with great Fleurons, representing the Kingdomes of Sicilie, Ierusalem and Nauarre, and (aboue them) the great Imperiall Crowne of France, which couered the three other, and on the top thereof, a great double Crosse, charged with burning Waxe-lights.
Vndernea^h this Chapelle Ardente, engirt with great Tapers, of sixe pounds a piece, lay the Body and Effigie of the deceased King, in his Bedde of Honour.
The first day of Funerall Pompe, was sung in the Church of Paris (where the Body rested for that night) Vigils, and other Prayers for the dead. On the morrow the Masses, the last whereof was said by the Bishop of Paris, the Funerall Oration deliuered by Cospeau, Bishop of Aire in Guienne; the Dinner performed at the Bishops Pallace. After which was done, the Funerall Pompe began to March (according as the day before) so farre as to Saint Denys.
On the Thursday, being the first day of Iuly, the Portrature or Effigies of the King, was carried to the Treasurie of the Church, and the Body placed vnder the Chappelle Ardente; the Masses Celebrated, and the l^st said by the Cardinall de Ioyeuse, and the Funerall Oration deliuered by the Bishop of Angiers, Myron.
The last Masse being ended, the Great Maister of the Ceremonies of France, De Rhodes, tooke from off the Hearse the Crowne, the Scepter, the Hand of Iustice, and

the other Honors, which he distributed according to the ancient custome; and after the State, Cloathes of cloth of Gold, and of Veluet.
The Gentlemen of the Chamber, and the Scottes Guard, tooke the Coffin, and brought it to the entrance of the caue or Vault of Ceremonies, which is at the entering into the Quire, on the Epistle side at the South doore, which euery day is hung with Blacke, where rest the bodies, entoured with foure burning Tapers, day and night, vntill such time as the Bodies are taken thence, and put into the place destinied and appointed at their Buriall.
At entering into the Vault, the Cardinall de Ioyeuse (ouer the body of the deceased King) said the accustomed Prayers. Which being ended, the said Cardinall was seated at one side of the Vault, and the Duke of Fronsack (in quality of Great Maister) at the other side, hauing by them the Great Master of the Ceremonies.
Within the Vault, vpon the very first step thereof, stood one of the Kings of Armes of France, who acording as he was commanded by the Great Master of the Ceremonies, called all them which carried the Honors. As namely, the Cornet, the Guidon, the Pennon, the great Standard, and the Banner Royall: the Spurres, the Helmet, the Coate of Armes, the Sword, the Crowne, the Scepter, the hand of Iustice, the Collar of the Order, and others; which such as carried them, deliuered to this first King of Armes, who gaue them to the other Kings of his Companions, to rank them in their due Order. And then the Great Maister of the Houshold, last of all deliuered vp his Staffe.
All these Honors being laide on the Bicre of the deceased King in the vault of Ceremonies; the Duke of Fronsack arose, saying in a soft and low voice, The King is dead. And immediately Mon Ioye, King of Armes, going on into the middest of the Quire, went to the high Altar, and to the Chapelle Ardente, speaking out aloud three times together: The King is dead, pray all to God for his Soule. Then euery one falling on their knees, so long as while the De profundis may be saide, the same Duke of Fronsacke returning from the Vault, with his Staffe of Great Maister, saith; Vine le Roy, God saue the King. Then Mon Ioye King of Armes, going againe into the midst of the Quire, before the high Altar, cryeth aloud three seuerall times* God saue King Lewes, Thirteenth of the name, by the Grace of God, the Most-Christian King of France, and of Nauarre, to whom God giue a most happy and long life. Which was no sooner saide, but the Church ecchoed wi^h sounds of Drummes, Fifes, Trumpets, Cornets, Hoboyes, and all other kindes of Musicke, their Cypresse Veyles being taken off, in signe of ioy, to finish this Funerall pompe, with the Maxime of State belonging to this Monarchie: That the King of France neuer dyeth. And for this reason, the Court of Parliament marched in his Funerals, not in habits of Mourning, but in Robes of Scarlet.
The parcels of Honour receiued againe, by them that had the carriage of them; the Princes were conducted into the Great Hall of the Abbey, there to haue their dinner: and after them the Soueraigne Courts, the Vniuersitie, and other Assistants in the Funerall Pompe. In another Hall, dined the Duke of Fronsack: They which caried th^ Honors; And the Officers for the mouth.
After dinner, the Duke of Fronsack returning into the great Hall, made a summary Discourse to the whole Assembly, concerning the death of the late King, and made offer of his seruice to the Officers of his house: promising, to recommend them to the King reigning, to the end that they might be still maintained in their estates, Offices, and Dignities, deliuering these words: We haue lost our late Master, and therefore do hold no more authority in his House. Which being spoken, hee brake the Staffe, belonging to his Office of Great Maister.
The Queene (who neuer had beene seene in publique, since the Act of her Regencie;) came vpon the Saterday following, being the third day of Iuly, to the Byshops Palace of Paris, to assist in the seruice which she caused to be performed for her deceased Lord. The Church of Paris was hung with Blacke, according as it had beene before: except the Chapelle Ardente, which was taken away. Insted thereof, and in the place of the Eagle (which they called vulgarly Ad Aquilum, where possession is taken of the Benefices belonging to the said Church) was erected an Oratory Pew, couered with a large great Canopie, made all of blacke Serge.
She came to the said Church, betweene the houres of eleuen and twelue at noone, entering in at the South doore. Before her, went the Princes, Lords, and Knightes of the Court: my Lords the Princes of Blood, De Contey, and de Soissons led her. The Traine of her Mourning Garment, was about six Elles in length, being carried by the Ladies and Princesses Dowagers, of Conde, of Contey, of Soissons, and of Montpensier.
Followed by Madam the Eldest daughter, Elizabeth of France; And she followed
By Queene Margaret, cloathed in Mourning.
And after them, the other Princesses and Ladies of the Court; attyred likewise in Mourning; that is to say, Serge and Blacke Cypresse.
Du Tillet, in the Tract of the later dayes Exequies and Enterrements of the Kings and Queenes of France, sayth; That Scarletted Violet is the Mourning for Kings, and for Queenes, sad Tawny. Hee should there haue added, that this was in the life time of their Husbands, but not after their death. For, I do well remember, that I saw King Henry, Third of the name, of blessed memorie, to be cloathed in a Violet Robe, when he went and sprinkled Holy-water, on the Body of the deceased Monsieur, Duke of Alanson and of Valois his Brother, in the Hall of Saint Iames du Hault Pas, the Sunday before the Feast of Saint Iohn Baptist, Anno one thousand, fiue hundred, fourescore, and foure. After his M^iestie followed the Queen, Louisa of Lorrain and Vaudemont, his Wife, cloathed in a Garment of the Stuffe called Tamine, and of Hayre-colour, hir Litter whollie open, and lined with the same Stuffe.
But concerning Widdowed Queenes, their Mourning was (in former times) of White. And the same fashion is to be seene at the Gray-Friers of Paris, in a Glasse-Window of the Chappell, for the deceased Lord, the first President Messire Gilles le Maistre, the Wife or Mother of the sayde Lord Maistre, ware White Mourning. And from thence, Widdowed Queenes seeme to bee styled by the name of white Queenes.
Afterward, this Mourning habite became wholly Blacke, as is to bee seene at the same Grey-Friars, in the Quire on the right hand, in the glasse Windowe of deceased Queene Elizabeth, Widdow to King Charles the Ninth. And the very same haue we seene for the Queenes Louisa, and Mary, Widdowes to the King Henries, the Third and Fourth of famous Memorie, to weare Blacke in Mourning, and not White, or Tawnie.

Index moestitiae est p^llus color: Vtimur omnes
Hoc habitu, tumulis cum damus inferias.


Blacke best becommeth Mourning: Vsually
For Buriall, there's no fitter Liuery.
As Alciat saith in his Emblemes.





Of such Ceremonies, as haue bin obserued, and ought to be kept, at the Obsequies and Funeralles of Knights of Order. CHAP. X. and VLT.
NOW we will finish these our famous Recherches, with the Funerals of Knights of Order, and Lords of note: as being the very last Acte of their Life, and finall shutting vp of our Theater of Honor and Knighthood.
The Great and worthie Captain Bertrand du Glesquin,Otherwise called Du Gu^s^n. Constable of France; the Thunder bolt and dreadfull terror of the English; the prop and support of the Castillians, laid Siege before Castel-Nau-de-Rondon in Geuaudan, the last place which the English held in the Countrey of Auuergne, and sware by his ordinarie Oath (I vow to God) that he would vn-nest the English thence.
The death of the Valiant Constable.On the fifteenth day of the Siedge, the good Constable dyed by sickenesse, and his death being concealed some certaine dayes; the English were constrained to yeeld, and themselues brought the keyes of the place, and layde them on the Coffin of the great Constable: whose body being enbalmed, was carried by the Count de Forests, to Moulins in Burbonnois, where the good Duke of Bourbon performed for him a very solemn Obsequie, in the Church of Nostre Dame de Moulins, and where newly the Duke had founded a perpetuall Colledge. But before, the saide Duke of Bourbon had sent word to King Charles the Fift, concerning the death of his Noble Constable, which his Highnesse tooke exceeding greeuously.
And, because the King wel remembred, the many acceptable Seruices of his Constable Messire Bertrand du Guesclin (Count of Longueuille, whose Armes we haue noted in the Tract, concerning the Orders of Spaine, and of them of his Descent and Linage:It is an honor to Princes, to remember passed good Seruices.) he being so forward for him during his life, hee would not now seeme backeward, in honouring so braue a Soldiour after death. For the King ordained, that (after his death) the saide Constable should be buried honourably at his feete: At S. Denys, where the Kings of France haue their Royall Enterment. And likewise the good Marshal of Sancerre, who had serued him faithfully: As accordingly it was done, and there they lye.
Not long was it after, but (the next yeare following) departed out of this World, King Charles of France, Fift of the name, that had so valiantly and wisely gouerned his Kingdome, and finished his dayes in the yeare of our Lord, one thousand, three hundred,Out of the Chronicle of the Duke of Bourbon. fourescore, and eight. Now behold what is said in the Chronicle of Lewes, the good Duke of Bourbon. And for the faithfull seruices, performed by Guesclin, Constable of France, to King Charles the Fift: his Monument is to be seene at the feete of the saide King Charles, in his Chappel at S. Denis in France, without the Quire, on the South side. And before that of Messire Bertrand du Guesclin, hath (a very long time) hung a Lampe, well maintained with Oyle, which burneth continually day and night.
Out of Iuuenaldes Vrsins his ChronicleMessire Iuuenal des Vrsins obserueth in his Chronicle, vnder the yeare of Grace, one thousand, three hundred, fourescore, and nine, That King Charles, Sixt of the name, being desirous to honor the person of the Constable Guesclin: caused to be sung in the said Church of Saint Denis, (...) very solemne Seruice for the dead, with a most goodly Luminarie of wax Tapers and Torches lighted.
Mourners at the Funerall.For Mourners, were appointed Messire Oliuer de Clissen, who is well knowne to beare De Gueules, au Lyon d'Argent, Arme, Lampasse, and Coronne d'Or.
The Marshall of Sancerre, whom Ferron hath let passe in silence, and ranked another vnder the name of Iohn de Bueill, which is the Ancient sirname of this Family, holding the Countie of Sancerre, Admirall of France, and Knight of the Order of S. Michael, vnder King Lewes the Eleuenth: wherein he is much mistaken, confounding the one, with the other.
And ten other Knights, whose Sirnames and Armes I haue long desired, to giue them place (equall to desert) in this Theater of Honor: because it is a matter most certaine, that for Honour and Valiancie, they were the very worthiest men of their time. These ten great personages, were all attyred in Robes of Mourning.
The Bishop of Auxerre sung the Masse. And when they came to the Offring
The Bishop and the King came and entred into the Quire.
And first of all came foure men of Armes, Armed at all points, mounted on Coursers well appointed and adorned, Representing the person of the dead man, when hee liued.
Secondly, after them came Foure men, hauing the Coates of Armes of the deceased when he liued, bearing Banners of his Armes. And wee haue heeretofore obserued, that Messire Bertrand du Guesclin, Count of Longue-Ville, Portoit d'Argent, a l'Aigle esploye de Sable, membre, and becque de Gueules, au Baston de mesme brochant sur le Tout.
This being done, the Bishop returned to the Altar, and then the Mourners came to the Offring, each one holding a Shield, with the deceaseds Armes; and a naked Sword with the point vpward.
After these, the Offring was seconded by them of the Blood, and Kindred to the King.
And then came Eight Gentlemen Armed in Coates of Maile, who carried the Helmets, and foure Banners of the dead mans Armes, and placed them on the Altar.
When these things were done, a Learned Sermon was deliuered by a Doctour in Diuinity: declaring the Vertues, Valiance, and Wisedome of the party deceased; and after the Masse was ended, they went all to dinner.
Then was giuen a generall Almes to the poore, and all that would come.
And great gifts were giuen by the King, to the Lords and eminent persons there present, in honour of so worthy a Knight and Noble Gentleman, as was the late deceased Constable.
So in like manner, at the Obsequies and Funerals of Princes and great Lords, as also of Knights, Captaines, and Gentlemen, are carried their Banner and Coronet,Diuers ^k^ of Funeral pompe. their Pennons and great Standard of Black colour, and their deuises training to the ground. Their Sword, Spurres, H^lmet and Shield of their Armes.
If they be Knights, the Collar of their Order must lye vpon the Pal of black Veluet.
If they be Dukes or Counts, the Crowne or Chappeau, with the Coate of Armes, and the Mantle Ducall, or the Countes, according to the Dignities which they helde in their life time.
But before these Honors, are led their Horses of Battell, trapped in Blacke; Trump^ts likewise couered with Blacke, and sounding softly; Drummes answering them in the same manner, and retorting sad sighings (as it were) each to other, as sorrowfully lamenting. And according as men haue finished the last Act of their life, so they ought to haue their buriall.
If he dyed in Warre, which is the Bed of Honor, and of true Nobility: His Effigie formed after the life, ought to be vpon his Tombe; but presented vppon his knees, the Helmet on his head, Sword by his side, Spurres on his heeles, Gauntlets on his hands,Dying in (...) and Armed at all points, hauing aboue all the Coate of his Armes. And ouer the Monument, the Banner, Standard, Pennon and Shield of his Armes, aptly placed.
If he dyed of Sickenesse, or wounded, being in faction of warre: his Effigie ought to be armed with a Cuirats and Coate of Armes, and aside by him his Helmet;Dying of s^nes, or wou^ded in thefi^ but not vpon his head, his Gauntlet also neere it. He may be allowed to haue his Sword by his side, Spurres on his heeles: but aboue his Tombe or Monument, hee ought to haue but a Cornet, and the Pennon at the most, but not the great Standard.
If he dyed peaceably, that is to say, of some sicknesse in his house:Dying pea^ably in the House. his figure ought not to be vpon his knees, but onely lying along, with his Coate of Armes, Armed for fashion sake, the Helmet and Spurres placed at his feete, and his feete lying or vnderpropped with two little Dogges.
These circumstances ought to be very carefully obserued by Caruers and Engrauers,A Caueat t^ Caruers and Sculptures. who (too often thorow their grosse ignorance) do confound the Order of these Authentick Ceremonies, which (in former times) haue beene kept most exactly.
In many places haue bin seen Effigies armed and on horseback, as in the chapel of out Lady at Rouen, the burial on horseback of le Sieur de Bresse, great Senescal of Normandy.
In the body of the Church at Paris, the Figure of Phillip le Bel, King of France,A history co^cerning King Philip le Bel. and of Nauarre, who hauing vanquished the rebellious Flemmings at Ments in Puelle, the moneth of August, Anno one thousand, three hundred and foure, at his returning to Paris, entred into the Church of our Lady, euen as he is there to be seene on Horssebacke, and Armed. There he offered his Horse and Armes, according to the Vow he had formerly made, at such time as he was surprized by the Flemmings vnarmed, and saw slaine before him, Messire Hugues de Bon^ille, a Knight, and two Brethren, Burgesses of Paris, Peter and Iames Gentiens. Wherefore, it is to be considered, that such Effigies on Horsebacke, and Armed in Churches, doe serue for Enquirie, concerning some extraordinary and excellent acte of Armes, done farre off from the common rule.
In the like manner, Princes, Soueraignes, and Barons of high Birth,Concerning great Seales. are figured in their great Seales Armed, and mounted on Horse-backe, holding a naked Sword in the right hand, and a Shield of their Armes in the other. Their Wiues also are represented on Horsebacke, holding with the left hand their Palfraies Bridle, and a Hawke on the right fist. Which declareth the note of an high Baronie, that is to say, a D^tchy, or County at the least.
The last testimony of Honor in Nobility and Knighthood, is Lights in Chappels, hanging Churches with Blacke,Funeral pomp in Churches. and Funerall Girdles, as well within as without Churches, where such buriall is performed. Funerall Girdles are charged with the Armes of the Lord deceased, and (in some respect) with them of their Wiues. The Armes of Lords are depicted with their Mettall and Colour, their Helmets Tarrez de Front, Charged with their Deuice on the Crest, wauing with Lambrequins, and sustayned by their Supporters. The Armes of the said Lords, are in Banner after the Anticke manner, and most commonly in the Shield, engirt with the Order of the Knight.
Those of widdowed Ladies, ought likewise to be in the Shield, but not otherwise, with the Armes, or at the least the moity of her Husbands on the right side, parted with the said Ladies on the left, and the Shields or Escocheons entoured with Girdles of Cordelieres, which we terme white Cordelieres, for reasons before alledged in this great Labour.
Eldest Sonnes deceasing vnmarried, carry their Armes in the Shield, the Helmet siluer, not open: the said Shield bearing the Fathers Armes, and ordinarily parted with the Mothers.
And as for Daughters, they bea^e but the Paternall Armes; yet not in Shield, as Widowed Ladies do, and the Cordeliers about; but onely in Lozenge, as wee haue related in the Tract of Shields, and elsewhere.
Soli Deo Laus, Honor, and Gloria.

FINIS.


